TRAVELSINNORTHERN GREECE^BYWILLIAM MARTIN LEAKE, F.R.S. &cIN FOUR VOLUMES.VOL. III.LONDON:J. IIODWELL, NEW BOND STREET.1835./Atirv,5,iit>'CONTENTSVOLUME III.Chapter XXII.THIRD JOL'BNEY.Departure from Corfu — Capes heucimne, Amphipagta — IslandsSybota — ArpUza. Chimera — Parga, Tary»e — Ai lanni, B»~ehtliuat — Porto Fanfiri, Glyci/i Limen, or Baa — Elia — Rini-ipsa — Agriapidhia — Amaxikhi in Lcfkadha — Ka!ig6ni, heuctuDioryclus — Meganisi — K&lamo— Gulf of Molo in Ithaca —Mount A'crirBm— Skhino, Dhexii, Vathy— Ecfiinaifcs — Anti —Add! — Oioi — Polls — Mount Neiam, Rkeilhrum — Alcomenir —jSgilips — Cracyleia — Dulickium — Oreia or Soit — Frikes —Kiuoi — Port Lia — Fountain Arethusa and rock Corax — Sameia Ke&loDia, Sane — Siet/e of Same by FuMut — Pulita — — Argostoli — Kranii, Cranii — Lixuri, Pale — Populationaud productions of Kefalonia — Prone, Aisut, Stella,Tnpkui, Heraclea, Erastus, Panormim ,CHAPTER XXIII.Ar-viva! ntTzcrigo — KnfniW—Cythera. Panics. ScuniWo— MiloHora— Kastro — Ruins of MHiu — Paro, ancient city — Descriptionofthe Island — Andiparo — Ancient Quarries of Prim —^ K<Mt6— Mdrmara— Nairia, Naxtu — Island of Palati— Villages.Propulsion, Produce— Dhiles — Deem, Hitrvm nf Apolh,A3JMount Ofmluu, Olfmpitm — RAen^io— Mykono, Mgcomu —Skyro, Scynu — For AehiUenan — Sk^ghero — SeopebtM, Scia-that, Hahnrtui, leur — Autr&tiCHAPTER XXIV.MACEDONIA.Monasteries near the anthem extremity of Athos — Arrival atXeropotimi — Other monuteiiea on th southern aide of theFeniDBOla— Tom of Kary^a — Ivtron — FUdthet^- Mylop6tamoIdvra— KankliJa — Stavronikita— Pandokiitore— Vatop^hiAncient Inscriptions — Sira^nu — Philander — Prfivlaka —Ittkumi of Ait — SoMt—QimiA of Xentti — EriB86, AeantkM —Ancient cities of jfcte, Stroma, and Pallas ICHAPTER XXV.Macedonia.Stnt6ni, Sfrafoniceia— Niiroro — Mines of lead and silver—Lybj&dbk— Kafkanft— Capni*— StavroB. 8tageinu—GaiI off,Aniim, AreOuua, BromineXxvi,DepBRUK from Salordki — Tekell — Bridge of the Vanihiri orAmu — AJaktini, or Apostles — Pella — Yenidj^, or linnitza —Pldedkajtro — Ritter of Mogleni — Vodheni, Edeua — VUdovaAncient Inscriptions et Vodhena — Via Regalia — NifiuBta,Citmn — Virria, Errata — Kastanifi, — Mount fin-niiuin— Kb&-dove — Plain of Budja — Djumi — Bordaa — Linaria — Kii-CH AFTER XXVIII.IJereembi — Geography of Upper Macedonia — EUmeia, Eordaa,Ortttit, tii/nce*lis, Livonia, Pelagoniu — Campaign of Sulpiciasagaiaul PktUp — TripoKtis of Pelagonia — Sir/mbara — PeHum —DoMtaretia — Antipatria, &c. — S^rvia, ^ Foii«(ano— Livid hi —Pass of Petra— TWjw/ifw 0/ Perrluebia—Pt/tkium. Atone,Douche — Elaesona, Olootton — Mount T^lanu, River Tarts— Mount Olytnpiti — I'zaritzena — Pass of Melton — Tfir-CHAPTER XXIX.Tiirnavo — Manufactures — Kastri — 'I'atiri — Larissa — Pole Larhia, Craitnon — A rgiasa — A trnx — Metropolis — Karaliir — ,Sycnrium — First Campaign of the Periic fear — SeaMopnura — Phaiaitna — Elaleia — Gyrloa — Kiserli — Makrik-h6ri — Vale of Dereli — Baba — Ascent of Mount Ossa—Awba-Ukia, its productions, &c. — Lykostomo, Gonniu — Pass ofLykiistomo, Tempt — River Pensive — Ancient descriptions ofTempt — GcmnaamdylH* — Charon — Castle of Tempt 3CHAFfER XXX.W of Salamvrta — Karitza — Homole — P]atam6na, HitraeleiumRiver of PUtamona, Apila* — Lildkhoro — Mount Olympia —VI rONTENTB.MalathrU, Dnm — River Bi^lufnit — Splghi — KaterioB — pottageof Olj/n^nu by the Conti Marcia — Ctdlipeiux, Phil,River Enipttit, lAbethritmt, Pia^leia — March of tin Coiuidbeyond Dint — Agate — Vasa — River Mityt — Hera — — Ayjin — Kitro — PalaSa Kitroi — Eleftberokh6ri — pardonof Per$au oa the B»^)eiu—D^fiot of the Moeedonimt atPetra^Battle ijf PyAta—Pjidna—MetioHe—AloTMt—KivenHaHaemw, I^diat, Aahit—Ketwra to Saloaiki 401CHAPTER XXXI.Comparative Geography of MaeeJoitia — River GalUkti, Eeki-ifcrM — Doir&n, Tatruma—Ot^citm— Stobi — Siena ot theAxitu — Moment— InoatUM qf Silica— Mount Cerciiu—Gor-tymia — Svroptu — Alimtpia — BnuUhia — Modi — Antpkaxia —Antkenuu — Mygdoaia — Crot*aa — Mount Cutu»~-Boltiatx —Chaleideiuet — ApoUoiaa of Chaleidiee — Olyittluu — ApoUoma ofMonimia — Iiete — Paonia — Strdmitu — Antrim — Romanroads from Stobi — Velesi, ByUaora — Abtuaut, Dtwadaba, medica— IvoHna, /impAoriiia — Mount SeomUu — DaUheietiB.BeitiIstipp, .^qpN*— GhiusUndil, PtmtaUa—Theranda, UltimaTown on the JUofiu — Skdpia, Scupi — Edict of Ampkipoli*after the conquest by PtuUlmt — Limits of the sow regiottt —Coins of the Tetrarehy 43DCONTENTS. VllCHAPTER XXXIII.iCTOLIA, ACARNANIA.ProbKurt-aga, Calydtm — Temple ef Diaika hapkria — River EoeitMMount Chalcis — Aia TrULdha — Neokh6ri — Stamina —(Etolo-Acamanian agriculture — Return to Neokh6ri — MagdlaKurtzolari — Katokbl — Trikardh6-ka8tro, (Eniada-marchof Philip from Linea to (Eniadte — PhoUeut — Medefm—Me-tripoli — Conope, Ithoria, Pteanium — Ekeus — Artemita — OxeiteLakes Meliie, Cynia, Uria — Lake of Calydon — Course of theAcheUnu below (EniacUe 533TRAVELSNORTHERN GREECE.THIRD JOURNEY.CHAPTER XXII.Epirus, LEUCAS, ITHACA, CEPHALLENIA.^^B EF^^D^mturc from Corfu — Capes Leucimne, /imphlpagus — IslandsSybota — Arpitza, Chimer'mm — Parga, Toryne — Ai lanni,Buckcetitim — Porto Fanari, Glijcys Limen, or Ella — Ella —RiniasBO — Agriapidhia — Amasikhi in Leffcadha — Kaligoni,Lucas — Dioryctui — Meganisi — Kalanio— Gulf of Molo inllhaca — Mount Neritum — Skhino, Dhcxia, Valh^ — EchinusAct* — Anon — Oxoi — Polis — Mount Neiam, Rheithrum^Akomeate — MgUijis — Crocyleia — Dulkhmm^—Oxeice orThotx — Frikes — Kioni — Port Lia— Fountain Arethusa androck Corax — Samo in Kcfalonia, Samo — Siege of Samo byFuleiui — Plata — Faraklata— Argostoli— Krania, Cranii —Lxiii, Pale — Population and productions of Kcfalonia —Prone, Astuf, AtciUi, Taphus, lieradia, ErUsus, Panormui.Corfu, 9th September, 1806. — Having engageda vessel to carry me through the ^y<Ea» toMount Athos, we set sail this evening fromthe M2 EPIRUS. [chap.port of Kastradhes, Italic Castra. The vessel is offi tons, and one of those called by the VenetiansManner, carrying square or latine sails, accordingto the state of the weather. The captain refusedto put to sea on a Tuesday until the sun was down,that day being considered unlucky by all classes ofGreeks : nor would he consent to sail in the daytime,as he feared the effects of the nariaatia, orcaptive occhio, of those who may envy him for thebeauty of his vessel.Sept. 10. — From the low sandy point of Eskimoin Corfu, the ancient I^ucimne, or Leu-comme,to Cave Bianco, probably the Amphi-pagesof Ptolemy, the .coast of Corfu has a N. andS. direction for 6 or 7 miles, nearly parallel to thatof Epinis, and thus forms the southern entrance ofthe channel of Corfu: the breadth is five miles, butis narrowed to four between Cape Bianco and theislands which preserve their ancient name Sybota,by extensive shallows adjoining the former Cape.Simitar shoals encircle Cape LifkJmo, but as theystretch chiefly to the northward, and the channelxxn.] EpiRus. 3dales calls "the continental Sybota'," and whereafterthe second naval action between the Corcy-rffii and Corinthians, in the year before the beginningof the Peloponnesian War, the Corinthianserected a trophy, while the Corcyrsei, who equallyclaimed the victory, set up their trophy " at theinsular Sybota' :" whence it would seem that therewere villages of that name on either side of the innerstrait or harbour. Midway between the outerS^votaand Parga is Cape Varlam, commonly called formalby the seamen of Italy and the Seven Islands.Immediately north of it, is a retirement of the coastwith a sandy beach, above which are cultivatedslopes round some dispersed hamlets, all known bythe name of Arpitza. Near the shore are the remainsof a Hellenic fortification now called Erimo-castro.Parga, and the heights behind it, covered witholive groves and gardens, have a very pleasing appearancefrom the sea. The town is situated onthe steep side of a conical rock, which divides aemail recess of the coast into two bays, both exposedto the Carbine, and consequently dangerous inwinter, except for small boats, which may shelterclose under the town, or behind some rocks on thesouthern side of the southern port. The ridgewhich connects the promontory with the neighbouringmountain and separates the two ports, iscovered with a street of houses, and there is anotheron the beach of the southey port. On the rockTpoxa'ioy tvnjirav iv rootOKriOTI)DTIIir rg {/Jtiip^ Sw/Jdroit- — Su/Sdro-tcjd. 1. I. c. 54.4 EPIRUS. [chap.Stands a fortress, in which resides the Bey sent fromConstantinople to receive the tribute ; the placebeing governed in the same manner as Pi^vyza '.About six miles to the south-eastward of Pargais the entrance of Planta, or the harbour of Fa-neri,the ancient Glycys Linea, into which theAcheron discharges itself. The intermediate coasthas a direction first due east, and then south ;exactly in the angle is Ai launi, or St. John, whichis the best harbour in this part of the coast. PortoFanari is small and shallow, and therefore frequentedonly by small vessels, which load the comand kalambokki of the plain of Fanari. The portis easily known by an interval of low coast betweensteep hills, and by a remarkable precipice on oneside of the entrance. As at Buthrotum the waterof this bay is rendered almost sweet by the greatriver which is disclaimed into it ; whence theancient name Glycys Limen. Suli is a conspicuousobject rising behind this part of the coast ; on theheights a little to the southward of Porto Fan4ri isthe village of Klarentza, and below it a small harbourand some magazines for the saddles. wbicat Klarentza. Thu most conspicuous object is thecastle of Riniassa ', situated at the foot of a maritimeridge, which ia separated by some elevatedvalleys from the range extending from Alongtowards Suli. Two miles to the north of it is asmall harbour named Ella.Some difficulty occurs in adjusting the ancientnames on the coast between the channel of Corcyraand Nicopolis. Arpkza I believe to be the placenamed Chimerium, where the Corinthians stationedtheir fleet, and established a camp on returning tothe Episode coast in the summer following theirdefeat by the Coi-cyraei near Pari', at the sametime that they formed another camp at Actiumfor the protection of Lcucaa and their other allies inthat quarter. The station of the Corcyra wasat Leucimne^; and in those positions the hostileforces remained the whole summer withoutcoming to action. Previously to the secondbattle between the same two parties, which occurredthree years after the first, Ckhnerium wasagain the station of the Corinthian fleet, while thatof the CorcyTEci was at Sybota. On this occasion,Thucydides describes Chimerium as a cape andharbour on the Episode coast, between the riversIn the year B.C. 435, T!iu-cyd. 1. 1, c. 29, ct Heir. Thehistorian does not (;xacUy slatewhere this battle took place,but the Corinthians who were intheir Thule to Epidaurus hadmet the herald of the Corcyrccioff Actium, and the latter, afterthe battle , planted their trophyon Cape Leucimme orLeucim-pie. The action, therefore, occurredprobably between I'axuand Cape Varlam.ioTpaTOiriSciiovTO iJri 'AktiuKai irfj)i TO Hiiftiptey rgc 6fiT-TrpmriSoc iiyrtarpa-Toriitimtrro Sc Kal ui Kcpiu-palpi inri TJj AfvKi/ifi^ rauat t(*«1 «iy.— Thucyd. 1, 1, c. 30.6 EPIRUS. [chap.Acheron and Tbyamis'. We find, accordingly,that Cape VarUm is about midway between themouths of those two rivers, and that the bay ofArpitza, being exactly opposite to Cape Bianco,was peculiarly well placed to observe the entranceof the channel of Corfii, and to prevent an enemystationed at L^fkimo from ruling out of it unobserved.The historian does not, indeed, refer toChimerium as a fortress, but seems to describe itas a harbour dependent upon Ephyre. But Ihave frequently had occasion to observe, th(Uplaces noticed only in history as mountains, harbours,or promontories, are proved by existingruins to have been also fortresses : and in thepresent instance, the words of Pausanias and Stephensafford some presumption that Chimeriumwas more than a mere cape or harbour *. If theremark of Pausanias were verified, who states thatfresh water, similar to that of the Dine on thecoast of Aisles *, rose in the sea near Chimerium,dm ActNcaSoc *\iovTtc, fiir oJv Kop/i^iot rtw ^rtlptmXXII.] Epirus.there would remain uo doubt on the subject. Asto the mention of Ephyre by Thucydides in connectionwith Chimerium, it can only be reconciledwith the situation which 1 have attributedto the latter, by supposing Thucydides to haveemployed the word intip in its widest sense, andmerely for the purpose of introducing a noticeof the rivers Acheron and Thyamis, and of the positionof Chimerium between them, for the historianhimself, compared with Strabo, leaves no doubtthat Ephyre, afterwards named Cichyrus, stood notfar above the discharge of the Acherusia and Acheroninto the Glycys Limen which is twelve or fourteenmiles distant from Cape Varliim. But it is obviousthat no cape near Port Fanari, nor any otherposition, such as Parga if we might suppose thatplace to have been the ancient Chimerium, can beso well adapted to the circumstances related byThucydides as the harbour of Arpitza and CapeVarlam.Eiffi Si ytialet^ rn Su/3oro,tSc fiy 'llirilpov fiiKpiiy aTi-j(Ouaat, Kara if To l^nv dupafrSt Kopcvpaiac, r4>' A(ui;i;ii-iji',Kilfuyai. Kai dAXat ^ ic r^mpdrXy vtiaiSt^ tlaiy ovk fi^imftt^fiift, 'Ertira dcpa Xu/ii-pwf cal rXvsvc Ai/J^f tic «viftfidWti 'Axe'p"'' *'t"'<'/">e.^lyiK r$£ 'A^ipovatat MfyijtiKal lty(6iiiyot irXEfouc rorafioutCool leal yXvKolruv rov koXttdv'Thou Kt)(ypoz 4 Tp(>rEpov 'E^vpa,irriXic 0ciTwpuiTiiv' rou Zc traruBouflpuTOi' 1/ ^oiylut}. 'EyyucSi ripe Kijfwpotf iroXij^KioF Boti-■}(alTiov Kaifaiiiiraliiiy, fiinpoyJoTEp r^c BaXdrTJn: ov. — Strabo,p. 324. It 13 easy to perceivethat Strabo has borrowed lirainformation, in this passage,from others; in placing theThyamis near the Glycys Limen,he follow probably thenegligent cKiireas ion of Thucy-8 Epirus. [chap.Parga, I am inclined to believe, was the ancientToiyne, which Sectarians, coming from the Ioniansea, occupied with his fleet, and from whence heproceeded to offer battle to Antonius at the entranceof the strait of Actium. Ptolemy, indeed, may bethoughtto leave some doubt whether Toryne, orTorone as he writes it, was at Parga, or at Port St.John, as he names only the following places, andin this order : " the mouth of the Thyamis, SymTorone, the mouth of the Acheron, PortElffia, Nicopotis;" whence it may be said that StJohn being a safer and more capacious harbour thanthat of Parga, will correspond better to Toryne.St. John lies however in an angle of the coast, notvery easily entered or quitted by a fleet, and wasnot so convenient for the purpose of Octavian asParga. It was more probably the harbour of ', a town described by Strabo as situatedat a small distance from the sea, and not far fromCichyrus or Ephyre, the remains of which city stillexist at a ruined monastery on the right bank ofthe. Vivo or Cactus, at an equal distance fromxxn.]Klarcntza and Riniaasa, Beema to show that theEUea^ which Ptolemy places on this coast, betweenthe mouth of the Acheron and Nicopolis, was theresituated. On the other hand, Thucydides, bydescribing the Electra as the district where theAchemsia discharged itself into the aea, affordsstrong reason for believing that the reading ofScylax is correct, which represents the portGlycys to have been also called Elea ', andthat aa no Thesprotian city of this name is noticedby any ancient author, the harbour wasnamed Elea, and the surrounding district Elevates,from the marshy nature of the neighbouringcountry, which, as it affects even the water of theharbour, was the more likely to attach that nameto it. It may not have been until long after thetime of Thucydides and Scylax, that for Elea wassubstituted the still more descriptive Glycys Limen,as the name of the harbour. It must be confessed,however, that the modem name, Elia, togetherwith the words of Ptolemy, which represent themouth of the Acheron and the harbour of Else asdistinct places, are adverse to tria conclusion, andthat the question is rather doubtful.The uiaestrale, which at this season seldom setsin till the afternoon, falls about sunset, and we areMira a \iuiviav Gi.inrpiu- iS,ii}inr 'A-j(i^aiv cut \iftn}vol tlmi' (flcoc iiTTi tfr 'Ax^P"""'"! 'i 'K' *• 'Aj^ejjuv ptiairrit liXifitvoc' irraiitla tori irora^di;. — Scylax in Oiairpiu-Xtfi^v f oyofia 'Extol {'EXfin)" rui.10 LBUCAB. [chap,becalmed till midnight, when begins the usual gulfwind from Prevyza, which carries us to the northernpromontory of Lefkddha at nine in the forenoonof Sept. 11. — From this precipitous cape thecoast runs south-westward aa far as Cape Dukito,consisting, without intermission, of the same descriptionof bold cliffs, of which the celebratedLeucate forms the still more remarkable termination.At the northern cape the coast makes asudden curve to the eastward, and a sandy beachbegins, from which, midway towards Amaxikhi,branches the low promontory of Plaka. Thespis ofsand makes an angle to the north-west, and thenretires in the opposite direction until at a shortdistance from the coast of Xeromero it assumesa direction parallel to that shore, forming thenorthern entrance of the lagoons, which separatethe island of Leacat from Acamaraa. Thefortress of Agfaia Mara stands exactly at the reenteringangle of the promontory, where the straitis narrowest, and covers the whole breadth of thePlaka. It is now occupied by a Russian garrisonThe modem capital of Leucas, named A maxikhi ',resembles Mesolonghi, as well by its situation onthe lagoon as in the form of the houses, which arevery unlike those of Corfu, being built chiefly ofwood on a substruction of stone or brick, with galleriessupported by wooden pillars. The greaterpart of them are of one story only, which, as wellas the wooden construction, is said to have beenadopted in consequence of the frequency of earthquakes.Some of the larger houses are fitted upwith tapestry in the Venetian taste. The town is'Afia!.i)(ioy,12 LEUCAS. [chap.composed of a single street, from which branch somenarrow lanes of small wooden tenements. At thenorthern termination of the street, near the head ofthe aqueduct, is a small square called the Piazzadi San Marco; from the other end branch tworoads which are practicable for carriages for two orLire miles, and then become mere horse-paths.Amaxlkhi may perhaps hare taken its name frombeing the only place in the island where o^a^, orwheel carriages, are or can be used. The womenare generally handsome, as at Mesolonghi, and insome other situations in Greece which have everyappearance of being unhealthy ; but many of themen have a sickly complexion. I am lodged inthe house of Mr. K. G., Austrian and Britishvice-consul, whose profits having been sadly diminishedsince the occupation of the Venetian statesby the French, his habitation is proportionallybumble. In the afternoon Count Angelo Oro,to whom 1 had a letter of introduction, presentsme to the Prytano, after which we walk out to oneof the count's gardens, which is spacious and ingood order. Count Orio is a Venetian, who inXXII.]l»Ht being persecuted by General Clialmt on suspicionof being in intelligence with the Turks andRussians, was obliged to take refuge in themountains. On Chaos departure he returnedto town, and claims the credit of having preventedAl" Pallid from entering the island whenthe Pasha, encamping with his Albanians on theshore opposite to the fortress, flattered himselfthat he should obtain this favourite object in thename of the Porte, and be able to hold it for himself.And he might have succeeded, if he hadhad a few boats to transport his Albanians. Orioendeavoured to gain time by negotiation with theBishop of Artaa and the Pasha, while the islanders,taking up a position to the southward, declaredtheir determination to resist the Albanians. Butthe only real impediment was the fire of the Frenchfrom the fortress upon the shallow channel, whichthe Albanians would otherwise have crossed onfoot. After a delay of fifteen days in the siege ofCerigo, Admiral Uschakoff arrived, but the Frenchheld out twenty days longer in the castle, the Russianbatteries being either too distant, or directedagainst the strongest parts of the work.Sept. 12, — Cross the lagoon in company withCount Orio to the fortress, in a small flat-bottomedboat which is punted, and sails back without anydanger under the lee of the aqueduct, though thereis a strong south-wester without. The aqueductis so narrow, that when the wind is very strong itsometimes happens that careless or drunken menor are blown over into the water and smotheredi mud. The Russians in garrison, who have14 Lucas. [chap.just received a year's arrear of pay and clothing,are commanded by a rough Russian colonel, whohas leant a few words of Italian at Naples and inthese islands, and says that he should prefer themost miserable village in Russia to his presentsolitary and disagreeable station. Formerly thefortress was the seat of government, and therewere houses in it for the progenitor ordinary andstraordinario. The profile is low, and the wall isvery weak, especially towards the lagoon. But itis well placed for protecting the strait just whereit is easily forded from the opposite heights inXeromero, called Lamia, on the extremity ofwhich is a Tekieh of Devises. The shallowchannel extends two or three miles to the northof the fort, separated only from the open sea bya continuation of the Plaka, which terminates atthe southern side of the entrance of port Dh^mata, or St. Nicolas. This harbour, being theonly one between Viskdrdho and Pr^vyza, is ofsome importance, though the depth of water issufficient for ships only at the entrance ; it com-Xvii.] LEUCAS, 15a narrow plain between the heights and the lagoon.The hills are almost entirely covered with vineyards; the plain is occupied by gardens. Towardsthe northern side of the heights are afew houses called Enervates, and a church of'Aio Vlasi. At two-thirds of the distance fromAmaxikhi to the ancient site, a fountain calledMegali Vr5'sis flows copiously from the rockyfoot of a hill, on the summit of which stands acasino which, as well as Kaligoni and the neighbouringplain, belongs to the Count. Water isconveyed from the Vr^'sis, in a subterraneousconduit, to Amaxikhi, where it supplies the townfrom various fountains constructed in the Turkishstyle. The conduit was originally a work of theTurks ; but the Venetians, when a repair wasrequired, not having been able to trace the directionof the old aqueduct, were obliged to constructthe whole anew. That the same accident maynot happen again, they have marked the directionby little heaps of earth, which show the extraordinarycircuit taken by the conduit in preservingthe proper level. A hollow between Me-galeVr^'sis and the Paleokastro, which is nowcovered with vineyards, was a part of the cemeteryof Leucas, as appears from the numerousbones, vases, and other sepulchral remains whichhave been found there. The ancient inclosureis almost entirely traceable as well round thebrow of the height on the northern, western andsouthern sides, as from either end of the heightsacross the plain to the lagoon, and along itsshore. This illustrates Livy, who remarks that thelower parts of Leucas were on a level close to the16 LEUCAS. [chap.shore'. The walls on the heights are, for the mostpart, of polygonal masonry, and apparently of aremote period. In the plain the masonry is moreregular, some remains of towers are seen, and itseems evident that this part of the fortification isof a much later date than the original inclosure onthe hills. The latter is probably a part of theNericus mentioned in the Odyssey, which Laertesboasts to have taken, and which, even in the Peloponnesianwar, had not yet assumed the name ofLeucas *. This change, and the extension of thewalls to the lagoon, occurred probably between thatwar, when Leucas was opposed to the Acamanes,and the time when it became the chief city of Acar-nania and the seat of the national council *. Thewestern, or most inland point of the hill of Leucasis of a peaked form, and was crowned by a laisseround tower, of which the foundations are extantNorthward of this, on a tabular summit of equalheight, are the remains of a small fortress or Acropolis: on the lower slope of the hill are the ruingof several terrace walls ; and there are some foundLEDCAS. 17them. Close to the remain of the walls to thesouthward there is another fine fountain, fitted up inthe Turkish raauoer, called awaafiivJt (ipliai^, orthe shattered fountain, and lying near it a shallsepulchral stone, inscribed with the name AofUij*,the last letter doubtful. In an adjoining vineyardI observed a plain sarcophagus, and among otherremains of the southern cemetery of the city a tombmade of slabs of stone set upright, in the most simplestyle, and which had been excavated Count Oriofound not long ago, in this vineyard, a sepulchralstone with a woman's name. Immediatelybelow the vineyards of Kaligoni are some extensivesalt pans of the same name, which extendsouthward to a small round fortress in ruins calledForti, and to the southern harbour of Amaxiklii,named Drcpano.Opposite to the middle of the ancient city someremains of a Hellenic mole are visible, evidentlyappertaining to a causeway and bridge which herecrossed the lagoon. The bridge was rendered necessaryby a channel, which pervades the whole lengthof the lagoon, and admits a passage to boats drawingfive or six feet of water, while the other partsof the lagoon are not more than two feet in depth.The great squared blocks which formed the ancientcauseway are still seen above the shallow water inseveral places on either side of the deep channel,but particularly towards the Canadian shore ;on which side, a little to the southward of thecauseway, on a small rocky hoiyht, are remainsof habitations, and of a castle of the middle ages.The bridge seems to have been kept in repair atVOL. 111.18 Lucas. [chap.a late period of time, there being a solid cubicalfabric of masonry of more modern workmanshiperected on the causeway on the western bank ofthe channel.The earliest appellation of Leucas was Acte, orthe " peninsula," a name applied to some othergreat maritime projections of the continentofGreece,as Aigolis, Attica, and Athos. To that of Leucasthe word 'Hvtlfunt was added as a distinction, and'Axrq 'Hn-tipoio seems to have been its common designationin the time of Homer ; it was indeed verynaturally so named by the neighbouring islanders,as Epirus or " the continent" weirs the wordthen applied to the whole of Acamania as well asto Epirus proper. According to Scylax, the peopleof the town were called Epileucadii, so that itwould seem that the name Leucas, derived fromthe cliffs of the western coast, had at an earlyperiod been adopted by the people. The Acar-'Danes of Leucas being in a state of insurrectioncalled in a thousand colonists from Corinth, whoslew the Acamanes, occupied the country, andcutting through the isthmus made it an island 'XXII.]1!)deny to close the entrance of the deep channelwhich pervades the lagoon, and the navigation ofwhich was probably the object of the Corinthians.If by this operation they rendered Leucasan island, we are to suppose that the part of thelagoon between the Plaka and Lamia, which nowinsulates Leucas, did not anciently exist. But Iam more disposed to believe, notwithstanding the'Akt-tj of Homer, and other ancient testimonies, thatLeucas was never more of a peninsula nor less ofan island than it is at present; that is to say, thatit has always been separated by a narrow fordablechannel, and that the changes which appear fromhistory to have occurred were all caused by thenatural obstruction and artificial clearing of theentrance of the deep channel.The dioryctufi formed by the Corinthian colonyin the seventh century B.C., had become unserviceablebefore the Peloponnesian war, as appearsby the Peloponnesian fleet having on more than oneoccasion been dragged across the isthmus, thoughLeucas was entirely in their interest '. It was in thesame state in the reign of Philip, son of Demerits,for Polybius relates, that when Philip surprisedThere's, in the year b. c. 218, and was hasteningwith his fleet from Cephallenia by Leucas to theAmbracic Gulf, he caused his ships to be conveyedacross the isthmus ', and Livy in describing the^^^TlKThucyd. L S, c. 8 1 : 1. 4,■patMaiuvot ra viii ruvcat TavTtf ttai.-ofuiiaisat wtv(. — Polyb, I. 5, i;. 5.The isthmus seems ^^ havebeen still called the Dioryctus,Although the canal was obstructed.20 LEUCAS. [chap.siege of Leucas by L. Quintus, 21 years afterwards,uses the words, ^^ Leucadia nunc insula etvadoso fret quod perfossum manu est ab Acar-nania divisa, turn peninsula erat ^ ;" the restorationof the dioryctus was perhaps a work of the Romans,after the Macedonian conquest, when oneof their first acts was to separate Leucas from theCanadian confederacy. Both bridge and canalappear from Strabo to have existed in the reignof Augustus, whose policy it was to facilitatecommunication by sea and land, by these meanssecuring the power of Rome, maintaining peace,and extending the commercial intercourse of thesubject nations.It is curious that Livy, though he has probablyborrowed, as usual, the part of his narrative justreferred to from Polybius, has represented thetown of Leucas as situated on the isthmus, whereit was 500 paces long and 120 broad. Perhapsin improving the expression he lost some of thetruth of his author, as he has done in someother instances. From a similar inaccuracy wemay suspect that Strabo never visited Leucasin person, like many other places which he hasincorrectly described, for he represents the isthmus,the dioryctus, the bridge, and Leucas tohave been all in the same place, and Nericus inadifferent situation', whereas from what I haveLiv. 1. 33, c. 17. viyKayreQ rrjy N^pcioov Wi ToyKoplvOioi 3c TOTToy Bq Jjy wore fxiy itrdfjioc• r^C X^ppoyiiffov hiopV' yvy hi TropdfjLog ye^vp^ fevicrociiayriQ tov Itrdfxoyy iiroiriaav fjLeTwy6fxa(ray AevKaBa. — Strayrev AevKa^a kqi jjuti' bo, p. 452.XXII.]already stated, it is evident that Nericus, Leucas,aud the bridge, were in one position, and the isthmusand dioryctus at a distance of three miles tothe north of them.The insecurity which the city of Leucas feltfrom being placed on a peninsula, or what wasnearly the same thing iu a military sense, anisland to which there was a fordable access fromthe continent, is strongly proved by the traces ofa Hellenic wall, commencing near Amaxikhi, andterminating at the bluff cape which rises from thewestern extremity of the sandy beach. This wallintercepted the communication between the ancientcity and the isthmus, or promontory ofPlaka, and may have been useful also against alanding in the bay of Amaxikhi. It was probablybuilt before the union of Leucas with Acarnania.Count Orio affirms that just before the fall ofVenice, every thing was in readiness to renew theancient canal, which would be extremely useful tothe island, as well as to the whole coast of Acar-nania and Epirus, by enabling small vessels toavoid the circuit of Cape Dukato ',Sept. 13. — This being the first of the month(Greek style) is the day of meeting of the Synclitito choose the members of the legislative body, ofwhom this island sends four, Corfu ten, Zante ten,Catalonia ten, Ithaca two, Pau two, Cerigo two.The canal has been re- side of Fort Santa Laura, aiiUstored since Leuvas has been joins the deep channel nearunder English protection : it en Aiiiaxiklu.(era the lagoon on the western22 LEUCAS. [chap.The Assembly meets in the church of St. Minason the out-skirts of the town, with a Russian guardat the door. The Prj^tano, S. V. . . of Corfu, opensthe assembly with a long speech in Greek, pointingout the importance of the business on whichthey are met, and supporting his arguments byexamples from ancient history. He has the characterof being one of the most learned men inthese islands, and the speech is much commended,though I hear one of the country nobles whisperingto another, KoXa Xoyia, ^ fine words withoutmeaning.' In fact, not one of those present isignorant that the meeting is all a farce, and thatthe legislators have been named a fortnight agoby N. the emissary of the Russian plenipotentiary.But this does not prevent the ceremony of a ballotfor 26 names, out of which a selection of four isto be made by the Senate. Two days are allowedfor the ballot, when the boxes, sealed by the prjr-tan, are sent to Corfu to be opened before theSenate. It is a common joke to call the Syncliti,Synklefti. Lefkadha produces corn enough for itsown consumption, and some oil for exportation ; agreat quantity of salt, and wine sufficient not onlyfor home consumption, but for exportation in considerablequantities to Corfu, Prevyza, and otherplaces. Besides the salt-works of Kaligoni, thereare some smaller near the town. The salt-chambersare separated from one another by otherchambers in which no salt is made ; the stagnantwater in these and in the ditches causes malaria.The salt is piled up in large pyramids, and coveredwith a roof of tiles. At Corfu it is formedJCXII.] LEUCAB. 23into little Hillocks. The manufacture there isnot so good as it is here, nor the salt so muchesteemed.On the Acarnanian mountain, which lies oppositeto the anchorage of Forti, and which extendsto the bay of Zaverdha, is the scattered village ofPlain', and on the slope of Lamia the monasteryand small village of Aghia Varia. There isconsiderable confusion in common discourse as tothe name of Santa Laura, which is given occasionallyto the island, the town, or the fortress, butproperly 'Alla Mavpa, is the fortress, having receivedthat name from a small church which stoodon the site, 'AfiaS.i'^i is the town and AfuKoSu theisland.Sept, 14. — The manner having made the tourof the island by Kavo Dukito, 1 pass through thechannel of the Lagoons in a small flat-bottomedboat, and rejoin the vessel a little below Forti.Sailing out of the harbour of Trepan, we leavethe fountain of the Pasha *, on the right hand, andthen pass the port of Klimiuo, which is shelteredby four or five islands lying before it. The twoprincipal, called Sparta and Skropeo, produce goodcom. Madura, situated exactly in the entrance ofKlimino, is covered with olives, and belongs to KyrNikola Vretto of Ithaca. The harbour communicatesby a narrow opening with a long interior bay.Klimino I take to be a corruption of the Ellome-nus of Thucydides *.24 ITHACA. [ChapLeaving Meganisi on the right, we run alongthe coast of Acamaniay which rises to a loftymountain named Kandili, containing a village ofthe same name ; but the wind coming to the southwe are unable to weather the outer cape of Ka-lamecalled Befall, and stand close in to the shoretowards the northern extremity of the island,where is the village Pistol, and below it asmall harbour. Opposite to the northern extremityof Kalamo, is a large bay, bordered byan extensive plain, in which are the ruins of thevillage Vamaka, and some Hellenic remains,probably those of Alyzia. The bay is dividedinto two by a low projection named M5^tika.The eastern anchorage is called Vurko, and fromsome magazines of that name there is a road ofan hour across a fertile valley and steep ascentto Zdvitza, a lai^e village on the mountain at thehead of the valley. Mount Kandili is separatedby a remarkable pass from Mount Bumisto, whichis the highest summit in this part of Acamania,and is nearly opposite to Kalamo. Southwardof Bumisto a long ridge borders the coast, whichends in the promontory on the western side ofthe entrance of the harbour of Tragamesti.Sept. 15. — Never having seen a tolerable mapof Ithaca, I was most agreeably surprised in enteringthe noble Gulf of Molo this morning at daybreak'.To the right rises with extreme steepnessthe great mountain of Anon, which, being the^ See a Map of Ithaca at the end of this volume.XXn.] ITHACA. 25highest and greatest in the island, we can haveno difficulty in identifying with the Neritum ofthe poet. To the left are three harbours ; theouter is a semicircular port called Skhino, perhapsan ancient name, then Vathy two miles inlength, and widening to the breadth of half a miletowards the bottom ; then Dhexia, resemblingSkhino, but smaller, and so called probably aabeing to the right in entering the principal harbourVathy. An island before it is namedKatzurbo. Beyond Dhexia the gulf extends twomiles to the Sew., and terminates in the portof Aeto, separated only from the channel ofKefalonia by a narrow ridge which thus dividesthe island into two peninsulas. The town ofVathy occupies a long narrow Space on the shoreat the head of the bay of the same name. Beforeit is an island named Pandokratora, on whichstands a lazaretto. I am lodged in the house ofMr. Constantine Pavo, English vice-consul, whosefather held the same office for 50 years. ThePr5'tano is of a Venetian family settled at Kefalo-nia. He has lately excited considerable discontentby disarming the Ithaca, and taking awayfrom them even the small knives which they worein their girdles.In a decree of the senate of Venice, dated in theyear 1504, of which a copy still exists at Vathy,lands are offered gratis, and an exemption fromall imposts for ten years in the uninhabited islandlying on the eastern side of Catalonia called Valcompare, or Val di Company ; in consc-26 ITHACA. [chap.quench of this decree the island was occupied,aod 25 years afterwards was governed by a Venetianstyled II Capitan. In this instance, as inmany others, the Greeks, however much behindthe Italians they may be in civilization generally,show that they were not so ignorant of the ancientgeography of Greece, for they have neverceased to apply to this island its ancient name,altered merely by a simple metathesis of the twofirst letters, Ouiki) for 'IBaKu, while the latter is wellknown by the better classes to be the correct orthography.The gentile 'lOoK^noc, employed by Homer,is in use, as well as 'IfioKoc, which is found inEuripides ', and on the coins of the island ; thecorresponding Bioicoc is now the vulgar gentile.From Okiki) has been formed the Italian Teach orTeach. Every peasant is acquainted with the nameof Odysseus, though few know much of his story,and probably not six persons in the island haveever read Homer.Thiaki has a population of 8000 souls, of whomabout 1200 are absentees, either as merchantsemployed chiefly at Constantinople in importingSSII.] ITHACA. 27Itbacans, and about as many boats, which carryon a traffic with the neighbouring islands andshores of the continent. About 20 of the shipsbave been built in the island.The exports of Thiaki are 250,000 lire Venete ofcurrants, now valued at 25,000 piastres, 6,000 barrelsof wine at 60,000 piastres, and 1,500 barrelsof oil every other year, valued at 30,000 piastres.The island produces also a sufficiency of oil andwine for its own consumption, 20,000 ella of wheatand barley, and a small quantity of cheese. Thegrain is hardly sufficient for half the year's consumption,and the yearly expenditure on this headis reckoned at 125,000 piastres. There is someimportation also of salt fish, and cattle for slaughter.The currants of the island were sent formerlyto England by the Zante merchants, and were themost esteemed of any, but they are now chieflybought by the Sclavonians and Orestes. Thewine is sent to Corfu and the continent ; the oilto Trieste and Venice ; the cheese to Zante. Thedaily price of labour is, on ordinary occasions, 80paras a day without provision, which is higherthan in most of the other islands, agriculturalhands being scarce. The valley around Vath^ iswell cultivated with corn, and scarcely a spot onthe heights, that will admit of a vineyard, has beenneglected. The remainder consists of rocky groundcovered with brushwood. To the south-west ofthe town rises the highest mountain in the southernpeninsula, and next to the mountain of Auri thehighest point in the island. It is called Stefauo*28 ITHACA. [chap.quoi, or Merovugli : on its slope are situated theTillage of Perakh6rio and the Monastery of theArchangels. On the opposite or western side itslopes abruptly to the channel of Kefalonia. Thesuperiority of Vath^ in fertility, and the convenienceof its harbour render probable thesupposition that here was one of the towns ofIthaca, if not the capital, and the presumption issupported by the numerous wrought stones of Hellenictimes, found in the houses and streets of thetown, and in the fences around it.The three principal families of Ithaca are thePetaliidbes, the Karaviadhes, and the Dhendhri-ladies; a principal branch of the first has takenthe name of Pavo, because one of the ancestors ofour present Vice-consul was an idiot. This familyowns the valley at Aeto, the greater part of Anon,and a part of the land near Vath^, of which theremainder chiefly belongs to the Dbendhrinadhes,particularly to their chief Asimaki Dhrakoleone.The valley of Oxoi, the most productive district inthe island, is chiefly the property of the Fretted, aXcii.] ECHTNADES. 29as far as Cape Chelonatas in the Peloponnesus. Ofthe islands, — Kalamo, Pasties, 'Atoko, and all theEchinades, are dependencies of Thiaki — Meganisi,Arkudhi, and the small islands near Klimin6, ofLefkiidha. As several of them are within gunshotof the Ottoman shore, the Peninsular Republicwould have some difficulty in establishing anybetter right to them than that of undisputed possessionfor several centuries, unless there was someparticular treaty by which they were ceded to theVenetians, unknown to every person of whom Ihave made the inquiry.The Promoters of Kalamo, who happens at presentto be at Vathj', informs me that Iiiss islandcontains 100 families, living in the two villages ofMule and Episcopi, the former situated on theeastern face of the mountain ; the latter on thewestern as before mentioned. The island producesnothing but wheat and barley, both excellent,hut particularly the former, which ispreferred to any other produced in the Seven Islands.At the northern extremity of the island,over against Candles, is the port of Ai Dhonato,with magazines and a square Castle called Spanish,on the water side, and on the slope above it someimperfect remains of Hellenic masonry. On thesummit of the hill which immediately faces thecontinent, there is also a Hellenic castle or acropolis,built of very large wrought stones. Thismountain is very little lower than the centralsummit of the island, which declines rapidly towardsthe south-western cape Kefali, not far fromwhich, on the eastern side, and opposite toasts,J30 ECHINADES. [CHAP.is the port of Gbero Lamina open to the eastTastes, which contains 30 or 30 families, is abouthalf as large as K41amo. The islands are bothlong and narrow, and lie in a parallel direction,the channel which separates them is two mileswide in the broadest part. Off the northern extremityof Kaatus is Provatiki, an islet coveredwith wild olives, which have been grafted, butwithout much success.Meg^nisi contains about 200 families in twovillages, and produces twice as much com as Ka-lame,the soil being generally cultivable. TheMeganisiotes pretend that their wheat is betterthan that of Kalamo. The island consists of asingle ridge, forming a half circle round a largebay on the eastern side, and diminishing in heightand breadth from north to south. The latter extremityis a mere rock, off which is a small lowisland called Khithro, separated from Meganisi bya narrow channel, and appearing at a distancelike a part of it.The Eckinades, which name, although not ioTTTt.]of the mouth of the Achdous, near Oxia. Seventeenof the islands have names beside the fourMocha, two of which are mere rocks, and nine ofthem are cultivated. These are beginning fromthe southward : — Oxia, Makri, Romola, Pondiko-nisi, Karlonisi, Private, Larabrino, Sofia, DragonOxia alone is lofty. Dhragonara producesfrom 250 to 300 kila of grain per annum ; andMr. Pavo, of Ithaca, to whom the island belongs,has grafted many wild olives, which havesucceeded to perfection. Makri and Romolaare the two islands next in importance, it issaid that most of the Echinades, as well as theother islands attached to the government of Thisformerly belonged to a large monastery atErastus.Ithaca, as the poet justly remarks in the Odyssey,is ruled, lias no good roads, and is notwell adapted to horses ; though small, it is notunproductive, but yields good corn and wine,and feeds goats and oxen'. So far its modernAlylfiorac ca) /iSXXoy i»^paroc iitTro(3Drwo,06 yo'p TIC vit^iav inTr^Xaroc ohi' tVKiiiiiiivAX ff 4\! MvUarai- 'Iflairi) ti r« rai vtp,\ vdaiuv.Od. A. V. 605.Ndura'w f "IWtijv tvZilihiv' iv o" opoc airytKlfHTOy, liyoci^uXkor, apiirpt iri'cTplXtT it\X' dyoOil Kouporpd^oc.32 ITHACA. [chap.state resembles that of the time of Homer ; butthe mountains are do longer shaded with woods,and this may be the reason why the rain and thedew are not bo plentiful as the poet represents,and why the island no longer abounds in hogs fatteningupon acorns.Mr. Pavo came in eleven hours in a boat fromthe port of Ostriches, at Corfu, to the town ofVathy. The same voyage by Ulysses, therefore,in the course of a night' was not wonderful, withthe assistance of Minerva. The port of Phocis,which was his place of landing, I am inclined toidentify with Skhino, for this seems the only pointin the island exactly corresponding to the poet'sdata : I. In being suited to the intention of thosewho conveyed Ulysses from Corcyra, namely, thatof landing him as quickly as possible, and of quittingthe coast before he was awake ; 2dly, in admittingof an easy and unobserved walk firm theplace of landing to the station of Humerus, at the'HrtK fiiy rpq^E'd Roi oIi)( imr^Xanic ivy.XXtl.] ITHACA. 33iayaTtn, or extremity ' of the island which was nearestto the Peloponnesus', the first might, perhaps, havebeen better obtained by a landing in some port ofthe northern peninsula, but the second would havebeen impracticable from thence ; 3dly, the situationof Mount Neritum, which rises directly in face ofSkhino, is exactly adapted to the speech of thedisguised Minerva, when she proves to Ulyssesthat he is in Ithaca, by pointing to the mountain';4th]y, the road from Skhino to the station of Eu-meetswas exactly as Homer describes, rugged,and leading through woods and mountains*.The island is now divided into four parts,Vathy, Aetos, Anon, and Exon or Oxol\ Vathy andOxoi, the two extremities, have each a fertile valley.In Aetos and Foot, which occupy the middlepart of the island, the rocky mountains admit oflittle cultivation. Aetos is the only division whichhas not a homologous village ; the name, vulgarlyAeto'j is specifically attached to the remains of^^^^^K * Avrap Eirijf n-purifi' aKTifr 'lOaicijc d^icqiOd. O. V. 36.Telemachus was sailing fran the Peloponnesus.^6pcufOS fir Si! ioTt Xipify Afloat yipovrot'Tdvto it Nqpirof iariy opoQ, Karaiiiiiyov CXj/.Od. N. V. 343.Alrrdp i « Xi/icyoc Ttfoaifiii rpiJX''""' nVapiroi-,Xfipov rf*"' iiXfitvra Zi iit'piac.Od. Sey. 1.'Atroc, 'Atw^, 'Equi) or 'Ofu^.prov 'Atom, according to the common mode of naming athe third case, when the find f is generally mute.VOL. HI. D[chap.a Hellenic fortress situated on the height alreadyalluded to, which rises from the extremity of theGulf of Molo, and falls on the opposite side tothe channel of Kefalonia.This height is separated from Mount Mero-vugli by a hollow cultivated with vineyards.Here on the 16th of September, having sailedfrom Vath^*, I pitched my tent, and remained thewhole day examining the ruins, or looking overthe topographical passages of the Odyssey, while aparty of labourers excavated some ancient sepulchresin the valley. There is a ridge in the middleXXII.] ITHACA. 35traced the remains of an ancient wall, and of atower facing towards the harbour of Aeto, or Gulfof Molo. A prolongation of this wall, bnt withoutany towers, mounts the steep hill of Aeto on thewestern aide of the hollow, and is connected nearthe summit with the lower wall of the citadel of anancient town which occupied the triangular faceof this hill, extending downwards to the edge ofthe hollow, where its lower walls may still betraced ; it was thus divided by the wall first-mentionedinto two nearly equal parts. Several terracewalls and foundations of buildings are stillapparent on the side of the hill, within the ancientinclosure. On tho summit, or acropolis, are theremains of an interior keep, or some other building,consisting of two parallel walls, which inclosea long narrow space containing two ancient cisternsconstructed in the usual manner.The wall along the ridge of the hollow appearsto have been made for the purpose of interruptingoccasionally the communication between the harboursof Aeto and Exo-veto, but chiefly, as appearsfrom the facing of the tower, as a defence on theside towards the Gulf of Molo, from whence alanding was most to be feared, as being easier thanon the other side. Another intention of this wallmay have been that of protecting the only springsof water which the town possessed : one of these isthe source of a torrent which flows to the Gulf ofMolo ; the other is a well lined with large blocks ofstone of ancient workmanship, situated a little unthe descent towards Exo-Aetd. A little above it,on the rocky side of the height, there is a sepulchraln 236 ITHACA. [chap.niche excavated in the rock. The walls of theacropolis on the hill of Aeto are of the polygonalorder of muonry, and in some places of a rudenessof construction approaching to the earliest kind.The remains below seem in general to be lessancient.The peasants who work in the-vineyards of Aetovery often find ancient coins : generally near thewell and tower. My own excavators, however,produce nothing to-day but some coarse beads,remains of pottery, and a few obliterated coins ofIthaca, of which I had already procured othersfrom the peasants in better preservation. Noneof these remains appear to be earlier than theRojnan empire. One of the coins has the headof Ulysses covered with the pileus ; on anotheris the head of Minerva ; and on a third, a cockwith the legend 'IBaKbiv at length.Although the ancient town which stood at Aetowas of small dimensions, not much more than amile in circumference, the position was of greatimportance, as not only commanding the intercourseby land between the two peninsulas whichJtxn.] ITHACA. 37putchral stones with single names'. The modempath, which now forms the only communicationby land from the district of Vatli^" to the northernparts of the island, touches the shore of Port Molo,and a little beyond it, below the northern walls ofthe Paleokastro, divides into two, that to the rightleading to the monastery of Katara and village ofAnon, the more direct crossing the isthmus of Aetoobliquely, and thence proceeding along the heightscomposing the western coast to Oxoi. It first passesa church of St. John, which is just below Tara,and from thence continues to the village of Lefka,which is situated among terraces of corn, overhangingthe steep and abrupt shore midway betweenAeto and Oxoi. Between Aeto and Ai lanni aresome vestiges of the ancient road cut in the rock,and the letters OA are distinguishable on the face ofit. The learned of Ithaca suppose these letters to beremains of the name of Ulysses, and to mark theplace where he was born by the road side, fromwhich circumstance his name is supposed to havebeen derived. This accident, however, accordingto the best authorities, happened to Anticleia notin Ithaca, but in Boeotia, and the letters on therock are more probably part of the word oSoc-Sept. 19. — Sail in a small boat from Vathy forFrikes, the eastern port of Oxoi, but the wind promisingto be a fresh maestnile, land in the gulf ofMolo, at the foot of Mount Neritum, and proceedon foot to the village of Anon, by a road deservedlycalled the Krunaka, or ladder, being excessivelysteep and rocky ; for the greater part of the dish.Inscriptions, Nos. 106,107.38 ITHACA. [chap.tance it ascends the bed of a torrent, flowing fromthe summit of the mountain of Anon, which remainson our left. The village of Anon stands on the sideof this great summit to the eastward, and overlooksan elevated level, if level it can be called, whichconsists of a labyrinth of rocks, separated by intervalsof fertile soil grown with vines. Some of therocks are needles of ten or twenty feet in height.From the further side of this plain of Anon, themountain falls to the sea by a rapid slope, like thatby which we mounted. After dining at the village,we descend the mountain on the northernside, by a road which threads its way among thepointed rocks, and enter the territory of Oxoi,which consists of an undulated valley, togetherwith the cultivated slopes of three surroundingmountains, inclosing a triangular space betweenthe three ports of Polls, Frikes, and Afales'. Themountain of Anon rises on the southern side of thebasin ; the hill of Oxoi, which has a remarkabledouble summit, incloses it to the westward, and tothe north that of Mariana, which is rocky andbarren, and forms a peninsula at the northern ex-ithaca.39has a delicate old malmsey, made of currants.These dwarf grapes succeed admirably in Ithaca,though the soil does not resemble that white argilof j4cAain and Zante which is there so favourableto them. Here it is a loose, light mould, equallyproper for grain, but much intersected with rocks,and strewn with loose stones. These in some placesare so numerous as totally to hide every particle ofearth, in which case, though the land is useless forcorn, it is not ill adapted to vines, the stones beingof service to the plant, by keeping the earth moistin summer. In fact, the vines and currants producedin that kind of soil are as good as any. Thewine exported from Ithaca in the greatest quantity,is a strong, dry, red wine. The wheat grown inthe district of Oxoi is of excellent quality, someparticularly, of which Mr. Vretto procured theseed from Kalamo, furnishes bread as good as thatmade from the grain of that island. But the greaterpart of the bread consumed in Ithaca is made froma mixture of wheat and barley, raised from mixedseed. This bread is often recommended by thephysicians of the Seven Islands to their dyspepticpatients.Sept. 20. — Mr. Vretto conducts me to the antiquities,and other objects which he considersworthy of notice in the district of Oxoi. We firstvisit at a quarter of a mile to the northward of hishouse, on the side of the northern summit of thehill of Oxoi, and about half a mile above the sea,a precipice of "25 or 30 feet in perpendicular height,lli^d Xoraka ', from a little below which flows a40 ITHACA. [chap.fouQtaiti of the purest water, very cool and copious,even in this season of uncommon dryness. Thesame vein of water shows itself in other parts ofthe hill in smaller sources, and waters some gardensbelonging to Mr. Vretto, which produce among otherfruits, excellent lemons and oranges, sufficient notonly for the consumption of the island, whichpossesses no other gardens, but which are even exportedto Artaa and loannina. Immediately belowthe gardens is a little bend of the coast, calledPeriT61i ', where boats sometimes anchor. Mr.Vrett6's father attempted to establish a mole herefor the convenience of himself and the village, butit was carried away by the sea during the firstwinter. In forming it, he broke down a fine cavein the cliff above, which an old man who was presentat the work describes to me as having had twoopenings. All this of course is intended to supportthe pretensions of the Oxoites, to the honour ofbeing the possessors of the rock Corax and fountainArethusa mentioned by Homer, as well as of theport of Pborcys, on the shore of which was theXXII.] ITHACA. 41In that case there would indeed have been awalk for Ulysses of three miles to the station ofEuniseus, supposing it to have been at the KorakaofOxoi; not over rocks and mountains, however, asHomer requires, but across the largest plain in theisland. As to the name Koraka, it is one not uncommonlyattached to a precipice, and I am assured thatthere is a much higher and more remarkable rock,also called Koraka, near the southern end of theisland, and over which there is a cascade. It issaid there was formerly a quarter of Oxon, justabove the cliff, named the town of the Korakini'.Nothing indeed appears more likely than that Oxoishould have once stood wholly or principally inthat situation, from whence it may have been removedfrom the fear of pirates ; for the fountain isnow at a very inconvenient distance from the village,and gives the women a painful ascent, afterfilling their hydrate and water kegs,Soi and the neighbouring heights, command afine view of the southern side of Lefkadha, fromthe white cliffs of Kavo Dukato or Leucate, to a remarkablehill above Poro, a village so called asstanding in the channel of Meganisi. This channel,which is about a mile in breadth, commencesa lite south of Poro, and extends about four milesto the north of that village, Leucate, upon the extremityof which stood the temple of Apollo Leu-cates', is a long promontory, consisting entirely ofperpendicular cliffs to the westward, and fallingffr^i- YLOpatiiruiv riiv j^iupai'.Strabo, p. 452.Et {iiinmdatiiB nautis aperture Apollo. — ViigU. Ma, 1. 3, v. 275.^42 ITHACA. [chap.Steeply to the eastward, where it shelters from thewest a bay Darned Va8ilik6. This bay extends tenmiles inland from the Cape, and terminates in aerred beach, where ia a river and some Hellenicremains. They mark perhaps the site of Fierce,a place described by Scylax as being opposite toIthaca '. Between Vasilik6 and Poro are the harboursof Sj'vota and Amelia.Having returned to Mr. Vretto's house, we proceedBoutfa-westward half a mile along the slopeof the mountain of Oxoi, and arrive at a littleinsulated cliff, on the summit of which are theremains of a small ancient temple, now convertedinto a church of St. Athanasius. Its dimensionswithin are 21 feet 6 inches by 13 feet 6inches, and attached to it on the eastern side arethe foundations of another smaller edifice, 14 feet6 inches by 12 feet. The laisser has a foundationextending beyond the superincumbent courses, ofwhich, where the ground is lowest, there remaintwo formed of very large regular blocks, abovewhich is a wall of polygonal masonry, a fewXXn.] ITHACA. 43building are chiefly composed of ancient blocks.Along the crest of the cliff are remains of a terracewall, almost destroyed by bushes of primarygrowing between the stones ; some votive nichesof the usual form are seen in the face of the cliff,and at its foot are eight or ten steps cut in the rock ;the natives remember the existence of many more.On the level ground beneath, are some rocks cutinto the form of door-posts, probably the remainsof the entrance of the sacred enclosure, and in thevineyards just below several sepulchres have beenfound, in one of which was the head of a spear, inanother vases. Papa Leondio made me a presentof a piece of calcareous stone having an ornament ofoak leavesandacornsupon it, which was found in thesame place, and probably was a part of the temple.It does not indicate an antiquity higher than that ofthe Roman empire. Not above 100 yards from thisspot to the southward is a fountain called Melany-thro '. In consequence of the uncommon droughtof the season, it is now reduced to two or three littlestagnant pools at the foot of a small cliff, which isabout fifteen feet high, and crowned with bushes ;in the winter the rivulet which flows from the hollowbetween the two summits of the mountain ofOxoi falls over the face of the cliff". The nameMelanydhro has much the appearance of havingbeen, like Koraka, a modem invention for the purposeof supporting the claim of the Oxoites to thehonour of possessing the station of JEum<sus, whereMfXoyvfpoc.^44 ITHACA. [chap.the fiiXav vStiip assuaged the thirst of the godlikehog-driver's cattle, when satiated with the sweetfruit of the oak. The Papas, however, assert thatthe name is derived from a black mud of a sulphureoussmell, which is said constantly to collect itselfhere, notwithstanding any pains which may betakento clear it away. The water is now turbidand ill-tasted, but is said to be very good in otherseasons. Two or three hundred yards farther, inthe same direction, I find in a corn-field a largewrought stone, precisely similar to one which I sawin the ruins of Xeuctu. It is pierced with two squareholes, and seems to have been the architrave of agreat door or gate . Just beyond , are the foundationsof a large Hellenic wall in the vineyards. The situationis called So^kov, apparently an ancient namepreserved. A little to the north of this wall a sorts,or coffin, is excavated in the summit of a gnat insulatedrock, and another adjoining rock has tworound holes, about nine inches in depth, surmountedby a square excavation of half that depth, inwhich are four small round holes thus,The largest is 1 foot 3 inches square: —XXn.} ITHACA. 45where a sepulchral stone is inscribed with thename AAMOX. On the descent from the middleof this ridge towards the bay of Polls, is anotherfountain, now almost dry ; from thence we ascendto the brow of the extremity of the mountain of0x01, where it overhangs the northern side of theharbour. Here is a small acropolis of the samewidth as that of Aeto, and about half the length.The wall, which on one side exists in part, is ofthe rudest kind of Greek masonry. The situationcommands a view of the western coast of the islandas far as Aeto, and of the channel of Kefalonia withthe island of Dhaskalio, which lies immediatelyopposite to the harbour of Polis. Ancient sepulchresare found in several situations adjacent toPolis, particularly to the southward of the beachat the head of the port, and on the slope of MountNeritum, beyond Stavro, where not long since amassive gold ring fitting the human finger wasbrought to light, which is now in the possession ofthe Prytauo, and is engraved in intaglio with thefigure of a woman holding a staff.I have been thus particular in noticing the remainsof antiquity in this quarter, because theyshow that one of the towns of Ithaca stood on theshore of Port Pots, and that it flourished during along succession of, or at least during very differentages; the scattered monuments in the plain beingchiefly of the Roman Empire, while some of thedefensive works near the harbour are of a remoteantiquity, and others of a middle Hellenic date.The name Folia is alone a strong argument that46 ITHACA. [chap.the town which stood here was that which Scylax,and more expressly Ptolemy, mention as havii^borne the same name as the island '. That Homeralso, in t^e earliest times of history, had inview the position of Polis as that of the capital ofIthaca might be presumed from that passage ofthe Odyssey where the poet represents the suitorsas lying in wait for Telemachus, on his return fromthe Peloponnesus at Masters ; for he describes As-termsas a small island in the channel betweenIthaca and Samos ', where the only island isDhaskalio, situated exactly opposite to the entranceof port Polis, St a distance of two miles, and thereforeperfectly adapted to the purpose of the suitorsif the capital and royal residence were at Polis.Indeed, there is no other harbour, nor any othersmall island, with which the poet's uarrafiTe canbe made to accord. It is true that his descriptionof the doable port of Masters does not so well agreewith the rock of Dhaskalio, which has no port, andcould only have furnished a temporary shelter onthe lee side ; this, however, may be considered asmerely a poetical amplification, and is very diffITHACA. 47tons of places, a kind of error which can seldomor never be imputed to Homer,If the Laeftian capital of Ithaca was at Pots,it will follow that the Mount Num, below whichit stood ', was the mountain of Oxoi, and itssouthern summit the Jill of Hermes, from whichEummis saw the ship of Telemachus enteringthe harbour' ; it becomes probable, also, that theharbour Rkeithrvm, which was under Neium, butnot near the city *, was in the bay of Ales,towards Perivolio : having derived its name perhapsfrom the stream which flows from the fountainof Kuraka. Such a position for Rheithrura accordsperfectly with the fiction which the poet representsMinerva to have employed when having assumedthe form of Mentes, king of the Taphii, she pretendedto Telemachus that Mentes was on hispassage from Taphus (now Meganisl) with a cargoof iron, to be exchanged for copper at Tense inCalabria, and that he had left his ship at Rheithrumwhile he came to the city. It ia obvious that thebay of Afales was more in the route from Taphusto Tense than any other harbour in Ithaca,By Plutarch, Stephens, and Istrus of Alexan-Iod. r.'nil) iiirip TilXioc, oHty'EpiidloQ Xil^us Iffrir,Od. n.TiijvQ li foi i)h' E(n-7)irtv Itr aypov roai^i jtdX?'Ev Xi^iri 'PilBpy vvo NijiV vX>itiTi.Od. A. ■Lycophr. v. 768, represents rum, but in tliia he differ fromBlues as' landing at Rheith- Homer.48 Ithaca. [chap.tria, an author cited by Plutarch, we are informedthat the proper name of the capital of Ithaca wasAlcomenae, or Alalcomenee ; that Ulysses bestowedthis name upon it from his having been born onthe road near Alalcomenee in Boeotia, and thathence he was sometimes described as Ulysses theComedian '. But this name is not found inHomer, and if it ever existed, was probably not soearly as the Trojan war, nor lasted 90 long as thetime when Scylax or Ptolemy wrote, but wasemployed in an intermediate period, bendingfrom the time, perhaps, when Ulysses was reestablishedin his kingdom. A passage in Strabotends to the belief, that AlcometuB was the townat Aet6', a place where Ulysses may well besupposed to have axed hie residence, for theBake of the advantages of position already noticed.At Polis I conceive to have stood the city of Ithaca,referred to by Homer, as well as by Scylax, andPtolemy. We* may readily believe that in everyXXII.] ITHACA. 49a^, tj ironic:, or the city, was among the Ithacathe most common designation of their chieftown.As natural causes are Likely to produce in allages similar effects, it is probable that the peculiarconformation of Ithaca has always causedit to be divided, as it now is, into four districts ;and that those which are now called Vathy, Aeto,Anon, and Oxoi, are very nearly the same as thefour divisions of the island noticed by Heraclea,an author cited by Stephanas', Three of thesewere named Neium, Crocyleium, and ^gireus,the fourth is lost by a defect in the text, ^gireuswas probably the same as the philips of Homer :Strabo, indeed, places Crocyleia and jEgilips inLeucas* ; but if Neritnm was in Ithaca, of whichHomer in several passages leaves no room todoubt, there is nothing in the poet which connectsCrocyleia and philips with Leucas ', and the testimonyof Heraclea is opposed to Strabo. Inanother place Stephens favours the suppositionr that Crocyleia was the name of the capital ofOovKvhlltK rpJrri, ro iOnKOfKpocuXiuc' 'iipanXiiiir Si orXairirou, TlTpafiipij stiff ref'ISan^r, Jc 70 fiiy icpaiTOf (Jrifiiarifijipiav Vol SaXarraf, trainToiivTipoy N^'i'oi', iTdi ro rplroyKpoKuXitav, ro rtrnprot- Aiyi-plea — Stephan. in KpenuXtioy.Stephens here confuses thisCrocylium with another in^tolia mentioned by Thucydides.Strabo, p. 370, 453,IfiO ITHACA. [chap.Laertes ' ; but this is obviously inconsistent writhelatter having been in the quarter of Neium.On the other hand, Heraclea is adverse to theplacing of Crocyleia at Vathj', because he statesthe unnamed town to have been in the southernpart of the island. But where a bearing is conceded,little reliance can.be placed upon ancientauthority, and if Crocyleia was the second town inimportance, as the ancient notices of it seem toshow, we . cannot but believe Vath^ to have beenits site. The rugged .sips can be nowhere sowell placed as at Anon.But of all the topographical questions arisingfrom the Odyssey, that of the site of Dulichiumis the niobe puzzling, and the same difficultywas felt by the ancient critics. Hellenic supposedDulichium to have been the ancient nameof the island of Cephallenia : Andros that ofone of its cities, which Precedes conceived tohave been Pale, — an opinion supported by Pausanias'.But Strabo insists that Dulichium was oneof the Echinades, which were occupied (togetherIECHINADE9. 61Troy '. The opinion of Strabo, therefore, is in conformitywith the poet, and there seems no goodreason for doubting that Dulicliium was the head ofan insular state, which, as well as that of the neighbouringislands of the Teleboee and Taphii, and likewme of the islands of Greece in modern times,may have attained by maritime commerce, not unmixedperhaps with piracy, a degree of [populousnessand opulence, beyond the proportion of itsdimensions and natural resources.Petala being the largest of the Eckmade^, andpossessing the advantage of two well sheltered harbours,seems to have the best claim to be consideredAe ancient Dulichium. Lt is indeed a mere rock,bat being separated only by a strait of a few hundred^rds from the fertile plains at the mouth of theAcJielous and river of ffinua, its natural deficienciesmay have been there supplied, and the epithets ofgrassy and abounding in wheat, which Homer appliesto Dulichium*, may be referred to that part»f its territory. But in fact, there is no proof inthe Iliad or Odyssey that Dulkkium, although atthe head of an insular confederacy, was itself anisland ; it may very possibly, therefore, have beena. city on the coast of Acarnania, opposite to theEchinades, perhaps at Tragamesti, or more probablyat the harbour named Pandelcimona, ,which is separated only by a channel of aStrabo. pp. 351, 458. \b'J.Tiliawv, fiT lovat jrt'pqv aXoQ "IIXiCoj &yTa'Til aSe" liyeftovivc Mtyiic, &c.— II. B. v.iouXl^lOlr Wll\vTtUpOU TtUlilCVTOi. 0(1. II. V. H'JG.E 2^M62 Ithaca. [Chap.mile or two frown the EcMnadea. The Oxeiee seemnot to have been included in this little state, forHomer in another place alludes to them under thename of Those, a synonym of Oxeiae '.Sept. 21. — In proceeding to the port of FrikesI observe, near a ruined church of the Panaghla,several ancient blocks of stone carved in furrows,as if for a ruedc basement. Here are also two inscriptions,one of which is in Latin. Like all thosefound in the district of Oxoi, they are sepulchral,and of the time of the Roman empire*. At Frikesare several magazines, and here die Oxoites principallycarry on their maritime trade, though theharbour is exposed to a swell when the wind isstrong at east, as well as to dangerous gusts fromthe narrow gorge which communicates with thevalley of Oxoi. It is much safer, however, thanthe open bays (tfPoUs and Ales. Ships generallyanchor at Matron, on the southern side, or atLim^ni, to the north, in preference to Frikes itself.At Matron there is a convent of St. Nicolas, andbehind it vineyards, on the ascent as far up asXXn.] ITHACA. 53Gulf of Molo, we pass a small port to the north-eastof Skliino, named Ghidhaki, having an islet of thatname before it, then a bare coast, then Filiatro andSarakiniko, two little bays at the foot of the ridgewhich separates this coast from the plain of Vath^',and reach Port Lia in time for me to land and visitthe fountain, which by the learned of Vathy issupposed to be the Arethusa of the poet. Thespring is in a ravine midway between the shoreand a long perpendicular cliff which closes theravine, at a distance of a mile from the sea. Thisprecipice forms the point of junction betweenMount Merovugli and a range of hills which followthe eastern and southern shore of the island. Inseasons of rain a torrent falls in a cascade overthe precipice, and from its foot descends rapidlybetween slopes covered with vines, corn, andfig trees, and leaving the pigadhi or fountainon its left, joins the sea at port Lia. The fountainis a natural and never-failing reservoir in a cavern,before which a wall has been built with a troughfor the convenience of watering cattle. There isevery reason to believe that this is really the fountainArethusa intended by Homer, and that theprecipice above it is the rock Corax, which thepoet had in view in describing the station of theswineherd Eumasus. Such a source of water mustalways have been valuable and celebrated in thisthirsty land ; the cliff is sufficiently remarkable tohave deserved the poet's notice, and the station ofMusaeus, as 1 before remarked, was evidently at thesouthern extremity of the island. It would evenI that the poet alluded to this precipice when54 ITHACA. [chap.he represented Ulysses as confining the assuranceswhich he eves to the incredulous Humerusof the approaching return of bis master, by permittingthe swineherd to throw him over the ' ' greatrock" if his words should prove false '. Near thepigadbi is another smaller cavern, which alsocontains water.Below them the torrent continues its rapid courseto the sea along a narrow glen, where a deepchannel in the lime-stone rock is overhung withetrees which cover all the heights around, andwhich consist chiefly of lentisk, agniis-castus, myrtle,and holly-oak. The scenery of the Arethusa andCorps is very beautiful, not only in its nearer features,but as commanding a noble prospect of thesea, of the Echinadea, and of the coasts of Acarnaoiaand ^tolia, seen through the openings of thewoody precipices. The port of Lia is well shelteredf^m the north by an island, on either sideof which there is a convenient access to the harbour,and a considerable depth of water near theshore, as in every part of the coast of Ithaca.The island is covered with brushwood, and is iXXn.] CEPHALLENIA. 55under the coast with a pleasant maestrale, andhaving passed the little harbour of St. Andrewunder the southern termination of Mount Mero-vugli, stand over for Cape Khelia, in Kefalonia.The wind coming afterwards from that shore, weareobliged to beat into the anchorage of Agrili, inthe south-eastern angle of the great bay of Samo,Sept, 22. — Samos, which has preserved its nameever since the first establishment of a Greek cityon this spot, is now nothing more than a street ofmagazines, situated at the north-eastern extremityof a wide valley which borders the bay, and whichis overlooked to the southward by the great summitcalled 'Elato, and by the Italians Montenero.Sae, or the city of the Santos, as we find itwritten on the coins of this place, stood on theNorthwestern face of a precipitous height, whichrises from the shore at the northern end of thestreet of magazines. The ruins and vestiges ofthe ancient walls show that the city occupied thetwo summits, an intermediate hollow, and theirslope as far as the sea. With the exception ofsome terraces of olive trees and corn on the northernside of the two hills, they are entirely covered withwild shrubs, and are connected behind with higherridges in a similar state, which follow the coast to thesouthward, as far as thevaleof Propos. On the northernof the two summits are the ruins of an acropolis,consisting of the entire circuit of the foundations,and in some places of several courses of masonryof the most regular kind ; the stones are fittedtogether with the greatest nicety, and some whichI measured are equal to cubes of 6 or 8 feet. All56 CEPBALLENIA. [Chap.the ground within the citadel, with the exceptionof a rocky height in the centre, is cultivated withcom, and strewn with fragments of ancient pottery.In the midst of the ploughed ground are the remainsof a large cistern built of Roman bricks.On the summit of the southern height stands amonastery dedicated to the ayioi ^avivrt^, on oneside of which are some remains of a Hellenic wall,which appears to have encircled this summit, thusforming a second but smaller castle. This agrees¥rith Livy, who mentions both the arx major, orgreater citadel of Same, and another named Cy-tis.Same was considerably smaller than Leucas, itscircuit being barely two miles. The south-easternor upper wall of the city, which united the twocitadels, is still in part preserved on the side ofeither hill ; the eastern and western faces of thetown walls may also be traced in places, as wellas some parts of that side which was parallel tothe sea beach ; one piece in particular towardsthe western angle, is of the most regular kind andfinest workmanship, being formed of stones exactlyequal, with projections in the middle of the faceof each stone, and as usual in this kind of masonry,with one narrow course near the ground. In thehollow between the two hills towards the center ofthe site are many foundations of ancient masonry,and near the western angle of the city some remainsof moles, which were probably connectedwith the maritime wall of the city, project fromthe beach into the sea ; they formed an artificialshelter for vessels, which was very necessary here,XXM.] CEPHALLENIA. 57as the bay, although well adapted to a largemodern fleet, was too much exposed for ancientships. Near the jetties are some shapeless ruinsof Roman brick. Some other remains of the sameconstruction, vulgarity called the mecca, or mint,are to be seen at a considerable distance to theeastward of the ancient site, near a metokhi ofthe monastery ; and there is a third ruin of brickworkon the western side of the walls, behind themodern street, which by the apertures in its wallsseems to have been a bath. These ruins of Romanconstruction are the more remarkable, as Strabo,who correctly describes the situation of Same,asserts that in his time there remained only afew vestiges of the city '. It would seem thatSame, like many other Greek cities, revived afterthe time of Augustus, and that the existing remainsbelonged to buildings of a subsequent date.Many sepulchres have been discovered in the cultivatedfields adjacent to the ancient site, as wellas near the Mint, where in particular an old monkof the metokhi remembers two gold coins to havebeen found.The solidity and finished construction of theexisting specimens of the Hellenic walls of Sameseem worthy of a city which stood a siege of fourmonths against the Romans under the consul M.Fulvous Nobility, in the year 189 b. c. *. I havealready hinted that the northern height seems tobe the major arx, or chief citadel, noticed by Livyg rvf fiirpvuir' lair, ^x""! «"' ""i-'/C ^a/iaioi ■.■(iXoDjtoi. —f avriit eiUfvrai Kara fiiaoy Strabo, p. "Miss.TOy Tfioc 'lOaVj) TroQOiioV o\ £' ' Liv. 1. 38, c. 29.58 CEPHALLENIA. [Chaponthat occasion, and the height of the ' Fan^ndesthat named Cyatis. Fulvous, after having reducedAmbracia and italia, had passed over into Ce-phalaena,and received hostages from its fourcities, when the Samsei, suddenly changing theirconduct, shut their gates against the Iloaiaiis.The siege was remarkable for the diligence withwhich the besieged retrenched their walls asquickly as die were demolished, and for thevigorous and frequent sallies by which they interruptedthe operations of the enemy. In thesesorties, their most effective opponents were 100slingers of Achaia, who having been habituatedfrom their youth to exercise, with pebbles foundon the beach of .£gium, Petra;, and Dame, hadacquired a greater skill in their art, even than theslingers of the: Balearic Islands. When at lengththe besieged had become weakened by fatigue andloss of men, the Romans scaled the Cyatis duringthe night, and from thence penetrated into theagora, upon which the Sanisei retired into thelarger citadel, and the next day surrendered andwere enslaved.The ruins of Same command a good view of thewestern side of Ithaca, and the outline of the fournatural divisions of the island, Oxoi, Anon, Aeto,and Vathy, is particularly well marked from hence.The valley of Same is about 3 miles in width atthe sea, and 5 or 6 in length from north to south.Above the latter extremity, in a lofty situation,stands the village of Kulurata, under Mount 'Elato\Pliny (1. 4, c. 12.) gives mountain, not of Cephallenia,the name of Latus to the hut ofZacynthus, which accordsXXII.] CEPHAI-LENIA. 59and there are several other small villages on theheights around the plain. The whole forms thedistrict of Samos ; it produces chiefly corn andolives. A brook, now dry, which rises in Mount'Elate flows through the middle of the plain intothe bay. According to Strabo, the ancient appellationof this great mountain, which is so lofty asto be visible at sea, together with etna in Sicily,was £nus ; and he adds, that upon it stood atemple of Jupiter genesis'. A few years ago,an accidental Are, like that which happened inMount Barnes, destroyed a great part of thewoods of fir, from which Mount 'Elato derives itsmodem name. The bare stems are now conspicuousmonuments of the misfortune.Having with difficulty procured a mule and twoasses, I depart from Samo for Argostoli at 3.30,P.M. ; we cross the plain in its widest part, andarrive in an hour at the village of Pulita, situatedon the slope of the range, which is a continuationof Mount 'Elato, and occupies the whole length ofthe island, beginning southward at Cape Scala,and approaching the northern coast near Asso ;from whence it is prolonged northward in theform of a long promontory, which lies parallel toIthaca, and terminates at Cape Viskurdho, oppositeto Cape Dukato in Lefkadha.in some measure with the vXij- ' fiiyumy c spa; it airr^tala ZdcvcOoc of Uomt-x, by Alroc, h jl tu tou Riot AiVij-rendering it probable Limit the aloe iipcir. — Shrubs, p. ^5ti.mountains of Zante, though nowbare, were formerly coveredwith are.60 CEPHALLBNIA. [Chap.After passing Plata, we ascend the ridge slowlythrough bushes and rocks by a very rugged path,and arrive a little after sunset at the summit, fromwhence there ia a fine view of both sides of theisland. To the west appears the great bay andthe town of Lixuri. Argost61i aud its harbour arehid by a round mounts in face of us, whichforms a ridge parallel to that of Mount 'Elato ;between them is a rugged valley poorly cultivated,with a torrent at the bottom. To the left of theround mountain, near the head of Aigostoli Bay,is seen Livadho, the third town in the island, andhaving in its dependency 23 villages, with all theancient plain of the Cranial whose city occupieda site still called Krani^ above the south-easternangle of the bay of Ai^ostoli. In the middle of theplain of Livadho rises the insulated height ofSt. Geoi:|;e, crowned with a Venetian castle, nowabandoned. Strabo seems to have had a mostincorrect idea of Cephallenia, for he states thatits circumference was only 300 stades, instead ofwhich it is near 800, and that at the gulf containingthe cities of the Granii and Pleases the islandXTtll."] CEPnALLENIA. 6!lage of 500 tufeka, and said to be the most rebelliousand disorderly in the island. From Farak-lata we continue to descend a road something betterthan before, but which required a sure-footed muleand a fine moonlight night to make it tolerablysafe. On every side are bare rocks, with very littlecultivation in the intervals. At length we enter anarrow rocky torrent bed, which emerges at an hourbelow Faraklata, on a small level on the side of theBay of Argostoli, opposite the northern end of thetown ; thence proceed along the sea side to a ferryopposite the southern end, which we cross at 9.The only place of amusement either at Argos-toldor Lixuri h a Casino at each of those places,where the people meet, drink coffee, aud play.There is little society on account of the familyenmities. The houses of Argostoli have in generalonly one story, on account of the earthquakes, towhich this island has the reputation of being morasubject than any of the surrounding countries ;the lowest part of the wall is of stone, and the upperof wood, and the stone-work contains a framingof wood, in order that the house may stand evenif the earthquake should throw down the stones.The town is very irregular, and in the outskirts areagreat number of miserable cottages. The fencesof the surrounding gardens and fields are chieflycomposed of American aloes.Sept. 24. — The walls of the Cramer are among thebest extant specimens of the military architectureof the Greeks, and a curious example of theirattention to strength of position in preference toother conveniences, for nothing can be more M62 CBPRALLENIA. [CHAP.get and forbidding than tie greater part of thesite. The iDcIoaure, which was of a quadrilateralform, and little, if at all, less than three miles incircumference, followed the crests of several rocky,summits, surrounding an elevated hollow whichfalls to the south-eastern extremity of the Gulf ofAi^stoli. This extremity served for an harbourto the city, and may perhaps have been so narrowedby moles from either shore as to have formeda closed port. The highest of the mountains justmentioned is that which rises in face of Ai^;ost61ito the east. There are few or no. remains of thetown wall along the crest of this mountain, whichformed the north-western face of the city ; butfrom its inland extremity commences the northeasternfence, through the whole of which the lowerparts of the walls and towers are extant, and in themiddle the principal gate of the city in a similarstate of preservation, retired within Uie line of thewalls, and having a quadrangular domus beforeit like that of Plataea, about fifteen yards square.The south-eastern and south-western fronts of thecity are in some parts, particularly towards thexxn.] cnpnALLENiA. 63the north-eastern side led immediately into the elevatedhollow already mentioned, which is grownwith olives, and is watered by a torrent from theeastern summit, which, meeting another from thenorthern, flows to the harbour. The walls of theuorth-eastem front are a complete specimen of thesecond or polygonal species of masonry. A foundationstone in one of the towers is twelve feet long,eight feet high, and thick in proportion. On thesouth-eastern and south-western faces some of themasonry is more regular. On the outside of thenorth-eastern face, near the eastern angle, are theremains of a wall built at a right angle to the inclosureof the city, and stretching from that wall to abrook at the foot of the height, thus effectually obstructingthe passage of an enemy along the footof the walls, and obliging him to make a greatcircuit. At Crania, as in other Hellenic fortifications,the beautiful masonry of the walls was onlya facing, all the middle of the work, amounting toa third of the thickness, having been formed ofrough stones and mortar. Not a vestige of anyfoundations, either constructed or excavated, is tobe seen among the rugged rocks within the inclosure,a remark which 1 have had occasion to apply to severalother ancient sites of great extent, and of thesame rocky kind, and which seems to show that thechief intent of these extensive inclosures was to securethe inhabitants, cattle, and property, of thewhole district in moments of danger, and that theywere very partially occupied in times of tranquillity.The mode of warfare of the Greeks, and the tenorof their history, support this opinion.aH64 CSPHALLBNIA. [Chap.Sept 25. — Sail to Liberi in company with thecommandant of the Russian samson and our vice-consul,Mr. Victor Kai^dhi. Dine with thepiano, and visit the Pale6-kastro, which is nownothing bat a small height rising immediatelyfrom the side of the bay, about a mile and a halfto the north of the town. It is formed of the samekind of white soil as the Castle-hill of Zdkytho,and is cut into gullies by the rain in the samemanner. In such a soil it is not to be expectedthat we should find many remains of antiquity ; accordinglythere is nothing left but a receptacle forasingle body, excavated in the upper part of agreat rock on the summit of the hill, and a well orcistern, which is also cut out of a vein of rock. Inthe fields, however, at the foot of this height, nearthe sea, many ancient squared blocks are scatteredabout, and there is a wall which, although built ofloose stones and mortar, appears once to have hada Hellenic facing. An old man whom Meet, remembersto have seen an inscription found herewiththe word ElaXnuv on it, which was carried toVepjce'. At a casino several large wrought rEPHALl-ENIA. 65gne before-mentioned, excavated in the summit ofa great rock. These are now the only remains ofPale aboveground, but the name in the slightly-corruptedform of Palioo still remains attached tothe plain, which extends about ten miles in circumferencearound Paleokastro, and the wholePeninsula, as far as the western coast and Gulf ofAsso, is called Paliki', which, being purely Hellenic,is sufficient with the name of Palioo, and the vestigesof antiquity on and around the hill of Palesto fix the latter for the site of the ancientPale, or city of the antic, or Pleases, for such appearsto have been the local form of the name, wluclivaries greatly in the printed authorities. Pnliki isnow divided into two districts Aiioi and Patois Theplain of Palioo has a white argillaceous soil, similarto that of Zakytho, and consists chiefly of currantplantations fenced with aloes ; there are severalwind-mills in it. The town of Lixuri is more irregularthan that of Argostoli, the streets dirtier, thehouses of the rich more mean, and the poorercottages more numerous. A muddy rivulet crossedby two small bridges, traverses the middle of thetown. It is reckoned more populous than Argos-told,and the situation more healthy, which mayeasily be imagined as it is well ventilated, and hasnone of that shallow water and marshy groundwhich are at the head of the Bay of Ariosto :the inhabitants are for the most part seamen.The island of Kefalonia is divided into eighteendistricts. The population is about 60,000. The66 CBPRALLENIA. [Chap.exports in the order of quantity are currants, wine,oil, cheese, barley, carouse, oats, oranges and lemons,honey, melons, cibibo, madder, liquorice,squills, and aloes. Among the productions are alsomuse and wheat, but not more than sufficient forthe consumption of two or three'months; with somecotton and flax, used in the manufacture of coarsestiifis, and a small quantity of coarse blankets andcapons made from the wool of the island. Theseafaring population, including fishermen, amountsto near 3,000. The soil is rocky in the mountainousdistricts, and stony even in. the plains ;but the productions ar generally good in theirkinds, particularly the wine, of which the islandwould be capable of producing a great variety andquantity, if there were more care and intelligencein the cultivation and manufacture of it. Wantof water is the great defect of the island. There isnot a single constantly flowing stream : the sourcesare neither numerous nor plentiful, and many ofthem fail entirely in dry summers, creating sometimesa great distress..Xii.] CE1>HAXLENIA. fibesides these four cities, all which were of sufficientimportance to coin their own money, it appears,from several Hellenic names stili existing,that there were some other fortresses or subordinatetowns in Cephallenia, The position of Asso, ona peninsula commanding two harbours, concurswith the evidence of a piece of Hellenic wallin the modem castle, to show that here stooda fortress named Asses. On the same coast, tothe southward, at the north-western extremityof the peninsula of Paliki, the harbour of Terraindicates an ancient site by its name, whichdiffers only by a slight dialectic variation fromStella, a known name. Farther south, on thecoast of the same peninsula, Tafio, where manyancient sepulchres are found, is the site apparentlyof Taphus, a Cephallenian town, noticed by Stephens.Towards the opposite side of the islandRakJi and Orissa, or Eriaso, have every appearanceof being ancient names. Rakli, which lies betweenthe north-eastern side of Mount 'Elato and themaritime ridge, seems to indicate that there wasanciently a Heraclea in that valley, and Erisso,that the long narrow peninsula so named at thenorthern extremity of the island, contained ancientlya town of Erasmus. The port of Viskurdliois evidently the Panoiinus, which an epigram ofAntipater of Thessalonica describes as being oppositeto Ithaca ', and which Artemidorus, by attri-^ifit K.upnW^ifiiH' XifitvoaKoirt, ffiya llariipftouTiaiuf Tpijxefic tivTiirifiifv 'IBatnic-Anthnl. Joroba. vol. ii. p. !!!).p268 CEPHALLEKIA. [CHAP. XXII.bunting to it a distance of twelve stades from thatisland ^ shows to have been in this the narroweststrait. The convenience of this harbour, at thepart of the entrance of the channels of Ithaca andJjetLcatCj has in all ages rendered it valuable. Ona former journey I observed there some remainsof Roman ruins near the shore, and there wouldseem, from the ancient authorities which I have ^cited, to have been a temple of Apollo on thepoint which shelters the northern side of the port,corresponding to a similar temple on the summitof Leucate. In the time of Strabo, Cephalleniawas inhabited by the ex-consul Caius AntoniusNepos, uncle of Marcus Antonius, when he wasexiled from Italy. The whole island obeyed himas if it had been his private property, and he projectedthe building of a new city, but being recalledfrom banishment, and dying soon afterwards, hisintention was never executed. Pale, Prongs, andCrania were then small, and Same a mere ruinedArtemidorus ap. Porphyry. * Strabo, p. 455.Ant. Nymph.*lr12^^CHAPTER XXIII.CYTHERA, /EoaiAN ISLANDS.Arrival at Tergo — Kapaali — Cytherea, Phaenicui, Scandeia —Milo — Kiiara — Kastro— Ruins of Jl/e/iM— Paro, ancient cityDescription of the Island — Andiparo — Ancient Quarries ofPnrut — Ko8t6 — Marmara — Naxia, Nexus— Island of Paldti —Villages, Population, Produce — Dales— fle/iu, Hientrn ofApollo, Mount Cynthia, Olympiemm—Rkeneia — Mykono,Mifcottu* — Sky TO, Scyrus — Port Achilles — SkSnghero —ScopelvM, Sciathui, Harness, Ices — Aistrati.Sept. 30. — We anchor this evening at Kapsali, inCerigo, after having encountered off the Tccnarianpromontory some stormy weather, which threatenedto send us to the coast of Africa. It was in consequenceof an adverse gale in the same place andat the same season that T had the misfortune, incompany with Mr. Hamilton and the late Lieut.Col. Squire, to be shipwrecked at Avleraona, in(his island.Oct, I. — Remain at the port in my tent, andreceive our vice-consul Calucci, to whose kindnesson that occasion we were extremely indebted. Inthe evening we walk up to the town together, andattend a baptism at the house of Mr. Mormon, theRussian vice-consul, the Pry taiioGeorgeArvanitaki.of Zante, standing godfather. This Prytano is well70 Gather. [CHAP.spoken of by the Cerigotes as disinterested, liberaland impartial. The pay of Prj^tano is 90 dollars amonth, that of Legislator 80 dollars, of a Senator60. The Prj^tano keeps a table for aides-de-campand secretaries, for which he has no allowance.The garrison of Cerigo now consists only of twoRussian officers with one company, and a fewAlbanians, chiefly Suites. 'The obscurity of the history of Greece duringthe middle ages, renders it impossible to tracethe modern appellation pf this island to its origin.It is almost the only instance of a Sclavonic namein the Greek islands. Tergo was perhaps a Serviannchieftain, who obtained possession of Cytherawhen the Sjcvdai !SjcXa/3oc, or barbarians of Slavonicrace settled in the Peloponnesus in suchnumbers that a name of Sclavonic origin has eversince remained attached to the peninsula ^ T2^epc-yoc, in Italian Cerigo, contains about 50 villagesand 7000 inhabitants : in the town there arescarcely 1000. The most fruitful parts are theplains of Mylopotamo and Livadhi ; the latter,which I formerly crossed on my way from Avle-mona to the town, consists of vineyards and comfields, interspersed with olive and other fruittrees, as well as with villages, single houses, andlabourers' huts. The town of Cerigo stands ona narrow ridge 500 yards in length, terminatingat the south-eastern end in a precipitous rock,crowned with a castle which is accessible only onMorea, from More, (sea,) as being the maritime provinceXXIII.] CYTMEHA. 71the side towards the town, by a steep and windingpath, but is commanded by a conical height at theopposite end of the ridge. The town is enfiladedby a battery of three guns in the castle, which waserected or repaired by the French when they tookpossession of the Venetian Islands.In the north-western height, which is composedof a bluish calcareous stone, the most commonrock in the island, are some hard argillaceousveins, noted for containing numerous bones perfectlyresembling the natural bone, except thatthe place of the marrow is filled with pellucidcrystals. The people of Cerigo long believed,and most of them probably still believe, thatthese bones are human ; but anatomists havepronounced some jaw bones and teeth which havebeen found among them, to have belonged to aspecies of deer. Another kind of limestone whichis brought to Cerigo from Candia, for the purposeof being pounded and mixed with the new wine,contains petrified fish, very much resembling thoseof Mount Linus.Heraclitus Pontius describes the people of Ceteraas laborious, and lovers of money, and theisland as productive, particularly in honey andwine '. The character of the people is the necessaryconsequence of the rocky soil on which theydwell. Although the productions, like those ofsome others of the driest islands, as Kefalonia andZia are good in their kinds, their quantity, withthe exception of honey and wine, is seldom morefia ya h vqffOC iroXXii, yupoi ci eli scil ^iXotocoi. —xoi fiiXi Kui oifoy . . . ^iKd{ Herald. Pont, in KvOiipfuv.72 Cetera . [crap.than sufficient for the consumption of the inhabitants.There is nothing, therefore, to attractcommerce to Cerigo, and the people have verylittle of that carrying trade 'vrhich has enrichedsome much more barren rocks. As in Zakythoand Kefalonia, many of the men obtain subsistenceabroad as agricultural labourers, not however ingeneral like the natives of those islands, on theneighbouring continent, but in Asia Minor, wherethey cultivate the Turkish lands, and gathermadder in the mountains. By these means theyoften bring back a few purses to their nativeisland, and are enabled to buy some land here.Beef is scarcely ever eaten, as there are no moreoxen in the island than are required for the plough.Pork and mutton, hares and quails, of which thereis a great quantity in the autumn, are the principalmeats; the consumption of which is mucheconomized by the 150 fast days of the Greekcalendar. The 'island is very subject to earthquakes; several occurred last July.The situation of the modem town of Cerigo soXXIII.] cytherea. 73there which was near it, and thirdly Scandeia,which had a harbour ', and was in a part of theistaud distant from the two former places.In the eighth year of the Peloponnesian war, theAthenians undertook an expedition against thisisland with 60 triremes, 2000 hopUtse, some cavalry,a body of Miles, and a few others of the Athenianallies, the whole commanded by Nicias and twoother generals. While a detachment of 2000 Milesand 10 ships captured Scandeia, the remainderproceeded to the shore opposite to Cape Maleaa inPeloponnesus, and having debarked, marched tothe maritime city of the Cytherii ', who metthe invaders, but having been defeated, retiredto their upper city ', where they capitulated toNicias on the sole condition that their lives shouldbe spared. The Athenians then took possessionof Scandeia, left a garrison in the city Cythera,and proceeded against Asine, Helps and other maritimeplaces in Laconia.At Paleopoli, about three miles inland from theport of Avlemona, are the ruined walls of an ancienttown, and as the situation is not far from the Capeof Cythera opposite to the promontory of Laconia,which is still named Maleaa, it seems evidentlyto have been the upper Cythera intended by Thucydides,in which case it cannot but follow thatripe (iri 6nXoVcT( itiiKiv iKojiavrii; TJj'; y'lfov i^ ni Trpo^Stiariiiay raXou^tV ijv MaXiOK Ttrptijifiiya, [)(upouyTO tVt X^itfi ir6\taiia. — Tim iV! ri;i' tire OnXdva^ ToKiy ruincyd. 1. 4, c. 53. Kv6npiu.y.—c. 54.74 Cytherea. [chap.Avlemona was the. site of the maritime Cythera.From Xenophon there is reason to believe that thislower town was also calleth Phoenicians, for in describingan expedition similar to that of Nicias,which was undertaken by Conon and Phamabazusin the Corinthian wai', the historian relates thatwhen the fleet anchored at Phoenicians, the* Cytheriiabandoned their city, and that Conon, having sentthem over to Laconia, strengthened the walls ofCythera and left an Athenian garrison in it ^ Thishappened in the year b. c. 393, in the spring succeedingthe naval victory of Conon at Cnidus, andthe same year in which the Long Walls of Athenswere rebuilt.The name Phoenicia was obviously derived fromthat Phoenician colony which, according to Herodotus,imported into Cythera the worship of theSyrian Venus, by the Greeks summed Urania,and whose temple (described by Pausanias a^ themost ancient and holy of all those, dedicated inGreece to Aphrodite) stood in the city of the Cytherii^ The whole circuit of Cerigo being verydeficient in harbours, there is no point on the coastat which it is so probable that the Phoeniciansshould have landed, as in the sheltered creek ofAvlemona*. And the appearance of the ruinsXenoph. Hellen. 1. 4, c. 8. * Avlemona itself may be anHerodot 1. 1, c. 105. Pau ancient name : a vXii/xaiK derivedsan. Bacon. c. 23. The statue from avXoc, in allusion to itsstill remained in the time of Pau long narrow form, bordered bysanias,made of wood, and represent rocks.setting the goddess as armed.XSItl.] Cytherea. 75at Paleopoli, which I examined on my formerjourney, ia equally in agreement with the remoteantiquity of the town, which may be inferred fromthat of the temple.Every circumstance, therefore, in the transactionsrelated by the historians favours the suppositionthat Paleopoli was the site of upper Cythera,and Avlemona that of Phoenicia or the lowertown ; and that Scandeia stood at the modem townof Ccrigo. Pausanias, however, is directly opposedto this conclusion; for be describes Scandeiaas the ivivuov, or harbour of the city whichcontained the temple of Venus, and as situatedonly ten stadia below it, which leads directly tothe conclusion that Cytltcra was at the modemtown ; that Scandeia was at Kapsali, and that itwas the same place as the lower Cytherea — whichcannot be reconciled with the historians.The island to the south-east of Cerigo, calledCerigotto by the Italians, is named Lies by theGreeks of Cerigo and the Morea, and by the Sfak-hopes of Crete Seghilio, a corruption or dialecticvariation of AlytXia, which, as we learn from Plinyand Stephanas', was the ancient name of theisland; the former places ^gilia at 15 M.P. fromCetera, and at 25 from Phalasaraa in Crete : Lysalludes to it under the name of ^gilus^There are about 40 families in Seghilio, of whomPlin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 12. AlyiXov r' atpoy. — Lycophr.Stephan. in AtyMa. v. 108.^ Bfxfcic mp Sttdvleiay76 Hale. £can.four are from Cerigo. The island iB a nominaldependence of Cerigo, and consequently belongsto the Peninsular state ; but there being no garrison,it is in last in the hands of the Sfakhi6tes.It produces good wheat, of which a portion, infavourable years, is sent to Crete : the port isbad, and open to the north. The small islandnamed Porn by the Italians, lying to the north ofCerigotto, is called Frasonisi by the Greeks.Oct. 3.— sail in the afternoon from Kaps&li :anchor at night at Fumes, andOct. 4. — Visit this morning the caveni ofMylop6tamo, two miles north of Fumes. It iswinding and intricate, with many branchingpassages, columns of stalactites, and basins ofclear water formed by droppings from the roof : inmostparts it is very low, and there is no laiopening or chamber in any part. The village ofMylopotamo is about a mile above it, and is socalled from a rivulet which rises there and turnstwelve mills : in the present season the water isall consumed before it reaches the sea, but some-xxii.]Melt. 77blows on the western coast, and anchor in thebay of Vatika', from whence we sail.Oct. 7. — And having again passed Maleaa andCape Kali :Oct. 8. — Find ourselves this morning a littlesouth of lerakunia, called Falconer by the Italians.Arrowsmith has correctly marked the situationof these rocks as well as those which he callsAnanes and Pa.^imadhi, near the southern extremityof Milo. Those names, however, are unknownto my sailors, who call them Ktinia andPrasoDisi.Oct. 10. — Light adverse winds or calms, accompaniedwith rain having continued to prevail,it is not until this morning that we enter the port ofMilo, and anchor near the head of the bay. Land,and visit the hot springs : the hottest is on the sea-beach,a mile from the old town. The ground aroundthem is impregnated with sulphur, as appears bya yellow crust on many of the stones. In theside of a little rocky height above is another hotsource in a cavern, and a vapour issuing from theassures so hot that the water appears less so thanit really is. A thick crust of salt is formed on therocks around, and flakes of salt float on the surface.Turks from the neighbouring continentsometimes come here to take a course of bathing.To the south-east of this height are some salt-pans,and a marshy level, in which, towards thebills, stands the hora, or town, once containingIG.OOO inhabitants, but now not more than 200For a more extended see Travels in the Morea,journal of Oct. 4, .'i, 6, 7, vol. i. p. .lOT.78 MBLtJS. [chap.families. There are 25 Greek and 2 Latinchurches still remaining. The ruins and thenaked valley surrounded by white rocky heights,and with scarcely any vegetation except a fewmeagre date-trees, give the place a most dismalappearance. The air is said to be very unhealthy.In the afternoon I proceed to the village calledKastro, which is situated on a peaked rocky heightabove the northern side of the entrance of the bay,and lodge in the house of the English vice*consul,Mr. Peter Mikh^lis, who with many of his relationsand all the richer Milites, gain their livelihoodas pilots for the JEg<sean sea. At the highestpoint of the village they have a look-out room,where some of them are always on the watch forships making signals for pilots. They are wellsupplied with English telescopes, and have goodboats, with which they sometimes meet vessels ata distance of 12 or 15 miles from the island. Therule is, that whoever first discovers a ship has aprior right to offer himself as pilot.Milo has now not more than between 2 and3000 inhabitants, who, in addition to the productionsconsumed by themselves, raise for exportation,in tolerable years, 2000 kila politics ofwheats and 12 or 14000 of barley, 2 or 300 kan-tarof cotton, and 1500 barrels of wine. The islandwould derive also a considerable profit from itsmines of alum and sulphur, if the fear of the Portedid not prevent the inhabitants from working them.The mines are on the eastern side of the island,The KoiiXoy ^roXiriicov, or ordered to contain 22 okes, orkilo of Constantinople, is con 60 English pounds.KXTTl.] Helots. 79near a height which emits smoke, and lias everyappearance of having been a volcano '.The oil produced in the island is seldom sufficient,even in good years, for its consumption.They depend upon their neighbours for cheese,and import a few European articles of householdfurniture. The men are all dressed in the whitecotton cloth made in the island, with the exceptionof a few of the more opulent, who wear stripedcottons from Turkey. The dress of the women isalso of Militate cotton, generally with a red edgingor fringe of flaxen lace, which is also homo-made.There are a few looms in the island for the makingof a coarse woollen cloth. They have fewsheep, and oxen only for tillage. The soil is notin general good, die cotton pods are small, andthe wheat and barley, though sometimes returning10 to 1, supply only a dingy disagreeable bread.The island is capable of producing excellentwine, as some specimens prove, both sweet anddry, but little care is observed in the making, andwater is generally mixed with the wine before it isoffered for sale. The island suffers often fromdrought, potherbs are very scarce, and there is nofruit of any kind. At the present season grapesare brought for sale from Sifno,Oct. 11. — Between the hill of Kastro and thenorthern shore of the harbour are the ruins of theancient city of Moles, which seems to have extendedquite to the water side, as there are remainsof walls and of a round tower on the beach.See the description of It in Olivier.80 MELUS. [chap.On the highest part, which i$ immediately overlookedby the village, are some remains of polygonalwalls, and others of regular masonry withround towers. The western wall of the city istraceable all the way down the hill from the summitto the sea : on the east it followed the ridge ofsome cliffs, but some foundations remain only in afew places.Within the inclosure, on the slope of the hill,are many other pieces of ancient wall, faced withregular masonry, but filled within with rubble andmortar. There is, particularly, a fine angle of themost regular kind, and preserving twelve or fourteencourses, a little eastward of a pointed hill,near the middle of the site, on the summit ofwhich stands a church of St. Elias, and a smallmonastery, with a lodging for a single monk. Thisbuilding occupies probably the site of a small-temple,as near it lies a stone which formed one ofthe angles of a pediment, including part of a Corinthiancornice below it. The stone is 3 ft. 10 in.in length, the same in thickness, and 3 ft. high inthe highest part. In a field immediately below thisspot are other fragments of the same edifice, amongwhich is a capital of a pilaster of the Corinthianorder, 2 ft. 9 in. square at bottom. Here also formerlystood an altar, with ornaments of sculpture,which has since been transported to England.That all the architectural remains belonged to oneand the same building can scarcely be doubted,as they are all of Parian marble, with blue veins,and the dimensions of the pediment and cornicecorrespond exactly to those of the pilaster andXXIII.] MELUS. 81column. The building seems, therefore, to havebeen a temple in antea, with two columns in theportico, and having a total breadth in the frontof from 15 to 18 feet. On the upper member ofthe cornice is the beginning of an inscription,showing that the building was erected by oneSabines, son of Papyrus'. The form of the charactersconcurs with the Corinthian order in indicatingan early period of the Roman Empire. Atthe foot of the same height, a little to the westward,is a quadrangular foundation of regularmasonry, of which, in one part, four or five coursesremain, and near it is a cistern in the usual form,lined with stucco. Ou several parts of the slopesare remains of walls, some of which perhaps wereinterior inclosures of defence ; others were evidentlyterraces to support buildings.On the height immediately to the eastward ofthe ancient city is a village named Tpun-ijrn, fromthe small catacombs with which the hill is piercedin every part. Some of these are of very irregularshapes, with narrow passages and niches oneach side. They were generally made for three,five, or seven bodies. Some of them have beenconverted into magazines for straw and corn, anda few into dwellings. Others having passages descendingfrom the entrance, have been converted bythe inhabitants into cisterns, which are filled by therain, or by hand, in the winter, and supply water allthe summer, each family keeping its cistern locked.^Hai.m.'Vide Inscription. No. 116.^^82 Malus. [chap.Kastro depends also for water upon its cisternswhich are of modem construction. The only springin the vicinity is to the westward of the ancientcity, on the sea-side, where is a chapel of St.Nicolas. The water of this source is excellent,which is a great rarity in Milo. Eastward of Try-pith,a narrow valley, which is planted with olives,and gardens, and slopes to the sea, has severalsepulchral excavations on its western side, most ofwhich are composed of two chambers, having aniche on each side in the outer chamber, and fiveniches in the inner, two on each side and one atthe end. Of one, which I measured, the outerchamber was 11 ft. square ; and the inner, 16 ft.10 in. by 12 ft. 1 in. ; 7 ft. 3 in. in perpendicularheight in the centre, and 6 ft. 3 in. at the walls,the roof terminating in an angle. Another, considerablylarger, is open in front ; and another,very long and narrow, has only one chamber, inwhich are three niches on each side, and one atthe end. This valley of the dead terminates atthe sea, at the eastern angle of the city, where arethe remains of buildings in the water, and theancient round tower already mentioned. Herealso is an ancient mole in the water, and ruins ofa modern round tower, now serving for a boathouse.From thence, eastward, a cliff* borders thecoast, in the face of which are some catacombsnear the water's edge, but they are inaccessible,except by sea in a calm, and as it blows a galeto-day, it is out of my power to examine them.The labourers in the valley eastward of Trypitixxii.] MEUrs. 83often find coins, small earthen figures, and vases,sometimes with drawings on them '.The Voivoda of Milo is a Sifniote, named ConstantineBagho', who bought the place of theKapitan Pasha ; he collects for his own benefit thecustoms, kharatj and dhekatia. The latter is asixth of all agricultural productions, besides whichthe island pays the kliaratj for the ancient populationof 16000 inhabitants; but as this is tooglaring an injustice, it is customary for the Voisto make a present every year to the islandof six purses. His annual payment to the KapitiinPasha is about 25 purses, and he is supposed togain 6 or 7, which he might greatly increase if hewere such an extortioner as many of the Greekfarmers of the revenue are, or if he followed thecommon practice of exciting and profiting by disputesamong the inhabitants.Since my visit to Milo, atheatre lias been discovered, ofthe existence of which the Kns-tribes nt that time were uncourteous,unless for some Inexplicablereason they thoughtproper to conceal their knowledge.But the indifference ofthe islanders to their antiquitiesis greater even than that of thecontinental Greeks ; and I shouldperhaps never have known ofthe ruins of Metus at all, if Ihad 1t ousei-ed ications of them from Kastri.From similar causes they wereunknown to Tourneforl andChoiseul r the first publishedaccount of them was by Olivier,whose work I had not seen.The followingmenta from the sumKastro at Milo may pihe of quae to geographershlyof the harbour 70° 47'Cope of Ercm6milo,84 MELUS. [Chap.Oct. 12. — In beating out of the harbour againsta west-south-west wind, remains of the westernextremity of the walls of the city are visible, wherethey terminate on the water side, immediately beyondwhich is the spring of good water beforementioned. At a considerable distance fartherwestward are some catacombs, a little westwardof Turko-vuni, which forms the northern cape ofthe harbour. The point opposite to the rocksnamed Arkudhia is called Kidhari, not Lakkidi,as in Arrowsmith's chart. A light S. E. breeze inthe night carries us round the north-western endof Sifno, called Santo by the Italians, and in themorning we are between that island and Sera.Oct. 13. — The town of Sifno is spread over alarge space, or rather is divided into several villageson a mountain, above which, on the highestpart of the island, appears a small church, conspicuousat a distance. The town of Sera standson a peaked height, near the middle of the island,and has a harbour below it on the eastern coast.In steering for Paro, leaving Despotic and on the right, Naxia makes its appearancebeyond Paro, which differs again from the chart.The same with northern cape of the same island 87 55The same with the passage between the rocks 123 55North Cape of Andimilo with Cape Kidhari, which isopposite to the north-easternmost of the Arkudhia . . 44 5The same with the western Cape of Serfs 64 46The same with the eastern Cape of Serfs 80The same with the Nee. of Sifho 97 44The same with the western end of Kimolo. . 112 38Xiii.] PARUS. H5The approach to Parikia', the chief" town of Paro,is dangerous, there being several small rocks farout at sea, and one in particular just above water.A squall of wind with rain drives us before it intothe harbour, which is capable only of receivingsmall vessels ; ships are obliged to anchor on theoutside of a chain of rocks which border the coastfrom Andiparo to the northern side of the bay ofParikia.Kyr Mavrogheni, in whose house I am lodgedat Parikia, is nephew of a prince of Wallachia,who was beheaded by a Grand Vezir withoutorders from the Porte, for which his own headfollowed the prince's. When interpreter of theKapitan Pasha, Prince Mavrogheni constructedan aqueduct to supply his native city with water.The town, although not large, nor affording anygreat appearance of comparative opulence, has anagreeable aspect, as it consists of neat small houseswith terraced roofs, surrounded by gardens oforanges and pomegranates, mixed with vines upontrellises. Though dry and well ventilated, withoutany impediment from neighbouring mountains, itis said to be subject to intermittents in summer.On a rocky height on the sea-side, in the middleof the town, are the ruins of a castle, constructedchiefly of marbles which belonged to some ancientbuildings once standing upon the same spot. Remainsof one of these are still in ska forming a partof the belfry of a small church. Half the cell of atemple remains, built of small quadrangular blocks86 Parus. [chap.of Parian marble, with a semicircular niche at theextremity, 10 ft. 2 in. in diameter, having anelegant Ionic prize surmounted with a cornice ofeggs ; the body of the cell has a cornice of verylarge eggs and anchors. In the wall of the towerclose by some pieces are inserted of a small Doriccornice having a plain metope 8^ inches broad,as well as other fragments of a Doric edifice,particularly many rows of portions of shafts placedin the wall with the ends outwards. These columnswere 2 feet in the upper diameter, andinflated but polygonal at the lower extremity.Here also are many portions of an architrave, oneof which is 18 feet 8 inches long, and 3 feet high,the interval between the guttse 1 foot 8 inches. Anotherpiece of it has an imperfect inscription, containing,together with that of the archon, the nameof the person who dedicated the building \ Ancientfragments and sepulchral monuments are numerousabout the town. On several of the latter the deceasedis represented, stretched on a couch havingvery high legs ; underneath the couch the childrenare seen, and below all is the name. In the wall ofa private house a very ancient bas-relief representsa procession of females, each having her handupon the head of the preceding one ; on another,in a still more archaic style, are a man and womanfacing each other, and each holding a torch. Inthe metropolitan church of Parikia, which is alarge building surrounded by a quadrangle ofcells, are many fragments of ancient architecture,and among them two sepulchral stones, and twoV. Inscription No. 117.Xxiii Part's. 87Ionic cornices. Oue of these lias a double row ofe^9 and anchors. Several inscribed marbles arefound at Parthia, chiefly in the castle and monastery'.The island of Paro consists of a single roundmountain, sloping evenly to a maritime plainwhich surrounds the mountain on every side.The plain is well cultivated with corn andvines, as well as many parts of the mountainitself. The island produces no oil, and, exceptin a few dispersed gardens, there are notrees of any kind ; the largest garden, whichbelongs to Mavrogheni, is on the shore oppositeto Andiparo. In good years there is anexportation of ten or eleven thousand barrelsof wine, twelve or fifteen thousand Constantinekila of barley, and five to seven thousandof wheat. The population is about 6000,of whom Andiparo contains 150, the remainderreside in Parikia and six villages named Aussi,Lefkes, Kosto, Marmara, Tzilidho, and Dragon.The cattle are reckoned to be 14,000sheep and goats, 1500 oxen, and 900 asses.The annual contribution to the Voivoda is sixtypurses, of which 1650 piastres are from Andi-part. The island possesses two excellent ports,Ai'issa', at the north end, and Dry ', to thesouth-east.Oct. 14. — A four-oared boat lands me at thenorthern end of Andiparo, near the castro, orcastle, which is nothing more than a quadrangletV. Inscriptions, N OS. 118, ' 'Ayovaau,Tpuyut, i>rT|iiac, or ipu(ic.i88 ANTIPARUS. [chap.of houses with a gate. It affords, however, sinedegree of security against a surprise by pirates orlawless seamen, who have ever been the scourgeof the Levant : times are rather improved sinceMalta has been English, and the Mandates haveentered into a treaty with the Kapitan Pasha ; butthe seamen of the Ottoman navy are still verydangerous visitors. Andiparo waa formerly muchfrequented by the Maltese and by piratical vessels,because they could always find shelter on theopposite side of the island to that on which theenemy appeared.From the castro to the grotto is an hour and halfon ass-back. The route crosses a small valleywhich separates the ridge of castro from the principalmountain of the island, and which is grownwith vines. This is the only produce of the island ;the rest of its cultivable land being neglected,as all the working hands except thirty are employedat sea. The celebrated cavern is on thesouthern side of the mountain, just above a cliffwhich borders the coast, facing Nio and Santorin.XXtll.]dimensions, the length of all that the eye can takein at once, being about 150 feet, the breadth 100,the height 50. A board preserves the names ofsome of the visitors, among which Lady Craven'sis conspicuous, with those of a multitude of Frenchmen.The memorial which De Pointed left of hiscelebration of mass on Christmas-day 1673, is notmuch less defaced by the rapid increase of thestalagmatic surface than the Hellenic inscription,which has been exposed on the outside of thecave for two thousand years longer to an obliteratingaction of a different kind. The latter memorialcould be deciphered without the assistanceof Toumefort'a copy, which he made more thanacentury ago, with the assistance of a transcriptin the possession of a native'. Having returnedto the village and dined with the Proestos, werow back to Parikia.Oct. 15. — Departing on horseback from thenorth-eastern end of Parikia at 7.15, 1 graduallyascend the northern slope of the mountain,through small corn-fields fenced with wallsof stone and surrounded by tig-trees, at 8 leavesome ancient quarries half a mile on the right in aravine of the mountain, where great heaps of irtXt-Klat*aTa, or chipping of stone, are lying before them,Tbe inscription was nothingmore than a record of thenames of persons who hadvisited the grotto:— 'Ewl KpJ-£wX(ip^°C> Miiifc-pajTif, 'Arri-mrfot, 'luirofiicuif, 'Apiarian,^iXittC, rApyOQ, \ioyiyrit, *i-XoEpariic, 'Oi-ijffi;iDe. Critwas undoubtedly Archon, forthat such was the title of thechief magistrate, appears fromthe fragment (No. 117)castle of Parikia.J90 Pads. [chap.and continuing to ascend from thence by a ruggedpath over rocks of white marble, arrive at 8.25 atthe great quarries of Mount Marpeaaa*, which aresituated a little below a convent of St. Mina.There are several excavations, from which animmense quantity of marble seems to have beenextracted at different times ; the largest, which ison the side of the hill below the convent, is about100 yards long and 25 feet broad, having a branchfrom the middle to the right, and another from theend to the left, each leading into a chamber, fromwhich almost aa much stone has been taken asfrom the great gallery itself. Of the latter, oneside has been excavated soas to form a regular curve,and the other has been leftruled. The marks of thewedges with which the ancientswrought are conspicuouseverywhere.On the rise of the opposite hill, but verynear the bottom, is another much smaller quarry,xjcni-l PARus. 91bearded, and supported upon two short legs ; onone side of it is a figure with the horns of a Panand the belly of a Silenus, sitting cross-legged ; onthe other are some small full-length figures. Inthe lower compartment a female is seated, havingher hair arranged in the Egyptian or archaicGreek style, and bearing in her lap a smallerfigure very indistinct'; a young man stands beforethe chair turning his face towards the goddess, andholding up one arm; behind him are three femalesin procession, facing in the opposite direction, anddraped from the neck to the feet. Behind theseated deity the upper parts of several figures areintroduced, particularly an old bearded head ;some children also appear, but this part is muchinjured'. On the rock to the right of the tablet,immediately below thf< three females, and facingthem, are several figures on half the scale, apparentlyworshippers. Below the tablet an inscription,in characters of the best times, shows that itwas dedicated to the Nymphs by Adams, a manof the Odrysa; of Thrace '.The worship of Pan and the Nymphs was sogeneral in the caverns of Greece, that we can havein Stuart, vol. iv. pi. 5, itis represented as a lion.Two sculptures in relief,in vrhich the same subject isaomewliiLt differently treated,bat both evidently belongingto Nymphs, and representingthe worship of Bacchus,the Earth, and Hours, havebeen engraved in the MuseumWorsleyanum, and in Morum. Peloponn., p.207. They were both foundat Athens. Subjoined to thelatter is the inscription oi r\v-y^S iT/J^aic taitftfiiyoi aridtaaytal ©loit Traaii; followed bythe names of the bathers.V. Inscription No. 122.J92 PARus. [chap.no hesitation in recognizing Pan in the cross-leggedfigure of the upper compartment : the great humanhead with horns I take to be Bacchus Comigerus,and the figures near him to be Silenus and hisother attendants. The seated female in the lowercompartment is probably Cybele, or the Earth,with her various attendants behind her, and thosein front Atys and the three Horse. It is not impossiblethat this sculpture may have originatedin an accident alluded to by Pliny, who says, '^ InVariorum (lapidicinis) mirabile proditur, glebecapitis unus cuneis dividentium soluta, imagineSilent extitisse." The outline of a Silenus havingaccidentally appeared in the progress of quarrying,Adams may have completed the work as a dedicationto the Nymphs. There is another quarrynear this, and a fourth near the great one. Everywherethe round grains by which the Parian marbleis generally known is observable, and in some placesthey are larger than I have ever seen them in ancientmonuments.From the quarries we begin, at 9.40, to crossoverthe ridge of the mountain, and leaving theharbour of Aussi in sight on the left, descend toKosto, and at 10.20 pass through that village. Theflies are in these islands a greater torment than Ihave ever witnessed on the continent of Greece.They are particularly so to the cattle in the meridianhours, and annoy them so much, that it isimpossible to ride without a covering over the noseof the horse, ass, or mule. Our guide having forgotthis necessary article, I am obliged to complete onfoot the journey to Marmara, where we arrive atXXIII.] Nantes. 9311.30. There is a considerable plain round thisplace, which is reckoned unhealthy, particularly inthe present season : the disorder is a severe intermittent,which is probably, as well here as at Parikia,the consequence In great measure of unwholesomediet during the long fast of August,and the total want of vegetable food, until the vintageand season of figs. Nothing is to be procuredbut mutton, or goat, lean and ill-tasted for want ofpasture.Having crossed from Marmara to Naxia in threehours in a small boat, I procure a lodging in thehouse of his holiness o riiipova^iac, as the metropolitanbishop of Paro and Naxia is designated, andto which is added the title, though not the authority,of head of all the Aegean sea. The metropolitanchurch has been lately rebuilt; in diggingthe foundations of a small house adjoining to it,many marbles were found, aud fragments ofstatues. At a point of land below the metropolisare the remains of a missive ancient wall, or mole,corresponding to another similar projecting fromthe southern side of the little island of Palati,which is separated from the main by a strait offifty or sixty yards. This mole may have servedthe double purpose of a bridge to the island, and toprotect the strait on the northern side of it againstthe sea, by which means that strait may haveserved as a harbour to the town, although now shallow,and useless for such a purpose. Palati receivedthis modem name from a ruined temple which stoodin the middle of it. The western portal, or door-case,still stands as Tournefort and Choiseul Gouf-94 Natus. [Chap.fier have drawn it, and stands in spite of an attemptwhich was made (so say the Naxiotes) by the ScythianAlexis OrlofF to beat it down with cannon-shot.The foundations of the temple have all beenremoved to serve for building materials, and itwould seem from the excavation which remains,that the cella was about eighty feet in length. Thedoor-case, and a small part of the pavement onwhich it stands, alone remain. The mouldings ofthe door seem to be of the Ionic order, and the massyproportions have an appearance of remote antiquity.It consists only of three stones ; the uprights are21 feet 6 inches high, and in thickness 4 feet 5inches by 3 feet 5 inches ; the width of the openingis 12 feet 1 inch. The rock of the island Palatiis grey granite, and so are the hills around the townof Naxia, as well as the highest summits and manyother parts of the island, but there were likewisequarries in the island of white marble with a verylarge grain, of which the portal in Palati is aspecimen.Naxia, or Asia, as it is more vulgarly called,contains 42 villages besides the city ; 16000 of thenatives are of the Greek and 350 of the Latinchurch. The latter live in the castle, and are almostall under French protection. They have a conventof Capuchins, another of Lazarists, which formerlybelonged to the Jesuits, and a Latin archbishop,who is metropolitan of all the iEgaean Sea. Thetown and neighbouring gardens are supplied withwater from wells.The island contains several fertile valleys, besidesthe plain near the town ; the latter yields corn :another which is separated from it by a range ofrocky heights, and lies between them and the greatcentral range of hills, is covered with olives. Thirtythousand Constantinopolitan kila of barley are exported,and a considerable quantity of wine, oil,honey, oranges, lemons, citrons, and emery, ofwhich last there is a mine in Mount Zia, towardsthe southern end of the island.At the northern end, near a cape called Apollo', in an ancient quarry near the sea, isan unfinished colossal bearded statue, which,though the modern name of the cape wouldlead one to suppose it to have been intended foran Apollo, was more probably a bearded Bacchus,such as he is represented on some beautifulsmall brass coins, of which great numbers havelately been found at the town near the sea side.The principal mountain is called Zia, and has probablyhome that name ever since the island wasnamed Ia. Korouo, another mountain, recallsto recollection the nymph Colonies, who had careof the education of Bacchus. On one of theheights beyond the plain are some ruins, whichsome of the Naxiotes believe to be the ancientcity ; hut the mole, the temple, and other remains,afford ample proof that the ancient capitalof the island stood on the same spot as the modemtown.Oct. 17.— Sail at 10 a.m. for the Dhiles \ witha fresh breeze from the south-west, which carries□8 over in three hours. On entering the straitbet een the two islands, the first object which.^96 Deus. [chap.presents itself is a heap of squared stones on theheight in Great Chili, or Rheneia^ which formsthe south-eastern cape of that island. There isno appearance of sculpture. We pass betweenthe great Remain, or Rematiari, anciently theisland of Hecate, and proceed to anchor betweenthe small Rematiari and Deluge the shore of whichis strewed with broken columns and epistola ofmarble, showing that notwithstanding the spoliationof Greek masons and makers of Turkish tombstonesin the time of Toumefort and Stuart, thisrich mine of antiquities is far from being exhausted,and probably still contains many rareproductions of art, as well as inscriptions valuableto history and philology. Having landed, I visitin succession the several objects described by Upon,Wheler, and Toumefort : the stoa of Philip, thetemple of Apollo, the oval basin, and the gymnasium.Besides these, of which there are still sufficientremains to leave no doubt of their identity,the Latour and Heraclea, which are the onlyother monuments mentioned by the ancients,would probably be ascertained by a diligentsearch. The inscription on the altar of MithridatesEuergetes, half of which had disappearedbetween the time of Upon and that of Toumefort,is exactly as the latter found it That on thealtar of Diomedes I cannot find. The basis ofIt is unnecessary to refer of this island, illustrated wit"more particularly to the in- his usual learning and ability,descriptions of Delus, as M. — V. Corp. Inscr. Gr. part.Boeckh has given a collection 12.of all the known inscriptionsDELOS. 97the colossal Apollo dedicated by the Naxii, stillremains. The words Na^i'oi 'AiroXXwvi in front ofthe stone are in perfect preservation, althoughthe form of the N and I, given accurately byStuart, indicate considerable antiquity. The muchmore ancient line on the opposite side, whichlong ago exercised the learning of Dawes andBentley, could hardly be deciphered without theassistance of the faithful copy in Stuart. Thefirst letter has always been uncertain. The words,written in ordinary Hellenic characters, are asfollows :O AFYTO Aie EMI Ananias Rai TO 2*EAA2,which in the cursive Greek, supplying the firstletter, isrov auto /TO ff^fXoC,meaning that the basis and statue were both partsof the same mass. The stone, nevertheless, has agreat square excavation in the centre, clearlyshowing that the statue which stood upon it, wasa separate piece of stone. A passage in Plutarch'slife of Nicias may perhaps furnish the solution ofthis difficulty. He relates that Nicias, havingbeen appointed by the Athenians to conduct theTheory to Delus, re-established the ancient ceremonieswhich had fallen into neglect ; that heentered the island in procession from Rheneia overa bridge the materials of which he carried with himfrom Athens ; that after having superintended thesacrifices, the games, and a feast, he made an endowmentof some land for the support of an annualVOL. III.leal ^^98 DGLVS. [chap.sacrifice and supper, and finally, that he set up abrazen palm-tree as a dedication to Apollo ' ; whichpalm-tree, adds Plutarch, was afterwards throwndown by the wind, and in falling carried with itthe colossal statue which had been dedicated 1^the Naxii. It is not improbable, therefore, thatthe more ancient inscription may have been coevalwith the monolithal dedication, and the latter witha restoration of the statue after the accident. Ofthe thighs of the statue as designed by Tomessome fragments only remain ; but a part ofthe shoulders, with the hair hanging over them,as Apollo is usually represented, is still conspicuous.The statue appears to have stood in front ofthe temple, facing the sea.Not far from it are the remains of a portico ofwhich the columns are three feet in diameter.These are of Parian marble. The stoa of Philip,and the colossus, seem to be of Nathan. Nearthe former portico are the remains of pilasters, ofwhich the capitals represent bulls' heads in highrelief, so as to include the dewlap. Behind thenorthern end of the portico oF PliHio arc loiXxii.] Delle. 99to be the Line Trochoeides of Herotiotiis andTbeognis, and the Trochoessa of Callimachus,which contained the water required for the serviceof the Upon, or sacred inclosure of Apono ',such tanks having been customary and necessaryfor the sacred offices in places distant fromrivers or springs. In Egypt there are remainsof several, but none of them are, to my recollection,circular, like that which Herodotus states tohave existed at Sais, and to which he comparesthe line of Delus. There are some remains,however, of a K-pija-ic, or marginal wall, composedof small squared stones, in which particularthis basin seems exactly to have resembled thatof Sais. That the Trochoessa was circular oroval is sufficiently indicated by the name, andstill more clearly perhaps by the epithet irtpivy^i,applied to it by Callimachus in the Hymn toApollo '. Near it was an altar made of the hornsin Sci iy Tf ipfi r^c 'Aflij- fiivtl iS kujcXji cai )iiya6ot, wcvttijfZ i^oX it&Kii, Sir] Tip i| cv AqX]>iXi'^fjj rt toi i^o/iiyij XifliVp ^ rpo'jfouS^c koXeo^i'vi). cK07jUT)p<i'i) toi ipyaa- root. I. 2, c. 170.4si/l( ivan oTt (tiv m Iii rite Trorvia AfjrwAutf/ijoi,' ^nfiv^c X^P"''' I'^'x^/^i^li'ABafdriuv raXXitrroi' iir'i Tpo')(oii6ii Xifivji,Theogn. v. 5.Xfjvffji ec Tpo)(AnTaa trayiificpoc i^€c \ifivjf.Cabin. Hymn in Del. v. 261.KoAif (V 'Oprvyiy ircpiiyioc iyyi/dt ki/ivtn:'ApTifiit aypiitraouaa xapi'iiiTa aBrnj^is alywyKuvOtdcwy ^opiiOKtv, u S" irXixt (iui^liy 'ATriWui'.Calling. Hymn lu ApoU. v, 59.u2A100 Delia. [chap.of Stags, which was said to have been constructedby Apollo himself, and was considered so admirableand sacred that a temple was built to incloseit ; some ruins which touch one side of theTrochoessa may perhaps be the remains of thistemple ; for Callimachus places the altar near theTrochoessa, and Plutarch, who saw and admiredit, describes it as being in the herm of Apollo '.The theatre stood at the western foot of MountCynthus, facing Rheoeia, and not far from thestoa of Philip. Its extremities were supported bywalls of white marble of the finest masonry, but ofa singular form, having had two projections adjacentto the orchestra, by which means the lowerseats were in this part prolonged beyond the semicircle,and thus afforded additional accommodationto spectators in the situation most desirable. Thediameter including only the projections is 187 feet.The marble seats have all been carried away, butmany of the stones which formed their substructionremain. Immediately below the theatre, onthe shore, are the ruins of a stoa, the columnsXXIII.] DELIS. 101son of Ctesippus uf Chins'. Like many others,remaining both in this island and in Rhcneia, itis adorned with bulls' heads and festoons. Anotherfragment of an inscription mentions Serapis,and as both these were nearly in the same placewhere Upon and Wheler found another in whichIsis, Anubis, Hippocrates and the Dioscuri wereall named, it is very probable that the remainsof white marble belonged to a temple of Isis.Among them is a portion of a large shaft piercedthrough the middle, 4 feet 5 inches in diameter,and there is another of the same kind 5 feet S inchesin diameter, half way up the peak of Cynthus. Thelatter lies just below the gate represented in thedrawing of Wheler. This structure, which bearsan appearance of remote antiquity, was probablythe entrance of a subterraneous chamber, perhapsthe treasury of Delus, which may still exist, asthe passage is buried in ruins to within a few feetof the roof, and is quite obstructed at the endof 15 feet. The roof is formed of two stonesrudely shaped, and resting against each other atan angle so obtuse that the rise is only 4 feet 2inches above a breadth of 16 feet 'i inches.From this ruin, the ascent is short to the summitof Mount Cynthus, which is a mere rock of coarsegranite, and seems anciently to have been inclosedby a wall. There are many architectural KrifoinTTOw Xioci in other inscriptions of Delus./uXdviifupoc- The Melanephori The Melanephori, it is lo beand Therapeutic are mentioning suppose, were dressed in black.u priests of the Egyptian deities102 Dells. [chap.ments of white marble on it. To the south of themountain is a small plain, which aeema the onlycultivate part of the island. A brook from themountain flows through it, and joins the sea at theport of Fume : being the only running stream inthe island (and that only in winter) we may concludethat it is the ancient Inopus, unless we areto suppose, with Toumefort, that the Inopus wasnot a river but a well or fountain which exists nearthe northern extremity of the island. Callimachus,however, as well as Strabo, refers to Inopus as ariver, and we may pardon the poet's exaggerationin applying to it the epithet of deep ', when thegeographer describes Cantus as a high mountain*.Ruins of private houses surround Mount Cynthuson every side. On the heights above the Troywhich form the north-western promontoryof the island, are many other similar ruins of ancienthouses, neatly constructed with mortar, andfor the most part having niches in the walls. On thesummit of the same hill, near the remains of a laihouse, are some sbafls of white marble, a foot andXXIlt.] RHENEIA. 103in a position called Olympieiuin', perhaps froma temple of Jupiter Olympus, to which the shastajust mentioned may have belonged . Each ofthese towns had its small theatre. The greattheatre, forming part of the Herm, was reservedperhaps for the periodical festivals, which attractedvisitors from every part of Greece.Oct. 18. — On the shore of llkeneia, on a smallbeach immediately opposite to the great Rema-tiara, the ground is covered on either side, forseveral hundred yards, with stelge, sepulchres, lidsof sori, and fragments of columns. To the south,not far from the beach, lies a piece of architrave,with a metope of 10 inches ; among the remains,in the opposite direction, are plain shafts, 3 ft. 4 in.in diameter. On the summit of a hill, which risesfrom the beach, are many other remains of ancientbuildings, and among them a Doric capital, witha small portion of a shaft, 2 ft. 7 in. in diameter,formed out of a single stone. The immense numberof sepulchres in this island is accounted for byits having been the cemetery of Delus, after thepurification of the latter, which took place in thesixth year of the Peloponnesian war, when all theancient coffins and bones were removed to Rlieneia,and it was thenceforth forbidden, as in the Hermof Epidaurus, that any one should be born or dieio the island of Delus'. Besides the sepulchralmonuments, Wteneia contains many ruins of privatehouses, similar to those of Delus. The town extendedto the north-eastern angle of the bay, in■OXu/iiriet,if. ' Tliucyd. 1.3,:.I04. ■104 RHENEIA. [chap.which direction among the ruins are seen a prodigiousnumber of square altars, adorned with afew mouldings, sufficient apparently to have suppliedeach house or family in the island with one.Hkeneia has some good pasture, and in many parts,especially about the ancient town, is capable of producingcom. It is about ten miles in circumferencedivided in two by a narrow isthmus at the head of agreat bay, on the north-western side of the ancienttown. On the promontory which forms the northernmostpoint of this bay stands a small monasteryand church, now abandoned, the island beinginhabited only by two or three men, who tendsome oxen, sheep, and goats belonging to peopleof Mykono, of which island both the Dhiles are adependency. In the smaller, which, according toToumefort abounds in rabbits, I saw no quadrupedbut a hog, and I believe the only use which theMaronites make of the island of Apollo is to pasturesome of their cattle and sheep in the spring,and in the autumn to turn in their swine to gatherthe acorns, or other productions of the wildbushes.From the strait of Dhiles, we cross over to theharbour of M^'kono, the entrance of which is distantabout five miles from the little Chili, andbeating into the bay or gulf (/cop^oc), as it is called,against a strong south-easter, anchor under thetown at 10 a.m. This part of the bay is muchexposed to the west, but round the town to thesouthward there is a harbour running far in tothe east and south east, and sheltered from thewest by a cape and island. Here ships winter inXXIII.] Mucous. 105perfect safety. The island of Mykono ^ is for themost part a miserable rock, the only cultivated orcultivable ground being a few declivities round thetown, where are some com fields and vineyards.The rest affords pasture for a few flocks, but hasno habitation except a monastery to the eastward.Nevertheless, the town is one of the largest andmost prosperous in the ^gcBan sea, in consequenceof its maritime commerce. There are twenty-fiveships belonging to the islanders, and a great numberof boats. The population is reckoned at 6000souls, the produce at 500 kila of wheat, which isnot sufficient for a month, 10,000 kila of barley,which suffices for home consumption, 5000 barrelsof wine in good years, of which about 1000 areexported, 400 kila of ^a^ovXia, or kidney beans,and 200 kila of figs. Some of the houses andstreets are better than in most of the islands, butingeneral they are equally mean and dirty, andthe hogs as usual have undisturbed possession ofthem. My Corfiote boatmen hearing rumours ofwar between Turkey and Russia, begin to murmurat proceeding any further, so I dismiss them, hirea rakol^va of the place, andOct. 19, at 10 in the forenoon, sail from Mj^-sono with a fresh south-east wind. At noon wearebecalmed, for a short time, under the northernextremity of Tin, a high bare mountain; fromthence cross the bay, which is formed by Andhroand Tin, and at sunset pass the town of Andhro,which is situated near the sea, and is crownedCyrus.[chap.with a castle on the summit of a peak, about one-thirdof the length of the island from the northerncape. From hence we steer for Skyro^ and at daybreakOct. 20, find ourselves near the southern end ofthat island. Pass along the eastern side, leavinga little to the west of the southern cape the twoislands which form the triple entrance of PortTpt/uirovxatc, a corruption of Tre Bouche *. Soonafter sunrise the wind freshens, and as we passalong the coast, which is lofty, rocky, and precipitous,it increases to a gale, and descends fromthe hills in such squalls, that we fail in fetchingiJ^-^^iUM\^ ) PorLAkhili, and anchor in a dangerous situationto the eastward of the town of St. George, whichcovers the northern and western sides of a highrocky peak, which to the eastward falls steeply tothe sea. Having landed in the surf with some difficulty,I walk up to the town, and send fromthence a pilot to conduct the boat to Paria, an anchoragefor small vessels, five miles to the northwardof port Akhili, where an islet shelters a low point,terminating a plain which extends southward fromthence as far as the heights of the town. ThisThis harbour, in which Iafterwards anchored in one ofHis Majesty's ships, is situatedat the foot of the highest mountainin Skyro, and is surroundedby desert woody hills. Theentrance at either end is aboutone-third of a mile in breadth.The third entrance between thetwo islands is narrower. Allare safe and deep : in the mid*die of the harbour there is adepth of twenty fathoms ; behindthe small island, sevenfathoms. There is no sourceof fresh water, useful to shipping,nearer than the great harbourof Kalamitza, six or sevenmiles to the northward.XXIII.] SCVRUS. 107plain, which is about four square whiles in extent, isgrown with corn, vines, and figs, and ia refreshedby a small perennial stream, watering many gardens,as well in the plain, as in a little valleyabove it, where the oaks and planes, the walnutand other fruit trees, which shade the banks of thestream, give this little district an appearance verydifferent from that of the dry and naked Cyclades.Akhili, the harbour which lies south-east of St.George, is evidently an ancient name, properly'AyiXXtiov, and a memorial of Achilles.Skyro is divided into two parts, nearly equal,by an isthmus, which lies between Port Akhlli andthe great harbour called by the Greeks Kalamitza,and by the Italians Grand Spiaggia. All thesouthern portion is uncultivated, and consists ofhigh mountains, which are intersected by deepgullies, and are rugged and bare, except towardsthe summits, where they are clothed with oaks, firs,and beeches. The northern part of the island is not80 mountainous : and all the hills bear com, vines,and piCapi, or madder ; besides the plain adjacentto the hora or town, there are two other fertilelevels, one at the northern extremity of the island,and another at Kalamitza. The wheat of Syriaequal to the best in the ^geean. The productionsare 10,000 barrels of wine when thevintage is good, of which three fourths are exported,15,000 kila of corn, of which 2,000 areexported, and 500 tartars of fascia. The otherexports are 2,000 okes of wax, 8,000 okes of honey,600,000 oranges and lemons, and 400 tartars ofmadder, which is cultivated only upon very steepJ108 9CYRU8. [chap.ground, and is grown from the seed, which is sownin February. The island abounds in sources ofwater, and affords pasture to a few oxen, and to15,000 head of sheep and goats, of which 2,000are annually exported. The taxes amount to 20purses a year, paid by 500 families, all of whomhave dwellings in St. Geoi^e, the only other villagein the island being merely an occasionalresidence of those who take care of the cattle.There are three kaiks belonging to the island, andmany feluccas are built for sale with the fir woodof the mountains. The oaks are used only for fuel,and though many of them are of the Velanldhikind, no use is made of the acorn.On the table summit of the rock which crownsthe town, are the ruins of a castle, inclosing manyhouses, which are now all abandoned except thebishop's, and some store houses where the rich inhabitantsplace their valuable effects wheneverthey are in danger from pirates or lawless Turkishseamen. The castle was the site of the acropolisof the ancient city of Scyrus, justly described byxxni.] cyrus. 109lai^e semicircular bastion almost entire, and builtof horizontal courses of masonry which diminish inthe height of each course towards the top. Fromthence the wall is traced along the slope above thesea, as far as a round tower which is still standingto half its height : about fifty yards beyond it arethe remains of another, and from each of them awall is traceable down the slope as far as the cliffswhich overhang the sea. These walls were betweenthree and four hundred yards in length, andserved, like the long walls of other maritime cities,to protect the communication between the city andthe shore, which was probably sheltered by a mole.Not a trace of it however now exists, which is notBuq>nsing as all this rocky coast is much exposedto the easterly winds. At the southernmost roundtower the city terminated in that direction, as appearsby the remains of the town walls which fromthence ascend to the precipice of the castle. Thecircumference was barely two miles. The onlyother objects of antiquity are a sepulchral stonein one of the churches, and a cornice of lentils inachapel in the gardens. Nor can I hear of theexistence of any other remains in the island, exceptthose of a large arched cistern at Kalamitza.The houses of Skyro, though flat roofed likethose of the Cyclades, are in other respects verydifferently built, being generally of two stories, ofwhich the lower is formed of stone and the upperof wood. The latter has projections on the outsidein the Turkish fashion ; the terraces of the roofsnvered with a peculiar kind of earth found on110 3CYBU8. [carp.the descent towards the plain, and which is said topossess the property of resisting the most continuedrain. In form the apartments resemble those <rfTurkish houses ; but round the floor are arrangedboxes of antique shape, covered with gilding andother ornamental work, and the walls are hung asthickly as it is possible to cover them with earthenjars and pots, pewter plates and dishes, merely forthe sake of decoration, being in far too great anumber to be of any use. The houses of the richernatives exceed the others in the dimensions of theirapartments, and in the quantity of their vases andplates, but not in the quality, which is all Germanof the coarsest kind. In one angle of the roomthere is generally a very wide chimney roundinginto the room, and below it a hearth a few inchesabove the level of the floor. This kind of chimneyis also peculiar to Skyro, unless it may be foundat Lemnos or Thaso, the only laisser islands of the^gtBon which I have not visited. The women,unlike those of the other islands, live quite retiredin the houses, and hide themselves on the approachwhich, according to Strabo, large quantities weresent from Scyrus to Rome. The island was famousalso for its breed of goats'.Oct. 21.— The gale not abating, I am detainedin the catacomb until the evening, when it moderates; at 10.30 p.m. we sail, andOct. 22, at sunrise, find ourselves near Skan-hero*. This is probably an ancient name. Ofthe islands which lie between Sltanghero and theCape of Magnesia, Scopelus and Sciathus preservetheir names unchanged ^. Scopelus I take to beSuabo, p. 437.• Stuyyijioc. Sometimes■Tinen "S-KavrCaVpa.ScoTcXoc, ^<la^t, or vulgarlySim'flo. Skopelo is oneof the most flourishing islandsof the iSgisan, for which itii indebted to ita wines, sentby the people in their ownships to the Block Sea, andmany parts of the Levant ;orange, lemons, and someother fruits are also exported.The town, which is on theeaten side of the island, containsabout 1200 houses, andhas a striking appearance inhailing through the channel ofKhilidhromia. It is the residenceof the bishop of Sciathusand Scopelus. On the westerncoast arc the village of Glossaand the harbour of Palermo.The island abounds in sources,which encourage the growth offruit tree, and enable the inhabitantsto raise a sufficiencyof the neccas.iriea of life fortheir consumption, with theexception of bread com.Skiatho, like Skyro has aharbour to the southward shelteredby an island. Theport is called Oreokastro, andseems to have been the siteof an ancient town, but notof the homonymous capital ofthe istaod, which was situatedat the village, still called Ski-tho,on a rock over the northernextremity of the island,as appears from the followinginscription existing there :'AyaSj Tujj^. Tof ptyiorovcai fliiorarov avrorpdrofia Aotr-King Xtwrifiioy Siivijpoy Ilcpr/-fq/iDc SKtaBltiiy, trt/iiXTjaa-fiivov TltoTov Toa 'yoKlyOov."Avflijc iipU" Tilt iiruyvfum12 scvRus. [chap.the same island as Halonesus, celebrated bymeans of one of the orations of Demosthenes, forStrabo, who takes no notice of Scopelus, showsHalonesus to have been one of the principal islandson the Magnesian coast ', and names it togetherwith Sciathus and Peparethus, the same twoislands which Ptolemy about two centuries afterwards,and still later Hierocles, associate withScopelns without naming Halonesus *. In this casePeparethus, the importance of which may be arguedas well from its history' as from its nameTripolis *, and its existing coins, was probablyKhilidhrdmia *, an island of about the same sizeas Skopelo, and which, although now little inhabitedor cultivated, produces wine, which finds agood market at Saloniki. Peparethus in likemanner was particularly noted for its wine *. Sa-rakingis probably the ancient Ices, which, accordingto Scymnus of Chins, was near Preparesand was colonized at the same time by theCnossii of Crete ^. Livy relates, that when thefleet of Attacks in the Macedonic war (b. c. 300)made a tour in the ^gaean. chiefly it wouldXxii.]in Euboea was past Skyrus to Ictis, where theywere detained by the north wind ; they then sailedto Sciathus, and from thence to Mende in Pallet '.Pelaghisi*, which is opposite to the northern endof Khilidhromia, may perhaps be the Polyjeguswhich Mela mentions in conjunction with Scia-thus and Halonesus'.Our course carries us not far to the westward ofAistrati ', which has about 30 houses, and is inhabitedby cultivators and a few sailors, of whomwe took two on board at Skyro. The island islow and has no port. It corresponds to the Hieraor Nea, near Lemnus, in which Philoctetes wassaid to have been bitten by the serpent, and whichreceived its name from the circumstance, thatwhen Chrj'se had been swallowed up by the sea,this island was reported to have made its appearancesoon afterwards iu a different situation Plinyindeed describes Nea as being between Lemnus andthe Hellespont*, but as there are shoals only in thatsituation, they would rather seem to be the remainsof Chrysalis1. Sl.c. 45.• Mela, 1. 2, c. 7.'AyinTpiinjCi which Miletusseems to suppose a corruptionof 'Apj^iOTjMirTiyoi;.Puusan. Arcade,Antigone. Caryst, cplan. and Suit. in IPlin. H. N. 1. aCHAPTER XXIV.MACEDONIA.Monasteries near the southern extremity of Athos — Arrival atXeropotami— Other monasteries on the southern side of the Peninsula— Town of Karyes — Iviron — Filotheo — MylopotamoLavra — Karakalo — Stavronikita — Pandokratora — Vato-pedhi — Ancient Inscriptions — Simenu — Khilandari — Pro v-lake — Isthmus of Acte — Sane — Canal of Xerxes — Erisso,Acanthus — Ancient cities of Acte Stthonioy and Fallen.Oct. 22, continued.-^ We now stand over to MountAthos, which appears very near, though still 40miles distant ; the wind blowing down the gulfof Saloniki will but just allow us to lay our course,and it is not until sunset we are abreast of CapeSt. George, anciently called Nymphaeum ^ fromwhence Mount Athos rises abruptly to the verysummit. A strong current setting out of the Singiticgulf is a further impediment. The first monasterythat appears is Aghia Anna, surrounded bymany small houses, and situated in a beautifulhollow of the rocks at some distance above the sea,cora ^iftpiQ' cira Nv^^atov "A^oxra &.Kpov Roi TroXtc — to£vr^ "A^wvt Trpoc 7-y 2iyytri/c^' fiicrov tov o^ovq — Nu/x^atov a-TO le Trpof Ti ^rpvfJioytK^ *Aicpa- Kpov, — Ptolemy. 1. 3, c. 13.6(i>c 6.Kpoy' (3y fiera^v 6''Adu)y,Strabo. Epit. 1. 7, p. 330.CnSV. Xiv.] MACEDONIA. 115just such a place as we may suppose to have been aNympfueum. St. Anna is not considered one of thetwenty monasteries of Athos, but only a ^oviStorand an aaKriTvpxov, that is to say, a subordinatemonastery and place of ascetic retreat, dependentupon Lavra, which possesses all this end of thepeninsula. The houses around the monastery ofSt. Anne, called cells (KtWtta), are inhabited byascetics chiefly employed in handicrafts. St. Annawas greatly augmented by a patriarch of Constantinople,a native of the isle of Andhro, who improvedthe roads around it, and built many cells,towers, and chapels, as well here as at Lavra,Iviron, and in oilier parts of the 'Aion Oros ', orholy mountain, which name is not confined toMount Athos, hut comprehends the entire peninsula,anciently called Acte. The church of AiAnna is noted for possessing the left foot of thesaint, a most miraculous and odoriferous relic*.We afterwards pass in succession St. Paul, St.Dionysius, and St. Gregory, all near the shore,and all situated under the great ridge which advancesfrom the peak of Athos and extends to theisthmus of the Holy Peninsula. St. Paul is amonastery of Servians and Bulgarians, and is saidto take its name from the founder, who was aneunuch, son of the emperor Maurice. The churchwas constructed at the expence of a lord of Semeu-TO 'Ayioy 'Opoc. work by John Comnenua ?Xtiiliamv irafOavfjairTev piiblisheil in 1701, and wtuucct. npocrKvtqrapiof printed by Montauban iI 'Ayiau "Opovc Venetians, Piilicograpliin.originalilia116 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.dra in Serra, but the to^wen, cells, and all themore modem parts, by one of the family of Vas-saliva,Waiwode of Wallachia. St. Dionysiuswas built in the year 1380, by Alexius Comnenus,king of Trapezus, in honour of a saint of Kory8s6,near Astoria[, who was brother of the bishop ofTrapezus, and became a hermit in this place.The Waiwodes of Wallachia and their familieshave greatly contributed to the buildings of thismonastery, which is rich in relics, such as a pieceof the cross, the crania of St. John the Baptist andof St Thomas, the lower jaw of St. Stephen, anda part of the hand of St. John Chrysostom. Themonastery of St. Gregory was named after thefounder, St. Gregory the younger, bit the presentbuilding was erected by a hospoddr of Moldavia.Next to St. Gregory, at a distance of two milesfrom the seacoast, is Sim6petra, situated on alofty precipitous rock in the midst of the forest.Its name, properly ii 2c/uaivoc Ilcrpa, or the rock ofSimon, is derived from a hermit of that name whofounded the church, but the present building waschiefly the work of John Angles, king of Serviaand Romania, who retired hither from his kingdomand became a monk. This monastery possessesthe right hand of St. Mary Magdalen, entire, andcivilising in abundance an agreeable odour ^At 10 P.M. we arrive at Xeropotami, the onlygood anchorage on the southern side of the peninsula,and so called from a torrent which here flowsiroXXy/v icai irdyripiryoy twaSiay iKwifiiroy, — UpotrKvytirdpioyfp. 80..MA. 117from Mount Athos into the sea. A little above itis the monastery of the Forty Saints', more commonlyknown as that of Xiropotamu', or the dryriver.Oct. 23. — This building was founded by theEmperor Romanus, and is one of the largest onthe mountain. It is an irregular quadrangle,flanked by towers having pointed roofs coveredwith lead, in the style of the Heptapyrgium,or Seven Towers of Constantinople, and otherworks of that time. Within, in the midst ofthe inclosed court, stands the church ; in manyparts of the building wooden kiosks project fromthe walls, which are posterior additions. Themonastery was once abandoned in consequence ofthe attacks of pirates, but was afterwards restoredand enlarged by a hospodar of Wallachia. Likethe other religious establishments of the peninsula,it possesses some much esteemed relics, such as apiece of the cross, and various fragments of theForty Martyrs, to whom it is dedicated. In onepart of the interior of the quadrangle two ancientsculptures in low relief are inserted in the wall,one representing a woman seated in an antiquechair, with a table before her and a mirror behindthe chair; the other seems to have been part of aprize representing wrestlers, but being high in thewall, and in a corner difficult of access, there issome difficulty in distinguishing the figures. Thewalls are in part constructed of Roman tiles, andcontain many small fragments of antiquity besides■ 'Ayiwy Zapiifui. " S,,pu!toTdfiop.118 MACBEIOKIAi. [fCfiUUP^those already noticed. At the harbour I observed:an ancient altar or pedestal om t^e beach, nitwo or three granite ; jIoIiuiim: i ins the < ncjtjoiiiifigvalley. These remains, together with the .emscience' of the ancbon^i wi^mlit the. belief )thathere stood one of the ancient citiesiof Actes-7%l¥port or landing-place is known by she sue ,c^i-Afmva^, or the Arsenic; whence it niay!bei inferredthat some buildings once ieocisfied, lliete, ffinppurposes of naval commerce) and defence. ^^ AHthe larger monasteries are said to have had skiSarestablishments on the adjoining riiore, ^heintmndlvessels were formerly hush ; th WMe fortifiedwith walls andltowen, some of wMch/stiU lemasi^but at present the peninsula possesses^onfy^fewfishing boats, or such as serve tor colnmtmioaAkiiial6i^ the shote in fine wether, and wfaich^chiMybelong to the monasteries oh the northern coast.The situation of the Forty Saints is extremelybeautiful. Hills covered with a thick forest ofoak, beech, and chestnut, in which are intervalscultivated with the vine and olive, surround ittowards the land, while in front it commands anoble view of the Singitic Gulf, bounded by thepeninsula of Sithoniaj above which riles MountOlympus. This peninsula is now called Longus,from its being principally a forest. The only inhabitedplaces in it are Sykia, in a good harbouron the eastern side towards the southern extremity,another small village or two, and three'AyiopiTiKa ficroxia, or farms, belonging to monasteriesof Athos, cultivated by the Callers, who havea church and dwellings at each metokhi. LongusXxiv'] MACEDONIA. 119does not possess such good timber as the Aion Oros,and is not so well watered, but affords excellentpasture for cattle and for bees, which are carriedover in the spring from the Oros to swarm andmake honey. The extreme cape seen from Xero-potash is named Kartali, it is situated five milesbeyond port Sykia, and hides another cape calledDhrepano at the entrance of the Gulf of Kassandhra: a little to the north of which is Kufo,a land-locked harbour, and then the ruins ofTorone, still preserving the ancient name. Kufoalso is ancient, being the ordinary Romaic form ofKbifoc (deaf), which gave rise to the Greek proverbKtatjiiripo^ Tou Topiuvalov Xi^iEfoc, the harbourhaving been so called, according to Zenobia,because, being separated from the outer sea bytwo narrow passages, the noise of the waves wasnot heard in it'. It was perhaps the same mentionedby Thucydides as the harbour of the Colophon*.Capes Kartali and Dhrepano are evidentlythe ancient Derrhis and Angelus. Thelatter is shown to be the nearer to Torone by Herodotus,who describes it as the Toronasan promontory,and as opposite to Canastratum of Pal-line'. The epitomizer of Strabo might indeedRtraba, p. 330. Mela, ' "AftriXoy, ti)v Topuirnitir1.2, c. 3.— Zenob. Prov. Grace. a«pi(i'.— Herod. I. 7, t. 122.cent 4, pr. 68. Stcphanua in 'AfircXos liasKarlvXivvtr eg roy KoXu- probably only followed '\ifiiya, ri>y Topaiyaiuy dolus in bis remark, iota Kaid-wi\oyra otr iroXu rfjc irdXiui(. ai;pa Topioyaiaiv, AfireXot .I. 3. c. 2. Ought yo^iyn-we not to read Kaajiir insteadof KoXofitii'iwf ?1'20 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.induce the belief, that Derrhis and Angelus werethe same, Since he describes Derrhis as a promontoryopposite to Castrum and near port Copies;but Ptolemy expressly distinguishes them, thouhe ia opposed both to other authorities and to actualappearances in placing Torone between the twocapes '.Besides the monasteries of the western side ofthe peninsula of Aion Oros already mentioned,there are five others to the northward of Xeropo-t4mi. Their names and order are Rlissiko, Xendfii,Dhokiariu, Kastamonitu, and Zografu*. Russianis a monastery of Russians, situated on an elevatedwell-watered level just above the sea. It was foundedby a Knew of Servia named Lazarus, who retiredhere and became a monk. Xen6fu is near the sea,and well fortified against pirates. Its name is derivedfrom Saint Xenophon the founder, but thechief constructors of the present building' wereseveral Wallachia, one of whom was a hospod4rof the family of Vassarava. It is inhabited by Serviansand Bulgarians. Beyond it is Dhokiarlu,XXIV.] MACEDONIA. 121renewed and augmented by Manuel Palseologus13 better authenticated. Zografu is a conventof Servians and Bulgarians, founded in the reignof the emperor Leo, the philosopher, by threebrothers of 'Akhrldha, of the family of the emperorJustinian, who became monks here. It isnoted for two wonderful pictures of St. George,one of which conveyed itself without human meansfrom Palestine, the other from Arabia : the formeris said also to have been painted by Divine will,and not by the hands of men', whence the monasterywas called iMypa^ov, or that of thepainter.Oct. 24. — From Xeropotami to Nares, or Karyes',a beautiful ride of an hour and a half across theridge of the peninsula, leaving the 'Athena, as thepeak of Athos is called*, five miles in a direct lineon the right: the ridge branches immediately fromthe foot of the great peak, and descends steeply toa high point above Iviron, from whence the fall ismore gradual to the line of our road to Karyes,where the ridge is lower than on either side of thatline. The great peak by its height, its abruptness,and conical form, crowns the landscape inthe most imposing manner, and consisting towardsthe summit of a white rock broken with precipices,offers a striking contrast to the rich unbrokenforests of the lower ridge. We pass through woodsof oak and chestnut, in the thickest parts of whichare openings where verdant lawns covered withcattle, or slopes cultivated with vines, are in-Kufiuai{.J123 MACBDOMU. [chap,tenpened'wiih «iX>iifi; or ofittagesi inhabited byBKNEiks who 'have charge of the vineyards, orcate. . Inthe MgheBt part of the ridge the woodia entirely of chestnut, Aj» we descend the northernor-eafttem aslope, the told of Kary^ presentitself covering a lai apace in the midst ofwoody declivities, where the spouses are dispersedamong-gardens add ' vineyards* ImmediatelyFound the t6#n'the most: oonunon 'tree is the}imnKupnai iorhdsel, from which the town has perhapstaken its name : the trees 'Are cultivated forthe sake of the nuts.; /whiehy*with planks of dealand scantlings of oak or chestnut are the onlyproductions of Ihe soil exported finotai the peninsula.At Kary6i resides the Turkish 'governor of theHoly Mountain : d'bostanji^bf Constantinople whois supported, together with a ^toard of Albanians,at the expence of the holy community ; but withouthaving any authority except for the genera]police of the mountain, and for its protectionagainst thieves and pirates. Towards the centreof the town the houses are more closely built, andthere is a sort of bazar containing shops of grocery,with those of a few artisans, among whom blacksmithsand locksmiths are the most numerous. OnSaturdays there is an ayopa, or market, to whichthe manufactures of the mountain are brought forsale. Karyes is the residence also of the Archonsor Epistatse K These are Callers deputed fromthe twenty monasteries to superintend the civil01 "ApxorrtQ JJ 'EircffTdroc rov 'Ayiov "OpovQ^XXIV.J MACEDONIA. 123affaire of the mountain, to take cognizance of anymatters in which the whole community is interested,to assign to each monastery its portion ofthe payments to the Turks, and to enforce thecollection of it. The revenue and internal governmentof each convent is its own concern. TheEpistatsB are four in number, and are changedevery year ; each monastery sending one deputy inits turn, but in such manner that one of the four isalways from one of the five great monasteries,Lavra, Vatopedhi, Ivlron, Khilandari, and Dionysia.Besides these principal officers the communityhave an agent at Salouiki and another at Constantinople.Ecclesiastically the Oros depends immediatelyon the patriarch of Constantinople. Thearchons are competent to punish small offences,and to determine such differences between themonasteries as are not sufficiently important to bodecided at Constantinople, where, however, themonks are too apt to carry their causes and tospend money in litigation for the benefit only ofthe Turks. In the time of the Greek Empire themountain was under the direction of a great ecclesiasticstyled o irpwToc roO 'A-yiou 'Opoug, whence thename Potato still attached to the church at Ka-eyeswhere he resided. This church is supposedto be the most ancient on the peninsula, and tohave been built by Constantine the Great. It iscelebrated on the mountain for a miraculous picturewhich once called out ' to the officiatingpriest to read his liturgy quicker, in order that heIJM wmmamamt %mM.Ktt%hl admitted ^^ coknmafiim to m djHbg^iniiidt^ifiar Khjj4^ to tii^i'Bcmthwitrd^ id KvAisiaiAd^:fiitttHted Ml ime of ^ ffioii^ eidtivafale^ putt itf^liiBfpMifiBida^ amidst gtr^dWi tin^fdsrolm fifiiliilltiatiSy and eora-iStlds; - it was foi»ided^ lys ^ Canstfioiperor Alexis CoolbeaitiSP^ bit 'piirtMl^^t^^ A^fate of all the earljr Imildii^ in beings teNM^fay plqndeNva; It wm kAimrm4B r^0Md/«iilabkrged by 00? ed saceeeslfe Wainbdei oftWalKlaekia. Katltat^ai boas to of poiMMmjIp emi 1^^fido of Sti Aaaie liiomg ito T0lU»4q'^cjim^^ iiMmaiMiiiiS it'hw^ uliidi'ii^iiekpirVMpy6»i not i»i*to>iiMfnioi^ Adamt»h/kmt mixme4rkm» die mktikMS^ tkOHhif'MmpeAiiiiida» sin a (EMafl^^bend «rf ttet(soti4^ milkyIdtmhea Ae ' otIi«ap ti principal itoonaMiKliMo^fthis shore, Lavra and Vatop^dhi. The road descendsthe hills obliquely by a rugged path throughvineyards, and amidst a great diversity of hillyground covered with wood. Iviron, or the monasteryof the Georgians, (rwv 'IjS^poiv,) was so calledas having been founded by four pious and wealthymen of that nation, of whom three were brothers,and the fourth was Tomicius, a general officer ofthe Emperor Romanus, who, having been recalledfrom his retreat by the widow of Romanus, to defendthe frontiers of the empire against the Persians,received from the empress, on his successfulreturn to Constantinople, the means of buildingKovrXovfiovati,XXIV.] MACEDONIA. 125the present church, which is the largest on thepeninsula next to that of Lavra. It stands in themidst of an irregular quadrangle, comprehendingalso a church of the Panaghia sustained PortalsThis church is renowned for a picture whichwas thrown into the sea in the reign of the iconoclastTheophilus, and some years afterwards madeits appearance again on the neighbouring shore.Besides several valuable Metokhia in the adjacentparts of Macedonia, it lias a large dependentmonastery at Moscow, and another in Wallachia,and it has always been the favourite and most protectedmonastery of the Russians. No conventon the Ore is so rich in relics. There are 300monks belonging to the house, but a third of themare either absent on eleemosynary missions, ordwelling on the metokhia and kellia of the monastery'.The library, which is kept in tolerable orderby an old Didasealus, consists chiefly, as he observes,of the fathers, or books appertaining to thechurch service ' ; but it contains also several Greekand Latin classics, a recent gift of a Mavromati ofArtaa, who was bishop of that see, and whosenephew I met there last year. None of the Latinhooks have been touched, because nobody canread them: indeed, the whole library is nearlyuseless, such is the extreme ignorance of themonks. The house has the reputation of beingthe best ordered on the mountain. Like all themonasteries, or at least the larger, Iviron hasan hospital for the sick, presses for wine and oil,:\i(ff(a<n-i<.n p.fiXm.126 KACBDOMIA. [chap.and among the monks some tailors and shoemakers,who make all the clothes of the inmates.It is often the residence of retired Greeks. ThePatriarch of Constantinople, who was deposedeight years ago, and who has lived here eversince, has just been recalled to the capital, on thechange of the Turkish ministry to resume thepatriarchal throne.Oct. 25. — In the afternoon I proceed to the conventof Filoth^u, in the way to Lavra : the roadfollows the slope of the mountain through a thickforest of chestnuts, oaks, and elms, mixed with agreat variety of shrubs, particularly the arbutus,now covered with ripe fruit. The oaks are small,but many of the chestnuts are fine trees : a smallportion of the fruit is consumed on t^e mountain,or exported in the boats which come to load firewood; the remainder perishes on the ground, oriswashed into the sea by the torrents. The monasterieslevy a small contribution upon the woodcutters.In a green valley near the sea, between IvironXXIV.] Macedonia. 127was enlarged by a prince of Kaket in GeorgiaIn 1492.Oct. 26. — Being detained at Filotheu by a violentgale of wind from the north, I look over thebooks of the monastery, which are laid aside asuseless lumber in a comer above the church, morefor amusement than with the hope of finding anythingvaluable, as they have been lately examinedby much more competent persons '. Among themare a few fragments of MSS. of the classics, butthe far greater part are volumes of the Fathers ofthe Church, which are all in good condition onhandsome parchment. In the afternoon I returnon foot to Iviron, disappointed to find that theseason for ascending the 'Athena is considered tobe past. But when the autumnal tempests have begunin this the stormiest quarter of a sea in all partsfickle and subject to gales, weeks may pass awaybefore such a day occurs as would secure a perfectview of distant objects from the summit. TheSee the interesting narrativeof tlietourof Dr. Hunt andMr. Carlyle in Mount Athos, inthe Rev. R. WaipoIe'B collectionof Memoirs, p. 198, Thefollowing was the result ofMr. Carlyle examination ofthe libraries of Athos, wherehe expected near 13,000 MSS.He found one copy of theIliad and another of theOdyssey ; a few of the editedplays of the tragedians ; copiesof Pindar and Hesiod ;the orations of Demosthenesand .Aeschines ; parts of Aristotle,and copies of Philo andJosephus : several MSS. of theNewTestament.but none so oldas the Alexandrian MS., or thatof Bea ; two copies of partsof the Septuagint ; and severalbeautiful MSS. of the Greekfathers, with a prodigious quantityof polemical divinity ;Lives of the Saints ; and treatiseson the doctrines or officesof the Greek Church.J128 Macedonia. [chap.monks are in the habit of repeating that Constantinoplemay be seen from thence, bnt this is undoubtedlya vulgar error ; for though very highlandmight in a peculiarly favourable state of theatmosphere be visible at the distance of Constantinople,so low a situation as that of the capital cannotpossibly be above the horizon. But undoubtedlywith a clear sky the angular intervals mightbe measured from thence between many of themost remarkable points of Asia, the islands, andGreece. The principal Macedonian and Thraciansummits, Mount Ida, the islands Lemnus andScyrus, the Euboea mountains Och, Dimple,and Telethrium, and the Thessalian summitsOthrys, Pelion, and Ossa, might all be connectedby the sextant, and possibly the Bithyniawith the Macedonian Olympus.The ordinary route from Filotheu to Lavra isby land to Karak41o, and by sea from the port ofthe latter to the Arsana of Lavra, the route by landbeing a ruled path, best travelled on foot.The monastery Lavra', originally the retreat ofXXIV.] MACEDONIA. 159ancient Acrathosi, now Kavo Smyrna. At a smallharbour below it is the Arsenal, and a tower forils protection. The monastery generally contains200 callers, besides whom there are as manymore travelling to collect charity, or in the cellsand hermitages of the mountain, employed inhandicrafts, or in taking care of the vineyards andolive plantations. Besides these there is a greatnumber of koit/kkoi, or laymen. The objects forwhich Lavra is most celebrated among the Greeksare its refectory in the form of a cross, containing 24marble tables, a great vase of marble and bronzeadorned with figures, 6 palms high and 17 in circumference,into which a perpetual stream of wateris conveyed by a canal ; the tomb and iron start" ofthe founder Athanasius, with which he drove awaythe demons ', and many holy relics, among whichare the crania of several saints, the hand of St.Chrysostom, and the foot of St, Clericus, who dieda martyr at three years of age. Midway betweenLavra and its askiti of St. Anna ia another namedKapBokalj'via ^, similarly placed at the foot of thepeak of Athos above the sea, and where is a churchwith numerous ascetic cells. Persia, St. Antony,St, Demetrius, and St. Paul, are similar dependencies,but not so large ; at the two latter are theprincipal vineyards of Lavra. In the territory ofthis monastery, which comprehends the entire peakof Athos, are more than 20 solitary chapels, one ofwhich is on the summit, and in all the paths about130 HACBDOMIA. [chap.the mountain there are seats for resting*. Themonastery of Karakilo received its name from thefounder, Antonio Caracalla, a Roman, but theprincipal part of the present structure was builtat the expence of a hospod&r of Moldavia.Oct. 27. — The stormy weather still continues.At a kelly above Iviron I find some monks employedin building a boat on the side of the mountain,a mile from the sea, and lean from themthat boats are sometimes built in much highersituation, as they find it easier to convey theboat to the sea side than the timber for buildingit.Oct. 28. — From Iviron to Vatop^dhi in threehours : first crossing a projection of the mountain,on which to the right stands the monastery of Stag*, and then descending to Pandokratora ',which is midway to Vatop^dbi. Stavronikita wasfounded by a Patriarch of Constantinople namedJeremiah. It is agreeably situated just above theshore, in the midst of gens and orange groves,and contains a celebrated picture of St. Nicolas ofXxiv.] MACEDONIA. 131Michael Palseologus, who recovered Constantinoplefrom the Franks. On a summit to the left isSt. Elias, a large askitiri, occupied entirely byRussians.From Pandokratora we cross another ridge,passing constantly through woods to Vatopedhi '.This monaster', which, with its lofty walls flankedby towers mounted with cannon, looks more like afortress than a religious house, is beautifully situatedon a commanding height, separated from the shoreof a little bay by slopes covered with plantationsof olives and oranges. The bay is the terminationof a small valley, surrounded by steep woodyheights, and watered by a torrent. These heightsare separated by the vale of Karyes from the hillswhich lie between the latter and Xeropotami, sothat the longitudinal ridge of the peninsula herebecomes double. Vatopedhi is larger than any ofthe monasteries except Lavra, and is the mostancient of all, its first foundation having been byConstantine the Great. It was augmented byArcades, and after having been ruined by theSaracens in the 9th century, was renewed by threecitizens of Adrianople, who here adopted the monasticlife. Its principal benefactors after thattime, were Manuel Comnenus, Antoninus Palseo-loans, and John Cantacuzenus, the last of whom,under the name of loasaph, passed a great part ofhis days here after his retirement from the throne.No monastery has larger possessions of olive plantations,vineyards, and foreign metokhia, the best132 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.of which are in Moldavia, and none is better providedwith all sorts of internal conveniences. Thetreasury nevertheless is now poor, in consequenceof a cause which the monastery has lately gainedagainst Zografu, concerning the property of a ,and in which they prevailed, not so muchby the evidence of their ancient charters, as by theexpenditure of 200 purses at Constantinople ; theGrand Vezlr, before whom the cause was heard,took occasion at the conclusion to give the partiesa good lecture on their folly. The ordinary annualexpences of the house are 200 purses, including allthe imposts which they pay to the Turks. Threehundred monks are attached to the establishment,but more than half of them are absent in the or in eleemosynary missions ; besides these,are a great number of cosmic, both in the houseand the kellia. The affairs of the monastery aredirected by twelve ^yovfuvot, among whom the chiefdignities are the aKtvofvXaKu^ or sacristan, the ivl-Tpowos or inspector, the BiKaios, who has the care ofthe stores, mules and lodgings, and the ypaitfuiTumvtiful scenery, and seclusion, seem to promise inMount Athos, as a place of education, the friendsof learning among the Greeks have been compelledto apply their exertions elsewhere. The ignorantare generally persecutors of knowledge : the schoolwas viewed with jealous eyes by all the vulgarherd of caloyera, and there were other objectionsto the Holy Peninsula which, combined with theformer, proved at last the ruin of the school.The monks at the head of the monasteries ofMount Athos are generally those who have broughtsome money to the treasury ; sometimes those whohave travelled to collect charity, and who, by retaininga part of the produce, acquire thereby themeans of influencing the Patriarch, who hasalways some weight in the election of the Igu-men, though nominally they are annually elective,wherever the monks are ISiopi^juoi, as theyare at Vatopedhi, and in the greater part of themonasteries of the Oros. When so denominated,they contribute something to the treasury on enteringthe society, receive a cell and a ration ofbread and wine, but provide every thing elsethemselves. The Koivo/Btaicoi, on the other hand,are headed by a single ijyovfiivoQ, appointed bythe Patriarch. They dress and live uniformly,receive raiment as well as food from the house,and are in every thing more despotically governed.Seven only of the twenty monasteries of the Orosare trotvo^ia, namely, Karakalo and Simenii, outhe northern coast, and on the southern, Dhionyslu,Simopetra, Russian, Xenofu, and Konstamonitu.The monks are of three degrees of rank, Suki^oi.in a stiite of probation, uTav^iiKpi'tpui, bearing tl.J134 MACEDONIA. [chap.ngn of the cross, and ro fUya tr^q^t or the highestrank. When the nXXua, or detached houses,are in small clusters, the monks and lacs whoinhabit them are under an elder of the parentmonastery, but many of these cells are solitarycottages occupied by hermits'. There are morethan 300 scattered kellia on the mountain. ThenXXttwrat are either cultivator of vineyards, gardens,or corn-fields*, of which latter however thereare very few, or they tend the bees ' and cattle *of the peninsula. Some of the inmates of all themonasteries are employed in spinning wool andmaking articles of clothing, generally those confinedto the house by incapacity for out door employment,but the manufactures are chiefly carried onin the retreats called aoK^pta, more vulgarly atrxq-rate, or ffxiirfc, or iricqria, from whence the bazarat Kary^ is supplied with articles of monasticdress, caps and bonnets of almost every kindused in Greece, beads, crosses, wooden spoons, andother ordinary implements used in the monasteries.Some of the atrxirrai, or ascetics, particularlyat St. Anna, are book-binders, paint-xxiv.]MACEDONIA. 136The principal ankles bides those dependent onLava, are the new skiti of St. Paul ', that ofXenofu', St. Elias of Paodokratora ', St. Deme-triesof Vatop^dhi *, Prodliromo, or the skiti ofKutlumiisi ', the skiti of A. Triidha near Simopetra,and a monidhi of St. Basil on the shore not far fromKaryes.The Ores supplies its inhabitants with timber,firewood, oil, olives, figs, walnuts, potherbs, grapes,and wine, but for bread corn they are entirely dependentupon their metukhia beyond the isthmus :of which the Oros possesses no less than fifty-five inthe adjacent parts oi Macedonia, or in the island ofThaso. Fish is the only animal food permitted onthe peninsula, except to strangers of distinction, whoare always expected to contribute something tothe treasury. The ordinary food therefore of theAnchorites*, even when there is no fast, is vegetables,salt-fish, olives, and cheese. Fresh fish they makelittle use of: their timid and indolent habits, thedeep and tempestuous sea that surrounds them,and the want of boats, combining to deprive themof the best nourishment their rules allow. Themountain is forbidden ground to all animals of thefemale sex. Neither cow, nor ewe, nor sow, nor hen,nor she-cat, is to be seen ; but of course the wild animalsand birds defy them; rats and mice multiplyand devour them, and they are obliged to confesstheir obligations to the queen bee, without whosetria 'SxiiTi) Toil' AylovUait' ' 'Aytoc Arj^^rfjioc tou Bo'i^fidroffoiii (>i 'AyiapiT''JJ36 Macedonia. fciUP.assistance they would be deprived of one of theirstaple productions. All the buildings swarm withwild pigeons in search of food, fortunately for thecarnivorous traveller, who without this resource,aod that afforded by a few cocks which are kepteither for his sake or for a retired prelate in caseof illness, would find it difficult to make a dinner.The vulgar believe, or affect to believe, contraryto the evidence of their senses, that nothing femininecan live* upon the peninsula ; and I haveheard the sailors of the ^gcean relate stories ofwomen who have been punished with immediatedeath for having had the audacity to land upon it.The pastures of the mountains are chiefly peopledwith mules and young bulls', which, as well assome oxen, rams, and goats*, are bred at the beyond the isthmus, and brought here togrow and fatten. A sheep or goat is killed occasionallyat Karyes for the use of the Aga and hishousehold, but even he cannot have any female inhis house.The amount of the contributions to the Porteis about 150 purses.XXIV.] MACEDONIA. 137obligations more burthensome than their directtaxes aod current expences.The inhabitants of Mount Athos are assembledof course from all parts of Turkey, and consistchiefly of men in the decline of life, who retirehither from motives of piety, or more commonlyfor the sake of securing the remainder of theirdays from the dangers of Turkish despotism. Anyman who brings money with him is welcome ; ifold, he is not received without it, but the youngand laborious are admitted free of expense, andafter serving for some years as cosmic they becomecaloycrs. As these persons merely seek theirliving, they are generally of the lowest classes.Not a few of every period of life are fugitives fromthe effects of their own crimes, or from Turkishvengeance, whether just or unjust. Hence itseldom happens at present, though it was probablyotherwise during the Byzantine empire, thatmore than a few of the monks in each monasteryknow any thing beyond the liturgy, the remainderbeing at the utmost just able to read the churchservice. Several were pointed out to me, whohaving formerly become Musulmans and then repented,have fled to this place as the only onewhere they can return to the church and savethemselves from the punishment which awaits theTurkish apostate. Not long since a young Jew ofSalouiki came to the Oros to embrace Christianityand the monastic life ; but as soon as he had beenwell-clothed, returned to Saloniki, and there receivednew favours from the Jews for renouncingChristianity. One of the monks of Vatopedhi, whit138 HACBDOMIA. [Chap.had been instrumental to hie first conversion, iii'forniB me that he found this Jew soon after at Adri-anople practising as a physician. A young Turkof Constantinople, who, being the son of a Janissaryof the Patriarch, had been brought up in theconstant view of the ceremonies of the church, andhad thus become thoroughly acquainted with them,finding himself totally destitute on hia father'sdeath, came to Vatop^hi and served for threeyears as an if^fopo^, or one of the priests whotake their turns to say the daily mass, and whohave frequent opportunities of sharing in the giftsof pilgrims or others. After having conformedhimself during that period to all the forms of confessionas well as to the usual mortifications, suchas an occasional retirement to a hermitage to liveon bread and water, he became tired at length ofsuch a life, and desirous of spending some of thepiastres which he had collected. Presenting himselftherefore one day to the Igumenos, he askedhis commands for Constantinople, stung that hehad now finished bis affairs at the Oros, and thathis name was once more Ismail. These tricks areXiv.] MACEDONIA. 139a prostration of the body to the ground. ThefiiKpii, or little met'diiia, 19 a cross and bend withoutprostration. The price of an aypvwia, or vigiland mass for the benefit of the purchaser's soul, is25 piastres, of the nap pii via, 50 piastres : by meansof the latter sum the donor is mentioned in a particularprayer on certain feast days as long as themonastery endures.Among the present inmates of Vatopedhi is anold Chose, who has been long in the Russian servicein various parts of Europe, and now enjoys apension as a retired captain : he had intended topass the remainder of his days on the Oros, butdisgusted with the companions whom he findshere, is about to return to Teresopol, where hehas a daughter married to a Russian colonel. Hewas at Kherson when Catherine, anxious for theprosperity of her newly-founded city of Kherson,sent thither the Corfiotes Genius Bulgaria, andTheotoki, with the princess Gkika, all persons wellqualified to improve their countrymen, many ofwhom had been induced to settle there by the advantageswhich the empress held out. The governor,however, was a Russian, and as such,hated the Greeks. To a new colony, at such adistance from the capital, this was fatal. Thepoorer settlers perished in great numbers in thewinter of 1780 ; and in 1784 the plague was introducedinto Kherson, by which the Chose captainlost five grown children in four days.Vatopedhi having greater natural advantagesthan any other situation on the northern coast ofthe peninsula, may be presumed to occupy the site140 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.of one of the towns of Acte, but the only antiquitiesI can find are two sepulchral inscriptions in thechurch. One of these is in memory of one Hero,daughter of Pancratides, and wife of Astycreon,son of Philip, to whose name that of Anacreonhimself was afterwards added'. The other inscriptionis in the magazine of the convent, on alarge sorts, now full of oil. Genuaniu, son ofHeracles, being still alive, constructed the tomb forhis wife Dionysia, daughter of Dionysius, and forhimself, and declared that if any other person shoulddare to open it, or to place in it another body, heshould pay a fine to the public chest of 2000 denarii,and the same sum to the city : dated in theyear 351, the second of the month Panes*.Nov. 2. — From Vatopedhi to Khilandari* in twohours and three quarters : the road very stony andwinding, and traversing a succession of heightsnot far from the sea. Half an hour short of Kbi-landor stands Simenu, properly 'Etr^iy^vov, situ-videInscription, No 123, on the some monument: — KurtpfiayoQ 'Hpas\a saw Manus. Public Torrent,Exit.] Macedonia. 141atetl close to the sea, at the mouth of a torrent inalittle narrow valley, from which compressed positionthe name is taken. The monastery wasfounded by Theodosius the younger and his sisterPulcheria. About a mile to the eastward is asecure little creek ; and on the hill which separatesthe vale of Simenu from that of Khilandari is atower standing on the edge of the cliff above the sea :some part of its wall is said to be of Hellenic masonry,though I saw no appearance of this in ridingalong the beach below it. it is also reported thatthere were formerly many Hellenic foundations atthe Arsana of Khilandari, which is a mile belowthat monastery, and in particular the remains of arale, part of which is now left. So many of theelder monks agree in this, that there seems littledoubt that here stood one of the ancient cities ofActe, the situation being moreover one of the mostlikely from its natural conveniences. A rock at alittle distance from the coast affords some shelter,but the anchorage is safe only in fine weather,Khilandari is delightfully situated in a vale wateredby a torrent, and surrounded with pine-clad hills.There is a good garden below the monastery, andbeyond, as far as the sea, the torrent is shadedwith trees. The monks are almost all from Serviaand Bulgaria, and the Illyria only is spoken in theconvent or read in the church, though many ofthem can speak and read Greek. The libraryconsists entirely of Illyria book*. The monasterywas founded by two ascetics, Simeon of Servia andhis son Abbas, but the present church was builtby Stephen, king of Servia, son-in-law of theJ143 HACBDOWIA. [Chap.pero Romanus. Philander is the tenth and lutmonastery of the northern shore of the peninsula.Three hours walk from it, towards the opposite shore,is Zogdifu another Servo-Bulgarian monastery, andthe tenth and last of the southern side of the peninsula.These two houses, but particularly Philander,possess larger territories than any of theothers, but the land is barren or uncultivated, anddoes not even produce the useful trees which clothethe eastern parts of the ridge. The pastures aloneare of any value.Nov. 3. — At an early hour this morning I proceedfrom Khilandari to the Isthmus of Acte, overhills intersected by narrow valleys ; the latter arewatered by torrents flowing from the heights onour left, which are covered with pines unmixedwith any other trees, or with any intervals of cultivation.The route follows the direction of theshore, at no great distance from it, for 2h.45m.,when at the summit of the ridge which terminatesin the cape forming the northern extremity of thepeninsula, and the eastern side of the entrance intoXXIV.] MACEDONIA. 143tokiii of Bulgarians belonging to the monastery ofKhiiaodari ; then, after passing over a rocky pointclothed with wood, enter the low undulated groundfanning the Isthmus which connects the Peninsulaof Acte with the great peninsula of Chalice. Thefirst metokhi on the isthmus is that of Ivlron ; aquarter of an hour beyond which is the Vatoped-lino. These farms and monimia stand on the shoreof the bay of Erisso, the former to the eastwardof the narrowest part of the isthmus, the lattera few hundred yards of it to the westward.The modem name of this neck of land is Prov-lake,evidently the Romaic form of the wordwpoouXoS, having reference to the canal in frontof the Peninsula of Athos, which crossed theisthmus and was excavated by Xerxes. Thebreadth of the isthmus, or length of the canal,appears to me not quite so much as the Romanmile and a half which Pliny assigns to it '. It isa hollow between natural banks, which are welldescribed by Herodotus as koAwvu! ov jii-ytiXoi*, thehighest points of them being scarcely 100 feetabove the sea. The lowest part of the hollow isonly a few feet higher than that level. About themiddle of the isthmus, where the bottom is highest,Plin. H.N.I. 4, c. 10.—In a plan of the Isthmus byMM. Chanaleilles and Record,published in the second vol. ofthe Travels of M. de CboiBculGouffier, the breadth of theIsthmus on the line of the canalisTortoises.'Yap 'Aftwc ewri iipot fiiya.Ti tai ovvofiairroy, cc BdXaaaavnaTifcov, oltJifiiroy into htSpii-army rp Si Stature (c t>)v (Jirn-poy TO po£ \cfnro*oitiiQ re irriml mX.,fiiydXot tik BaKaairiK rijc 'Aicoifli'uiv ct! OaXavaay T^y AvrlovTopiwii- — Herodot. 1. 7,^144 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.are some traces of the ardent canal ; where theground is lower, it is indicated only by hollows,now 611ed with water in consequence of the laterains. At the northern end in particular, there isa large pond, divided only from the sea by a narrowridge of sand. On either side of this pond, areseen foundations of Hellenic walls. Those to theeastward are at some little distance from the pond,but on the opposite side they are close to theedge of it, and of the sea beach, and are traceablefor some distance parallel to the beach towards theVatopedhino metokhi. At the opposite end of theisthmus, or that which borders the Sinffitic Gulf,the canal passed for the last 200 yards along thebed of a rivulet, which originates above Erisso, anddischarges itself into the sea between two smallheights, which embrace this end of the canal, andbehind the eastern of which, above that bank of thecanal, are two other similar eminences. The middleof the three has a flat summit, apparently artificial,on the slope of which, towards the canal, are foundationscontaining several lai squared masses ofXxi.] MACEDONIA 145while Thucydides adds, that it was towards the seaof Euboea '.The canal seems to have been not more than 60feet wide. As history does not mention that itwas ever kept in repair after the time of Xerxes,the waters from the heights around have naturallyfilled it in part with soil in the course of ages. Itmight, however, without much labour, be renewed ;and there can be no doubt that it would be usefulto the navigation of the ^g<Ean, for such is the fearentertained by the Greek boatmen of the strengthand uncertain direction of the currents aroundMount Athos, and of the gales and high seas towhich the vicinity of the mountain is subjectduring half the year, and which are renderedmore formidable by the deficiency of harboursin the Gulf of Orfana, that I could not, as longas I was on the peninsula, and though offeringa high price, prevail upon any boat to carry mefrom the eastern side of the peninsula to thewestern, or even from Xiropotami to Vatopedhi.Xerxes, therefore, was perfectly justified in cuttingthis canal, as well from the security which it affordedto his fleet, as from the facility of the work,and the advantages of the ground, which seemsmade expressly to tempt such an undertaking.iv ti ry loB/t^ roury I'c 'Suc atrSc opoc w>/^Xov o'Aflwc, SaKij ffdXic Aeur^ ie ""o Aiyalov wiXayos.*tunc oi«ira(. — Herodot. 7, UoXeic ^i 'X*'- ^avijv fiir, '.ZS. Ipluiv diruitiav, wap abTi)v Tippyrev 'Astir caXoufiiniv ^lipir^a, it to xpiit ES/3oiiffTi ii dro TOO liuaiXiaii liiu- iri'Xayoc Tfrpfi/i/itViji'. — tai 'wpov\ov<ra (at o cyd. 1. 4, c- lOS.VOL. III.J146 MACEDONIA. [cUAF.The experience of the losses wtucH the fonder expeditionunder Antonius bad suffered suggestedthe idea. The circumnavigation of the capes Am-plusand Canastneum was much lees dangerous,as the gulfs offer some good harbours, and it wasthe object of Xerxes to collect forces from the Greekcities in those gulfs as he passed. If there be anydifficulty arising from the narrative of Herodotus, itis in comprehending how the operation should haverequired so long a time as three years ', when theking of Persia had such multitudes at his disposal,and among them Egyptians and Babylonians, whowere accustomed to the making of canals.The view from the site of Sane comprehendsonly a small portion of the southern coast of Acte,a cape near Zogr^fu hiding all the more distantpart ; the island of Julian, which is only a mileor two distant, impedes also the prospect of allthe eastern coast of Sithoniay except that of PortVurvuri, before which are some islands seen in a linewith the northern extremity of Julian, and to theright of which appears the coast at the head of thegulf. At Vurvuri is the isthmus of theMACEDONIA.mioatiDg on the northern coast in a cape whichlies half way between Erisso and the Vatoped-lino metdkhi, and shuts out all view of the onevalley from the other. At the opening in the ridge,stands another metokhi, belonging to one of theconvents of the Holy Mountain, and half a milebeyond it, on a height adjoining the ridge, isErissos or lerissos ', consisting of 150 scatteredhouses, inhabited entirely by Greeks, and of whichthose nearest to the sea are about a quarter of amile distant from it, and half an hour from theVatopedhino metokhi. The height of Erisso iscrowned with a ruined castle of the middle ages,and on the shore stands a windmill, the only oneI have seen on the continent of Greece, except atMegara : here also is a large ancient mole, advancingin a curve into the sea, and though in ruinsstill serving to shelter the boats which navigate theStrymonic Gulf. As Herodotus denominates thesea at the northern end of the Canal of Xerxes theSea of the Acanthus, the mole seems sufficient evidenceof the position of the port of Acanthus, andconsequently, that Acanthus occupied exactly thesituation of the modern Erisso ; in confirmation ofwhich I find on the maritime or northern side ofthe hill upon which the village stands, some remainsof a Hellenic wall, constructed of squareblocks of grey granite, of which stone there is anancient quarry near the port of Plats'. There aresome foundations of similar construction at agreater distance from the sea, particularly near a'Epiffiroi, 'ItpnTirne.La1 48 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.new khan in the lower part of the village ; theseseem to have belonged to the town walls, the formerto the Acropolis. It can hardly be doubted,therefore, that Ptolemy and the Epitomizer ofStrabo have erroneously placed Acanthus on theSingitic instead of the Strymonic Gulf, in whichthey are opposed by Herodotus, who is extremelyaccurate in his topography of the Persian invasion,and with whom Scymnus and Mela are in agreement.The error of Strabo and Ptolemy mayperhaps have arisen from the territory of Acanthushaving stretched for a considerable distancealong the shore of the Smgiiic as well as the Stry-ionic Gulf, from the former of which Erisso is nottwo miles distant. It would even seem from Livythat Acanthus had a harbour on that gulf; for iodescribing the course of the fleet of Attains andthe Romans iu the Macedonic war, B.C. 200,when after their failure at Cassandra they sailedto Acanthus, he states only that they sailed roundthe promontory of Canastreeum and that of Torone*, thereby implying that they did not doubleXXIV.] MACEDONIA. 149of Uranopolis, or the city of the Urania, Ovpavl-Suit TToAtoic, as the name is inscribed upon them,of which place history has left us no information,except that it was founded by Alexarchus, brotherof Cassander, king of Macedonia '. Possibly itmay have occupied the same site as Sane, as Pliny,the only author besides Atheujpus who namesUranopolis, has not included Sane among thetowns of Athos '.Herodotus, Thucydides, and Strabo, agree inshowing that the peninsula of Acte contained fivecities, named Dium, Thyrsus, Clennam, Acroathos,or the city of the Acrotlioi, and Holophyxus ' ; tothese Scylax adds Characterise*. As all these authoritiesagree in showing the city of the Acrothoi tohave been near the extremity of the peninsula,there seems no situation with which it can be identifiedbut thatof Lavra, where alone the site and asmall harbour offer some natural conveniences.The proximity of Lavra to the adjacent capeZmyma is a further proof, for Acroathos was acape as well as a town, and it is evident thatZmyma and St. George are the Acroathos andNymphaum described by Strabo as being theformer the termination of the Strymonic, the latterthat of the Singitic Gulf. Strabo, indeed, or hisEpitomizer, as well as Pliny and Mela, seem tohave supposed that Acroathos stood on the peak ofAllen. I. 3, c. 20, ct Thucyd. 1. 4, c. 109. Btr.i-Herald. Lamb. ibid. bon Epit. 1. 7, p. 331.Plin. H. N. I. 4, c. 1(1. ' Scylax in iAaKilovia.t A150 Macedonia. [CHAP.Athos ; bat to any person who has seen the mountain,that supposition cannot but appear almost asincredible as that the inhabitants should have seenthe sun three hours before those who dwelt on thesea-shore *. These absurdities are the more glaringin Strabo, as his description of the peak is correctand forcible. A statue of Jupiter AdiooB, andsome altars, were probably all that ever occupiedthe position of the modem chapel *.Of the situation of the other for cities of Acte wehave no means of judging, but by the order in whichthey are named by the for authors just cited.But, unfortunately, they do not all agree in thatorder, and a comparison of them, as often happensin similar cases, leads to no certain result.Scylax, whose work, being a perils, ought tobe the best authority, arranges them in the followingorder, coasting from Torone: — Dium,Thyrsus, Cleonse, the mountain Athos, Charades,Holophyxus, and then Acanthus, whenceit would appear that Thyssus and Cleanse wereMIT.] MACEDONIA. 151OD the southern, and Charades and Holophyxuson the northern coast. Neither of the two historiansmention Sane among the cities of Acte,though it was within the isthmus. Herodotusplaces next to it, Dium, then Holophyxus,Acrothoum, Thyssus and Cleonae ; while Thucydidesthus names them ', beginning also fromSane : Thyssus, Cleonae, Acrothoi, Holophyxus,Dium. If then we suppose the two historians tohave followed opposite directions round the peninsula,they concur both with one another, and withScylax, in favouring the opinion that Thyssusand CleoDEe were on the southern coast, andHolophyxus on the northern, hut they differ fromhim as to Dium, which they tend to place on thenorthern coast.As they all agree, however, in showing that Diumwas the nearest town to the isthmus, in whichStraho concurs by thus enumerating the towns ofActe — Dium, Cleonae, Thyssus, Holophyxus, Acro-thou, it is very possible that Dhtm was neither onthe northern nor southern shore of the peninsula,but on the western, or in the gulf of Acanthus.In this case, if it be admitted that Vatopedhiand the Arsana of Khilandari were ancient positions,it will follow, if we trust to the order ofnames in Scylax, which in this instance is notopposed to the testimony of the historians or ofStraho, since they all omit Charadria^, that thelatter site was that of Holophyxus, and thatIt occurs in relating an ei in the eighth year of the Expeditionof Brasidaa into Acte, ponncaian war.after be bad taken Ampbipolis152 MACEDONIA. [CBAF.Vatop^dhi is the position of Charades. Ab toThyssus and Cleonse, one of them appears to haveoccupied some situation near Zografii, or Dho-khiari, and the other that of Xeropotdmi ; but itis impossible to come to any more precise conclusion,unless we consider the periplua of Scylaxas a weightier authority than the others ; for Herodotusand Strabo seem to place Cleonse in the morewestern position, while Thucydides accords withScylax in giving that situation to Thyrsus. Inthis case Xeropotami occupied the site of Cleonse,and Thyssus stood near Dhokhiari or Z<^r4fu.The discovery of an inscription, with the name ofany of these towns, would tend greatly to elucidatethis question of the ancient sites of Acte.Pliny has so mixed up the names of the cities ofthis part of Macedonia, that no positive inferencecan be drawn from him, though it may be worthyof remark, that be, like all the other four authorswho enumerate the towns, names Thyssus andCleonse contiguously.From Eiisso a road, which soon joins that fromthe southern end of the Provlaka, or site of Sane.,XXIV.]MACEDONIA.the name of Kassandhra. The road from Erisso tothe Porta passes by Aio Nikola, a village not far fromthe northwestern extremity of the Singing Gulf,thence to Ermylies, or Ormylia', situate a fewmiles from the north-eastern angle of the ToronaicGulf, and by Molivo-pyrgo to Aio Mamas, bothsituated on the same shore, the latter two hoursfrom the Porta.!n the Singitic Gulf, according to Herodotus,the maritime towns between Sane and Cape Am-pluswere Assaa, Pylorus, Sings, and Sparta', andas the historian was describing the progress of thefleet of Xerxes, we can hardly doubt that theirsituations were in that order. Sykia is probably acorruption of Sings, from which the gulf wasnamed Singitic. Assaa perhaps occupied the siteof some ruins called Paleokastro, which are at thenorthern extremity of the Singitic Gulf, aboutmidway by land between Erisso and Vurvuri, andon the road to Porta about midway between Erissoand Orm^'lia. The position in the centre of a fertilecountry at the head of the gulf seems to correspondto the apparent importance of Assaa,as deducible from Theophilus, Aristotle andPliny ' ; if we suppose, as can hardly be doubted,n-ais "BpfivKinii, ma. 'Opfti-via, and sometimes'Fui/ii'Xia.• Herodot. 1. 7, c. 122.Theoponip. ap. Stephatt. inAvmjpa ,Qfiurnt iv rp 'AaavpvTiZu —Aristotle. Hat. Animi. 1. 3, c. 12.Herewu a river which frown itscoldness was called the i^XP"^,and which had the reputation ofcausing the fleet which drankof it to produce black Lambs.Oppidum Assert, fauceaquealtered Istbmi, Acanthus, Stagira,&c,— Plin. 1. 4, c, 10.The real orthographyprobably 'Atrvqpa,iiT A1 54 Macedonia. [CHAP.that the Assaa of Herodotus is the same placeas the Assyria of Aristotle and the Assert ofPliny ; Pilots, on this supposition, may hareoccupied Port Vurvuri, or one of the harboursadjacent to it on the north, and Kart41i may be acorruption of Sparta, marking the site of that ci,which probably, like many others of the Greekcities of Thrace, declined after the Macedonianconquest.In the gulf of Cassandra, anciently known asthe Sermylian, or Mecybemsean ', as well as theToronaic, the towns on the eastern and northernsides were situated in the following order, accordingto their occurrence in Herodotus : Torone,Galepsus, Sermyle, Mecybema, Olynthus. Ofthe situation of Sermyle there can be no doubt,there being no greater difference between ^pftvX^and the modem 'OpfiiXia, or 'EpfivXuQ, than mighteven have existed anciently between the local andthe general form of the word. The site of Olynthusat Aio Mamas is known by its distance of60 stades from Potsdam, or the isthmus of Pallet*,as well as by some vestiges of the city stillXXIV.] MACEDONIA. 155of Thrace, after having escorted the defeatedXerxes to the Hellespont'. From Theseus, onthe authority of Hegesandrus, we learn that thename of the marsh was Bolyca, and that it receivedtwo rivers, named the Ammonites and Olyn-thiacua '.The ruins of Torone preserving their ancientname, and the positions of Olynthus and Senilebeing obtained, it follows from the order of namesin Herodotus, that Meci/berna was at Molivopyrgowhere some remains of antiquity are said to bepreserved ; and the site of Galepsus is to be soughtfor in some part of the shore about 25 miles inlength, which lies between Torone and the port ofSermyle. Galepsus I take to have been the sameplace afterwards called Pbyscella ', a distinctionhaving probably been required because there wasanother Galepsus at no great distance, on the seacoast,eastward of the Strymon.In the peninsula of Pallene there were eight townsin the time of the Persian invasion, and in thefollowing order, coasting from Olynthus to theThermaic gulf: Potidaea, Aphytis, Neapolis, ^ge,Thermo, Scione, Mende, Sane. Of these itappears from other authors, and especially fromStrabo, who names no others, that the principalbesides Potidaea were Aphytis, Mende, Scione,Herodot. I. 8, c. 127. originate in a word having refer1. 8, c. 3. ij BoXui;^ hence to the marsh, and havingXifiyil is nothing more than the the same import and origin aslakeofOlTnthua, the Being ftcWccommon Macedonian prefix ; ' I'lin. H. N.though probably both names Mela, I. 2, c, 3,d156 MACEDONIA. [Chap.and Sane. All these, except Same, were sufficientlyopulent to coin their own money, ofwhich specimens are still extant. AphyHs is determinedby the modem name 'Athyto, attachedto a village on the eastern shore, about one thirdof the distance between Porta or Cassandra andCape Palitiri, the ancient Caaastrseam. Thermoappears from Stephens to have been on orvery near a promontory', to which circumstanceof position Lycophron seems to have alluded inmentioning Therambus in a passage relating toPhlegm *, which was the ancient name of Pallene.Therambus therefore occupied a position very nearCape Canastreeum. The south-western cape ofP(Ule7te, by Livy called Posidium*, and by ThucydidesPosidonium *, probably from a temple ofNeptune which stood upon it, still retains the formerappellation', vulgarly pronounced Posidhi.Mende appears, from the following circumstances,to have been situated near this cape onthe South-wester side. When Attains and theRomans, in the year b.c. 200, sailed from Scia-thu against Cassandra. they first touched atXXIV.] MACEDONIA. 157According to these data it seems evident, thatsome Hellenic remains which have been observedon the shore, near Cape Posidhi, to the eastward,as well as on the heights above it, are thoseof Mende, such a position of Mende with relationto Posidium according moreover with thetransactions of the ninth year of the Peloponnesianwar, when the Athenians, proceeding from against Mende and Scione, sailed to Posi-iconium, and after having taken Mende, proceededagainst Scione, of which the territory was conterminouswith that of Mende '. The order ofnames in Herodotus, therefore, which tends toplace Stone between the Capes Paliiiri and ,agrees perfectly with the narrative ofThucydides : and the remains of Sane should, accordingto Herodotus, be sought for betweenCape Posidhi and the western side of the isthmusof Porta. Mela accords with the same conclusionas to Scione, inasmuch as he states it to haveoccupied together with Mende the broadest partof the peninsula, but he is opposed to it in regardto the position of Sane, which he places near *.lUcj'd. ubi Bp.JCHAPTER XXV.MACEDONIA.Strath, SlratoiuceiO'-'Sizyoro — shines of lead and silvered— Kafkana — Caprut—Stxnos, Stageirtu — Gulf ofPosidium, pun SyUtu, lake BMe, Avon, Arethusa, Bromt-cut — Argitu* — Ferry of SlTymon — Eion — Orfana, Phagn* —Neokhori, Amphipolh — Lake Cercinilis — Inscription — BillofAmphipolU — Capture ofAmpkipolu by Brandon — TakhynoSerra, Sirrha — Inhabitants of the Strymonic plain, &e.Nov. 4. — From Erisso to Nizvoro : distance, threehours and three quarters. A ride of forty minutesbrings us to the end of the cultivated lands ofEriss6, which bear com, Kalambokki, and vines.The low undulations of ground which border theisthmus become higher as we advance, and atleng^are blended with a woody ridge which, branchingCHAP. XXV.] MACEDONIA. 159with another from the mountain of Nizvoro, followa wide torrent, a branch of the latter, and ascendsome narrow valleys, which conduct at length bya steep path to Nizvoro. This town stands in a loftysituation on the south-western face of a woodymountain, the extremity of a ridge, which stretcheswestward from thence across the Cluilcidic peninsula.In the ascent we passed in several placeslarge heaps of the burnt ore of the silver mines,which have given to the surrounding districtthe name of Sidhero-kapsa, and we looked downto the right on an inlet which branches from thenorthern side of the Acanthus bay. At the headof this hay, on a small level, a Hellenic castle isdescribed to mc as situated on a height, and asenclosing a space of four striata; below it, onthe ea-side, there are said to be many Hellenicfoundations with remains of an ancient port. Theplace is called Stratton, and is supposed to betheancient Stageirus. An agitates, who accompaniedthe horses on foot, remarked to me that itwas ii n-arpiSa tou 'ApiffroTfXoug, or the native townof Aristotle. Yesterday, in like manner, a monkof the Vatopedhino metokhi showed some knowledgeof the history of the invasion of Xerxes, andthat notwithstanding the mass of ignorance collectedin the monasteries of the Oros, some recollectionsof ancient history are still preserved here.This may be attributed in great measure to theChalice and its three smaller peninsulas beinginhabited by Greeks unmixed either with the Bulgarianor Albanian race, and having very fewTurks among them. Nevertheless the tradition assto M160 Macedonia. [CHAP.Stageirus is probably erroneous, for Stagarua wasa place of greater importance than the vestiges atStratton and its confined valley indicate, and thelatter name so nearly resembles Stratotucaa thatthere is a strong presumption of the identity. Itis true that Ptolemy, the only author who mentionsStratoniceia, places it in the Singitic gulf, but thismay be a consequence of his having improperlyassigned Acanthus to the same gulf '.Nizvoro contains three or four hundred houses,divided into two nearly equal Makhaladhes, situatedhalf a mile apart, the one inhabited by Greeks,at the head of whom is the bishop of Erissos, one ofthe Suffragans of the metropolitan of Thessalonica,and styled also bishop of 'Aghion Oros ; the otherby Turks, and the residence of Rustem Aga, who,as Madam 'Agasi, has the direction of the neighbouringsilver mines, together with the governmentof twelve eleftherokhoiia in the ChtUdeUc peninsula,which from this union of the Mukati arenamed the Sidherokapsika, or Mademokhoria. Notlong since Rustem was nearly expelled from hisXir.] MACEDONIA. 1 (i ioff bis head. My Janissary, who relates this anecdote,considers it as a proof of Rustem being adoghru adam, or upright man. Rustem pays thePorte 120 purses and 200 okes of silver for themukata of the villages and mines, but as he nevermakes more than 100 okes from the mines, he isobliged to supply the difference in money*. This he isenabled to do by the Greeks of the SIdherokapsika,who are well content to make good the deficiencyfor the sake of the advantages they derive from belongingto the government of the mines. Theowner of the house in which I lodge pays 300piastres a year in Zoaimma of all kinds. Belon,who visited the mines of Sidherokapsa in themiddle of the sixteenth century, asserts that hefound five or six hundred furnaces in differentparts of the mountain, that besides silver, gold wasextracted here from pyrites, that 6000 workmenwere then employed, and that the mines sometimesreturned to the Turkish government a monthlyprofit of 30,000 ducats of gold. The name ,although implying a smelting of iron, isgenerally applied to places where any appearancesof metallurgy remain ; it is not probable that thereever existed any iron works in this place.The villages attached to the government of theMines are chiefly situated in the highlands of theChalcidic peninsula on either side of the centralridge, and in a part of the country to the south-westof Nlzvoro, towards the isthmus of Sithonia. Inthis direction, four hours distant, is Reveniko, containing200 houses. On the direct road to Salonwhich is eighteen hours distant, are Eleri-VOL. HI. M162 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.goya, four hours from Nizroro, containing 400houses, Gal4tista, or Galatia, of 500 houses, eighthours farther, and Basilica of 400, midway fromthe latter to Saloniki. Baptista is near the originof a stream which separates the highlands of Chat-choiceinto two parallel ridges, and joins the sea inthe bay of Saloniki. The road from Galatia followsthe river nearly to its mouth. Not far short ofBasilica, to the right of the road, is the monasteryof St. Anastasia. To the southward of Gal4tista,towards Polighyro, are Vdvdho, of 300 houses,two hours distant, and beyond it, at a like distance,Riutnikia. To the northward of Galdtista,in the mountains towards the valley of Klisali andBesikia, are Adhami, Zakliv^ri, and Ravani, the lastof which is on the road from Saloniki to Pazarudhi.The ridges which extend westward from Ntzvororise to a central peak called Solomon, or Solomon*, possibly an ancient name, from whence thewaters flow southward to the gulls of Ain Orosand Kassandhra, westward to that of Saloniki, andnorthward, into the lake of Besikia. There areXXV.] MACEDONIA. 1 fi')with a council or deputation for the repartition ofthe taxes, and other general concerns, which assemblesat Polighyro, the residence of the Turkishaga, who farms the revenue from the Porte. contains 600 families, and stands at a distanceof three hours from the shore of the Gulf ofKassandhra, at the foot of the heights of Solomon.The Khasika comprehend all the rifupn iowa ', orcultivable heights and undulated country, whichfall southward from those mountains to the Thrownand Thermaic Gulfs. The northern part of(he district bordering on the latter gulf is knownby the name of Kalameria, and is one of the mostproductive districts in Macedonia. With the exceptionof some Turkish tjiftliks, and some metok-hia of Aion Oros, the land of the Khasika is possessedentirely by the villages. Besides affordingexcellent winter pasture for cattle and sheep, itproduces an abundance of grain of superior quality; its wool, honey, and wax, are also considerable,and silk-worms are raised in the villages,particularly in the two principal towns, Polighyroand Ermylies, which alone contain four or five hundredsilk-looms.Kassandhra, or the peninsula of Pallene, formsa similar union of villages, under a Turkish V6i-vota, who resides at Malta, towards the centreof the peninsula. The villages are twelve in num-partyanie influence, which ' A common Greek expressthe general qualifications sion in contradistinction toof the 'Arkhondes in the Elef- iypta /Jomi'i.therakhoria of Greece.164 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.ber, of which 'Athyto, Malta, Furka, Valencia, andAghia Paraskevi, are the principal. The produceof the peninsula is similar to that of the Kh4sika,which adjoins to it, besides which the Palleneeamhave numerous boats and small vessels, and derivegreat benefit from their maritime traffic.Nov. 5. — The mines now wrought are abouthalf an hour from Nizvoro, between two hills, inadeep ravine, where a stream of water serves forthe operations of washing, as well as to turn awheel for working the bellows for the furnace.The whole is conducted in the rudest and mostslovenly manner. The richest ore is poundedwith stones upon a board by hand, then washedand burnt with charcoal ; the inferior ore is brokeninto laisser pieces, and burnt twice without washing.The lead, when extracted from the furnace,is carried to Kastro, where the silver is separated,in the proportion of two or three drams to an okeof 400 drams. When the present shafts are exhausted,the mines will probably be abandoned.From the mines I return, by a circuitous path, toXXV.] MACEDONIA. 165and to the north of oaks. Some of the elms arevery fine trees. All the forenoon we travel amidstthe clouds, which, as the wind is to the south-east,hang low upon the hills, and at 6.30 descendupon the southern corner of the plain of Lybjadha,around which all the sides of the hills are coveredwith great heaps of scoriae, similar to those nearthe Made of Nlzvoro, but much larger and morenumerous.The plain, which is a dead level in the form ofan equilateral triangle, surrounded by woodymountains, is covered with fields of kalambokki,and intersected with torrents shaded by largeplane trees. The scoriae are seen in the greatestquantities in the bed of one of these torrents, belowthe comer where we descended ; but a peasantwho has the care of a magazine for the maize,informs me, that towards the summit of the mountainthere are heaps of the same substance largerthan any near the valley, and shafts of a muchgreater depth and size. Some of these may beworks, perhaps, of the ancient Macedonians, whencea part of the silver money was derived, the prodigiousquantity of which is proved by the proportionof it still existing. 1 am not aware, however, thatany ancient author has noticed mines in this partof the country.On inquiring for ancient buildings, the keeperof the magazine conducts me to the southern angleof the bay, where I find the remains of a thinwall constructed of small stones and mortar, builtacross the neck of a promontory, and a little withinthe same point towards the plain, many fragments166 HACBDOKIA. [Chap.of ancient pottery on the aide of the hill, with apiece of Hellenic wall crossing a little ravine orvater-course. In the adjacent angle of the bayis a place called the Scala, where plank andscantling are now lying ready for embarkation.The bay is sheltered by an island in the middle,distant a mile and a half iron the shore, andabout as much in circumference. It is calledKafkana', a word derived from Kavia, like Kafkhi6and Kappa, names which we generally find attachedto places preserving appearances of metallurgyoperations.The bay, plain, pale6ka8tro, and skala, are allknown by the name of Lybjadha, which the nativesderive from that of the mother of Alexander, andnot without probability ; since the omission of theinitial o, the third case, and the conversion of Avju-riaSa into Av^s-rJ^idSa, are all in the ordinary courseof Romaic corruption. A situation a little belowthe serai of the Aga at Kastro, where some fragmentsof columns are still seen, is said to havebeen the site of Alexander's mint. Both TurksXXT.] MACEDONIA. 167Strymonic Gulf, except Leftheridha, and the latterbeing close to the cape now called Mammary,which forms the northern side of the entrance intothe bay of Acanthus, is too far from Stageirus, ifthat place, as I suspect from the name, stood atthe modern Stavros, Leftheridha, moreover, beingnothing more than the Romaic form of Eleuthuru,seems to indicate the preservation of an ancientname. Within that cape to the northward thereis a small harbour.Leaving the skala at 8.30 Turkish, and followingthe beach, I arrive at 9 at the point whichforms the northern extremity of the bay and plain,and from thence follow the sea shore under themountains, winding to the left as we enter uponthe shore of the bay of Rending, as this extremityof the Strymonic gulf is called, until we arrive at10.50 on the beach immediately below the villageof Stavros, and about a mile eastward of the westerextremity of the gulf, where now lies a shiploading wood. An ascent of a quarter of an hourbrings me to the village of Stavros, which standson a height at the foot of woody mountains, similarto those enclosing the plain of Lybtzadha.Stavros contains about 50 houses, inhabited bycultivators of kalambokki grounds in the plain atthe head of the gulf, or by pastors of the finecattle, of which there are numerous flocks in everypart of the Ckalcidic peninsula. The position isytipovTOXta^Toii'ApioTOTiXoiic yvfwv rjji Xifiim' dra al tovOTiifta nrpacdiria' iy ^ Xi^^f 'Siti^v^ovo^ infloXni. — Strabo,Bv^lta KaVpoc khX njaloi' i/iili- p. 331.168 Macedonia. [Chap.very much that of a Hellenic town, the hei^tbeing detached in front of the mountain, flankedOD either side by a torrent, and falling to a levelwhich is itself h%faer than the plain adjacent tothe sea-shore. There are even some appearancesof ancient walls of a very rough and irregularspecies on the eastern side above the torrent.These remains, the portion, and the nameStavros, which, the accent in STa-ya(>oc being onthe first syllable, is a natural contraction of thatname, seem decisive of Stavros being the site ofStageirtts.Herodotus in describing the march of the armyof Xerxes from the mouth of the Strymon toAcanthus, states, that after passing Argilus andleaving the gulf of Posidium on the left, theytraversed the plain called Syleus, and then passingStageirus arrived at Acanthus *, all whichaccords perfectly with the supposition just stated,the plain which lies between it and the sea beingsufficiently wide for the army to have left thecity on the right. That Stageirus was not forXXV.] MACEDONIA. 169geirus immediately followed the example '. Indie fact of the restoration of Stageirus by theinfluence of Aristotle ', we have a proof that ithad fallen to decay before the time of Alexander; at the same time that the few vestiges nowremaining, and the want of all coins of Stages*, give reason to believe that the improvementwas not permanent. The city therefore wasprobably in the height of its prosperity aboutthe time of the Persian war, and with the otherGreek colonies in this quarter, declined whenwestern Thrace became a part of the kingdom ofMacedonia.Nov. 6.— From Stavros to Orfani, distant 5 h.40 min. without the baggage, which is left to followas on the three preceding days. Our pace,notwithstanding, is not more than a man's walk,as the agoydtes, from whom I hire the horses,accompany them on foot. The rain begins verysoon after we set out, and continues with littleintermission all the day ; half an hour beyondStavros, leaving a khan in the plain, a quarter ofa mile on the left, we cross a wooden bridge overa small stream which issues from the lake ofBesikia*, and from thence passing through an■ Thucyd. 1. 4, c. 88.Plutarch, in Alexander. —Diogen. Inert. 1. 5, § 4. —Theophr. Hist. Plant, c. 102.—.Slian. Var. Hist. 1. 3, c. 17.Unless those inscribed'OpOayopiuy are of this place,ai Eckbcl supposed on ii'authority of a fragment ii) theGeography Minorca, Vol. iv.Pliny (1. 4, c. 11.) howeverfavours the opinion that was the old name ofBaronet.170 Macedonia. [CHAP.opening id the mountain, which remains a mileOD our left, fall into the sea at the same distanceto the light of the bridge. The opening being inthe great post road from Saloniki to Constantinople,and in a country which has c^n beeninfested by robbers, there is a guard-house in thepass, occupied by a few soldiers, commanded by abolu-b^i, who examines all passengers, and expectsa present of a few parts.Herodotus calls this maritime plain Syleus, andThucydides has exactly described the places inrelating the march of Brasidas from Ama in theChalcidice to Amphipolis. Moving from Amen,he arrived towards the evening at Alon and ,where the lake Bolbe discharged itself intothe sea, and after supper marched forward '. Asthe word Alon sufficiently indicates the para,Sole was evidently the lake of Besikia and Bro-risus,near the mouth of the river. Ama I suspectto have been the same place called Bahamaby Stephens, the existence of which latter placenear this part of the coast is shown by the nameXXV.] MACEDONIA. 171valley and station very near to Bromiscus \ By astation he probably meant such a guard as nowoccupies the pass. It appears from the JerusalemItinerary, that in the time of the Greek Empirethere was a mutation, or place for changing horses,at the tomb of Euripides, which was on the roadfrom Amphipolis to Apollonia, twenty Romanmiles distant from the former and eleven from thelatter ».The plain diminishes as we advance, and atlength becomes a narrow level between the footof woody mountains and the northern shore of thegulf, partly cultivated with maize and corn, andpartly covered with groves of large plane-trees.It belongs, as well as the plain nearer to theAnton of Arcthtisa, to Vrasta, a large village of amixed population of Greeks and Turks, whichstands on the mountain, not far from the Avon,but not in sight from our road. This mountainwas comprehended in the ancient Bisaltia, which,according to Stephens, contained a city of thesame name. Argilus, another city of the Basalt,occupied a position not far from the sea, betweenBromiscus and the mouth of the Strymon. Itseems from Herodotus to have been like Stageirus,a little to the right of the route of the army ofXerxes in marching from the Strymon to Acan-Bromiscus, eui proxima ii, p. 226, Jacobs.— Stephan.Arethusa cornwallis el statio in Bop^/omci whence 'Op^cest in que visitor Euripides seems to have been the Ely-sepulchre.— Ammian. 1. 27, mon.c. 4. — Plutarch, in Lycurg. — ' Tin. Hieioaol. p. G04.Kaiser Epic. in Antholog. \o\. Vessel.172 Macedonia. [cHAP.thus, and may therefore be sought for on themountain. Its territory extended as far as theright bank of the Strymon ; for Cerdylium, themountain immediately opposite to AmphipoUs,was in the territory of Aisles ^At the end of two hours and a half from Stavrosa violent fall of rain detains us an hour in ahut near the sea, after which we follow the directionof the shore at no great distance from it.In approaching the Strymon, the hills are muchdiminished in height; instead of being coveredwith wood as before they are partly cultivated,and they terminate in a plain which towards themouth of the river is sandy, and intersected withmarshes. In one hour and forty minutes from thehut, we arrive at the Tjai-agsi, or the river'smouth, as the Turks call the ferry of the Strymon,though it is situated a quarter of a mile from thesea. The river is about 180 yards in breadth.A store-house for the grain of the Strymonicplains, which is exported from hence in laiquantities to Constantinople, stands on the rightXXV.] MACEDONIA. 173among which appear many squared blocks in theHellenic style. Though the walls are little morethan heaps of ruins, enough remains to show thatthere was a large quadrangular inclosure, withother smaller detached buildings. The greaterpart of what now remains is evidently of the timeof the Byzantine Empire. By the native Greeksthe ruins are most erroneously supposed to bethose of Amphipotis : elsewhere 1 have heard themattributed to a town of the Lower Empire namedComtesse ; but KofxiTiaav, which the Italians haveconverted into Confess, and from which theyhave named this gulf, was, according to the monksof Aionoros, a town or fortress of the Lower Empire,at the western extremity of that peninsula.Among the Greeks, the gulf, as I before observed,generally bears the name of Rending, which wasan imperial-Greek town and bishop's see, occupy-interpositionin ornearthe pass of Arethusa '. Thegulf is sometimes known also as that of Stavros orof Orfana. The ruins at the ferry of the Strymon,whatever may have been their name under theGreek Empire, stand nearly, if not exactly, on thesite of that Eion on the Strymon, from whenceXer-tes sailed to Asia after his defeat at Salamis' ;for it seems evident from some of the circumstancesattending the battle of Amphipolis, in the tenth yearof the Peloponnesian war *, that Eion stood on thisbank of the river.free quarters of a mile beyond the ferry, andMet. vol. ii. p. 464. ' Hcrodot. 1. 8, c. 108.8vo. Venice. 1807. ' Thucyd. 1. 5, c 10.r.174 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.about Ihe same distance from the aea, the hillswhich border the plain on the eastern side, terminatein a point higher than the part of the ridgebehind it, divided into terraces, and having a flatsummit, with some appearances of art, bat I searchin vain for any unequivocal remains of antiquityon it. Along the side of the mountain, of whichthis height is the termination, stand several Turkishvillages, forming a district called OHana, belongingto the Serres kazasi. The Turks of Orfanaare descendants of those Osmanlis who came intothis country with the predecessors of Mahomet II.and who, like those of Thessaly, are called by theGreeks KoviaptSt^, or Ionian, a name which recallsto memory the most ancient capital of theTurkish power in Asia Minor. They occupy alai^e portion of the cultivated mountains of Macedonia,and some parts of the plains distant fromthe large towns. Around the latter the lands aregenerally tjiftlika belonging to Turkish inhabitantsof the towns, which are farmed by Christians. TheKoni4ridbes, on the contrary, cultivate their ownXXV.] MACEDONIA. 175who belonged to an agricultural family of theneighbourhood of Kavala, is an illustrious exception.Hia uncle, who was governor of that town,having fallen a victim to the arts of his enemies,Mehmet Ali, deprived of tins support, was inducedto seek his fortune in Egypt, at the head of asmall number of followers. The Yuniks, who inAsia live a wandering life, like the Curds andTurkomans, as their name implies', have becomemore sedentary in Macedonia and Thrace, whereobey have villages, and have become cultivators.Those in the Pashalik of Saloniki have a chiefcalled the Yuruk Bey, who resides in that city.Their principal abodes are in the districts ofGumertzina, Drama, Nevrokopo, Serres, StrutRadhovitzi, Tikfis, Karadagh.From the height above-mentioned, which liesto the left of the direct road, I proceed, over opendowns covered with corn-fields, to one of the villagesof Orfana, situated at an hour and a halffrom the ferry, in a hollow between two heightswatered by a finally stream, which flows directlyto the sea. The village contains fifty or sixtybouses, all Turkish except those of five or sixGreek shopkeepers. Although not the largest ofthe makhalas of Orfana, it is more especiallyknown by that name as being a post station on thegreat road from Greece to Constantinople. AboveAs there is no difference nians of Europe, they are, Iin language, and very little in believe, often confounded,manners and mode of life, be though the names sufficientlytween the Yuruks and leo show the original distinction.176 Macedonia. [CHAP.it rises the great mountain, which, stretching eastwardfrom the left bank of the Strymon, at the passqS Amphipolia, bounds all the eastern portion of thegreat Strymonic basin on the south, and near Praymeets the ridges which inclose the samebasin on the east. The mountain is now knownby the name of Pimari, and is evidently the samewhich has been celebrated by poets and historiansunder the name of Pangeeum '.Nov. 7. — Being detained this day by the weatherat the mensis lane, or post-house of Orfuna,1 discover in the course of the day that the heightwhich overhangs the village to the eastward wasthe site of an ancient city. Only a few smallpieces of the walls remain in situ, but all thespace now ploughed for com, which they onceenclosed, is strewn with fragments of ancient pottery,and. the remains of former buildings, amongwhich are a few squared blocks of stone. Greekcoins arc very often found here, and among othersmall productions of Hellenic art, oval sling-bulletsof lead ', generally inscribed with Greek names inXXV.]MACEDONIA.1 found several of these bullets, and purchasedothers, together with coins from the people of thevillage. There is reason to believe that the anteis that of Phagres, a place of some importance', situated in a district which was namedPieria, because it was inhabited by descendantsof emigrants from Pieria near Mount Olympus,who had been driven from thence by the Mace-tones.Hence the valley included between MountPanga>um and the sea, ia which Phagres wassituated, was still called in the time of Thucydideso riii^iKuc (cotton, or the Pieric bay ' ; the latter wordis explained by the nature of the extensive hollowwhich reaches from Orfan-i to Pravista, and isincluded between Pang(Bnm and a lower maritimeridge which at Pravista forms a junction withthat mountain and there separates the head of thePieric valley from the plain of Philippi. Thearmy of Xerxes followed this valley in their marchinto Greece, leaving, as Herodotus observes, MountPangseum on the right '. It is true that the orderHecaUeus ap. Stephan. in♦aywc— Herodot. 1. 7, c. 1 12.Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 99— Scylaxin Opooi.— Strabo (Epit. I. 7.)p. 331.. . . . niipiic< 01 vtrrtpor,inrii TO niyyaiuy ripai- Erpu-ftorof f>Ki)iTa>- ibayptfTa cni ^X-Aa x^P'" '"' '" *'''' *^'' '^"~piKoc coXruc caXclrai i) iiiro ryiIlo^yaiy wpoc BAXaeaay yij, —Thupyd. 1. 2, c. 99. Xenophonin like manner employaVOL. III.iriJXiroc to describe a branch ofthe plain of Mantinea : rosuwiaSei- KoXtroy Tic Man-ii'tK^cKvirXfi opi( i')(ovTa, (Xcnoph.Hell. 1. 6, c. 5.) and the wordia still often used in the sameTlapaficiiiidfiivo^ ct u Sip'silt riif (Jpij/KVijt' (region athenaeum»c.) (irvrtpa TovTiuifirapaiifififTO ru'jjia ra Diipuv"Tuv «ii tyi ♦oypiis tariv owopa,Kai cnpfi nipyafiot' rairji fiiv178 Macedonia. [CHAP.in which the historian names Phagres and Per-gaius, as the two chief places in Pieria, tends tothe belief that Orfan6 occupied the site of Perga-vau rather than that of Phagres; his words howeverdo not absolutely require that Xerxes shouldhave passed the two places in the order in whichthe names occur, and Organs is the only situationin which Phagres can be placed, so as toconciliate the testimony of Herodotus and Thucydides,in attributing it to the Eric valley, withthat of Scylax and Strabo, who show that it wasthe first town beyond the Strymon K If PhagresMood at Orfani, Pegasus was most probably themodem Privity.The march of Xerxes serves also to give anegative intimation of the position of Galepsusand ^syme, colonies of the Thasii, which weretaken by Brasidas after the capture of Amphi-poles' ; for as neither of these places is mentionedas having been in the line of march of the Persians,we may infer that they were on that partMacedonia. 179of the coast where the line diverged from the eaand followed the Pieric valley. The point wherethey quitted the shore must, from the nature of thecountry, have been at or near Kavala ; Galepsuaand Jessie, therefore, were probably on the coastbetween Kavala and Orfand, and one of them at theharbour of Neater which is situated 2 hours to thesouthward of Pravista, just within the cape formingthe western entrance of the Gulf of Kavala, wherestill remain the ruins of a Greek city now knownby the name of Paleopoli, or Nefteropoli, or Dhef-tripoli ; the other in that case was at some pointof the coast between Neater and the mouth of theStri/imn. The former would rather seem to havebeen the site of Galepsus than of ^syme, becauseLivy in relating that Perseus, when flying fromthe Romans after his defeat at Pydna, sailed fromthe mouth of the Strymon to Galepsua on the firstday, and on the second to Samothrace ', rendersit probable that Galepsus was towards the middledistance between the Strymon and Samothrace,and that it was one of the most remarkable Harboursof the intervening coast, which data canonly be reconciled at Nefteropoli. Scylax, it mustbe admitted, gives an opposite testimony as to therelative situation of ^syme and Galepsus ; butwhen the assertions of the geographers are at variancewith the circumstantial evidence of history,the latter is generally to be preferred.Although the modern route from Constantinopleb Orfana and Saloniki, leading by Pravlsta through■ Liv. I. 44, c. 45. :n2190 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.the Pierre Valley, along the southern side of MoatPttH^entm, exactly in the Hoe of that of Xerxes, isthe most direct, it does not coincide with the Romanroad, or Via Egpiatia, which passed along theopposite hase of that mountain through Philippiand Amphipolia, probably for the sake of comprehendingin the line both those important cities,the former of which was a Roman colony. Wereit not certain from the Adversaries that such wasthe direction of the Roman road, there might besome doubt whether Neapolis, which lay on thatroute about 12 M. P. short of Philippi, were notat Nefter<Spoli ; but as there would have been inthat case a needless detour of near 20 miles byan angle to the north-east, such a suppositioncannot he entertained. Neapolis, therefore, orNeopolis according to its coins, occupied the siteof Kavila ; and Acontisma ' which was 8 or 9mUes eastward of Neapolis, may be placed nearthe other end of the passes of the Sapsei *, whichwere formed hy the mountainous coast stretchingeastward from Kavila.^^^ theLXXV.] MACEDONIA. 181have been omitted by Herodotus in his account ofthe march of Xerxes, or by Scylax in his Peripluaof this coast. Myrcinus therefore was in the interior,to the northward of Mount Pangwum, where theEdoni then possessed all the country as far as Dragincluded', and probably it was very nearthe site of Ampliipolis, which before the Atheniancolonization was only a subordinate place calledthe Nine Ways in the district of Myrcinus, then thechief Greek city in this part of Thrace °. WhenAmphipolis rose to eminence, Myrcinus naturallydeclined.Nov. 8. — This morning, at 2.40 Turkish, wereturn for some distance on the road to Saloniki,then leaving it to the left, arrive at 3,22 at thepoint mentioned on the 6th, where the surface ofthe ground has an artificial appearance. Theintermediate space between this point and the seaconsists chiefly of marshy ground and salt pans,near which latter are some magazines on the sea-beach.Turning again to the right, we follow thedirect route to the bridge of the Strymon at Neok-horn, proceeding along the foot of the hills. At3.45 Longer is a mile and a half on the right : itis the largest of the Koniaro-raakhaladhes as theGreeks call the detached quarters of Orfana ;though bearing, like Orfani, a Greek name, it isinhabited entirely by Turks, dwelling in pyrghi ortowers. From hence we approach the strait wherethe Strymon issues from between the hills into theThucyd. I. I, c. 100.Herod. 1. 5, c. 11,23, 126.— Thucyd. 1. 4, e. 102, 107.1 B8 Macedonia. [CHAP.maritime plain, and at 4 mount the heights whichadvance from Mount Pangceum to form the strait.At 4.15, below the little Turkish nllage of Aly-ba»B4, or, as the Greeks call it, Alibassiates, theground is covered with broken pottery and fragmentsof buildings, which mark the beginning ofthe site of AmphipoHs. On the road side, as wellas in an adjacent field, are several son of stone,but without any inscriptions now visible on them,at least on any of those which I examined. Theground appears to be full of sepulchres. Heresome remains of the waits of AmphipoKs are visibleon the crest of the hill to the leftBefore us, at the same time, opens a fine viewof the Strymonic lake mentioned by Thucydides,and by Arrian named Cercinitis*, together withthe extensive plains of Series and Zikhna extendingthirty miles from west to east, along the footof a range of lofty mountains. To the southwardthis great valley is inclosed by the parallel ridgeof Pim4ri, or Pangeeum, and by the mountain of'Orsova and Vrasta, which is separated only fromXXV.] Macedonia. !8Sof three openings, one for the entrance of the Strymonnear Demirissur, another for its exit at Amphipolls, and a third for the entrance of a large branchanciently called Angitas. and now 'Anghista, which,after crossing the plain of Drain, the ancientDrabescuB, and receiving contributions from aroundthat town and Philippi, joins the Strymonic lakesix or eight miles to the north of Ainphipolis. Theplain of Drabescus is concealed from Amphipolis bythe meeting of the lower heights of PanycEvm withthose which inclose the plain to the north-east.Through this strait the 'Anghista makes its way tothe lake, and thus there is a marked separationbetween the Stryinonk: plain and that which containsRabelais anal Philippi. The river 'Anghistahas its origin in some Iiigh mountains aroundNevrokopo, and after watering the valley containingthat town, is said to have a subterraneouscourse for some distance before it enters the plainof Dhrama. From the sepulchres on the ridgewhich connects the hill oi Amphipolis with MountPartyfpum there is a descent of eight minutes toMeokborio, in Turkish Yenikiuy, a small villagesituated on the side of the hill oi' Amphipolis abovethe left bank of the river, not far from where itissues from the lake, and is crossed a little belowthat point by a wooden bridge. Above the bridge,where the lake narrows before it becomes a river,stand two towers of the middle ages, on the oppositesides of the water. A little below the bridge,a stream of some magnitude joins the Strymonfrom the westward.The site of Amphipolis is now called Marmara,184 HACBDOHU. [chap.and there was formerly a village of that name'.Neokhori, as the word implies, is of recent construction.It is inhabited by forty Greek families,and 18 included in the district of Zikhna, a townsituated between Dhrama and Serres, at the footof the great mountain which borders the Strymomcplains to the northward. Neokhori seems chieflyto owe its existence to the profitable fishery of thoseStrymonian eels' which were celebrated among theancients for their size and fatness, and were considerednot inferior to the eels of the lake Copais.They are caught at a dam which crosses the streamhalf a mile below the bridge of Neokhori, and whichserves as well for this purpose as for a mill-head.Were it not for this artificial impediment, the river,although rapid, would be navigable to Neokhoriand into the lake. The mill belongs to the conventof Pandokratora on Mount Athos, but thefishery, since it has become valuable, has beenclaimed by the Sultan, and is now farmed by FetaBey of Zikhna, whose deputy I find at the mill,counting the fish as they are caught. Some thou-xt.]MACEDONIA. 1 85are of enormous size. Grey mullet and other migratorysea-fiali are sometimes intercepted here inthe same manner, but always in a small proportionto the eels. Possibly the Strymonic lake istoo distant from the sea for the mullet. Thefreshness of the water can hardly be an objection,as many of the lagoons of Greece and Asia Minormost productive of mullet are of mixed water; andsome, as that of Buthrotum, are quite fresh. TheBey as Mukatesi levies on the spot 20 paras foreach zevgari, or pair, of large eels; and the peopleof Neokhori sell them either fresh or salted at 30,40, or 50 paras a pair, according to the distanceto which they are sent. The fishery is said toproduce annually about 40,000 brace of largeeels, besides the smaller and other fish.The late rains have rendered the moment favourablefor fishing, which is an unfortunate accidentfor me, having brought hither Feta Bey'sagent to superintend the fishing, from his usual residenceat a village an hour distant, of which he isvoivoda. He refuses a present of a pair of pistols,gives orders to prevent my visiting the summit ofthe hill, and issues a proclamation forbidding thepeople to sell me any antiquities, but is afterwards80 far pacified, though still refusing any present,as to retract the latter part of the order, and tosend a messenger to the Bey, who is now at Zili-akhova, a village to the eastward of Zikhna, forpermission that I may view the place. My firmanhe cannot read.Nov. 9. — The answer of the Bey of Zikhna isunfavourable : the only reason of which appears186 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.to be the persuasion among these barbarians thatthe site of AmpUpoUa contains hidden treasures.I am obliged, therefore, to heare this interestingsite with a transient view of it, and it is not withoutdifficult that I succeed in copying an inscriptionin the wall of a fountain in the village ; forinscription are supposed by Turks to inform uswhere to dig for treasures : I fortunately observedit yesterday evening, and had transcribed it assoon as there was light enough, this morning, justwhen some of the Myrmidons of the Ago, whohad probably formed some suspicion of my intention,arrived with the design of preventing me.It is a document of great interest, as being writtenin the Ionic dialect, and as containing the exactwords of some of the laws of Athens as cited bythe Athenian orators, both which peculiarities arereferable to the factor Amphipolis having been anAttic colony *. The letters are small, but beautifullyengraved, and have the form which is supposedto indicate a date earlier than that of Alexander.The record is that of a decree of perpetualMACEDONIA.banishment from Amphipolis and its territory,enacted by the people against two of their citizens,Philo and Stratocles, and their children. If theywere ever taken they were to suffer death as enemies.Their property was confiscated, and a tenthof it was to be applied to the sacred service ofApollo and of Strymon. Their names were to beinscribed by the Prostate upon a pillar of stone ;and if any person should revoke the decree, or byany art or contrivance give countenance to thebanished men, that man's property also was to beforfeited to the people, and he was to be banishedfrom Amphipolis for ever. 'The following is the Greek text in ordinaryHellenic :ESo£,iv Tip ^iifiif) ■I'lXwva KOI STparodXta ^tvytivAfiip'nroXlv tai tijv yriv rev ' Afufuvo^lrCiv ' ain^uylav naiavTouQ Kai Tone jraiSac* Kai i)i' ttov nXi<Tfi:(ui>Tai jraa^tivnuTov^ wc *foAi;Utoiic ifot vtfiToivfi TtSvavai' ra 8* ypij^nratfTuv oij/icxrta uvai, to St iiriBiKarov itpitv too AtoA-V. Inscription, No. 125.• 1 have here supplied thethird line of the inscription,NTIUTUSTllNAM*, from M.Cousinery's copy ; for it is evidentfrom that copy (see V.dons le Macedon, honte i.p. 128) compared with thatwhich I first published in Mr.Walpole's collection, vol. ii.that I neglected to copy tuncline. It may seem presumptuousafter this admission tooppose my readings of sthe words to M. Cousinery's,but 1 shall state them, in thehope that some future travellerwill determine the truth. Inline 7, IIEiAS, Cousinery ;HAIiAS, Leake. In line II,22, XPHMATA Aston, C.XPHMATAYTQN. L. ; in line13, leon, C, Upon, L. ; inline 17, STIiAHN, C, E2TU-AHN, L. ; in lines 19, 20.ANA*H*ISEINKATAaEXH-TAI, C, ANA*EI*IZE1HKA-TAAEXETAI, L.MACEDONIA.[chap.Xwvoc icai Tov Srpvfiovoc* rove Sc ITpoorarac avaypatpaiavrovc etc orniXifv Xc0ivf)v* hav SI rcc ro i^^^ca/ia Ti JcaraSe)^crac rovrovc rl)^vp i| fii|)^avp ijrivtouv^ra yjpfiuar ainov St}/iio<rui carol, icai avrog i^tvyirfa A/i^i-voXcv OBi^vylav ^The dialectic peculiarities on the marble are, —^ojHV for ^cvyccv — riiyyijv for rriv yriv — 'A/u^cv^Xt-rciiiv for 'Afi^nroXcraiv — acc^vY^^H^ f'^^ ati^vyiav — avrocjcac roc for avrowc icai rove — vi^ifov for sav iron* — avrocife voXc/iMOC for avrovc ifC iroXc/tiiovc — cpov for ccpov —Toc & for Tovc 8f — avroc «C for avrovc eiQ^^nv Sc forhav Se— rovroc for rovrovc — orfwiovv for jjrcvtovv —auro for avrov — ^koytrtap aci^vyiifv for ^cvylroi acc^v-yiav.In the first Olynthus oration of Demosthenes,the name of Stratocles occurs as one of two deputieswho were sent to Athens from Amphipolis torequest the assistance of an armament to save thecity from Philip, who took it in the same year,after having beaten down the walls with enginesand entered the place through the breach, butwho treated the captured city with mildness, andwas satisfied with banishing those who had been<pvytljv ^€ KOI /!)) OeXi^o'acKplaiy ifTroa^eiyj (bevyeru) actus— Plato de Leg.yrjTTOivil Tedydyai. — De-most.adv. Bristol. — Andocid.de Most.'Eav ce £cVoc aor^ ^vyoitcfjTi^yrj 1/ firixay^ i/rtvioiJv, ypa-<l>i(rdw "npoQ tovq Qea^diTag, —Dem. adv. Never.Tpowt^ II firj-)(av^ ijTLviovy, —Dem. adv. Mid.'Evi^tKaToy, — Harpocrat. invoce. Plutarch de decern Rhet.in Antiph. Xenoph. Hellcn.1. 1, c. 7.TCokiynoQ iarai tojv ^AOrjyaiwyKal vriiroiri ridvaTo* Roi ra'^(pyifxaTa airrov ErjfjLoaia tan KalTfJQ deou TO iTTi^iKaroy, — Ando-cid. de Most.MACEDONIA. 199opposed to him '. It ia probable that the inscriptionrefers to the latter action of the conqueror,and that the Stratocles named in it is the samewho harangued the Athenian people from thebema of the I'nyx, and was evidently one of theleaders of the party opposed to Philip. It is noobjection to this supposition that the name ofPhilip does not appear in the edict, since, accordingto the usual practice of Greek diplomacy, itwas the act of the people, though in truth theyhad lost their liberty, and were never afterwardsfree from a garrison of Macedonians until they receivedone of Romans. If this conjecture be wellfounded, we have the exact date of this inscription,namely, 358 B, C.The acquisition of Amphipolis by Philip wasone of the most important steps in the advancementof Macedonian power, as it opened to himthe entrance into Western Thrace, and whenadded to Datus, which commanded the pass nextin importance to that of Amphipolis, caused thewhole of that country, as far as the Nestus, to beever afterwards annexed to the crown of Macedonia.Not the least important consequence of theseacquisitions was that of the mines of Mount and of Crenides, which was an ancient settlementof the Thasii, in the district of Datus, betweenNeapolis and Drabescus. Here the ambitiousmonarch founded a new city, which he calledPhilippi, and soon extracted from the adjacentmountains five times aa much gold and silver asrove /Mf&XAorpi'ti'c irpoE ail li JiAXoic fiXarOpwirwc wpoa-iuutifiiyoutifuyaSevWiToli ijri^^^ii. — Diodor. I. I6| C- 8.I190 MACEDONIA. [chap.the mines had ever yielded to the Thasii or anyother people who had preceded him in workingthem. Pangseum produced gold as well as silver;but the principal mines of gold were near Crenides,in a hill called, according to Appian, Xo^oc Atomor the hill of Bacchus, being probably noother than the mountain where Herodotus informsus that the Satrse possessed an oracle of Bacchusinterpreted by the Bessi, and enounced by apriestess, who uttered responses not less ambiguousthan those of Delphi. These Satrse seem tohave been the original of the Satyrs, as attendantsof Bacchus ^Amphipolis, as Thucydides remarks, occupieda situation conspicuous both from the sea and theinterior country *. Being situated at the only convenientpassage across the maritime ridge ofmountains occurring between the passes of Kuhnand Neapolis^ and being at a point which leadsimmediately into the middle of one of the richestand most extensive plains in Greece, it was naturallythe centre of many roads, whence originatedthe name of Nine Ways, which the place borewhen possessed by the Edoni before the Atheniancolonization. The site is not less strong in itselfthan important with regard to the surroundingcountry. Above the bridge the lake forms a bayat the northern foot of the hill of Amphipolis^ andbelow the bridge the river makes a half circleround the hill, which, being very precipitous onthat side, is easily accessible only on the side ofV. ApoUodor. 1. 3, c. 5. koi t^v Hireipov, — Thiicyd. 1.4,irtfHifiarrj eg d/tXaatrnv re c. 102.xxr.]MACEDONIA.the connecting ridge by which I approached fromOrfana. The annexed sketch will give some ideaof the position. It appears from Thucydides thatoriginally a wall across the ridge, resting ateither extremity on the river, was the only fortificationof the town, and that on the summit of thehill stood a temple of Minerva. This was thestate of Amphipolis when in the tenth year of thePeloponnesian war, it was the scene of that celebratedbattle which was fatal to the commanderson both sides '■192 HACBDOHIA. [chap.Cleon was waiting at Eion for some expectedreinforcements of Macedonians and Odomanti,when Brasidas posted himself with a part of hisforces on Cerdylinm, a mountain in the territoryof Margins, opposite to Amphipolis, from whenceall the motions of Cleon could be seen* The remainderof the army of Brasidas was in Amphi-poles.His whole Greek force consisted of 2000hoplitsB and 300 cavalry, bat with these werejoined about 4000 Thracian infantry and somecavalry. Cleon was about equal in numbers, buthe had greatly the advantage in choice troops,having 3000 hoplitcB, with 600 cavalry. As soonas Brasidas perceived that Cleon was advancingtowards Amphipolis, he descended from Cerdyliumand entered the city in the hope of seizing someadvantageous moment of attack before his advertsay should be reinforced. Cleon occupied theheights in frt)nt of the walls of Amphipolis, acrosswhich led the high road : his position commandeda view of the Strymonic lake, and in one part wasso high that Brasidas was visible to the Atheniansas he sacrificed at the temple of Minerva. Thereturn of Brasidas into the city, together with thesacrifice, had already persuaded Cleon that hisadversary was preparing for battle, when he receiveda report that the feet of men and horseswere visible in great numbers under the Thraciangate. As soon as he had convinced himself ofthis fact with his own eyes, he resolved upon animmediate retreat, for he had moved from Eionwithout any intention of engaging, and only 1^^^ asIxxv.] MACEDONIA. 193cause his men murmured at his inaction, therebeing moreover at that time no appearance of alai^e force in the city.Having ordered his troops to move off by theleft towards Eion, and soon becoming impatientat their tardiness in executing the movement, hefaced also the right of the army in the same direction,hy which he exposed their right or uncoveredside to the enemy. This was the favourable momentfor Brasidas, who had already made his preparations.Leaving instructions, therefore, with Clearings,the second in command, to advance from the Thraciangate against the nearest part of the enemy'sline, or that which had been their right, as soonas his own intended movement should throw thecentre into confusion, he instantly issued at thefirst gate of the Long Wall at the head of 150chosen men, ran with them across the space lyingbetween the wall and the high road, and thus fellupon the Athenians as they were marching alongthe road. The effect of this bold and judiciousplan was the flight of the enemy's left, whichhad become the front in column, towards Eion, aswell as the separation of his forces, and finally thedefeat of his right, after some resistance on thehighest part of the ridge. Cleon, flying at thefirst attack of Clearings, was overtaken and slainby a targeteer of Myrcinus, about the same timethat Brasidas, successful in the centre, received amortal wound, unobserved by the enemy, justas he turned from the defeated centre of theAthenians towards their right wing. He wasVOL. III. o194 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.carried into AmphipoHs, and survived only longenough to hear of the completion of his victory.Six hundred men fell on the side of the Athenians,the remainder effected their retreat over the mountainto Eion. No more than seven were slain onthe side of Brasidas.I have already remarked that Cerdylium wasevidently the mountain which rises from the rightbank of the Strymon, immediately opposite to thehill of Amphipolis ; it is equally evident that theposition of Cleon was on the opposite side of thecity, on the height which connects the hill ofAmphipolis with Mount Pangseum, exactly on thepass of the Nine Ways. The Thracian gate probablyopened in the direction of the modem routeto Dhrama, and to the places in the plain eastwardof the Strymonic lake, and it stood consequently onthe north-eastern side of the ancient site, just atthe beginning of the descent towards the lake ;in fact, this point is exactly opposite to a risingground on the ridge of the Nine Ways which commandsa comprehensive view both of the lake andof the mouth of the Strymon and forms part ofan inferior summit in advance of Mount .Here it is probable that the Atheniansmade their stand after the flight of Cleon. Thegate at which Brasidas issued having been oppositeto the centre of the retreating Athenians, andthe Thracian gate to their right, which had becometheir rear, the former was evidently situated tothe southward of the latter, and led probably toPhagres and the Pierian valley.It was in the middle of the winter following theXXV.] MACEDONIA. \9')eighth year of the war, tliatBrasidas had made himselfmaster of Araphipolis '. After having persuadedthe people of Acanthus and Stageirus to desert theAthenian alliance, he marched with all the force hecould collect from his allies, on a snowy night,from Broruiscus to Argilua, from whence, under theguidance of the Argilii, he proceeded before themorning to the bridge of the Strymon, which hefound slightly guarded, and by taking possessionof it obtained the disposal of all the property ofthe Amphipolitaus which was not within the city.This circumstance, together with the divided sentimentsof the people of various origin who inhabitedthe city, and particularly of some Argiliiwho were much disinclined to the Athenians,made the influential persons willing to capitulate;to which Brasidas himself was sufficiently disposed,as he was aware that Thucydides, who commandedan Athenian squadron at Thasus, possessedproperty in the gold mines of Panga;um,which might give him considerable influence overthe neighbouring people, and, if time were allowed,might enable him to excite a formidableopposition.The capitulation took place accordingly ; andit was not until the evening of the same day onwhich it occurred that Thucydides arrived withhis squadron at Eion*. Though he thus savedI that place from being taken, and deserved no Movable blame for the loss of AmpIiipoHs, he in-LThucyd. 1. ■!. .A196 HACEDOXU. [chap.erred the displeasure of the Athenian pei^ile Idsuch a dree that he was banished from AtfaeoBfor tven^^ years ' : a fortunate event for literature,as by forcing him to exchange the public servicefor a residence on his estate at Scaptesyle, inMount Pangseam *, it afforded him ample leisurefor composing that jcr^fw ic au, or everlastinglegacy, which, as long as the Greek languageexists, will be the delight of all readers, and amodel of genuine history.In the time of Brasidas the bridge of the Strymonwas probably in the same situation as atpresent, the same causes tending in all ages torender that position the most convenient, withregard to the external communications of thosedwelling on the hill of AmphipoUs ; besides which,it was exactly opposite to the center of the ancientcity. Tbucydides remarks that in the timeof the expedition of Brasidas, the bridge was at asmall distance from the city, and that there werenot then, as when he wrote his history, walkextending from the city to the never '. Bythis and two other references which he makes toXXV.] Macedonia. 197length it was fortified. Agnon, the founder oftile Athenian colony, seems to have been satisfiedwith building a wall across the isthmus of thepeninsula terminating at either end in the river ',and to have left the western Imlf-circuit of the hillto the natural protection of its precipices. Theonly addition that appears to have been made tothis fortification during the fifteen years whichelapsed between the foundation and the battle wasa uravpiufia, or palliating with gates behind theLong Wall, on the moat accessible parts of the hill,for Thucydides relates that Brasidas issued througha gate in a palliating, and then through the firstgate in the Long Wall '. When the Athenians recoveredAmphipolis, they very naturally set aboutfortifying it more technically. TheLongWall seems,from the words tot oitoc, employed by Thucydides,to have been neglected or destroyed ; the summitof the height was entirely enclosed with walls,of which remains still exist ; and all the northernface of the hill, where stands the modern village,was probably included within a wall which terminatedat the lake, and comprehended withinit the bridge of the Strymon. The road leadingfrom the sea coast into the plains lying eastwardof the lake would thus pass under the easternwalls of the city, and that into the western plainsthrough the fortifications and across the bridge.droXo/Juf Ttlyii }iaKpy tie araipuifla riiXat, ini rdt; irpw-woTdfiDt' I'c voracity. — Thucyd. rat tov fiaxfiov m'xouc sortU 4. c. 102. O.TOC iitXflii'.— Thucyd. 1. 5,MACEDONIA.Aitiphipolis was probably in this state when Philipbe8)(^;ed and took it.The only remains of antiquity in Neokhori be-desthe inscription at the fountain, are manytoatteicd blocks of ancient workmanship, and•omc mueniata, of which one is adorned withfacere* in low relief, and two others have namesMite u|Mn them : there is also a plain Dorictri|tlTph between metres, which is said to haveborn hmi^t from the Bernstein, a place so calledon the summit of the hill, and where are some fragmentssimilar to those in the village. If theiriglyph belonged to the temple of Minerva, itwas probably of small dimensions.In the afternoon of November 9, I proceed in3 hours and 20 minutes to Takhyn6s ', the rainfalling continually. At 6.10, Turkish time, wecross the bridge of the Sternum, which is 300yards long ; then leaving the lake at some distanceon the right, pass over downs which are connectedwith the mountains on the left, pass at 7.20through a lai^e Greek village called Kutzos * ;XXV.] MACEDONIA. 199higher up it terminates in maraiiy ground, throughwhich the river flows to join it ; Thucydides has accuratelydescribed this lake by the words to Xi/tvtuSccTov ^pv/iovoc \ as being in fact nothing more thanan enlargement of the river, varying in size accordingto the season of the year, but neverreduced to that of the river only, according toits dimensions above and below the lake. Besidesthe Stn/mon, the Angitas contributes to the inundationas well as some other smaller streams fromthe mountains on either side. I find a civil oldAga at Takhyno, the reverse of him of Neokhori,though both are Albanians, but they take theirtone from their chiefs ; so much do the traveller'ssuccess and comforts in every part of Turkeydepend upon the individual character of the chieftainswhom he encounters, and upon accidentalcircumstances. 1 should have found no difficultyat Ainphipolis, if I bad proceeded thither fromSerres with a letter from Ibrahim Bey, whoseauthority is not disputed either in Zikhna orDhrama, and serves to keep in some order thesavage chieftains around him, who lose no opportunityof exercising the cruelest oppression ontheir Christian fellow subjects. The kara of Zikhna,which is here separated by the lake from thatof Serres, contains 70 or 80 villages ; the largestare Ziliakhova, already mentioned, and Lukovikiaon the side of Mount Pimari, above Alibassates.Nov, 10. — From Takhyno to Serres. Settingout at 2.40 Turkish, we coast the marshy groundThucyd. 1. .1, c. 7.300 Macedonia. [Clap.at the bead of the lake, then follow the right bankof the Strymon along the center of the plain, for2^ hours, until having arrived nearly abreast ofSerres we turn eastward towards the town, crossthe river at 5.55, over a new wooden bridge amile below a lai^e tjiftlik of Ismail Bey, calledthe Add tjifUik, where he has lately built aSerai, and at 7 enter the gate of Serres. Ourpace, though with Menzll horses, has been slow,on account of the muddy state of the roads afterthe late rains. The Amazon begins this evening,and is introduced, as usual, with firing ofmusqueta at sunset, followed by an illuminationof all the minarets.Nov. 11. — Serr^ stands in the widest part ofthe gnat Strynumic plain, on the last slope of therange of mountains which bounds it to the northeast.At a distance the town has a very imposingappearance ; its whitened walls, flanked by towersat distant intervals, being not less than three mitesin circumference ; but they enclose, besides thetown, a large space occupied by gardens, and evenXXV.] MACEDONIA. 201at 15,000 Turks, 5000 Greeks and Bulgarians,and a few families of Jews.The Surrounding plain is very fertile, and besidesyielding abundant harvests of cotton, wheat, barleyand maize, contains extensive pastures now peopledwith oxen, horses and sheep. No part of the landisneglected, and the district, in its general appearance,is not inferior to any part of Europe ;though probably neither the agricultural economynor the condition of the people, would bear a closeinspection. To the north-westward, the plain extendsabout 4 hours to Demirissar (iron castle),which occupies a position similar to that of Serres,but nearer to the left bank of the Strymon, justwhere it issues from the mountains. A little abovethe ravines of Demirissar the Strymon receives itsprincipal tributary, from Strumitza to the right,and a smaller contribution on the opposite bankfrom Meleniko, a large Greek town, 6 hours fromDemirissar to the north. The sources of the riverare in the highest ridges of Rhodope around Dupeand Ghiustendil. To the Greeks and Bulgariansthe river is known by the name of Struma,to the Turks by the very common appellation ofKarasu, or Black River.The lower Strymomc valley, which extends fromDemirissar to 'Anghista and the site of Ampkipolis,is the greatest of the Macedonian plains, next tothat which borders the head of the Thermaic Gulf,and if we add to it the levels watered by the tributariesof the Strymon, anciently constituting theAngitas, the entire extent is not inferior in magnitudeand fertility to those plains o! Lower Macedonia.202 Macedonia. [chap.A lai^e portion of that part which is in the districtof Serres, is the private property of Ismail Bey andhis family, one of the richest and most powerfulsubjects of the Sultan, if he can be called a subjectwho is absolute here, and obeys only such of theorders of the Porte as he thinks fit, always, however,with a great show of submission. Besides hislanded property he is engaged in commerce, andderives great profits from his farm of the imperialrevenues. He has been rapidly increasing inpower during the last ten years, and his authoritynow extends northward to the borders of S6(ia andFeline ', to the westward to Istlb inclusive, and tothe eastward as far as Gumurdjina inclusive. Histroops are now fighting with Emir Aga of Hastilybeyond Gumurdjina, whom he will probablysoon reduce. To the southward and westward thesummits of the mountains which border the plain,separate bis dominions from the district of Saloniki.His forces do not amount to more than 2000 inconstantpay, who are chiefly Albanians, but uponoccasion he might easily raise 10,000. When heXXV.] MACEDONIA. 203Christians themselves as a just, attentive governor,aod whose extortions are comparatively moderate.Hence his territory presents a more prosperousappearance than aoy part of Aly Pasha's. Theculture of cotton being very advantageous to him,he is anxious to encourage its exportation, in whichhe is himself engaged, and hence the Greek merchantsof SerrcB, who carry on an extensive tradewith Vienna, enjoy sufficient protection, thoughpersonally they are often ignominiously treatedby him.As to the rajahs in general, it is sufficient tomention one of the labours and exactions imposedupon them, to show their condition even under agovernor who has the reputation of being indulgent.Every village is bound to deliver the Bey's tithe ofthe cotton in a state fit for immediate exportation,that is to say, cleared of the seeds and husks,instead of supplying it as it comes from the field ;and even to make good the loss of weight caused bythe abstraction of the seeds, by the addition of anequal weight of cleared cotton. The Turks justifythis oppression, by alleging that it is customary inall cotton districts ; the only kind of answer they(ver deign to give, when they are the strongest.The Bey has four sons, of whom the eldest,Yussiif, carries on all the active business of thegovernment ', while his father enjoys a rather indolentretirement at the Add tjiftlik. The GreekThis is the same YuBsuf afterwards surrendered Roma,who distinguished hini- in the year 182S, to the Ruinthe Greek insurrection sins.Governor of 'Epakto, andi204 Macedonia. [chap.community is governed with very little interferencefrom the Bey, by the Greek metropolitan bishop,and the archons, of whom the chief is a Greekmerchant, Matako Dhimitriu, whose brother isestablished at Salooiki. Another merchant, namedSpoDty, who acts as consul for several nations, isof a French family long settled in Candia, and hereI sain meet a Dr. P. of loannina, who after havingserved for some time as surgeon in the Frencharmy of Italy under Bonaparte, narrowly escapedbeing put to death by Al at Pr^vyza on his return :he attended Vel* Pash in the siege of Suli, andwas eye-witness to the heroism of the womanKhaidho, and eight Snliotes, who came disguisedinto the middle of the Albanian camp in the night,and when discovered the next morning, retreatedwith such bravery and conduct as to kill or wound20 Albanians in the retreat, without receiving ahurt.The bishop is denominated o 'Sippwv, and themodem name Serres is the Romaic third case ofthe same word' ; hut though Serree was alreadyMacedonia.which they are combined, are not uD&eqoent inMacedonian inscriptions tithe Roman empire'.The only other vestige 1 can find of the ancientSirrhee is on the highest ground within the modemwalls, where is a piece of Hellenic wall faced withlai quadrangular blocks, but composed within ofsmall stones and mortar, forming a mass of extremesolidity. It now serres for the substructionof the Bash Rule, or principal tower of the modeminclosure, half the height of which is of anintermediate date, between the Hellenic and therecent Turkish. Similar mined walls of thatmiddle period are to be seen in many parts of thenorth-eastern quarter of the city. They resemblein construction, and are supposed to be of thesame origin, as two ruined fortresses which defendedthe two passes leading to the valley ofNevrokopo from Serres and from Drama, andwhich are attributed to the Servian kings, whoseOi WW apxitpiaynBirtfv raw xoiyoa Mdp)(upia It cat dyttroBirtiv nalroc li dyuvoOinp' rit Stppalurwi\ius. Us ti r&v'li^iy yolira-vapor, Ti. tiXaiitior, ^wyi-vows viol, Kvplyif, Atoyivrj,aperqc truth, c^i^iXijUi'itoeKavirartpov ruv Kaoaavfpov.—Vide Inscription, No. 126.Since my visit to Serres,another inscription has beenfound near the metropolitanchurch, in honour of the son ofibe above-mentioned Diogenes.The following is the copy of it,from the fac-iiniile of M. Conroi( riy apyiipfa midyiroeimy nSv 2t0arr^,, KXavfiov ^XoouiararAv,rif,axoy,vwy Ti^,,piov Knave^loyirovt, a'p^ifpiwc roSroirou tioKtioyuy, roy iy wSatyri-ipyenj^, tiyoiat JvtKiy riesik lavT^y mi i-« fjiit-ccouc f-imiaiias, lia iVi^cXijrw t- Atoa-xoupilov Tou noatteirrov, EiaiSuipov, Eiaifwpou MACEDONIA. [Chap.dominions comprehended Serra. Two hours tothe north eastward of the city, on the mountainbehind it, stands the large monastery of St Prodro-mus, which is known to have been founded byStephen king of Servia, and his brother-in-lawJohn Palseologus, in the middle of the fourteenthcentury.The hill of the Bash-rule is protected, towardsthe mountains, by a torrent flowing in a broadbed, and winding so as to encircle one-third of thetown. The elevated situation of this quarter, theHellenic and Servian remains, and the position ofthe metropolitan church in the midst of it, showthat it was the site of Sirrhse both in ancient andmiddle ages. It is now the Varus, or part inhabitedby the Christians and Jews, the Turks dwellingin the lower or exterior part ; towards the westernextremity of the latter quarter stands the palace ofIsmail Bey, which, though extensive and splendid,is not above one-third of the size of Al Pasha's.From the remains of the Servian walls, it seemsevident that the city never covered so much groundXXV.] MACEDONIA. 207exchange their agricultural produce for manufacturesboth foreign and domestic, but that to whichthe natives of a great part of European Turkeyresort to obtain raw cotton, for internal consumption,as well as for the manufacture of yarn, whichthey sell in Hungary and Poland. In favourableyears, the Frank and Greek merchants settled hereBend not less than 30 or 40,000 bales of cottonto Germany by the caravans, and in return supplythe Turks with cloths, stuffs, and other Europeanmanufactures, but cloth and raw cotton are thebasis of the trade.The principal roads leading from Serres, besidesthat of Orfana, by which I came, are, 1. ToKavala, by Ziklina and Dhrama. 2. To Nevro-kopo, directly across the great range of the mountains,which extend northward from Serres toMeleniko and Nevrokopo, and eastward towardsDhrama ; the circuitous route to Nevrokopo, however,is often preferred, especially in the winter,passing through Zikhna, and falling into the routefrom Dhrama to Nevrokopo. 3. The northernroad. This leads to Demirissar along the footof the mountain of Serres, and near Demirissarenters the derveni, through which that riverissues from the mountains. Beyond the pass,the road branches to Meleniko to the right, andto Strumitza to the left. 4. To Doghiran ; thisroad crosses the mountain which rises from thewestern side of the plain of Serres, by a passwhich is seen from the city, bearing by compassN.63 W. 5, 6. There are two routes to Saloniki,the more direct crossing the range of mountains1-2Macedonia.[chap. XXV.on the south-wester side of the plain, by a villagecalled Lakhana, and from thence descending intothe vale of Langaza. The other, more easterly,traverses a continuation of the same range ofmountains, and joins the great route from Constantinopleat KlisaU, to the eastward of Langage.CHAPTER XXVI.MACEDONIA.Ancient Geography of the Slrymonk Plain and surroundingMountains — Battle of Philippi — Nigrita — Sokho — Klisali —Lakes — Langaza— Khftivat — Salon — Antiquities, Population,&c.Although Stephens distinguishes the Sirs whichgave name to the Siro-peeones, from Sirrha, theywere assuredly one and the same place, for thatthe Siro-paeones inhabited the banks of the Strymonis clear from Herodotus', and that they didnot dwell above the derveni of Demirissar mayalso be inferred from the historian, when he states,that Xerxes left a part of his sick at Sirs In hisretreat to the Hellespont* ; for it is not conceivablethat a place could have been chosen for that purpose,so far and inconveniently removed from thedirect route of the army, as any position abovethe Straits of Demirissar would have been. Thesame inference may be drawn from Livy, whorelates that P. ^milius Paulus, after his victoryat Pydna, received at Sire a deputation from Perseuswho had retired to Samothrace'. As Siraj is^^^Ktol.Herodot. 1. 5, c. 13, IS, S8.• Lit. 1. 45. i'OL. III. P210 Macedonia [chap.here described by Livy as a city of the Womanlike,it seems evident that the Odomanti borderedon the Siro-Peeones, and that in the reign ofPerseus they were in possession of this city '.The Odomanti, therefore, probably occupied thegreat mountain vrhich extends along the northeasternside of the lower Strymonic plain fromabout Meleniko and Demirissar nearly to Pangtsum,their vicinity to which latter mountain is renderedprobable by their having been one of the threetribes who worked its mines, the two others havingbeen the Pieres and Satrte ', the former ofwhom dwelt on the southern side of the mountain,the latter to the eastward of it. It wasvery natural that Megabyzus should have subduedthe Siropeeones, who possessed the most fertile andexposed part of the Strymonic plain, while theOdomanti, who were secure in a higher situation,and still more the Agrianes, who dwelt at the sourcesof the StrymoD, were able to avoid or resist him,as well as the Doberes, and the other Stones ofMount Pangsenm, and the amphibious inhabitantsof the lake Prasias 'XXVI.] MACEDONIA. 'SI Ilake of Beslkia, chiefly perhaps because Herodotusdescribe the lake Prasias as confining on certaininiues, which afterwards produced to Alexander I.a talent a day ', and which were separated only fromMacedonia by Mount Decorum ; whence Danville,who must have known from the travels of Belonof the existence of the mines of Sidherokapsa,may have supposed those to have been the minesin question, and consequently that the neighbouringlake was the Bolbe. But on comparing Herodotuswith Arrian, it is impossible to accede to this opinion.The former relates that the inhabitants of the lakePrasias procured the piles and planks with whichthey constructed their dwellings in the lake, fromMount Orbelus, whence it may be presumed that thelake was contiguous to Orbelus, and Arrian clearlyshews Orbelus to have been the great mountainwhich, beginning at the Strymonic plain and lake,extends towards the sources of the Strymon, whereit unites with the summit called Somnus, in whichthe river bad its origin ', for in describing the expeditionof Alexander the Great against the Tribal,Arrian remarks that Alexander in marching fromAmphipolis to the Nestus, had Philippi and MountOrbelus on his left. Indeed, a comparison aloneof the passage of Herodotus, in which he mentionsthe extent of the conquests of Megabyzus with thatConsistently vrilh this re- ' Thucyd. I. 2, c. 96. —markofHcrodotuBiwefindthat Aiistot. Meteor. 1. 1, c. 13.the telradracbniB of Alexander ' Arriving. Dc Esp. Alex. 1.1. aresomcof the earliest coins, 1, c. 1.of tut size, in tic Macedonian212 Macedonia. [CHAP.in which he describes the march of Xerxes throughPieria and Peeonia, seems to leave no doubt as' tothe Prasias ; for in the latter he states that theDoberes and People inhabited the country northwardof Mount Pangseum ', these being preciselythe tribes whom he had before associated with theinhabitants of the lake Prasias. In reference tothe former passage it may incidentally be remarked,that as the people who were able to resist were the mountaineers and the dwellers onthe lake, the People like the Slropeeones, probablyoccupied some portion of the plain which was notexactly on the banks of the lake. The Doberesseem to have shared Mount Pangeeum with thePeeonians and Pieres, and dwelt probably on thenorthern side of it, where in the time of the RomanEmpire there was a mutation, or place for changinghorses, called Domes, between Amphipolis andPhilippi, 13 M.P. from the former, and 19 M.P.from the latter*. As to Mount Decorum, if we supposeHerodotus to have referred not so much to theMacedonia of the reign of Amyntas, when Mega-macedonia.mountain towards the modem Sokfao, may havebeen the ancient Dysomm. That the Bisaltse,before they were annexed to the kingdom of Mapossessed silver mines, may be stronglyfrom the tetradrachm with the legendBISAATIKON '.V. Hnler, Tib. IS. IV.To &e ne ene suy be S-parted Ae exiatciicc of gibec«M«f Omni an odMTwiae town at Ksdtn(Ptaleinj-,L 3. c 13.) at a time when thenjii txiaage wta Toy instiSaUt, When the kings hadwade Andrea masters of Bi-skinand the other ai^enti-faoai £«ricti, the silver coinagetdH bore a great resentto the autonomous■OBej, tbongb it WM naturallyiaaeribed only with the nameat the monarch. At the timewhen the Basaltic coins were■tmek, the mines of Pangaeumwere chiefly in the hands of theTkatii, who bad also silvermine* of their own, and henceibe scant; and abundance ofthe early money of Thasus.Tbe other people who, accordingto Herodotus, worked themines of Pangs, were icPieces and Odomauti, bnt particularlythe Satis, who borderedon the mountain. Noneof their money has reached■», bat to the Pagan severmine* we may trace a latgccoin of Get, king of the Edoni,lately published bj llr. IID-Iti^eB, the (banter (m wbic&perfectly agree with the linewhen the Edoni poaKiaedDiabescus and the Xia« Ways,and bad therefore the power ofwriting some of the mines. Itis to some unknown places orpeople in the sameargetitifeTovsdistricts, that we may attribute aclass of coins inscribed OPPU£-Kiln or OPUSKION, and not Retain, as hasbeen supposed by a mistake ofthe ancient form of the Gammafor a .v. which would refer tbeiecoins to Letee of Mygdonia.The resemblance of the moreancient coins of the Brescia tothose of Acta, king of theEdoni is very remarkable.The smaller and more modem,niseribed QPHSK,IQN, havethe same t\-pe u those of theRetain,' namely, a satyrcarrying off a nymph. Theyseem therefore all to belongto Edoius or its vicinity ;the Satyrs were the Sacra?and refer to the worship ofBacchus in the mountains Pan-suraand Orbelus. (HcrodoL1. 7. c. Ill, v. 970.— Eurip. iniMACEDONIA.[chap.Being bere so near the interesting scene of oneof the most important military occurrences in history,where two hundred thousand Roman infantryand thirty-three thousand cavalry were encamped,and twice iu the course of a few days engaged ingeneral combat ', 1 cannot avoid making a fewremarks on the topography of that event, morewith a view lo the convenience of future travellersthan with the hope of throwing much light uponthe historians, as I have never visited Philippimyself. But the general features of the countryare not unknown to me, and the site of Philippi isperfectly ascertained by considerable remains ofantiquity in the situation indicated by the Itineraries,and which are known by the Greeks to bethose of Philippi ; by the Taille the place is calledFelibedjik'.IIRies. ct Hecuba. t. 1267.—Pomp.Mela, I. Z, c 2,)conceni-ing which ApoUodoius (1. 3, c.S.) baa left us some bsditiont,bowing the connexion betweenthe kings of the Edoni and theIdes of Bacchus and the Sa-tria.The Brescia probably inhabitedthe mountains aboveDnbeaciis, in which was the<Hncle of Bacchus, one of iriioceepitbetawas dpcvxioc.^AndioLTol. iii. p. 217, Lac.) It isremarkable, with a general le-scienceto the silverciunaof Macedoniaand Trace, bow \»igta portion of them belonged to1 in the nudity of tflTertoned, may be added the coinsof Acanthus, Neapolis, Tagus,Ossa, Bisaltia, Philippi,and those inscribed iSactioymt'rpwnfo which were stick atAmphipolia after the Romanconquest. In like manner,we once the gold coins ofPhilip to his extensive elaborationof the mines of CreeAppian de B. C 1. 4, c.101, et seq. Dicti. Case. L 47,c I, ^ seq. Plutarch. inBmLFHipp^nti, which takesita name from the same kingof Macedonia as Philip, isnamed Fdibe bjr the Toils,XXVI.] MACEDONIA. '215When the army of Cassias and Brutus wasadvancing from Asia along maritime Thrace, andtheir fleet had occupied several positions on thatcoast, Norbanus, who was in possession of the twoprincipal passes, called the Siena of the Compileand the Steua of the Sapsei, thought it prudent toabandon the former for the better defence of thelatter. The Compile occupied the country nearanus ', whence it is evident their passes werethose of the mountains terminating in the promontorySerriuni', and lying between the valley of theHebrus and the maritime plains, in which thechief city was Abdera. Into the latter plains Cassiusand Brutus led their army after having traversediEuus, Orisons, and the abandoned Sienaof the Compile ; but they found themselves at aloss to proceed farther, because the Paean passeswhich separated the plains of Abdera and of theriver Nestus from those of Philippi and the Strymonwere still in the hands of the enemy. In thisemergency, by the advice of the Thracian princeRhescuporis, a road was made, not without greatlabour, through some woody mountains wliicii areinterposed between the maritime plains and thevalley of the largesses, a branch of the Hebrus :a three days' march then conducted the Cassiaarmy to the Harpessus, from whence there wasottly a single day's march to Philippi.Felibedjlk therefore is little ' Hcrodot. 1. 7,c. 59. .pin. (IcD. C. 1.4. c. 101, ion.Stephen. in k-opsiKui.Soin t. 10.216 Macedonia. [Chap.The Harness can be no other than the branchof the Maria, or Heirs, which flows throughthe valley of Area. If then we suppose the campof Cassius to have been near the modem Gumerd-jena, which is about the centre of the maritimeplains lying between the passes of the Corpus andthose of the Saptsi, it would seem that the roadto the Harpessus followed for a considerable distancethe valley of the Kurutj&i, which fromHerodotus seems to have been anciently calledTravis '. From the valley of the Harpessus toPhilippi, the route of Cassius was nearly in themodem track from Adrianople to Sires, whichfrom the sources of the Area crosses the valley ofthe Nestus and enters the plain of Philippi atDhrama. When Philippi was the chief city inthe plain, the road led probably more directlyupon that point.Appian thus describes Philippi and the positionon which Cassius and Brutus encamped. Thecity, he says, was called Datus before the time ofPhilip, and still earlier Crenides, from numerousnXXVI.] Macedonia. 217that of Bacchus, which contained the gold minescalled Asyla, and eighteen stades from the townwere two other heights eight stades asunder, onthe northern of which Brutus placed his camp,and on the southern Cassius : that of Bnitus wasprotected on the right by rocky hills, and the leftof the camp of Cassius by a marsh. The riverGanges, or Granites, flowed along the front, andthe sea was in the rear. The camps of the twoleaders, although separate, were inclosed within acommon entrenchment, and midway between themwas the pass which led like a gate from Europeinto Asia '. The triremes were at Neapolis, seventystades distant, and the magazines of provisions inthe island of Thasus distant 100 stades.Dio adds, that Philippi stood near Pangaeumand Symbolum, and that Symbolum, which wasbetween Philippi and Neapolis, was so calledbecause it connected PaugEeum with anothermountain which stretched inland ', by whichdescription Si/mbolum is very clearly identifiedwith the ridge which stretches from Pravista toKavala, separating the bay of Kavala from theplain of Philippi. The Pylte, therefore, couldivory Tu/v \6<piiiy, tu opoQ ckuvo trtp^i tibi tc fuaii-1, Zioioi Ify iQ r^c ytiav avarilvovTi mifijiaXku,'Airily tc koI Ebpuiwtiy Indica toi fiira^u Nc'ac iruXtbicaTip TuAai, — Appian de B. C. Kai *iX(V™»' >/ t'^y yap irpueI. 4, c. 106. OaXaaati Kal dmitipas SnauuI (sc. Philippi) iy' Iflayyaly\iiipioy (icii^afoixri, t(ITC/C Tiny Opttrl- Cpapa. n ry Ila^yaJfi Hal rj! ircfiifi irEirdXurrai, — Dion. Cas.Zv/ifJdXf) Kiiraf ^ifi^Xoy yhp 1. 47, C. 35.218 Macedonia. [CHAP.have been no other than the pass over that mountainbehind Karaia, which being the commencementof Uie SapcBon straits, extending eastwardfrom thence about twenty miles along the abruptmaritime termination of the mountain as far as thevalley of the Nettus, was in this sense a gate in thegreat route of communication between Europe andAsia. Norbanus, on hearing of the movement ofthe enemy upon Philippi, first evacuated that post,and soon afterwards Symbolum, from whence heretired to Amphipolis. By the possession of Symbolsthe Passions secured a ready communicationwith the sea, and at the same time obtainedsecurity for their foraging decisions in theplains '.Antony, having arrived at Amphipolis, proceededimmediately to encamp in the plain at adistance of only eight stades from the enemy *,where he fortified his camp with entrenchmentsand redoubts, and excavated wells which in thatmarshy plain produced an abundance of water.His own position was on the right, opposite to thatXxv.] MACEDONIA. 219meet in the rear of Cassius ; and in order to facilitatethis enterprise, he consumed ten days in constructinga causeway across the marsh whichseparated him from the camp of Cassius. Heproceeded with such caution, that the work wasconsiderably advanced towards completion whenit was first perceived by Cassius, who could thenonly erect countervallations to impede the enemy'sprogress when he should have crossed the marsh.An attempt upon these works of Cassius by Antonybrought on a general action, in which thetroops of Brutus defeated those of Caesar opposedto them, and entered his camp, while Antonyforced the works of Cassius near the marsh, routedhis legions, and took possession of his camp.Cassius retired to the heights of Philippi ', toobtain a view of the combat, and there put an endto his life. The loss of the Passions was 8000,that of Caesar and Antony twice as many.Antony was now distressed for provisions andapprehensive of being left totally destitute in consequenceof the superiority of his adversaries atsea, which had been increased hy the loss of aCasariau convoy in the Ionian sea under Domi-thusCalvin's. He therefore led forth his armyevery day, with the hope of bringing on a secondand more decisive battle ; but Brutus being toocautious to afford him this advantage, he pursuedhis original object of intercepting his adversary'ssupplies, and with this view occupied with fouric Tvy *iXiVirwi' \6^f. — Appian, c. 113. Plutarch, inL^220 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.legions a height which had been a part of theposition of Cassius, but which Brutus had abandoned.From thence he advanced ten more legionsfive stades towards the sea, and four Bladesfarther two others. Brutus opposed him by similarmovements, as well as by constructing redoubts,and it was not until after repeated insults,both by words and by throwing writings into thecamp of Brutus, that the legions of the latterloud all patience, obliged their commander, verymuch against his inclination, to meet the enemyin the plain. It was the ninth hour of the daywhen the meeting took place ; the shock was terrible', and the conflict obstinate ; but at lengththe Sectarians, who were superior in numbers,who knew that they were in imminent danger ofstarvation, and who were conscious that they hadgained an advantage in inducing the enemy togive up his advantage of position, turned him toflight, and seizing the gate of the camp, as theyhad been directed in the previous harangues ofOctavian and Antony, prevented the enemyXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 921rally to be attributed to the author's personal wantof knowledge of the scene of action, and his misapprehensionof the information of others. Futuretravellers may perhaps be able to explain thecauses of the discrepancy which occurs in the presentinstance, on comparing the history with thescene of action, and to which I shall presently advert.If, however, the opinion be admitted, that thepass leading over the mountain from the plain ofPhilippi to Kavula was the Pt/lts, which separatedthe camp of Brutus from that of Cassius, thetopography will be found in perfect agreementwith the narrative. The camp of Brutus, in thatcase, extended to the right of the entrance of thepass towards Philippi, that of Cassius to the leftof it towards Pravista. The river Ganges, whichrises at and around Philippi flows nearly parallelto the position in front ; and northward of Pravistathere is a lake or inundation corresponding tothat which lay between the camps of Cassius andAntony in the first position. Here alone, in theseason when the battle was fought', a marsh islikely to have existed, such as Appian describes.The movement of Antony, which had been hisdesign from the beginning, had the advantage ofbeing on that flank of the enemy which wasnearest his own post of Amphipolis, and it becamemore easy of execution when he had obtainedpossession of the heights near Pravista, after thedeath of Cassius. As in endeavouring to effectthis object, a part of his legions had advancedLThe autumn of 42, \222 HACBDOHIA. [CHAP.nine stades nearer to the sea, bb position seemsthen to have been about Pravista, iron thence extendingtowards Kav^a ; a great part if not all theforces of Brains were at the same time upon theheights, bot when he was induced by the importunityof his followers to risk a general action,both parties descended again into the shun.The difficulty is, that Appian in stating thatthe camps of Bmtus and Cassius were distant 18stades from Philippi, and 70 from Neapolis, shewsthat the position was much nearer to Philippi thanto Kavala, which does not accord with the passoverthe mountain of Kavala. It would seem,therefore, either that the numbers expressing thedistances have been reversed in the text of Appian,for in that case they would represent the two intervalswith sufficient correctness, or that there wasa movement, which Appian has omitted to notice,from the first encampment of Brutus and Cassiusinto the position which they occupied previouslyto the first battle. The latter supposition is countenancedby Dio, who states that by the acquisitionXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 223battle extended from that pass as a centre, andoccupied all the heights from near Philippi as faras Praviata, We are the more justified in suspectingsome inaccuracy in Appian, as he evidentlyhad not a correct knowledge of the country ; hesupposed the marshes in the plain of Philippi tohave extended, if not to the sea, at least to nogreat distance from it'; and he seems, therefore,not to have been aware that the plain is entirelyseparated from the sea by a range of hills, and inno part approaches the coast within several miles.In another error his text only may, perhaps, be toblame ; he represents the distance between thecamp of Antony and Amphipolis to have been 350stades, whereas that was the entire length of thelower Strymonic plain, as indeed he had beforecorrectly stated. Dio also, although generallywell informed, makes on this occasion an observationwhich is at least inaccurate. He says, thatwhile Norbanus and Sara were intent on occupyingthe shortest route over the Capstan mountains,their opponents took the circuit by Crenides,and so arrived at Philippi, as if Crenides andPhilippi were not one and the same place, as weareassured by Appian, and several other authorities'.It is not so easy, however, to admit with Appian,that it was the same place also as Datus.The "good things" which made Datus the subject"-pof rp fuoTifi^piif (rii»i in Kpqc/fEc et 4/XiTiroi. —^tXlmruv) c\oe harl toi 8<t- Strabo (Epit. 1. 7), p. 331Xovon fit' air, — c. 105. DiodoT. I. Ifi, c. 3.Artemidorus, ap. Stcphaii.224 Macedonia. [chap.of a proverb ' could not have been complete if ithad not been a seaport, as Strabo intimates Datusto have been ' ; whence I am inclined to believethat Datum was the same place as Neapolis. Scy-lax indeed distinguishes them, but as he adds thatDatus was an Athenian colony, which could nothave been true of the original Datus, a placemuch more ancient than the earliest settlementsof the Athenians in Thrace, his text perhapsis corrupt in this place, as in so manyothers, and his real meaning may have been,that Neapolis was a colony which the Athenianshad established at Datus. Zenobia and Eustathiusboth assert that Datus was a colony ofThasus *, which is highly probable, as the Thastihad several colonies on the coast opposite totheir island, whereas there is every reason to believethat the Athenians had no footing in Thraceuntil after the reduction of Thasus, which did notoccur till the year b. c. 463, nor any permanentestablishment until the foundation of AmphipoUsby Agnon, 26 years afterwards, their previousXXVI.] macedonia 225been one of the Thespian colonies, and of suchantiquity as to be mentioned by Homer ', ismore likely than Dated to have occupied the positionin which the colony of Neapolis was afterwardssettled, but iEsyme still existed under thatname in the eighth year of the Peloponnesianwar, when, together with Galepsus, it surrenderedtoBrasidas'. It was afterwards called Mathias,as we learn from Stephens, and Livy mentions itunder that name, as having, with Amphipolis andother towns of the Thracian coast, shut its gatesagainst the Romans under the consul Hostilityin the Persic war, b, c, 170',Aa Gauges, or Granites, or (according to thetext of Herodotus) Angitas, was the name attachedto the river which rises at Philippi, it follows thatthe branch from Nevrokopo was the Zygactes,which agrees perfectly with the circumstance relatedby Appian, that many of the defeated followersof Brutus retreated to the mountains by thevalley of the Zygactes. It was in fact the onlyroute towards the interior open to them. Althoughthis stream is much longer if not larger than theAngitas, Herodotus shows that the limited rivertook its name from the branch of Philippi.Nov. 12. — Recrossing in an hour from Seriesthe bridge of the Karasu, we arrive in 2 hours moreat Nigrita ; the road throughout traverses a richplain, covered with com or cotton fields, and enlivenedby numerous cattle, farms, and small villages.Tobacco is not grown in this part of the■ Liv. 1. 43, c. 7.326 MACBDOKIA. [cHAP.Strymonic plea, bat Drama produces a considerablequantity of it. Nigrita is a lai^e Greekvillae, situated immediately opposite to Serr^ tothe Sew. on the downs which form the last slopeof the parallel range of mountains. It is dividedonly by a space of a few hundred yards fromanother village of the same description, namedSera or Tjerpa. A mile farther westward, is athird collection of houses, inhabited chiefly byTurks, and named Tjerpista '. An hour and ahalf to the eastward of Nigrita, and similarly situatedat the foot of the mountain, stands Zerro-khori, a small village where the peasants find, inploughing the ground, great numbers of ancientcoins. Those found near Nigrita are almost equallynumerous, and it seems evident that both theseplaces were ancient sites. Of those which arebrought to me by the people of Nigrita for sale, thegreater number by far, like those I procured atSerr^, are Macedonian, and of all dates, fromPhilip, father of Alexander, to a late period of theCreek Empire. Those earlier than Philip areXXVI.] MACEDONIA. '227as Heracleia of the Strymon '. 2. The Sincewas to the right of the Strymon, for Livy informsus that when Macedonia was divided into fourprovinces at the Roman conquest, Sintice was associatedwith Bisaltia in the first Macedonia, of whichthe capital was Amphipolis, while all the remainingparts of the country between the Strymon andAxius, were attributed to the second Macedonia,of which the capital was Thessalonica*. 3. Theposition of Zervokhori agrees with that which theTabular Itinerary ascribes to Heracleia relativelyto Philippi, as indicated on two different Romanroads from the one city to the other ; one measuring55 M.P. the other 52 M.P. and both sufficientlycorresponding to the 37 Gem. of direct distance betweenthe site of Philippi and Zervokhori. Therecan be little doubt that one of these roads passedround the northern, the other round the southernside of the lake. On the former, the names anddistances are Philippi, 1*2 M.P. Drabescus, 8 M.P.Strymon, 13 M.P. Sara, 18 M.P. Scotus, 4M.P. Heracleia, — total, 55 M.P. ; where Strymoncorresponds exactly to the crossing of the river ofNevrokopo, which Danville, influenced perhapsby this authority, although directly opposed to thatof Herodotus, supposed to be the real Strymon.Sara answers equally well to Zikhna ', and Scotusto the place where the Strymon was crossedjust above the lake. The southern road was as'HpaicXiia ^rpsfiovoc. Hie ' The true ancient ninerod. p. 639. Less, perhaps more nearly resembledLiv. 1. 45, c. 29.— Diodor. Zikhnn.Pragm. 27-q2228 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.follows : Philippi, 10 M.P. Triulo, 17 M.P. Graero,8 M.P. Euporia, 17 M.P. Heracleia,— total, 52M.P. Here the distance of Eaporia from Heracleiacombined with the name, seems to indicate that itstood at a ferry across the lake, perhaps at the spotwhere the lake first begins to narrow, 3 or 4 milesto the north-westward of Amphipolis, but moreprobably on the western side of the lake, becauseEnporia is named by Ptolemy among the towns ofBisaltia, tether with Ossa and Argilus, whenceit may be farther conjectured that the river whichI before noticed as joining the ' Strymon a littlebelow the bridge of Neokhorio or AmphipolWt isthe ancient Basaltes '.In reference to the place, which the Itinerary indicatesby the evidently corrupted name Triulo,it is a remark of M. Couainery, who resided manyyears as French consul at Salonlki, that coins wittAc inscription TPAIAION are not unfrequentlyfound near Amphipolis ', whence the conjecturemay be admitted, that Triulo is a corruptionof Tnelio. The real name, however, I suspectXXVI.] macedonia. 229AION of the coin may represent the Hellenic Tpa-ytXiu'v. The Triulo of the Table would then onlyrequire to be corrected into Trail. 7'raijilns, inthis case, stood on the foot of Mount PangtEum,opposite to Philippi, The real name of the place8 M.P. eastward of Euporia, which in the Table18 written Graero, I take to have been Azores,which we learn from Stephens to have been aMacedonian town, and from Ptolemy that it wasin the land of the Edoni '. Azores, therefore,probably stood between Troilus and Eupor'm., towardsthe north western end of Mount Pangeeum.Terga being placed by Ptolemy on the borders of theEdoni, as well as near the Odomanti, who, in histime, occupied Sirrhse and Scotus, seems to havebeen near the shore of the Strymonic lake, perhapsnear the modem Takhyno. Scymnus describes itas lying inland from the mouth of the Strymon'.If Zervokhori be the site of Heracleia Sciatica, it isprobable that a considerable district to the northwardof that place and to the right of the Stripnoitwas also included in the Sintice, and consequentlythat Nigrita was either Tristolus or Part/iicopolis,for these are the only two towns, besides Heracleia,which Ptolemy ascribes to the Sintice.Nov. 13. —-At 6.25 Turkish, we begin to ascendthe mountain, which rises from Nigrita, througha region of corn land, at the end of an hourenter a forest, here chiefly consisting of smallokm. dealt so much in the marvellousaa to give rise lo the verbplace (iipyaiZuv. — Strabo, p. 47,who 100, 104.— Stephan. in Bipyij.230 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.oaks, which covers all this range of lille, andat 9.35 reach SolLh6 ', called by the TalksSukha, a large village inhabited chiefly byGreeks, and standing in an elevated situation onthe southern side of the mountain, under one ofthe summits. It commands an extensive prospectover the valley included between the mountainson which Sokho stands, and the parallel rangewhich stretches from Mount Khortiatzi *, aboveSaloniki to the mountain of Nizvoro. Above themiddle of the latter ridge appears the peaked summitnamed Solomon, which falls to the Singitic andToroaaic gulfs, and by its prolongation forms thepeninsula of Sitkonia, which separates those twogulfs. Three lakes are seen from Sokho, that ofLangaza, towards Mount Khortiatzi, that of Be-aliain the same great valley, to the eastward, andnearly at the same distance as the last lake, in asouth-easterly direction from Sokh6 that of .The last, which is situated in a valley surroundedby mountains, is considerably the smallestof the three lakes, and is said to be dry in summer.XXVI.] MACEDONIA. 231Lakhana, on the northern road from Serres toSalonlki, which being similarly situated on thecrest of the same ridge of mountains, may havesome claim to be considered the site of Ossa,I lodge at Sokho, in the house of the Greekpriests Kliariso, who prefixes to his name theTurkish title Hadji because he has been atJerusalem. The side of the mountain slopingfrom the village is covered with vineyards, belowwliicii there is a fertile undulated country fallingto the plain of Besikia, into which we descend.Nov. 14. — this morning, through a pleasantcountry composed of corn-fields interspersed amonggroves, copses, single trees, and numerous hamletsinhabited entirely by Turks, many of whomwe meet on their road to the market at Sokhowith their wool and corn. Klisali, where wearrive in three hours and a half from Sokho, isa miserable Turkish village on the last slope ofthe mountain, where it terminates in a plainlying between the lakes of Besikia and of AioVashti, or Langaza. The town of Besikia standsOil the northern side of the eastern lake, oppositeto Pazarudhi. It is perhaps the site of the townBolbe '. The plain, with its two lakes, is included,as I before stated, between the ridge ofSokho and that of Khortiatzi, and is closed atthe eastern end by the meeting of the two ranges,which are there separated only by the pass oi Kuhn,ir Arethusa. A stream flows out of the lake of:simla, through the pass of Arethusa to the Slry-Sleplian. in B(iA/Ji.332 XACEDORU. [Chap.sone Gulf. As the ancient artois indicate onlyone lake in this situation named Bolbe, it is likelythat they were distinguished as the upper andknrer Bolbe. Both now abound in a varies offiflb, auKM^ which, as in genenl in the waters ofGreece having a current, is the Aa^ipcC, or perch,DOW called "Xmii^pin ; the gastnmoQiic poet outwittedl^ Athenaeum, particularly admired the perchof this lake as well as those of Ambracia andCalydon '.KHsall being a protestation on the main routeto C<Histantin(^e, we here change our honesBulged by the mennl of Serres, and at 7.50,Turkish time, pursue the foot of the hills, leavingon the right several small Turkish villages.At 8.30 the eastern extremity of the lakeof Aio Vashti is one mile and a half on the left,and near it a Turkish village named Doanji Ogle.The woody sides f>f the mountain of Khortiatzirise steeply from the opposite shore of the lake,and beyond the western end of the lake assume aBoth-westerly direction At 9.10 we are oppositeXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 233hospitable. At 10.30 the hot baths of Langazaare half a mile on the right of the road. Hereare two old buildings, in the Turkish style,one of which is in ruins, the other still in use.It consists of two apartments covered with domes,of which the outer is used for dressing, and theinner is the hath, where the hot source is receivedinto a large marble basin surrounded withseats, and overflows into the outer apartment.The water is almost tasteless, and of a very moderatedegree of heat : close by, there is another hotsource rising amidst a great quantity of blackmud, into which patients plunge up to their necksfor the cure of rheumatism and other chronic complaints,and afterwards wash in the neighbouringwater-bath. Close to the baths there is a finesource of cold water. A mile beyond the baths,and two or three hundred yards on the right ofthe road, rises an artificial height with a flat top,and covered with fragments of pottery. There isanother hill of the same description at the foot ofthe northern range, opposite to Demiglara, beyondwhich village the plain of Langaza terminates in apeaked rocky summit called Stress, on either sideof which there is a passage over some lofty downsinto the great plain of Tfussalonica. Half an hourfrom the baths we leave on the right Salina,and then a mile farther from our road Demi-glare,both considerable villages, inhabited byChristians. Around these places the valleywidens. We now enter a boghaz, or narrowglee, leading from the valley of Langaza intothe plain of Saloniki. At the entrance some re-S34 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.mains of a wall constructed of mortar and smallstones, are seen on the slope of either hill ; thepass, however, of which these works formed thedefence, although remarkable, is not very important,as the passage over the hills on eitherside is easy, particularly to the north. Towardsthe middle of the pass, on a small rock liy theside of the paved road, the word OAIIAI is engravedin large letters on the rock. Olpse mayperhaps have been the name of the pass, derivedfrom iXvit, Jellies oXiric, in allusion to the expectationwhich the traveller feels of being quicklygratified by a view of the maritime plain and sea,and by the speedy termination of his journey.At the issue of the glen stand Kbaivat on theright and Lain on the left. The latter is verysmall, but Khaivat contains a large church and300 cottages, inhabited by Bulgarian Christians,a people which occupies, with the exception oftwo or three large Greek villages, all the greatmaritime plain of Ijnoer Mtuxdojua. Few ofthe women in the Bulgarian villages can speakXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 235the mountains to the north and west with snow,and this morning a strong gale from that directionbrings frost with it. At a well and largeplane tree, a little below the village, lies a marbleinscribed with characters of a good time, bat containingonly names'. In half an hour we descendinto the plain of Saloniki, and winding to the leftalong the foot of the range of Khortiatzi, enter atthe end of another hour the Turkish cemeterywhich surrounds the city, and which containsmany fragments of columns and sori dispersedamong the tomb-stones. The city walls towardstheir foundations, are in part composed of ancientmarbles, and there is every appearance of theirhaving followed the ancient line. At the end ofan hour and three quarters from Khaivat, we enterthe Vardar-kapesI, or gate of the Vardhari. In atree before it hangs the body of a robber. Justwithin the gate the street is crossed by an ancientarch about 14 feet wide, supported by pilasters,which are buried apparently to half their originalheight. Below the capital of each pilaster, on thewestern side, a Roman donatus is represented inrelief, standing before a horse. The prize abovethe arch is decorated with the caput bevis unitedby festoons. The whole construction consists oflarge masses of stone, but the monument couldV. Inscription, No. outstanding before her with theirAt Saloniki I saw a sepulchral right anne in their cloaks. Belsaid to have been low are the words,brought from Khaivat, which Utitovuki role ricvoic Srparo-represents in relief a woman vtitii koI tleucuKuo^ fury. —seated, and llirec young men V. Inscription, No. 129.336 Macedonia. [chap.never have been very magnificent, and appearshardly worthy of the time of Antony and Octaves,to which it is attributed by Beaujoor, who supposesit to have been a triumphal memorial of thevictory of Philippi. Nor does an inscription belowthe arch which contains the names of the eightarchons in whose magistracy the monument waserected seem to favour his opinion, as the namesare chiefly Roman, which they would hardly havebeen at so early a period. They are styledPolitarchffi, as when St. Paul visited Thessalonica *,93 years after the battle of Philippi. Two ofthese magistrates were the gymnasiarch and thetamias '.Nov. 17. — In the evening (being the proper timeduring the Amazon) I visit Mush (Moses) Pasha.This is the same gentleman whom I saw in exileat 'Epakto, cooking his pilaf with oil for want ofiwpoy rov 'tdaova sal rt The name of Cleopatra, thevac ditXfoit Iri rove roKtirap- mother of Soaipatnis, may per-X<(Ci 'Eropofav H riy Iiaps have preceded that of hisoxXoc rat Toil iroXeirapx<'C- — Roman father, because she wasXxv.] MACEDONIA. 237butter, and stealing onr consul's wood. Sincethat time he has been in Egjpl, whither he wassent to supersede Mehmet Aly, who was ordered bythe Porte, on the plea of his being a Macedonian,to exchange the government of Egypt for that ofSaloniki. Mehmet Aly, however, was not to be displacedso easily. Musa Pasha had chiefly foundedhis hopes of success on the dells in Mehmet'sguard, the chiefs of whom were his friends andformerly in his service, and attributes his failureto the Kapitan Pasha, whom he accuses of havingbeen bribed by Mehmet Aly to delay a march toCairo, which had been concerted with Elfin andfour other Mamliik beys, until it was renderedimpracticable by the rising of the Nile. Musa'stroops had a skirmish with Mehmet Aiy's, butwithout any advantage on either side. The Porte,convinced that their project had failed, orderedMusa to assume the government of Saloniki, andthe Kapitan Pasha to return to Constantinoplewith his fleet. Musa came with the fleet as faras Cos, He affirms that Mehmet's forces amountonly to 4000 Albanians and 5000 others, that heis detested for his oppressions, and for havingruined commerce, and that no Red Sea goods canpass the desert, as the merchants are afraid ofbeing plundered by the Pasha at Cairo.On the event of the battle of Austerlitz, theTurkish government assumed a certain degree of insolence,and supported by the French, immediatelypet about attempting two objects upon which theyid long fixed their wishes, though until thattomeut without much prospect of attaining them :238 MACEDONIA!. [CHAP.■1. The extending of the Nizaiiii-djedid, its impostsand military discipline over Rumili ; 2. The withdrawingfrom all ray4hs the protections of theEuropean courts, and particularly the Russian'flags from the Greek ships. To effect the formerof these objects a very large force was raised inAsia, and sent into Rumili, and for the latter afirman had already been issued last March. TheJanissaries of Constantinople, however, and particularlyall the Turks of the country extendingfrom Adrianople to the capital, having unitedagainst the Nizam, the Asiatics were entirelydefeated and dispersed before they got beyondSeliviia, where the remainder were surroundedand in danger of being cut off, while their adversariesthreatened to march to Constantinople anddepose the Salton as a giaour. The project ofthe Sultan was immediately renounced and theTurkish ministry changed.Japonica, as the Italians and English name thiscity, is by the Turks called Selanik, by the GreeksSoXovim, and by all the educated among themXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 239extending a mile in length along the sea shore,and defended by three great towers, one at eachextremity, the third overlooking the skala or landingplace, where stands a small suburb, betweenthe tower and the sea shore. Since the inventionof gunpowder, batteries on a level with the waterhave been added to the maritime defences in themost important points, and a fortress, or fortifiedinclosure, has been constructed at the westernangle of the city.The eastern and western walls follow theedges of the height, where it falls on either sidetowards a small valley watered by a rivulet,and terminate above in the walls of the citadel,which has a double inclosure towards the townflanked with square towers. The heads of thevalleys on the east and west are separated only bya ridge connecting the citadel with the falls ofMount Khortiatzi, which command it at a shortrange. The citadel, like that of Constantinople, iscalled 'EvTavupytov, which the Turks have translatedinto Yeddi Tutelar, the Seven Towers ; fordoubtless at both places the name is older thanthe Turkish conquest. Saloniki bears the usualcharacteristics of a Turkish town ; no attention ispaid to cleanliness or convenience in the streets,the exterior of the houses is designed to concealall indications of wealth, nor can any correctopinion be formed of the population from thecentral part of the town, or a visit to the bazar,where crowds are collected during the greaterpart of the day, while the rest of the city is asolitude. The houses in the lower part of the240 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.town are shut out from all external view by thenarrow streets and the high town walls, butinrising higher, a noble prospect opens of thegrand outlines of Olympus, Ossa, and Pelntm,seen above the promontory of Kardburiiu, togetherwith a part of the Chaotic peninsula tothe southward, and to the westward the immenselevel which extends for 50 miles to Verria andVodhen^.All the principal mosques were formerly Greekchurches, and two of them were Pagan temples,which had been converted into churches. Themost remarkable is that which is still known to theGreeks by the name of vaXta MtrrpowoXtt, or morevulgarly EskiMetropoli', an appellation employedalso by the Turks. Hence it seems to have been,in the time of the Byzantine Empire, the cathedralchurch of the metropolitan bishop. It is a rotundabuilt of Roman bricks, with two doors, one to thesouth, the other to the west. The thickness of thewalls below is 1 8 feet, their height about 50 feet, thediameter within, 80 feet : above these walls was aXSVr.] MACEDONIA. '241temple having perhaps been lighted from the dome.The inside of the dome is adorned with the representationof buildings and saints, in mosaic, interspersedwith inscriptions which, as usual inGreek churches, explained the subjects, but arenow too much injured to be decypherable, thoughthe Turks have not destroyed any of these ornaments,nor even a figure of the Almighty whichoccupied a niche opposite to the door where oncestood the Pagan idol. In one place they havesupplied a fallen mosaic with a painting in imitationof it.Eski Djuma, or Old Friday, is the name ofanother mosque, the masonry and form of a greatpart of which shows that it was once a building ofthe same age as the Eski Mitropoli, or perhapsstill older, but such have been the repairs and alterationswhich it has undergone in its conversionfirst into a church and then a mosque, that theancient plan cannot easily be traced. It is supposedby the learned to have been a temple of Venus.At Sofia is a mosque, so called by the Turks, andwhich like the celebrated temple at Constantinople,was formerly a church dedicated to the DivineWisdom. The Greeks assert it to have been builtby the architect of St. Sophia, of Constantinople :its form at least is similar, being that of a Greekcross with an octastyle portico before the door, anda dome in the centre, which is lined with mosaic,representing various objects much defaced; amongthese I can distinguish saints and palm trees. TheTurks, contrary to their usual custom of destroying,or at least of hiding with a coat of plaster, theVOL. III. R242 MACEDONIA. [chap.figures in the Greek churches which they have convertedinto mosque, have allowed all the figures ofSt. Sophia to remain, with the exception of a piecein the centre, which they have replaced by an Arabicinscription, having been justly shocked, perhaps,by a huge human face, locking down, as I havefrequently seen in Greek churches, and which isgenerally inscribed with the word navroKpaT<tfp.St. Demetrius is along church with a triple aisle,supported by a double order of columns of severalkinds of variegated marble, and very much resemblingan old Latin church, such as are see in Italy,Sicily and the Holy Land! It may possibly havebeen built by the Latins when in possession of Thessalonicain the 13th century. Within this templea sepulchral marble is inserted in the wall, whichvery much resembles many similar monuments inChristendom, being in that common form which representsthe end of a sorts crowned with a pedimentIt is ornamented with lowers well executed, withinwhich is an inscription in twenty-two Greek Iambicverses, in honour of one Luke Spanduni, who ismodernMACEDONIA.ake hie Hclleithealtenipt imore complete, has imitated the ancient character,and avoided any division of the words. The wordOta show that it ia a woman who grieves for theloss of Spanduni.Among the ecclesiastical antiquities, in whichSaloniki exceeds any place in Greece, as thechurches just mentioned show, are two of the moatancient pulpits in existence; they are single blocksof variegated marble, with small steps cut in them.One of these ^lW'■(<, as they are still called by theGreeks, is in the mosque of Eski Mitropoli ; theother is lying in the yard of a church of St. Minas,which is still appropriated to the Greek worship.Itt jiapjiupiK^t: oil fitrea^^fi; KTfXiSiK'• Sir yap iraTpixuv apiriiv t£ij^fi(i«Cir Xpvaos Hovcp tic S tioritfi iua^opot,W 'EXajijI/ti kaf/rpHQ rji rus dpcrur KaWei,p itu^poavviiv yap >;ui dvipiiav omr^ffac,^ T^r* Tt ippvyriaiy Ku! rijy laoyofitay^ 'Oc jidOpoy look dptraiy rwi* rvC^cuc,'AyaXfxa Biioy role amy ai'tSd'xSfCiBiXyaty Si iravrac rj rise Xdyuf otipijvi,p Kal Tp yXa^up^ tov xaXKavt iJyXaif ,L Kai roi; ytvmloit Tats ipyiuy KaTawXfirray,k 'Ev rp Q'/'Pi 'pti', ruv fiiyitrruy iXxicuy,r Oljoi foi TO ^c Kal K\ioc r^c {"Sc f^ov,To KDivdc kUoCi h atipa tov ■jf^voov yirouc,W 'H Gift ^iiaiut \afirpa ftkorifila.^ Oho inrEiTT^v eri gaol, iii tov waOove,^Ikt) «^X4, cXtIci {"^i ^"c, riptl/is,Tov Bv^ayrlov icai i'Eam/i^dq u iovXos rim Qtoii Aol^X^irfl" iy fli)>'< 'Infoirapiou n".VOL. III. R 2i-'EXX^i.V apmii,.344 Macedonia. [Chap.Among the remains of Pagan times, may be mentionedsome small portions of the walls, whichthere is every reason to believe, follow the lineand foundations of the inclosure of Cassander,and which being in their general structure muchh^her and more solid than Such as the Ottomansbuild, seem to consist for the most part of successiverepairs of the Macedonian work, beforethe Turkish conquest. Faerie we can hardlysuppose to have been so lai as Tkaaalonica,and as it could not have left the citadel unoccupied,probably did not extend as ^ as the sea.That the main street, and two principal gates,and consequently the whole inclosure, of the RomanThessalonica, corresponded with those of themodem town, we have an infallible proof, in twoancient arches which still cross that street; onealready mentioned near the Vardar gate, the othernot fttr from the corresponding gate at the easternend of the same street. The latter, which had twosmaller lateral arches annexed to it, now destroyed,consists of two piers 14 feet square, faced withXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 245the piers is still more deprived of its facing, and isnow a mere mass of Roman tile and mortar.Zosimus seems to give some support to the traditionwhich attributes this monument to Constantine,by his remarking, that when Constantine hadsubdued the Sarmatia, he went to Thessaloniansthere constructed a port '. But the executionof the sculpture is perhaps better suited to the ageof Theodosius, whose victories over the Gothswere a common subject on the monuments of hisage.To the westward of this arch, near the mainstreet, are the ruins of a portico with a doubleorder of architecture, consisting of four Corinthiancolumns, not of the best design or execution, andthe shafts of which are now half buried in theground. On their architrave stands an upperorder, consisting of four plain pilasters, on the oppositefaces of which are Caryatides, eight in all :the figures are of the human size, or near it, andeach of them represents a different subject. Onone of the pilasters the two opposite figures areLeda and Ganymede ; the former embraces theswan, whose head reposes upon her breast ; Ganymedeis held by the eagle, whose wings are spreadover his back, and whose talons rest on his hips,while the head of the eagle reaches over the leftshoulder of the youth, looking in his face. This isa very good piece of sculpture, and not much injuredby time. The other figures seem inferiorin merit as they are in preservation ; nor can thesubjects be easily understood. The next to Gany-^^ subjectsZosun. I. 2, 1246 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.mede, on the same side, is a man with a Phrygianbonnet, at whose feet is a bull's head ; the thirdand fourth are females in light drapery, the latterwith wings. On the opposite ude, or that of theLeda, the figures are so much ruined that I cannotdistinguish the subjects'. This monument is inthe house of a Jew, and is known in the Spanishdialect of the Jews by the name of Cantata, " theEnchanted," on the supposition that the figures arehuman beings petrified by the effect of magic. Itscentral position, and the nature of the construction,support the idea that it was connected withthe ancient agora. The space which lies betweenthe sea and that part of the main street where theCantata and arch of Constantine are situated, issaid to have been occupied by the hippodrome,noted for having been the scene of a promiscuousmassacre of the assembled people of Thessalonicaby order of Theodosius *.In many parts of the town, particularly at thefountains, sepulchral stones and inscribed son areto he found. Wherever figures occur upon theXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 247for Its having a double date, by which it appearsthat the year 302 in one epoch corresponded to166 in the other: as the difference 116 is theexact interval between the destruction of Corinthand the battle of Actium, there can be no doubtthat these were the two events from which thedates were taken. 2. An epitaph in verse, wantingone or two lines at the beginning, where thename of a woman occurred, whose husband Eutro-pus constructed the tomb for her and himself. Intwo prose lines in smaller characters, which followthe verses, he declares that whoever shallplace any other corpse in the tomb, except thoseof his children, shall pay a fine to the public chestof 10,200 denarii. 3. Another inscription containsthe names of those who contended for theprize in a certain funereal contest, in which therewere trials in the pancratium and in wrestlingby boys, by young men, and by adults. It is lobesupposed that the prior name of each pairwas the victor'.M. 'loiiXioc Ep/jiJE 'hiv\i(f \ii/ 'Ep/jiui'g rp Ovyarpi (liarTiprli/ yucuui iavruv, nui 'luu- inuiii, iTOUi o't tvu xai fir.Tui yap (► Ciuo'iaiy iwiiyvfioy eOH yvramiEifiKir ^C aptTqc Roi (l(ii^pu(rvfi)£ fia' a'fiiirTtt^-tiili ii TuvCi rdifioy ^I'Xioc Jriimt EuTfwstDt: arp,OV atrjj liiTiiria6i.v oirwi ix dftvanaOai£ilv f iX'g fuvtic d\&)(if, KcK\iita(tivov ajiryiTip*' kaiZiiv fit/iTov (iXuroiv viri rii/iaai /loipwi .MACEDONIA.[chap.The population of Salonibi is reckoned at80,000, but probably does not exceed 65,000, ofwhom 35,000 are Turks, 15,000 Greeks, and13,000 Jews, the remainder Franks and Gypsies.'Easy Si eric trtpov roXfi^v^ upvTarf IjijidptaKaraBioOtu fttra to Isti Kara tivpia iiaxOua. — V. Insciip-riOifrtti x*'ph riv Ttxvtiy . . tion, No. 138.'Povfy cat . ., . taXdvSvy 'Otrmliptmy/ii/ru((oc . . . . r. Oi .(lou \ciriSov 'Ax'XXt'oc' feraBwtat ravpov tai fitra 0vir(las. . p, ixl impious p, inriUfiooaKwlKnfy Stvqpov 'Upamc"Kaaaavifla KatupoKtifvKa K. Kaic/Xiof KcfX-0( dyuytadfuvot. Ilai^Eca'aXaivrai, Rb^fuUvmv cal Ao^Knot 'AKparoCi ml Ziiai/UKt Mv-pwf ml Sugla^. llaiStt ,MapKOS cal Maft-loci Hfifopoc cal AiaSov^ivc.'ArcMiwvirJXjr, taOffToc ca 1 A <!•poc. 'Ayirtioi trayKftwriamu,OMXqc cal £(covv^c. 'ir<tXp, DpwTTic cal 'Epft^t,'AvipSv wavKpari^, Nfur^^poccal 'HXioc. — ^V. Inscription,No. 137.XXVI.] MACEDONIA. 249All the Turks of Macedonia who bear arms areSpahis, Yuruks, or Janissaries. The Spahis arethe cavalry found by the holders of the aims andtiara, when called upon by the government.The Yuruks cultivate their own lands chiefly inthe mountainous districts. The Janissaries are thegarrisons of the fortified places, among whom aregenerally enrolled the greater part of the heads offamilies engaged in trade or manufactures, orwho have landed property in the neighbouringplain. A thousand pounds sterling a year inlandis considered a large estate. Hadji Mustafa,the Bash Tjaus of the Janissaries, hasseven tjiftliks worth 20,000 piastres a year (or1200/.), though he lives at the rate of not morethan eight or ten thousand. Under a governmentwhich makes every one feel danger in displayinghis wealth, and renders property and life insecureeven to its most favoured subjects, the extremes ofparsimony and extravagance are naturally to befound. Turks as well as Jews often carry the formerto excess, and the latter is by no means uncommonamong the young Osraanlis. An under-employedin the Mehemet is pointed out to me,who in a few years dissipated 2000 purses andseven tjiftliks. These Turkish landed proprietors,however, are the persons of the greatest stabilityin Turkey ; and the Frank merchants who bargainfor their corn, cotton, and tobacco, can, withoutmuch risk, make advances upon their crops.The Jews of Saloniki are descended from thelargest of those colonies, which settled in Greece\ at the time of their expulsion from Spain at the250 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.end of the fifteenth century ; but a considerableportion of them have become Musulmans sincethat time, though without being altogether acknowledgedby the Osmaulis, and forming a separateclass under the denomination of Mains.Inheriting the Jewish spirit of parsimony and industry,they are generally rich, and among themare some of the wealthiest Turks at Salonlki.Hassan Adjik, one of the ministry at Constantinople,and his brother, who is Grumrukji, or collectorof the customs at Salouiki, are Mains. Theyare naturally objects of extreme dislike to theidle, poor, and profligate Janissaries of the lowerclass. They go to mosque regularly, and conformto the Mahometan religion in externals, but arereproached by the other Turks with having secretmeetings and ceremonies, with other peculiaritiesof which the best attested is their knowledge ofthe Spanish language. They are said to be dividedinto three tribes, two of whom will not intermarrywith the third, nor will the latter give theirdaughters in marriage to the Osmanlis.The iroXtrEid, orCrreek community, is presided overby the metropolitan bishop, who with the archonsarranges all civil disputes in which Turks are notconcerned, unless when the Christians think fit toresort to the Mehemet.By a strange distortion of ancient geography,Thessalonica and Berrhoea are ecclesiasticallyiwapy^tai, or provinces of Thessaly ' ; thus theThis apse cfaon^praphy is and we find it in the twelfth,aa old as the ninth century; in AnnaCamnena(l. 14, c. 10.)IXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 251bishop of Thessalonica is styled viripTifio^ koI iS,ap-yoq iraariQ GtrraXiac ; he claims the privilege ofthe epithet Ttavaywrarov in his own province, butelsewhere is intitled only, like other metropolitan,to the TrnvwpwT-arog. The bishoprics of Iiiss provinceare Kitro, Campania, Platamona togetherwith Lykostomo, Servia, Petra, Ardhameri, ofwhich the residence is Galatia, and lerisso whichincludes the Aion Oros.There are some opulent Greek merchants atSaloniki, most of whom are indebted for the undisturbedpossession and increase of their wealthto the protection which they have enjoyed asdragomans or baratalres of the European missions.Now that these protections are about to beabolished, their situation will be much more precarious.There are three sorts of kharatj paid by therajahs ; the first, called medina, is of 3 piastres, towhich boys under 14 are subject, but which isgenerally exacted from all under 11 ; the second,the efsat, of 6 piastres, is paid by artisans, servants,and all the poor, even beggars; the third, alia,taken from all the classes above the last, amountsat Japonica to 12 piastres a head. Mr. N — , theprincipal Greek merchant, who is procurator forMount Athos, informs me that he pays only 3600kharatjes for the while population of the peninsula,though there are 4000 monks alone, besides lacs.who with all her learning seems founds Philippi with PhiHppo-I have known but little of polis, 1. 5, c. 3.ancient geography, for she MACEDONIA. [CHAP.Ic is almost the only place where the khardtj is underrated.Those who ann it having generally themeans of making good their claims for an increasein the rajah population, it moat frequently happensthat individuals pay more than the regulatedsum, and scarcely ever the reverse. Sometimesthey are called upon for the double or triple.The Turks are probably aware that Mouiit Athos israted below its numbers, but being the abode of personsdevoted to religion, it is intitled to favour by theTurkish usages, for custom is a powerful argumentamong them, though seldom employed, as in theinstance just mentioned, for the benefit of any butthemselves. A Pasha of Saloniki having receivedorders to join the Grand Vezir's army, was waitedupon by a merchant acting as English consul,to whom he was indebted about 30/. My friend,said he, where am 1 to find a para ? I have notmoney to pay the bread 1 have been eating here ;the Porte indeed has sent me 500 purses, but itwill not disclaim one fourth of my debts. Atleast, says the consul, you will give me an ac-xxvi.]MACEDONIA. 253servants in the Frank families have about 50piastres a year, with some articles of clothing ;in all cases with board. The finest bread is now15 paras the oke of 2flbs., and mutton 18 or 20paras an oke ; beef only 8 or 10, as it is consumedonly by Jews and Franks. The ordinary price ofsilk is 50 piastres the oke; and almost every familyraises silkworms. Ordinary cotton and wooUcdstuds for the clothing of the common people arealso woven in the private houses as well as in thesurrounding villages. A considerable quantity ofcotton towels are made here, sometimes with aborder of gold threads, for the vliptftov, or washingof the upper classes before and after meal, whichin every part of Greece is practised as in the time ofHomer'. Silken gauze for shirts and mosquito curtains,are another fabric of the city, but the chiefmanufacture is the tanning and dyeing of leather,which is entirely in the hands of the Janissaries.The commerce of Saloniki has very much declinedduring the war, and even since Beaujour describedit in 1797. Tobacco sent from hence in imperiali^ips is now the oily considerable export. No Englishship has loaded here for 12 years. The beyshave their magazines full of corn, which by a firmanof the Porte, issued last year and renewed thisI year, they are forbidden from sending to ChristenX/prijia S" A/iipiroKot irpojfOy Iri-j^ivc ^fpouffoUliPao&ai. Oil. A. V. 136.But we must now rend copiifiEver, even in the case of Pashas.J254 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.down. Meantime the Porte demands a certain 4)1*0-portion from all the most productive com countriesof the empire, Macedonia among the rest, at a lowprice, on the pretence of fitting out fleets andarmies. The consequence has been, that last year,when the price of com at Athens was very high, itwas sold by the government at Constantinople toforeigners, at a much lower price than they mighthave received for it in Greece, including the expenceof sending it there. Three or four hundredthousand Stambul kila of wheat might be procuredhere in a month, and cattle in any number thatcould be required. The Beys of Salonlki suffermore than the more distant landlords, because thesmiling of com can be more easily carried onfrom any other part of the coast. In general theorders of the Porte against the exportation of comare converted into a source of profit to the localgovernor ; but in a fortified place, under the eyesof a Pasha, and in time of war, more attention tothe imperial orders is necessary.In reading descriptions of China one is struckXXVI.] MACEDONIA. 255audiences to ambassadors, one at coming, the otherat departing. When a great man passes throughthe streets, his approach is indicated by a smalldrum. A drum marks the watches of the night.Provincial governors are changed very frequently.Tray, of which word tea is the softened Englishform, preserves its original sound from Japan tothe Adriatic. From the Lettres 'Edifices, welearn that the Mongol Tartars distinguish blacktea by the name Kara Tray, like the Turks. Thelatter, however, now make very little use of tea,except medicinally, nor is any brought to themoverland as formerly, their supply being entirely,as well as that of the greater part of their coffee,from Europe. In Barbary the custom of drinkingtea, particularly green tea, still prevails.There are many words in Turkish, which havingbeen borrowed from the Greek, seem to show thatthe Turks had not in their own country the objectsexpressed by them ; for example, leek stork, linenport, kercmid tile. The borrowing of titles is moreeasily accounted for, as Effendi from auQivriK-Effendi in Turkish, and avOfvi-^^ou or more vulgarlya^tvrxifiov in Greek, le the common mode ofaddressing a gentleman among both people.The Turks have a certain manly politeness,which is the most powerful of all modes of deceit,and which seldom fails in giving strangers an erroneousimpression of their real character. Itcovers a rooted aversion to all European nations,as well as to the individuals who have the misfortuneto have any dealings with these plausiblebarbarians. Though in the most splendid sra of256 HACBDORIA. [chap.their history their feelings may have been those ofcontempt, founded upon ignorance, fanaticism andthe pride of conquest, it has been changed by theirweakness and their dread of the Christians ofEurope, into a mixture of fear and hatred. Thusthere are two things which the European who hasany political dealings with the Turk, should neverlose sight of: 1, that he hates us : 2, that he fearsns. By the latter only can we counteract the effectsof the former, added as it is, to the most profounddissimulation, a keen sense of self-interest,and an obstinate perseverance in defending it.The Turks have so long experienced the advantagesof conduct founded on this basis, and that of themutual jealousy of the several European powers,that we may rely upon their adhering to it, as longas they have a foot of land on the continent ofEurope. To say that the Turks have more honourand honesty than their Christian subjects, is a poorcommendation : they have not the same necessityfor the practice of fraud and falsehood. Whatother arms against their tyrants, are left to the un-xxvi.]MACEDONIA.of an European power. But this powerful engineis rendered inefficient by the impotence of thegovernment : repeated firman, which have latelyarrived at Salonlki for the movement of the Macedoniantroops to the northward, have producedonly the march of a few Janissaries from this city.All the Yuruks and Janissaries of the subordinatetowns have pleaded the insufficiency of their forcefor their own defence, and yet Macedonia is consideredone of the most military provinces in theempire. The Albanians justly hold both Janissariesand Yuruks cheap in comparison of themselves;but they have a considerable respect forthe Turkish cavalry.CHAPTER XXVII.MACEDONIA.Departure from SfdonOd — Tekeli — Bridge of the Vardhiiri m-Jxku — AUkliri. or Apo*t61iu — Pella — Yenidje, or IfitmiUaPaleokastTD — River of Modena — Vodheni, Edeita —TUdova — Ancient Inscription at Vodhenfi — Via Regalia —Niagara, Citttmi — Vena, Berrhcea — Kaatanii — Uoimt BertatHM— KhadoT^—Plain of Bndja — D)Uiii£ — Eordaa — Snlj'naiia — Eozani.Nov. 26. — From Saloniki to Alaklisi in five hoursand fii^ minutes, with menzU horses and baggage,and deducting halts. The road lies all theway through the plain. At an hour and a halffrom the city a rivulet named Gallic crosses theroad and flows directly to the guts; half an hourbeyond it is Tekeli, a small village, where thehorses are changed ; and an hour and a half farrCHAP. Xvii.] MACEDONIA. 259of the river, which occupies about a third of thewhole breadth between the hanks. The stream isnow rapid, deep, and swollen with rain, thoughnot so high as it usually is in winter. Below thebridge, about midway to the mouth, the riverleaves Kulakia, a large Greek village, at no greatdistance on the left, and widens so much before itmeets the sea, as to be near two miles in breadth.Kulakia, which is in the road from Salons toKaterina as well as to Verria, is the residence ofthe bishop rm- Ko/iTraviac, one of the subordinatesof the metropolitan despot of Thessalonica. Thebishop of Campania formerly resided at Kapso-kbori, another Greek village, situated between theKarasmak, or Maupovtpi, and the Injekara, orBtarpirt", 11 a well-wooded part of the plains,around which are some other Greek villages.All the rest of the population of these great plainsof Lower Macedonia consists of Bulgarian cultivatorsof the Turkish tjiftliks which are dispersedover it.One hour and ten minutes beyond the bridge, asmall flat-topped height is on the left of the road,on the summit of which are some ancient foundations,and around it a Turkish burying ground, inwhich are many fluted and plain shafts, and otherfragments of architecture, together with a pedestalbearing an imperfect inscription. This place isabout a mile distant from the south-eastern extremityof a high mountain, which stretches fromthe right bank of the Vardhari in the direction ofVodhena. The valley of that river is seen to ourright branching to a considerable distance among260 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.the mountains. Midway between the artificialheight and Assisi, which is 1 hour and 10minutes beyond it, a tumulus rises close to theroad on the right, then five more, nearly inaline, the last of which is at a masque shotfrom Alaklisi. These tumuli stand on the lastslope of the mountain, where a mile on the leftbegins an immense marsh, which extends as far ascan be seen southward towards the sea, and westwardtowards the Olffn^ene range of mountainswhich border the plains on the west. The tumulusnearest to Alaklisi is a great heap of earth basedupon the rock, which all around is covered onlywith a thin layer of mould. An opening cut in therock, covered above with a semicircular archedroof of masonry, and having a small chamber oneither side of it, leads on a descent 33 feet long, totwo chambers, which are excavated in the rock,under the centre of thetumulus, and are nownearly filled with theearth washed into themthrough the entrance.XXVII.] MACEDONIA. 26 1the duck tribe in the winter ; and partridges of thored-legged species on the slopes of the hills. TheEnglish breed has been introduced by some of themerchants of Salonlki, but has not propagated fnrfrom the neighbourhood of the city. Alaklisi,meaning in Turkish Godchurch, is by the Greeksnamed otouq 'Airoaro^ou^, and by the BulgariansPistol. It contains 40 or 50 poor cottages, andbelongs to Sell Bey, of Salonlki, who maintainshere an Albanian Subashi, with a small guard.The village is not in the direct road to Yenidje,but half a mile to the right of it.Nov. 27. — On the descent from Alaklisi into themain route, the fields are covered with fragmentsof former buildings, and of ancient pottery, suchas are generally observable on the sites of Helleniccities. The foundations of a wall of the constructionof those times is seen at right angles to theroad, and terminating apparently at the marsh, theedge of which is parallel to the road at the distanceof half a mile. A little beyond these foundations,following the road towards Yenidje, occurs a fountain,below which, on the edge of the marsh, is asmall village, named Neokhori.or Yenikiuy, wherealow mound of considerable extent, and apparentlyartificial, seems to have been intended as a defenceagainst the encroachment of the marsh. At 20minutes from Alaklisi, and 10 beyond the firstfountain, is another much more copious source,which is received into a square reservoir of masonry,and flows out of it in a stream to the marsh.This source is called by the Bulgarians Pel, andby the Greeks FltXAii. As the ancient cities of362 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.Greece often derived their naraea from a river orfountain, the same may have occurred in the in-Stance of the celebrated capital of Philip and hissuccessors, which the description of livy, comparedwith the tumuli and other ancient remains, clearlyshow to have stood in this situation. It wouldseem as if the name of Pella had survived even theruins of the city, and bad reverted to the fountainto which it waa originally attached. The wordwas appropriate to a fountain, whether derived fromthe same etymon as wOiXn multum, or from irtXocblack, an epithet which has been very generallyapplied by the Greeks to a source of water, fromthe /ttXay vSwfi of Homer to the mavromati of thepresent day. Below the fountain are some remainsof buildings, sud to have been baths, and still calledra Aovrptt. The hath of Pella are alluded to by acomic poet cited by Athenaeum '. There is nothingremarkable in the taste of the water, but it has aslight degree of warmth, which perhaps might notbe perceptible in summer. The reservoir standsupon the foundation of a Hellenic wall, above which ,XXVII.] MACEDONIA. 263of all, and has either been excavated, or lias Fallenin by natural decay, for it now exhibits the appearanceof a double summit, with a hollow in themiddle. It might naturally be supposed, thatsome of these tumuli were royal sepulchres,especially the last mentioned, as well as that nearestto Alaklisi, which contains chambers in the rock ;but as we are informed upon good authority thatJEgee continued to he the burial place of the royalfamily, even after the seat of government was transferredto Pella, that the body of Alexander wasdestined to be sent to the same place, had not Ptolemycaused it to be carried to Egypt ', and trialPhilip Aridaeiis, his wife Eurydice, and her motherCinna, were buried at ^gae by Cassander ' ;it is more probable that the tumuli of Pella are thetombs of some of the noble families of Macedonia.That which I examined near AJaklisi might havebeen the receptacle of a family during a long successionof ages, and from the arched entrance itseems to have been used for this purpose, as lateas the Roman Empire.Although so little remains of Pella, a tolerableidea may be formed of its extent and general planby means of the description of Livy, compared withthe existing traces. The interval between thewesternmost of the eastern tumuli and the easternmostof the western was probably something morethan the maximum of the diameter of the city, aswe cannot but suppose these monuments to have1 Pausan. Attic, c. 6.Diodor. I. la, c. 52. Illus ap. Athen. 1. 4,264 HACBDDITIA. [CHAP.stood on the. outside of the walls. Its circumference,therefore, vas about three miles. Thetwo sources were probably about t^e centre of thesite, and the modern road may possibly be in theexact line of a main street which traversed it fromeast to west. The temple of Minerva Accidentsis the (mly public building mentioned in history', but of its exact situation we must remainin ignorance, unless some excavation or accidentaldiscovery should hereafter reveal it. Of the constructionof the city towards the lake, the historianhas left us the following description, derived undoubtedlyfrom Polybius : " Pella stands upon aheight sloping to the southwest, and is bounded bymanes, which are impassable both in winter andsummer, and are caused by the overflowing of a lake.The citadel rises like an island from the part ofthe marsh nearest to the city, being built upon animmense embankment which defies all injury fromthe waters ; though appearing at a distance to beunited to the wall of the city, it is in reality separatedfrom it by a wet ditch, over which there is abridge. 8o that no access whatever is afforded to anxxTir.]MACEDONIA.The mound near Neokhori marks perhaps theline where the wall was separated by the wetditch from the citadel, but no vestiges of theisland are to be perceived, which is not surprisingas the citadel of Pella has now for not less probablythan fifteen centuries been abandoned tothe encroachments of the lake and the effects of theseasons. Beaujour asserts that he saw the remainsof a port, and of a nicely-levelled canalcommunicating from the port to the sea'. I aminformed, that in summer when the marsh recedesfrom its present limits, some remains of a canalmay be traced from the heights above Alakltsi,but as to the port, I can neither perceive the leasttraces of it, nor can 1 discover where M. Beaujourfound any mention of it in ancient history. Nothingseems to have been wanted for a watercommunication between the city and the sea butto clear a passage through the marshes, which inall the deeper parts are capable of receiving vesselsof a considerable draught of water. Scylaxseems to have been sensible of this fact, for hemerely states that there was a navigation from thequos restagnanteB faint lacus.In ipsa palace, quaproxima urbis est, (ars) velutinsula eminent, agger operis in-gentis iraposita: qui et munimsuitine&t et humor circumfusssalutis nihil liedatur. Munrourbis conjunct procul videtur :divisa eat inter mur ali anni eteadem ponte cuncta: ut neerepugnant ejctemo actum abua parte habet, nee si quernibi rex included, ullum nisi perfacillims custodis oaten effluvium.Et gaza regia in coloco erat.— Liv. 1. 44, c. 46.On Toit encore le pour-tourde son magnifique port ctles vestiges du canal qui joig-not ce port 4 la mer par leniveau le mieux entendu. —Beaujour, tome i. p. 87, note,266 Macedonian [CHAP.sea by the Lydia to the royal residence of Macedonia',which was 120 atadea in length exclusiveof the Lydiass *. The lake was named Bourbon,as appears from an epigram, in which Aristotlewas reproached for preferring a residence near theBorborus to that of the Academy *.From the baths of Pella to Yenidj^ is a rideof SO minutes. Two miles to the right of thelast tumulus of Pella is the village of Alatjaush-link, standing on the slope of the mountain.linnitza, or Ghianitza*, more commonly knownto the inhabitants, being chiefly Turks, by thecorrupted Turkish form of Yenidje, appears tohave declined considerably of late years, as thenumber of houses is now by no means proportionedto the eight minarets which the town stillexhibits. There are however several good Turkishdwellings, and in the middle of the town that ofAbdurrahman Bey, an Small of an ancient family,and possessor of a large proportion of the> Scylax in ilaaSovla. The can be little doubt that it wastext ia corrupted, and the com- the former, aa there could notXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 267neighbouring lauds, which produce grain, cotton,and tobacco. The last of these, which occupiedmost of the land in the immediate vicinity ofVenice, is renowned in every part of Turkey forits aromatic tutun, which, together with coffee, suppliesthe Turks with a stimulant at least as agreeableas the meagre ill-made wines of modernGreece. The leaves have been lately gathered,strung together, and hung up to dry, which operationsare chiefly performed by the women : everywall in the town is now festooned with tobaccoleaves, but particularly the open galleries whichsurround all the houses, and into which theinner chambers open. As the apartments ingeneral have hearths only, without chimneys,the smoke of the wood which is burnt uponthem circulates amidst the tobacco leaves, andgives the tobacco a peculiar flavour, which Italiansobject to, but Turks admire. The herb of Yenidjeis of the species called garden tobacco, and has asmall yellowish leaf. The territory yields in goodyears 2000 bales of 80 okes. The late harvest ofcom has been abundant, and the Bey has hisgranaries overflowing for want of a market.Yenidje is commonly known among the Turksin distant parts of the country by the name ofVardar Yenidje, to distinguish it from the KarasuYenidje, still more renowned for its tobacco, andwhich is situated about as far from the Cestus orKarasu eastward, as the Vardar Yenidje is to thewestward of the Axius\ The lofty and congopoor ia the Turkish nomencktiUE, that black luilanguage ill its geographical white mountains, and block,iJ968 MACEDONIA. [cRAP.sfMCOOUs mountain which rises behind Pella andYenidje, is named by the Bulgarians Pain, and bythe Greeks the mountain of lannitza. The ancientname I know not where to look for. On thesouthern side it is for the most part bare androcky, but on the summit and northern face itcontains forests chiefly of chestnut trees. Beyondit is the district named by the Christians Modena,and by the Turks Karadjox-aai, into which there isa direct road across the mountain from Yenidje,but the more frequented route makes a circuit ofthe western end of the mountain.Nov. 29. — Many remains of Hellenic antiquity,such as squared blocks of stone and fragments ofarchitecture, are to be seen in the streets andburying-grounds of Yenidje, which has beenbuilt and repaired with the spoils of Pella. Idquitting the town this morning for Vodhena Idiverge to the right of the direct road, for the purposeof visiting Balakastra, as the Turks callPaleokastro, a tjiftlik of Abdurrahman Bey, whichhe recommended to my notice as a place containingantiquities, and arrive there in forty minutes.Just above the ^iftlik a copious source issues fromthe foot of the mountain, turns several mills, andwhile, blue, and yellow riven or little Karasu. In Bulgarianare found in all parts of the it bears the synonym Tjema,empire. Though the Strymon but among that people theand Nettut aie so near to each epithet (little) is not necessaryother, they are both called to distinguish it, as the twoKarasu, or Black Water, and other Parasites preserve amongthe Erigon, or great western the Christians their ancientbranch of the AiAtu, has no names slightly corrupted,other name than that of KutjukXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 269waters some gardens belonging to the Farm wliicli ison its right bank. On the opposite side of the streamare many ancient wrought blocks in and arounda ruined chapel ; others are observable in differentparts of the tjiftlik, as well as at the mills near thesource ; so that there can be little doubt thatPaleokastro was an ancient site. The position isvery agreeable, being well furnished with woodand water, and commanding a prospect over anextensive level bounded by the mountain of langthe lake of Pella, and the heights near Modena.This plain is much better cultivated thanany part of that towards Saloniki, being nowalmost a continued field of nascent corn, withouta single fence.Leaving Paleokastro exactly at noon, we followa carriage-road through the plain, and pass severalsmall Turkish villages with burying-grounds, inwhich the tombstones are for the most part ancientwrought blocks or fragments of architecture. Manyof these have probably been brought from Palesor even from Pella, for the Turks often resortto a considerable distance for the stones, whichthey convert into sepulchral monuments. At 1.40we cross a large river by a bridge which derives itsname of Golden Kiupresi from a small village alittle below it on the left bank. The river flows fromthe valley of Karadjovasi, or Modena, which isseparated from the plain by a range of small hills,admitting only a narrow vale for the passage of theriver, and connecting the mountain of lannitzawith the great range which is a continuation ofW^^^lympua. A lofty summit to the northward of ^|MACEDONIA. [chap,Vodhena, called Nitje, bounds Karadjovaai on thewest, and is the highest point of the range exceptOlympus itself.Modena is a Greek bishopric, under the nameof Modena and Moleskha '. The former name,as well as Vodhena, is older than the twelfth century,as we learn from Anna Comnena. They areboth to be traced to the language of the Sclavonictribes, who occupied the Macedonian plains aboutthe ninth century, and drove the Greeks into theCfutlcidic peninsula, or into the low grounds nearthe sea, where the marshes and rivers which intersectthem offered means of resistance. To thesetwo parts of Lower Macedonia the Greeks arenow chiefly confined, and there the names of placesare of Greek form and derivation. The Turks ofKaradjovasi are supposed, for the most part, to beBulgarian apostates from Christianity.A high snowy mountain makes its appearanceto the northward of Mount Pain, which is said tobe not far &om Isti and the plains of the UpperAxius. The river of Modena is called Karadjaby the Turks, Meglesnitj by the Bulgarians, andby the Greeks Moglenitiko. The ancient name isnot certain, possibly it was Lydiass, or Lucius, forit is the tallest of the rivers which fall into thelake of Fella, and its course before it enters thelake is in the same direction in which the Harassor Mavroneri, which we know to have beenthe Lydiass, pursues its course to the sea, afteremei^ng from the lower end of the lake.CHAP. flXXVII.] MACBDOKIA. 271At 2.10 we arrive at the extremity of theplain, which is not less than fifty miles long, in adirect line from its opposite end near Saloniki.Turning a point of the heights which branchfrom Mount Nitje, and bound the valley of Modenaon the north, we enter that valley, which isabout a mile broad, and is included on the southernside by the lowest falls of Mount Turba, a summitof the Olymyene range, which rises above Nausea.Nitje is a link in the same chain, and is separatedfrom it only by the pass of Vladova behind Modena.The valley of Vodhena, at the end of fourmiles, is closed by precipices over which the riverfalls in one principal and several smaller cascades.On the edge of the cHffa stands the town of Modena.Ascending the valley we soon reach theleft bank of the river formed by the reunion ofthe torrents which fall over the cliffs ; it is asmall, but deep and rapid stream, confined byhigh banks. At 3. 15 we cross it by a bridge, andimmediately afterwards a smaller branch by anotherbridge, then enter the vineyards and mulberrygrounds which extend to the foot of the precipices ofVodhena; pass soon afterwards some foundations ofHellenic walls on the road side, and at 3.40 arriveat the cliff's. Leaving these to the right, we mountthe heights by a circuitous stony road, which inone place is cat through the rock, and enter thetown through a wall of sun-baked bricks.Vodhena, in the grandeur of its situation, in themagnificence of the surrounding objects, and theextent of the rich prospect which it commands, isnot inferior to any situation in Greece, As Horace272 MACEDONIA. [CHAR.said of Tiber and the precipitous Anno *, neitherSparta nor Larissa, although both combining sublimityand beauty of scenery in the highest degree,appear to me so striking as the rocks, cascades,and smiling valleys of Vodheni, encasedin loamy mountains which expand into an immensesemicircle, and embrace the great plainsat the head of the Thermaic Gulf. There cannotbe a doubt that this is the site of iBgse, orEdessa, the ancient capital of Macedonia, to whichit was well adapted by its lofty, salubrious, andstrong position, at the entrance of a pass whichwas the most important in the kingdom, as leadingfrom the maritime provinces into Upper Macedonia,and by another branch of the same passinto Lyncestis and Pelagonia. Such a situationwould have been ill exchanged for the marshes ofPella, had not the increasing power and civilizationof the Macedonians rendered maritime communicationof more importance to their capitalthan strength of position, while in the winterPella had the recommendation of a much milderclimate.XXyll.] MACEDONIA. 273Greek language. The bishopric is still known bythe name of Edessa as well as Godhead ' ; ecclesiasticallyit is considered subordinate, together withseveral other metropolitan and episcopal sees *, tothe archbishop of Achris, or Bulgaria, who receivedthis authority from the emperor Justinian,when he founded at Achris the town which henamed Justinianaa Prima. Hence the archbishop of'Akhridha is still in the Greek church atrroKifaXoc,and independent of the three patriarchs ; thoughthe Turkish government not acknowledging hisindependence of the Patriarch of Constantinople,and the duties and influence of the hierarchy beingalmost entirely local, his authority is little morethan nominal.Numerous ruins of churches on the skirts ofVodhena show its former importance under theGreek Empire. At present it contains 1500Turkish and 500 Greek houses, but many of theTurkish houses are let to Greeks. The bazar isextensive and well-furnished. There are five orsix mosques, and a high tower containing a clock,but the most striking building, more howeverfrom situation than magnitude or structure, idthe bishop's palace adjoining the metropolitanchurch. Standing on the edge of a projectingrock in the middle of the cliff's, it commands a'EctVoTic 'I Betray. and Kanina ; 5. Heliopolis,The other metropolitan now Striimnitza ; 6. Green.ore: 1. Latona ; 2. Pelago- The bishopric are; 1. Slsaninia, now BitoUa, in union with and Siatista ; 2. Modena andPrilUpo ; 3. Korytza and Se Moleskha : 3. Preapa and ;4.Velagrada, orBerit, bra; 4. Koch and Molua.VOL. III. T1 De H274 Macedonia. [CHAP.prospect of the plains as fkr as the Bay of Said*nisi and Mount Khordatzi, and itself finishes amost picturesque object, especially when viewedin profile, crowding the clio which overhang abeautiful concave slope terminating in the valleywhich consists of gardens, vineyards, and orchards.The chief produce of Vodhena is silk and fruit ;the yearly amount of the former varies from 2000to 4000 oLes, with a price equally variable, beingsometimes 16 and sometimes 40 piastres the oke :this year it is 17. Every market day, which inGreece is commonly on a Sunday, is attended bymen from Sarighioli, 'Ostrovo, Filtering, and othersurrounding districts, for the sale of their agriculturalproductions, or to furnish themselves withmanufactures from the baz^, or with the fruitgrown in the gardens of Vodhena, consisting ofjujubes', apricots, apples, plums, and grapes: thelatter are raised in large quantities, and are chieflyused for making a sweetmeat common in Turkey,by boiling the juice of the fruit into a thick hardsyrup, which is mixed with almonds and walnuts.XXVII.] MACEDONIA. 275gardens the plain narrows, and is occupied bymeadows and vineyards on the bank of the riveras far as the cascade, which is not large but extremelypicturesque, falling into the meadow overa rocky steep covered with bushes. The perpendicularfall is not more than 50 feet, but above itthere is a rapid descent at an angle of about 45°,more than equal in perpendicular height to theformer. Above the cataract stands the little villageof Vladova, bo named from the fall, at theentrance of a green valley which terminates at theend of two miles in a small lake, from which theriver issues. The vale is about half a mile inwidth, and is bordered by the woody summits oftwo parallel ridges which meet at a pass at thefurther end of the lake : through the opening appearsthe great snowy peak northward of Astoriacalled Vitzi. The valley leads, at the end of twohours more, to the town and lake of 'Ostrovo, nearwhich the road branches to the left into Sarighioli,and to the right by a precipitous ascent over theridges which unite Mount Vitzi with the summitson the northern side of the pass of Vlidova andwith Mount Nitje. The latter route leads into theplains and valleys watered by the tributaries of theErigon, or great western branch of the ^a^ws, calledTjema by the Bulgarians, and by the Turks theLittle Karasi'i. The pass of Vladova being the openingmade by nature for the passage of the river ofVodhena, which rises in Sarighioli and Mount Vitalisthe easiest of all the communications which leadacross the Olympene range from Lower into UpperMacedonia. The two others most remarkable aret2276 MACEDONIA. [Chap.trifle behind Niausta and Verra, both whichdescend into the plain of Sarighioli, bnt arerendered leas important than the pass of Vod-hand, as well by their difficulty and steepnessIM by their conducting into a part of the countrymore distant from the passes which lead intothe Imsin of the Erigon. Having crossed theriver near VUdova, I ream to Vodheni along therifi^ht bank, and in descending the hill of the cas-rudepass through a deep passage which has beencity through the rocks for a road, and is probablyn work of the ancient Macedonians. The rivuletsdiverted from the main stream for the sake ofwiitcrini; the gardens behind the town, are convictedthrough every street, and even throughinuny of the houses, until approaching the cliffstlioy reunite, and fall over the precipices in fourprincipal cascades, which, after watering the gardensbelow the cliffs, they again constitute thesingle stream which flows through the lower valleyto the Moglenitiko. The largest &tl of water overthe cliffs is towards the northern end of the hill,Xxviii MACEDONIA. 277piece of wall which supports one of the modernhouses on the edge of the cliff; hut there aremany scattered remains in the town, and amongthem some inscriptions of the time of the Romanempire. A stele, surmounted by a pediment,which has been placed over the gate of theBishop's palace, preserves a catalogue of youngmen who had passed through their ephesian underan ephebarch named Lysimachus, son of AbydosIt is curious for two particulars : 1. Someof the ephebi are distinguished by the mother'sname without any mention of the father's, as,AXi^avSpoc K^i' EioiiXioc 01 Mn/^KiaCi "E'l'TEpoc ^e/'eXtic,EIouXiocKoXXicrrrn:. I have already given an exampleof this Macedonian custom from the Vardar gateofSaloniki. 2. The inscription has the date 328,which, calculated from the capture of Corinth, isthe year a. d. 182, in the reign of Commodus, butfrom the battle of Actium, is a. d. 298, in thereign of Diocletian'. The latter epoch is to bepreferred, not so much from the style of the monumentas from the certainty afforded by a coinof the emperor Philip bearing the date 275, andwhich was struck probably at Berrhoea, that thelatter epoch was then employed in Macedonia.In the metropolitan church are two fragments,which appear to have belonged to one and the sameinscription. The epsilon and sigma are of a singularform ^ ^J> ^"* **f which there are otherv. Inscription, No. 138. changed its name to Diocesneighbouring Pella seems tianopolis. — Cf. Anton. It. pp.to have been indebted to Dio 319. 330. Hieroaol. It. p. 006.clean's passion for building, Hierocl. p. 638. W.I Ibr a short time Ui have ' V. inscription, No.276 MACEDoniA. [chap.examples in Macedonia. A Quidmight be ascribed to a late period of the 'empire, from the angular form of the omicron andtheta, thus, ^ ^ ; but this also may have beena Macedonian peculiarity, for the companionshows no decline of taste among the Edesseei, hangan elegant epitaph in three elegiac couplets in memoryof one Graphical, whose wife survived him *.7'Iiti poor in saying that " God had placed thedivine soul of Graphical in the plain of theliicMied," may be thought, perhaps, to have writtenin Christian times, but the words are not incogwith the Platonic doctrines. The epitaphis inscribed on a sarcophagus standing at a fountain(now dry) which is called by the Turks thefountain of the Mirror, because one of the lacusof a Corinthian ceiling has been placed overit, with the stone set on its edge over the pipe.The sculpture thus placed the Turks have likenedto a mirror.A\y Pashi was not slow in discovering theadvantages of the position of Vodhena, and havingintroduced himself into it ten years ago zts Per-XXVII.] MACEDONIA. 279under the influence of Al", who maintains here aguard of Albanians.The military importance of Edessa was stillgreater under the Romans, in consequence of itslying in the great road from Dyrrhachinm toThessalonica, the establishment of which was oneof their first cares after the conquest of Macedonia'. Although this road was furnished throughits whole extent of 267 miles with milestones,and the distances of the several stations aregiven in all the three itineraries, the Antoine,Jerusalem, and Tabular, and some parts of ittwice over in the first', there are not manypoints on the road which can be accurately fixeduntil the whole shall be submitted to a carefulexamination, so as to ascertain some of the ancientsites. Nor until then can any safe criticism beexercised upon the itineraries themselves, whichas usual differ from one another in many of thedistances. A few remarks on this important routemay nevertheless be acceptable to future travellers.In proceeding westward from the pass of Modena,the road crossed two great valleys and three^ remarkable ridges before it arrived at Clodiana,from which there was a bifurcation to Pyrrhaand Apollonia. From the Tabular Itinerarywe lean that at 19 m.p., beyond Lychnidus,the road crossed a bridge named Pons Servile,which could have been no other than a bridgeover the Drin, anciently Drill, at its issue fromthe lake Lychnitis. We thus obtain the pointlA A^^^1 ' Polyb. &p. Strabo, p. 322. ^H^^^^ * Vet RomtU). Itiner. Wcssct, p. »t7. 339. thos. ^^H280 MACEDONIA. [CHAP;from whence the road crossed Mount Candia toClodiana, which appears to have been situated onthe Genius, for the name Clodiana is probably derivedfrom Pius Claudius, whose camp was uponthat river when he was employed against Genius,at the same time that the Consul ^milius wascarrying the war against Perseus in Macedonia,in the year b.c. 168 '. And hence it b.comes evidentthat the Genius was the river now calledSkumbi, or Tjerma, consequently that the mountainwhich lies between the sources of that riverand the northern end of the lake Lychnitis wasthe proper Ckindama. It is the same mountainof which I observed the bearing from Korytza tobe N. 23 W. by compass. Although the distancefA Clodiana from Apollonia is no less than 8 h. p.greater in the Jerusalem than in the Tabular,Itinerary, yet as both these authorities place theApsus about midway, we have thus, an approximationwhich may assist in ascertaining the exact siteof Clodiana '. Skumbi is obviously a corruption ofKempis, a name found in all the Itineraries atXXVII.] MACBDOWtA. 281As there was a distance of about 17 m. p. fromthe bridge of Servility to Lychnidus, this chiefcity of the Dassaretii was near the southern extremityof the lake, on the eastern shore, wherethe road, after having been diverted by the laketo the northward of its general direction, recoveredthat line by following the eastern shore from thebridge of Servility to Lychnidus. From thence itcrossed the mountains which rise from the easternside of the lake into the plains watered by theErigon and its branches. These mountains, whichhave a north and south direction, are divided intotwo parallel ridges by a longitudinal valley, whereare situated Peuple and Prespa, and, if 1 amrightly informed, three lakes, of which the southern,called that of Ventre, sends forth, as 1 havebefore observed, the river which flows throughthe pass of Tzangon, and forms the principal, orat least the longest branch of the Apsus, andwhich I suppose to be the Eordaicus of Arrian '.The disagreement of numbers in the severalItineraries renders it difficult to deduce from themthe exact position of any of the places on theroad between Lychnidus and Edessa ; the onlyone of any importance was Heracleia, the chieftown of the province of Upper Macedonia, calledLyncus, or Lyncestis. Heracleia was distant fromLychnidus about 46 m. p., from Edessa 64, — totalfrom Lychnidus to Edessa 110; which, comparedwith the 56 o. m. of direct distance on the map,gives a rate of 2 m. p. to the horizontal o. m., notArrian. Exp. Alex. 1. 1,383 Macedonia. [chap.an unreasonable rate in itself, as the road m ingreat part mountainous, nor as compared with therate on the level road from Edessa to Thessalonians,which is 1.4 hap. to the o. m. Accordingto the proportional distances, Heradaa stood not&r from the modem town of Filurina, at about 10o. H. direct to the southward of Italia, which isnow the principal town in that part of the country,and occupies the site of the ancient Pelagonia, thusagreeing in reference to the supposed position ofHeracleia of Lyncestis, inasmuch as the ancientauthorities show that the Lancets were situatedto the southward of the Pelagones, and betweenthem and the Eordeei, who appear to have occupiedthe country of 'Ostrovo and Sarighioli. ButI shall have occasion to revert to the geography ofLyncestis, in reference to the military operations atthe beginning of the contest between Philip, sonof Demetrius, and the Romans.Neo. 1. — Among the vineyards at the foot ofthe precipices of Vodhena are many fragments andfoundations of ancient buildings, together with re-XXVII.] BACBDOMA. 283conquest, the lower town may have gradually beenabandoned, and the upper, which was ancientlythe acropolis, and probably the royal residence,may have become the part principally inhabited,aa indeed the inscriptions, being all of that date,tend to show. At 10 we leave the point where wecrossed the two bridges iu approaching the town,and following the foot of the heights on the southeyside of the valley, arrive at 10.30 at a projectingpoint where a copious source of waterissues from under the hill ; then pass along theplain at a short distance from the foot of themountain, and at 11,25 join the direct road fromVodhena to Niausta, which descends from thesouthern extremity of the former town into a smallcircular plain lying at the foot of the hill on thatside, and then crosses over the heights of MountTala, which enclose that plain to the southward.At 12.5 we halt, till 12.34, to dine at a brook.,and then after having crossed a small streamwhich descends to the lake of lannitza from themountain on the right, arrive in sight of the singulartopography of Niausta, to which we soonbegin to ascend, and arrive in the town at 1.45.At the upper end of a deep rocky glen, betweentwo of the highest summits of the mountain, threetabular elevations rising one above the other,look from the plain like enormous steps ; theypresent a front of cliffs not so high as those ofVodhena, but which terminate laterally also incliffs separated on each side by ravines fromthe great heights of the mountain. Niausta occupiesthe middle and widest terrace, and, likeVodhena, is watered by numerous branches of ai284 Macedonia. [CHAP.Stream which, flowing from a ravine behind theupper tabular summit, passes through the middleof the town in a deep rocky bed, over which thereis a bridge. As at Modena derivations from thisstream pass through every house in the town, and&1I over the cliffs', after which they turn somemills, and are again united into one river in thelow grounds.Niausta is a Greek town, the Bulgarians nothaving obtained possession of the OlyvgxTie rangeto the southward of Vodhen4. The name is properlyUtaymiaru, perhaps a corruption of filia AveAlthough now in the power of Alp' Pasha,it is still governed by its own magistrates, whoseauthority, the place being an imperial appanage,and the inhabitants well armed, has been generallyrespected by all the neighbouring Pashasand other men in authority, including the robbers,though Niausta has occasionally been at war withthem all. By an effect of the republican systemof the place, I am detained two hours in anempty house, while the powers are consulting asXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 285Greece, and like Verria, Satiate, and Astoria,had merchants who traded to Christendom as wellas Turkey, but not one of whom now remainshere. Papafilippo, who is spoken of in terms ofhigh respect by his own adherents as a benefactorof his native town, was poisoned with severalothers, about 20 years ago, by the adverse party,at the head of which was one Zafiraki, son ofTheodosius, who afterwards became priests. andenjoyed all the authority until last year, whenthe party of Papafilippo, by applying to Al"Pasha, gave him the long-desired excuse for introducinghis myrmidons into the town. But hemet with a stout resistance from Zafiraki and hisbrother Constantine Musa assisted by a party ofAlbanians, under two Albanian brothers Vrakhoand Litjo, Those whom the Pasha first senthaving been fired upon from an inclosure ofmud bricks, which is the only artificial defenceof the place, he found it necessary to increasetheir numbers to 2000, who quickly destroyedevery thing on the outside of the town, but nothaving cannon, could not ruin the fortifications,slight as they are. They proceeded thereforein the manner of an ancient iroXiopKia, buildingtowers on a level with the walls, from whichthey could fire into the town. Their loss wasvery great, according to the people of Niausta,of whom about fifty were slain. At lengththe besieged, after having lived for some timeupon wild herbs, branches of trees, and breadmade of the refuse of their rice mills, were obligedto surrender, but nut until the four chiefs above366 HACBDOItlA. [chap.mentioned had fonghi their way one night throughthe beei^rs with 50 palikiria, and had arriveduse at Saloniki, where I eaw them, and whenthey still remain. All the persons found in Zafi-raki's house have been carried to' lodnnina, wherethey are now in prison, and the house is occupiedby the Albanian commandant, and by a StimuliBostanji residing here as agent of the Sultana,who enjoys the revenue of the town and its district.In one year Al' has exacted 500 pursesfrom the people, and no longer apprehending anyresistance, has reduced his Albanian guard to 20,which, united with those stationed at Verria andGodhead, are sufficient both to maintain his interestsand to protect the passes against the robbers,to whom he has been indebted for his justificationwith the Porte for introducing his troopshere. These clefts during the last summerblockaded Verria as well as Niausta, and advancingto the walls of the latter, carried away children,cattle, and sheep. At length A\y sent histrusty Tepeleniote Mu^ob6n, or MfrHo^irovac, asXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 287it is almost impossible to eradicate the thievesfrom them. Not long since, Sulu took a hoy ofNiausta going to Verria, who was to have beenransomed by the village for 16 purses, when, twodays before the money was to be paid, the boyescaped, and arrived here a day or two ago.The principal church, dedicated to St. George,has a monastery attached to it, and is surroundedby a quadrangle of cells or small apartments forthe monks, which they generally let to strangers.The people of Niausta were formerly noted forworking in gold and silver, and still carry on themanufacture in a smaller degree. The productionsof the territory are wheat, barley and maize in theplain ; rice in the immediate neighbourhood of themarshes adjacent to the lake of lannltza ; onthe heights vines, supplying one of the best winesin Macedonia, in sufficient quantity for a largeexportation, and in the valley mulberry plantations,which yield about 300 okes of silk per annum.The town is well supplied with fish, particularlywith large pike from the lake of lannitza, and withtrout from their own river, the principal source ofwhich is at a short distance above the town. Manypersons suppose it to be the discharge of a in the lake of 'Akridha, but can give nobetter reason for this opinion, than that the lakeis the only one in Macedonia which producestrout. The sheep which feed on the mountainsbehind the town, furnish a fine wool, and muttonof the best quality.Niausta, as might be expected from its natural268 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.advantages, stands on the site of an ancient city,of this the coins Trhich are found in the fieldsbelow the hill, and some vestiges of ancientbuildings in the same situation, leave no doul^But these are the only remains I can discover,except a Doric shaft, of a soft kind of stone, inthe gallery of the church of St. George, and atoneof the fountains in the town a sepulchralmarble, with figures in low relief. The nativessuppose that the Macedonian city stood higher inthe mountain ; it occupied, perhaps, all the threeterraces, the upper having been the citadel. I aminclined to think that Citium was the ancientname. Livy states that in the plain before CitiumPerseus reviewed his army before he marched intoThessaly, when after a peace of twenty-three years,he began that celebrated war with Rome, which infour campaigns put an end to the Macedoniankingdom '. That Citium was between Pella andLiv, 1. 42, c. 51. The peloponnesian wars ; though it isarmor reviewed at Citium, which in hannover with a last men-amountedto 89,000 foot and toned by Xenophon (1. 5, c. 2,)4000 horse, was collected, with that Olynthus, with onU- 800Xxvi.] Macedonia. y89Berrhcea, may be inferred from the king havingsacrificed to Minerva Accidents at Pella, justbefore he joined his army at Citium, and from hishaving marched from thence in one day to the lakeBegorrites in Eord^a, and on the succeeding dayinto Elimeia, where he encamped on the bank ofthe Harmon, and thence proceeded to cross theCambrian mountains into Perrhsebia. Hencealso we may infer that the lake Begorrites was theKitrini of SarighioU, for the lake of 'Ostrovo wouldnot have been in the direction from Delta to theMatiacmon, unless Citium had been at Vodhena,nor could the king have marched in one day fromthat lake to the Harmon.In the epitome of the 7th book of Strabo, it isstated that the lake of Pella is formed by a certainawoairaafia, or Stream diverging from the Axius ',which can only be reconciled with the reality, bysupposing the sources of Leila and Paieokastro tobe derived from the Axuts through the mountain.But this would be so unusual a phenomenon, thatit cannot even be considered probable, until aderivation from the Axius is found flowinginto the opposite side of the mountain ; nor if itwere true, would the quantity of water be anytiling approaching to a sufficiency for the lakeof Pella, which is evidently fed, not only by thesprings of Pella and Paieokastro, but also bythe Moglenitiko. the rivers of Vodhena and Nonrii* DiXXoi- olaar3c i Antoine wora/ios ^ii* reffiiKfiiv trpSrtpoy, ^iXittoc litit Xlfiyrtv irXijpoi row 'A^iov r«;j^wi tfvtiiiri rpa^(<c if afcrg'iruntfiou ineioxaaiia, — Strabo,iii hi Xifyiiy vpo ntrSc, H(Epic 1. 7), p. 330.VOL. III.U290 MACEDONIA. ' [Chap.justa, and many smaller torrents, assisted perhapsby some subterraneous springs ; the ezcesB of allthese over the water carried off by the IaiSos,is the cause of this extensive tract of lakes andmarshes.Dec. 2. — Setting out from Niagara for Verria at12.30, we descend the hills obliquely, and havingreached the plain follow its margin, pass two smallvillages beautifully situated among the rich slopesof the mountain, while to the left is the plain,equally well cultivated, and extending to themarshes of the Pelican lake. At 3, turning a projectingpoint of the mountain, we arrive in sightof Verria, and at 3.30 cross a deep rivulet, whichissues from a goi^e in the mountain to the right.Here are some foundations of an ancient bridge,- consisting of loose materials cemented with mortar,but faced with lai^e quadrangular stones, accuratelylaid in the best Hellenic style. An ascent fromthence of ten minutes conducts to the modem gateof Verria, after passing through turkish cemetery,which contains many fragments of ancient architecture,and a little beyond it a large piece of the wallXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 291corn and maize in the lower plain, and at the footof the mountain hemp and fix, which are suppliedwith the necessary irrigation from the rivulet onthe northern aide of the town. This stream, whichhas its origin in the mountains to the westward,emerges from a rocky gorge in them, falls in cascadesover some heights which rise abruptly abovethe town, and after turning several mills, rushesdown the mountain between steep rocky banks tothe bridge, over which we crossed it, and fromthence into the plain.The town contains about 2000 families, of which1200 are Greek : the houses arc lofty, and forTurkey well built. Water flows through everystreet, supplied either from springs or from therivulet ; which advantage, together with the loftyand salubrious situation, the surrounding gardens,many fine plane-trees interspersed among thehouses, the vicinity of the mountains, and a commandingview over the great level to the eastward,renders Verria one of the most agreeable towns inRumili. The manufacturing part of the populationspin the hemp and flax grown at the foot ofthe mountain, and make shirts and towels, particularlythe makrama, or large towel used in thepublic baths, and of which titre is a great consumptionin all Turkish towns, four of them beingrequired for each bather, besides two more forsheets to the bed on which he reposes after thebath. Many of the water-mills around the townare for fulling coarse woollens and carpets, whichare made in the surrounding villages or by theJews of Saloniki.i; 2A292 MACEDONIA. [CIUP.The remains of the ancient Berriicea are veryinconsiderable. I have already noticed that whichappears to be the north-western angle of the wallsor perhaps of the acropolis ; these walls are traceablefrom that point southward to two high towers towardsthe upper part of the modem town, whichappear to have been repaired or rebuilt in Roman orByzantine times, as the lai^e quadrangular stonesof which the work is partly constructed are mixedwith mortar, tiles, and fragments of ancient monuments.I can discover only three inscriptions atVerra ' : in one, Popillius Summum the younger ishonoured by the council and people ; the other twoare sepulchral monuments, one of which was erectedby Anna Epitome, in memory of her son Flavian,and her grandfather, who is not named ; the otherby Pome, son of Ammia, to Caius Sirius Aga-boles,his son, and Scientia Zosime, his wife, whoare styled heroes of virtuous life '. In this inscriptionwe have another instance of the Macedoniancustom of recording in some cases the mother'sname instead of the father's; and it is remarkablethat one of the Politarchons of Thessalonica wasXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 293from ^liao that there was a river called Atreus ',flowing between Thessalonica and Berrhcea, whichalthough not a very correct description of the ,inasmuch as this river is not crossed on theroad from Saloniki to Verria, would be still less suitableto the Moglenitiko, or to the river of Vodhena,as lying so far to the right of that line, or indeedto any but the two great streams which we knowto have been anciently named Axius and Lydiass.Perhaps Haliacmon was the ordinary appellationof the river above the gorges of Berrhcea, and below them : in the same manner as Injekaraand Vistritza are used in the present day. Therivet is noted at Verria for julian of immense size.I before remarked that the same fish grows toenormous dimensions in the lake at Kastoria, whichja one of the sources of the Vistritza.The district of Verria contains about 300 villages,extending eastward nearly to the Lydiass, orKarasmak, and to the west to Sarighiul. To thesouth the village of Kulindros, standing on theheights which terminate the plains at their southernextremity, not far from the gulf, formerly belongedto Verria, but is now enumerated among the villagesof Elassona. The voivoda of Verria is HallBey of Grevena, who lived here many years askharatji, or farmer of the Christian capitation tax,and upon the death of Osman Aga, a short timeago, obtained the government, having first secured^iian. Hist. Anitn. 1. 15, from thec. 1. Aftneua was probably and perhapsMl old Macedonic word derived294 Macedonia. [CHAP*the approbation of Aiy Pashi, whose influence hthat established in Verria. Though the Veiriotosuspect Al' to have been sometimes instrumentalto their having been annoyed by the thieves iaorder to make the necessity of his own servicesmanifest to the Porte, they are so &r satisfied withthe result as to agree in commendation of thepolice of Metjobon, and to admit that all this partof Macedonia now enjoys great security ; nor hasAly yet ventured to lay any heavy contributionson a place which is at the farthest extremity of thecountry under his influence, and the revenues ofwhich are attached to the imperial family. Hisencroachments in this quarter have, however,created a panic, and there are now several largehouses in the town of which the building has suddenlybeen suspended.Dec. 3. — In the afternoon I receive a visit fromMetjobon, who here assumes the Turkish name ofMehmet Bey : be is a little spare man, of simpleAlbanian manners and mild address, and is saidto be gifted with a remarkable share of promptitude,coolness, and sagacity. He showed greatXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 295extraordinary celerity of some of the pezodhromi, orfoot-messenger in Greece. A celebrated one ofVerria may compete with any of them. He carriedletters on foot to Saloniki in seven hours, re-maimed there one hour, and returned to Verria atthe end of the fifteenth hour. After having performedthis feat more than (ice, he was commonlyknown to the day of his death by the name of'Anemos, an adjunct as honourable to a courier asAfricans to a Scipio.Dec. 4, — The weather, which has been fine,with a northerly wind, ever since the day of myarrival at Salontki, as well as on the road fromthence, is said to have been the reverse at Verriafor several days, and last night the rain fell heavily.At 6.30, Turkish time, 1 set out for Romani,accompanied by one of Aly Pasha's tatars, a guardof six Albanians supplied by Metjobon, and MushPasha's tatar, who has accompanied me from SalonWe begin immediately to ascend the hillsat the back of the town, and soon enter a narrowvale watered by the stream which descends to thetown. At the upper end of this valley, at 8.4,stands the derveni, a straw hut for lodging theAlbanian guard, from whence we begin to ascendMount Ennius, in defiance of the assertion ofHerodotus, that it is impassable ', and although thehistorian has every possible advantage in theseason, and weather, that of last night having Toil Bfpp'ow Ofiovt- — Tov iiTTO \ii(i-Lrot- — Hercxlot.Strabo, p. 330. 1. 8, c. 138.296 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.vere the mountain with snow to a great depth.Very Boon after entering a forest of large chestnuttrees, we arrive, at 9.40, at Kastani4, a small village,of which all the houses, except two or three,are now deserted, in consequence of the demandsfor provisions, which were alternately made uponthem hy the robbers and their Albanian opponents.Aiy Pasha endeavours to encourage their return,and declares his intention of building here a laivillage, with rules on the mountain for his soldiers,and thus to secure to himself this importantpass between Lower and Upper Macedonia. Themountain abounds with wolves', wild boars', fallowdeer ', and roes *. The swine are killed forthe sake of their skin, which are in request formaking shoes'. A peasant informs me that notlong since he shot one of these animals in thewoods, which weighed 90 okes. The flesh of theroe is esteemed by these people, but not that ofthe deer.Dec. 5. — We leave Catania at 3.5, Turkishtime. The snow continued to fall during thenight, but the weather has now become bright andXXVII.] MACEDONIA. 297tain now called Dhoxa, or more commonly XeroU-vadho, from a village of that name which oncestood near it, six or eight miles on our right, anddescend to Khadova, a village of about 50 Turkish ■families, from whence there is a further descent ofahont three miles to the Vistritza, which is seenfrom our road. There is no passage to the samepoint from Verria along the river, as both banksare here bordered by impracticable precipices.Above those on the right hank are the villages ofKokova, Kataf^ghi, and some others, from whichthe mountain rises to a lofty summit, one of theOli/mpene chain, and separated only from Olympiaitself by the elevated pass of Petra. To the northwestwardof the mountains the Vistritza is againseen flowing in a valley which extends to Servia.Katafjghi is on the shortest route from Verria toServia, which crosses the Vistritza near Verria, hutinsome parts is so difficult that the pass of cataniais often preferred. Having passed Khivaat 5.10, we descend from thence along a narrowvalley, which at the end of an hour conducts intothe plain of Budja. To the left this plain isseparated from those of Tjersemba and Servia onthe banks of the Injekara, by a low root of MountBermiiim, which is connected at the other end ofthe plain of Budja with the mountain of Romani,which is a branch of Mount Burino. The highestand middle point of these lower heights is calledby the Turks Ghioztepe, a name analogous to theGreek Skopo, and meaning a point which commandsan extensive view. The plain of Budjawidens as we advance, and contains many smalliinall ^MMAC£D0H1A. [CHAP.Yur<ik villages, situated at the foot of the moaa-taiiiii on either side.To our right a root of Mount Dhoxa, advancingto the westward, leaves only a space of two milesbetween it and a similar projection of the mountainof Sialista ; but beyond the opening the levelagain widens into the more extensive plain ofSarighiul. A little on this side of the openingstands the small Turkish town of Djuma, whichcontains a bazar, and is the market town of a districtof small Turkish villages. The plains of'Ostrovo, Sarighiul, Djuma, and Budja, seem,with the enclosing mountains, to have formed tfaeancient Eordsea. At 6.50 we halt to dine at arising ground in the plain, spreading carpets andcapons on the snow, which still ties here thoughthe son is now hot; then proceeding at 7.35,leave soon afterwards Djuma two or three miles onthe right, and at length arrive in the lowest part ofthe plain, in which there is no longer any snow.The plain is fertile, and well cultivated with com.The entrance of the Boghaz of Siatista appears ata distance of seven or eight miles on the right.At 9.20, having arrived at the end of the plain ofDjuma, and passed a little to the right of severalsmall Turkish villages situated at the foot of thehills of Ghioztepe, we turn to the left of our formercourse, through a narrow passage betweenthe Ghioztepe range and some other small hillsconnected with the mountains near Kozani. Atthe entrance of the opening stands a khan anda small Turkish village called Linaria : half anhour further begins an undulated country, whichXxvii.] MACEDONIA. '299extends on the right to Kuzani, and the mountainsbehind it, and descends to the left to the Vistritza ;at 10.30 we arrive at Kozani, vulgarly pronouncedKodjani. This is a town of sis orseven hundred houses, with a good bazar and amarket on Saturday for the neighbouring country: formerly it had a considerable commercewith Hungary and Germany, and several opulentmerchants resided here. My lodging, whichbelonged to one of them, is constructed like thehouses at Siatista, with thick walls, and apartments,which, though smaller, are more commodiousthan those in ordinary Greek and Turkish houses.There is a cellar below the house for the wine,which is here made from an extensive tract ofvineyards surrounding the town. The greaterpart of the Kozanite merchants, whom Turkishoppression, particularly that of Aly Pashi, hasdriven from hence, have settled in Hungary.Dec. 6.- — The market this morning is muchfrequented by both Turks and Greeks from theneighbouring country. Kuzani and Servia formone episcopal diocese in the province of Thessalonica; the bishop has a house in both places,and is now at Servia, but his ordinary residence isKozani. At the foot of thesteps of his house, is asquare stone of the annexedform, which serves thebishop for a mounting-blockwhen he rides out.It is an iwiTVfi^ioc arii\ji, erected in honour of oneCleopatra, by her husband Crispus, in union with1^800 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.his daughter Crispin ' : a square excavation io theupper surface may perhaps have supported a vaseof stone. On two opposite sides of the stele, is arepetition of words, intended probably for an Iambicverse, and signifyingFarewell ye heroes : and fare thee well alsotraveller, and good journey to thee."The plural form of ^piittg appears to indicate thatthese two inscriptions were added after the deathof Crispus and Crispin, and when they had beenburied in the same sepulchre with Cleopatra. Theenigma is rectangular, and there are several siglaeor conjoined letters, a mode of engraving whichseems to have been more common in Macedoniathan in the southern provinces of Greece,but was probably seldom or ever employed evenhere, before the end of the first century of theRoman Empire, to which date the inscription maywith probability be attributed. The monumenthaving been discovered in one of the corn-fieldsabove the village, where several small sepulchralmarbles, with figures in relief, or other remains ofantiquity, have also been brought to light, it isevident that Kozani occupies the position of anancient town, though I search in vain for any otherindications of it, such as town walls, or remains ofarchitecture. Kozani is the native place of Dr.Kpiinrtlyac, iuy tt, K\c6- ivinty.Vide Inscription, Nu. 144.XXVII.] MACEDONIA. 301George Sakellario, translator of a part of theVoyage D'Anacharsis and some other works, whichhe undertook for the benefit of his countrymen.The comfortable residence in which I find hisfamily, shews the sacrifice he makes, or hither isforced to make, in residing at Berat as physicianto Ibrahim Pasha. His brother-in-law. Papa Khanwho is now residing at K6zani, is an authoralso, and has written a Pantheon for the use of theschools of Greece.CHAPTER XXVIII.MACEDONIA, PERRH-BBIA,l^enemba — Geography of Upper Macedonia — Elimeia, Eordtea,Orestis, Lyneesim, Livonia, Pelagian — Campaign of Sulpiciuiagainst Philip — Tripiditis of Patagonia— Slymbara — PelhamDa$taretia — Antipatria, &c. — Servia, I'o/iM/ano,— LivadhiPass of VaXtn—TiipoUtit of Perrhcehia—Pythium, Jiorvt.Z)o/icAe— Ela^aona, Olooison — Mount Tiara, River Tilare-iriui — Mount Olympus — Tzaritzena — Pass of Meluna —Tumavo.The plain or rather low undulated country includedbetween the Vistritza, the mountain ofKozani, Mount Burino and Ghioztepc, is calledTjersemba, a Turkish word, written by the GreeksTttpofHTOQ, Its inhabitants are chiefly Turks, occupyingsmall villages. The soil produces goodcom, but it is more particularly noted for saffron ',which is sent by land to Germany, by the merchantsof Kozani and Tzaritzena. When the trade ofEgypt was closed by the consequences of the Frenchinvasion, the saffron of this country was worth 80piastres the oke, but it has now fallen to 50 and 40.The only other district which produces it, is thatof Venja, on the opposite side of Mount Burino,InlAP. XXVIII,] MACEDONIA. 303and lying between TjerBembi and Grevena. Thename Burino appears to belong, like Vistritza, tothe ancient language of Macedonia, and may havebeen derived from the same root as Bora ', Ber-miss,Bertiscus.Beyond Burino to the southward, is seen a ridgeof nearly equal height, which takes a southerlydirection towards Trikkala, and separates thewaters of the Maliacmon from those of the Peneus.They are the mountains anciently called Cambunii,a word of which ^ouvoc is obviously the root. Theyform a continuation of the heights above Katafighi,and at their foot, a few degrees to the right of thesummit of Oli/mptcs, is seen the town of Servia,called Selfidje by the Turks, a name which theyattach also to the entire district stretching alongthe right bank of the Injekara, opposite to Tjer-semba. In Tjersemba there are said to be remainsof antiquity in four places, but in none of themare they described as being formed of that beautifulmasonry which is so distinguishing a mark ofHellenic works. This the Kozanitea ' very justlyaccount for, by the nature of the stone of the auroraseems to be nothing *£pt)-/«ij and *iX(iiroc weremore than a modification of /laXavpo;, BtponVfj, B/Xuriroe.Spot preceded by /i, which the Beirhcea seems in like mannerMacedonians employed instead to have been the same as ^tpai,of the digamma or initial asia name common in other partsrate customary in other dialects, of Greece, and Bees anderson,In Macedonic, according to the same as Spheres and Heron.Plutarch, (Qu. Graeca.) and Step Koiav(ra,{.lua (in apoia) fUXcupoc,m304 HACEZWKIA. [chap.rounding mountains, which being brittle and incapableof being hewn into large blocks, apparentlyobliged the inhabitants of this part of Upper Macedonia,who moreover were semi-barbarous beforethe time of Philip sonofAmyntas, to build in a mannerdifferent from that of the Southern Greeks. Thefour ruins are : 1. At Ktinia, on the side of MountBurino, where a height is crowned by a castlehaving a double inclosure, and thin walls. 2. AtKaliani, a small Greek village, three hours from K6-siam, near the left bank of the Injekara, a little onthis side of a boghaz leading from the valley ofTjersemba into that of Venja. Here are the remainsof a building, of which my informant gaveme a rude drawing. It was constructed with adouble row of arches, of which the larger weresupported by white marble columns, with Corinthiancapitals, in bad taste. The building is inrains on three sides, but the fourth still preservesthe place where the statue is supposed to havestood. The arches have been walled to form itinto a Greek church. The neighbouring fields aresaid to be strewed with broken pottery ; coins alsoare often found, and sometimes small idols. 3. AtKesaria, about half way between Kozani and Servia,half an hour to the right of the direct road, aresimilar appearances, with fragments of marble andsepulchral monuments ; and there are remains ofthe same kind also between Kesaria and Kaliani.So deficient are the ancient details of Macedoniangeography, that no opinion can be givenof these places, further than that one of themXXVIII.] MACEDONIA. 305bore the common name of KaiaapU, and that theywere all subordinate towns of the EUnteiay for thatElimeia extended thus far to the eastward, andhere bordered upon Geordie and Pieria, Beginsevident from Livy, in a passage already referredto, where he relates that Perseus marched fromCitium to the lake Begorrites in Eorda-a, fromthence to the Haliacmon in Elimeia, and on thefollowing day into Perrhaibia, which lies immediatelyto the southward of Tjersemba on thewestern side of Mount Olympus, whence it isevident that the encampment of Perseus, previouslyto his entering Perrhaebia, was exactlyou this part of the river. As it is equallymanifest from other authorities that Elimeia extendedwestward to the range of Pindus, it maybedefined as comprehending the modern districtsof Greveua, Venja and Tjersemba. Of the threeother subdivisions of Upper Macedonia, namely,Eordcea, Orestis and Lyncest'is, Eordtea comprehendedprobably, as I have before remarked, themodem districts of Budja, Sarighlul and 'Ostrovo —Orestisthose of Gramista, Anaselitza and Kastoria —and Lyncestis, Filurina and all the southern part ofthe basin of the Erigon. These seem to have beenall the districts which properly belonged to UpperMacedonia, the country to the northward, as faras illyria westward, and Thrace eastward, constitutingPaeonia, a part of which (probably, on theUpper Axius) was a separate kingdom as late asthe reign of Cassander ', but which in its widestDiodor. I. 20. c. 19.«306 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.sense enveloped on the north and northeast bothUpper and Lower Macedonia, the latter containingthe maritime and central provinces, which werethe earliest acquisition of the kings, namely, Pieria,Bottieeis, Emathia, and Mygdonia. Even a partof these was occupied by Pteonians before theestablishment of the Macedonian monarchy.Peeonia extended to the Dentheletee and Mmof Thrace and to the Dardan, Penestte andDassaretii of illyria, comprehending the Nationstribes who occupied the upper valleys of the Erigon,Axius, Strymon, and Angitas, as far southward asSirrhffi inclusive. Its principal tribes to the eastwardwere the Odomanti, street and Agrianes,parts of whose country were known by the names ofParstrymonia and Paroreia, the former containingprobably the valleys of the Upper Strymon and ofits great tributary ^e river of Strumitza (.^IstrteuB f)the latter the adjacent mountains. On the westernfrontier of Peeonia, its subdivisions bordering onthe part of illyria inhabited by the Penestee andDassaretii were Deuriopus and Pelagonia, whichXxvi.] MACEDONIA. 307to Patagonia, and as Bryatiiiim, placed ley Strahoin Deuriopus, was near the passes leading intoEordsea, and consequently in Lyncestis, it is evidentthat no exact definition of these districts prevailed,at least among the ancient writers whose workshave reached us. Lyncestis, although originallya part of Pecunia, having become a separate kingdom,which was annexed to Macedonia as early asthe reign of Philip, son of Amyntas, may, withreference to a later period, be ascribed to UpperMacedonia ; at the same time that all beyond it,to the sources of the Erigon, was still a portion ofPawnia, the whole of which, however, was unitedto regal Macedonic before the Macedonic wars ofRome.There is no occurrence in ancient history whichbetter illustrates the ancient geography of thatpart of the country than the operations of theconsul Sulpicius against Philip, in the campaignof the year b.c. 200 '. Philip, who flattered himselfthat he should be able to deprive the Romansof the assistance of the ^tolians and Dardan, hadfor the purpose of preventing the entrance of thelatter people into Macedonia, stationed his son Perseusin the passes of Pelagonia, when the consulhaving marched from Apologia of Illyria throughDassaretia into LjTicestis, there encamped on thebanks of the Bevis, and from thence sent foragingparties into Dassaretia, where the corn of the opencountry had already enabled him, on passingthrough that district, to save the supplies whichlie brought with him from his winter quarters.Liv. I. 31. C 13, ctse-].X 2Lors. ^m308 MACBDOKIA. [chap.One of his parties having suddenly Coco an tereda body of Philip's cavalry who were in quest ofinformation, an action eosned, with a lose neaHvequal on both sides. Upon learning the force andposition of the enemy, Philip found it prudent torecal Perseus from Uie passes of Pecunia, andhaving thus brought together 20,000 men, heoccupied a height distant only 200 paces from theRoman camp, and which he fortified with a ditchand rampart. On the third ensuing day, theconsul having drawn forth his line at a distanceof 500 paces from the enemy, Philip ordered oat700 of his cavalry, attended by the same numberof light infantry ; these the enemy met with anequal body of horse and foot, and obtained anadvantage, the Greeks having shown themselves,in both kinds of force, inferior in firmness to theRomans, and the velites of the latter being muchbetter armed than the Illyrian and Cretan whoaccompanied the Macedonian cavalry.Two days afterwards, Philip equally failed indrawing the enemy into an ambuscade of peltastse,whom he had stationed during the iXXVlir.] MACEDONIA. 309inactive in their respective positions until theRoman foragers had become negligent of theirsecurity, when the king advancing suddenly withallhis cavalry, and sore Cretan infantry, cut off theRoman foragers from their camp, and slew manyof them. The consul, upon being made acquaintedwith the occurrence, advanced his legions in aclose column and sent forward his cavalry, whocame to action with the king. At first Philip hadthe superiority, hut at length he was defeated, andlost 300 horsemen, of whom a third were madeprisoners, and the rest were killed or perishedin some neighbouring marshes. The king himselfwas nearly taken, having wandered forsome time in the marshes before he recoveredhis camp. He now resolved upon a retreat, beingpartly actuated by the report that the Dardan,under Pleuratua, were approaching. He concealedthis intention from his adversary by a proposal foratruce to bury the dead, and by lighting fires inhis camp at night, while he was retiring towardsthe mountains.The consul remained several days in the sameposition, ignorant of the enemy's movements, when,having exhausted the supplies of the neighbouringcountry, he removed to Stymbara, and fromthence, after having collected the com from thefields of Pelagonia, to Plurima, still ignorant of themotions of Philip, who had in the meantimeencamped at Cranium, and having better informationof his opponent's proceedings, alarmedthe Romans by suddenly approaching their, butdid not venture to bring on an action. The310 MACEDONIA. [CHIP.Romans then proceeded to encamp on the rimOsph^^s, while Philip entrenched himself at dogreat distance on the bank of the Ellison, when,perceiving that the Romans intended to cross diemountains into Eordasa, he retired, and fortified thepasses with trees, stones, ditches, and ramparts.But from these works he derived little benefit. TbtRomans forced or turned them without difficile,chiefly because the Macedonian phalanx waa uselessand unmanageable in such a narrow andrugged field of action. Philip having retired, theRomans ravaged the fields of Eordsea, enteredElimeia, and from thence moved into Orestis.Here the consul received the submission of Cele-enim, and from thence, proceeding into Dashtook Pelium, " a town conveniently placedfor making incursions into Macedonia," and havingplaced a garrison in this place, he retained withhis captives and plunder to Apologia.This narrative, extracted undoubtedly fromPolybius, seems so clear, that a traveller commandingsufficient leisure and security might hopeto determine the position of the first encampmentXXVIII.] MACEDONIA. 311to have been et Lyncua, on the river Bevis', andas Lyncus is described as a town by Stephens *,it might be supposed that Heracleia was sometimescalled Lyncus, and that the camp of Suspiciouswas at Heracleia itself. But notwithstandingthe words "ad Lyncura " seem to favour thisopinion, it is more likely that Polybius employedLyncus on this occasion in the same sense whichwe end attached to it in two other passages ofLivy, as well as in Thucydides and Plutarch';that is to say, as synonymous with Lyncestis,or the country of the Lyncestse, once a smallindependent kingdom, and afterwards a provinceof the Macedonian monarchy.Lychnidus and Heracleia lying nearly in the linebetween Dyrrhachium, or Apologia, and Tliossalo-nice, were the principal places in the centre of theCanadian or Egyptian way — the great line of communicationby land between Italy and the East, betweenRome, Constantinople, and Jerusalem. Aroad of such importance, and on which the distancehad been marked with milestones soon after theRoman conquest of Macedonia, we may believe tohave been kept in the best order, as long as Romewas the centre of a vigorous authority ; but it probablyshared the fate of many other great establishmentsin the decline of the empire, and especiallyAd Lyncum attila posuit Strabo, who mentions only theprope lumen Begum. — Liv. Lynccstx : and the ethnogra-I. 31, c. S3. pier is obviously wrong as toAwyitocj ironic 'HTilpov. Epirus.Zrpalivt' f^^rifiji.— Stephan. in ^ Liv. 1. 2fl, c. 25 ; 1. 32,voce. No aucli name, how c. 9, Thucyd. I. 4, c. 83. J 34.ever, is found in our copies of — Plutarch iiIxiuerBneF; iir ui^m^imad £d«sL sali cmamwd. as «■ the CtBdnniwm descnhef m* PoMhik. » be tke liiee prii-nia SKDCT' in han lui'jiif tUBK^tw Ans ibtlixif in ii»«- T-aLfT in list Dennis. 'brmadauf fromthe TnETTarae rnmninr n Hail and poMnatiB^Mcmzn C&iidxTn is site sure eHBtcafr dnvcboB mvbjcb 1^ Title cis "Matt Tsver id EdesBs uhuu intoxtM- jtlaisf of L;<<rer Macedon dteie spoonic hurt :tc«i. i c^»»' rf riMiet ©rer thendr» vHcx cdDaoDftC i3ie bcnndaiia of Utrumand Muc^.-miiL £sid loci aepmit Aclake vY Z-vrjaaOif iras die Tim ratovdItt ■Ha-sam ssd hs iaxaditt '1» ™-ik ATt».W>'XXVIII. J MACEDONIA. 313indication that the great Roman work was outof repair. In the original road described by Polybius,the portion between Lychnidus and Heracleialed through Pylon, which received that namefrom its being the limit of the twu provinces. TheAntoine Itinerary gives two routes in this part ;one passing through Scirtiana (Scirtonia' ?) andCastra, the other through Nicias (Niceea ?), whichis the same as that in the Tabular Itinerary '. Inthe Jerusalem the road passes through Brucida(Brygiada, i. e. Brygias ' ?) and Parembole.Now there seems little doubt that these namesCastra, Parembole, and NicEca, have reference to themilitary transactions of the Romans in Lyncestis,who not many jeers after those events constructeda road, which happened to pass exactly over theScampis21,Trajectus9,Canda-via 9, in tabemaa9, Claudanon9,Patras4, LychnidumlS, Bru-ida13, Parembole 19, Iltra-cleia 12.— It. Hieroaol, p. «06.This route boa been reversed,and some of the nanieacorrected, in order to fumiah abetter comparison with theother Itineraries.Dyrrhachio, Clodiana 31,Scamps 20, ad Genus 9, adDionam 7, in CandaviaO, PonsServile 9, Lychnido 19, Nice16, Heracleia 11.— Tab. Peu-finger,aegm. 5.Ptolemy, 1. 2, c. 17. couplesthe Rustic and Scirtones asIllyrian tribes near Macedonia,and the Pirusta; wc know fromPolybius (1. 5, e. 108) and fromLivy (1. 45, c. 26) to have beena people of Dassaretis.A station has been omittedin the Table between Lychm-dus and Nicsa, the total distancefrom Lychnidus to Heracleiabeing only half of that inthe Jerusalem, and seventeenor eighteen miles less than inthe Antoine.Bp«i, TO iBrns Roi BfivyaiKtdovtKov iByot Ttpoatx^c 'IWv-pioTc. — Stephan. in voce. Seealso in Bpvyi'ac, Bpiiyioi', eachdescribed as a riots MuccJo-rat, but probably one and the= pi«<314 MACEDONIA. [Chap.scene of the former exploits of their army. Castor Farembole, therefore, indicates the first encampmentof Sulpicius on the Beams ; and Nicsa theplace where he obtained the advantage oviir Philip'scavalry, near Octolopfans, which was ei^tmiles distant from the first encampment : consequently,Nicaea was about eight Roman miles fromParembole or Caetera — and probably to the northwardof it, because after the battle near Octolo-phuB, the consul proceeded in a northerly directionto Stymbara, in search of provisions, havingalready exhausted the country around Heracleia.It appears, therefore, that Nicaea, Parembole, andHeracleia, formed a triangle, of which the sideswere 8, U, and 12 h. f. in length; that thenorthern route from Lychuidus descended uponNicsea, or Octolophus, and the two southern uponParembole, or Castra, on the river Beaus : thiswas evidently the southern branch of the Erigon,near the issue of which into the plains Heracleamight be sought for, and nearer to its sources thetown of Bee '. As to the route described by Poly-xxvii.]MACEDONIA. 315n ctf^Xq Attic AiyKou, ill relating the attempt of Per-diccas against Lyncestis, in the eiglitli year of thePeloponnesian War, which ended in a separate negotiationbetween his ally Brasidas and Arrhibscusking of the Lyncesta; '. It was by the same passthat Brasidas, in the following year, effected a skilfulretreat from the Lyucestse and Illyrianss', when,having descended into the plains of Lyucus withPerdiccas and a joint force, composed of 3000hoplitBE, 1000 cavalry, and a large body of barbariansof Thrace, they were obliged to retreat inconsequenceof the Illyrianss, who had promised tojoin Perdiccas, having suddenly ranged themselveson the side of Arrhibxus. The Macedoniansof Perdiccas, and the undisciplined barbarians,having taken the alarm, moved tumultuouslyin the night, and rendered it necessary forthe king himself to accompany them without communicatingwith Brasidas, who was stationed withhis forces at some distance. Thus abandoned, theSpartan general began his retreat on the followingmomiog towards the pass, forming his hoplitee inasquare, placing his light-armed within it, and coveringthe retreat of this body with 300 chosen menunder Its own command. He thus not only resistedthe attacks of the enemy, but having seized uponone of the heights which bordered the entrance ofthe pass, prevented them from intercepting him init. He was then allowed to retreat without farthermolestation, and arrived the same day at Amiss,the first town in the territory of Perdiccas. orissa,therefore, seems to have been in the vale ofThucyd. 1. 4, c. 83. ' Thueyd. 1. 4, c. 124, et seq.S16 Macedonia. [chap.'Ostrovo, anil possibly it may have been the sameplace a3 the Banns of Polybius, B being a commonMacedonian prefix ; for the words of Straboare not imperative in placing Ramus betweenLychnidus and Heraclea, although bearing undoubtedlythat interpretation.It is from the remark of Polybius that the Canadianway passed through the country of the Eord^ei,in proceeding from that of the Lyncestte to Edessa ',together with the historical authorities just referredto, and that other passage in the Latin historian,wherein be describes the march of Perseus fromCitium in Lower Macedonia, through Eordasa intoEHmeia, and to the Haliacmon*, that we obtain aknowledge of the exact situation of-Eord^a, whichthus appears to have extended along the westernside of Mount Berries, comprehending 'Ostrovo andliatranitza to the north, Sarighioli in the middle,and to the southward the plains of Djuma, Budja,and Karaianni, as far as the ridges near Kozani andthe Klisura of Siatista, which seem to be the naturalboundaries of the province. The only Jordantown noticed in history is Priscus, of which Thucydidesremarks, that near it there still remainedsome of the descendants of the Eordaei, who hadbeen expelled from all other parts of Eordsea bythe Temenidae'. But there is some reason to addto this name those of Begorra and Galadrae asOrdain towns, the Begorrites hums, to which Perseusmarched from Citium, having probably beenso called from a town of Begorra; which stoodAp.Straboii,p.32a, v.sup. ' Tliucyd, I. 2, c. OS.Liv. 1. 42, c. 53.Xxvii.] MACEDONIA. 317perhaps at Kaliari, by the Turks called Sprigsthe central and otherwise advantageous positionof which leads also to the conjecture that itmay have been the city Eordsea of later times'.As Lycophron couples Galadr® with the land of theEordfei, and as Stephanas attributes that town toPieria *, it might best be sought for at the southernextremity of EordsEa, towards the Haliacnion andthe frontiers of Pieria, its territory having consistedchiefly perhaps of the plains of Jiudja andDjuina. If Galatea; was in the southern partof the province, and Begorra in the middle, Priscuswas probably to the northward, about Katra-nitza, towards the mountains of the pierianrange, such a situation being the most likely tohave preserved the ancient race *.The modem routes over the mountains whichseparated Lyncus from Eordtsa, are, from Tilbelito 'Oslova, to the eastward, and from Banitza to'Ostrovo to the westward : the former is in theordinary route from Bitolia to Vodhena; the latterfrom Filurina to the same place. Although Filurinais nearer than Bitolia to the site of Heracleia,1 should conceive the Egyptian Way to havecrossed by the former route, as it descends intoIlierocI, p. 638.PaXii^pifc rite vrparffXariti' \vKot'tLycophr. v. 1444. ,;Xwpnv r' 'Eopfwv Kai raXafpalov risky.lb. V. 1342.— Stephan. in ToXaSpai.Pwlemy, 1. 3, c. 13, evidently confounded the Eor-classes three lovras under the dei with the Eordeti, an of Macedonia ; but ua ran people.Scamps is one of them, hi has318 Macedonia. [Cup.the MordtBom valleys nearer to the Situation ofEdessa. The only place which the three Itinerariesagree in placing between Heracleia and Edessa, isCells, but the distance given are too conflictingto lead to any certainty as to its position.At or near Banitza are the mineral acidulonswaters of Lyncestia, much renowned among theancients, who imagined that they possessed intoxicatingqualities ' ; they were noticed by Dr.Browne in the year 1669*.Although Livy employs the name Pelagoniain his narrative of the campaign of Sulpicius onlyas that of a large district containing Stymbara, itis evident from his account of the division of Macedoniainto four provinces after the Roman conquest,that if not at the former period of time, thirty-threeyears later at least, Pelagonia was the appellationof the chief town of the Pelagones, which thenbecame the capital of the Fourth Macedonia *. Itwas perhaps not specifically employed as the nameof a town until the two other cities of Pelagoniawere ruined : for that Pelagonia or a portion of itXxvii.] MACEDONIA. 319three towns tore the same name as the Azorus ofPerrhEebia Tripolitis '. The name Pelagonia stillexists as the designation of the Greek metropolitanbishopric, of which the see is Bitolia, or monastery*,which latter Greek, name the Turks haveadopted. Bitolia is now the chief place of the surroundingcountry, and the ordinary residence ofthe governor-general of Rumili. At or near thetown are many vestiges of ancient buildings ofRoman times. These the natives suppose to havebelonged to a city named Tripolis: a tradition'0 Si 'Epiywc iroXXci ItH-fuyot ptiifiara en ti^v 'IXXu-piKwf ipuv Roi Avyxijmiiy KanBpuyuv, ml ^ivpi6ruv xal tit rw'A^ioy iKeiSutri.UpAripof fiiv our Nol ■roXcieJivav iv roi i6yiai rouroic-TpfwoXint yoiv // TliXayoylai^iytTO, 3c Kdi'Aftupos ^y, nalxi ry 'EpiySri irdirat al TtiyAtvpiowvy irdXus fKifiTo, i3fTO ISpvdyuiy Ka! 'AXtofteyal rai2ruji/}upo.— Strabo, p. 327.The following are iIKKHIPTtOKa F1.On a square stele, five feethigh and two feet and a halfsquare, adorned with mouldingsin the usual taste of thedeclining Roman Empire.Maacoyuy oi S-ivfCfMn Mofi-inscriptions which were foundamong the ruins called those ofTripolis, in an excavation madein that spot in the search ofbuilding materials in the jean1808. They were communicatedto me by Al Pasha, whoat the same time presented mewith a Heroic bust, and ahead which seems to haveformed part of another. Theformer is in perfect preservation,and is inscribed with thename AIZXINIIS. An engravingof it has been published byMr. Milliner. — Anc. used.Monuments Series 2 pi. 9-Kay 'Ai:v\iay,i>iiiipitiai-oSAin~pof&vyaripa, ArSpot &yaBt>v.On a similar stele —"Ayn^ T^Xif' "^^ •roii'oi' tvvSiaKcioyw MaVXiai' Uovrtlarl^.T MACEDONIA.[CIIAP.which accords with the existence of a PatagoniaTripoHtis as attested by Strabo, and which is notadverse to the identity of Tripolis with the cityPelagODia of Livy, since it is easy to conceive thatafter the reduction of the two other towns of theTripolitis (and Strabo asserts that all the towns onthe Erigonj Stynibara included, were ruins in histime), the sunning city may have been knownby the name of Tripolis, as formed from the threeformer towns, and that it may also have been oftenknown by the name of the district, Pclagoniu.BitoHa being a ^rord of Greek origin, may possiblybe a corruption of a third name of the same place,or that which the city bore when the three townsof Pelagonia still existed : the Hellenic name mostresembling it is Italia.The passes of Pelagonia, in which Perseus wasstationed by his father PhiHp, 1 take to have beenthe passage over the mountains in the modemAwOTtXXar :\^<n^n,r Aim,4.»««K./lOHuy x^t^Y ♦'■^'"r 'F^>-3./1.0.TI H-V-JS X")**'-On a quadrangular steleUnadorned, tmo feet and a halfhigh and two feet broad —On another stele —Nicartpof ffTpor.wm sir/"^HK X"f"' '^^ '■■'' "' O'^*a«e^r harrow ri ^i,Pi, O;w»o (TOd.TtpT,as Tt vtfirvranK mtii-6.AiXiar^ 'lovXuitw.♦o^. ,\«.. . . «i rw» iiiwi firingl-tftnno; Emirr-Y ut^fUKfKXIf*'-X«l"'-Xxviii.] MACEDONIA. 321route from 'Akliridha to Bitolia, nliich now formsthe main communication instead of the old lineor lines of the Via Egnatia, that change havingprobably been caused by the circumstance thatA'khridha and Bitolia being now the chief placesinstead of Lycknidus and Hcradeia, and lyingrespectively to the northward of the two ancientplaces, have caused the road to assume a morenortherly line in this part, and which has occurredthe more easily, as anciently the Egnatia was herediverted from its direct line by the necessity ofpassing round either the northern or southern endof the lake Lychnidus, and had no advantagetherefore in shortness over the present line.The pass of Pelagonia was of great importanceas one of the direct entrances from Illyria intoMacedonia by the course of the river Drilon,now called Drin. Hence it was necessary forthe kings of Macedonia to maintain strong garrisonsin Lychnidus and some other positions onthe lake, as well as in Stymbara and Heracleia.By means of these garrisons and the strength ofthe frontier, the kingdom was not so liable toinvasion here as on the side of Scupi, whichcommanded the entrance from Dardaniaia intothe plains of the Upper Axius, and which placehaving been generally held by the Dardan,gave them great facilities of offence against Macedonia.Stymbara or Tubers appears from Polybiusand Livy to have stood in the most fertile partof the country, to the northward of BitingIII. VtltO- HN9 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.lia'; a situation which accords with its having beenthe place from whence Perseus marched in threedays to Uscana, the chief town of the Penestiaua',situated probably on the Drilon, at or near themodem Dire. Stymbara would seem to havebeen near Prillapo, by the Turks called PyreneanPlurima, between Stymbara and Craniumwhich was not far from the passes leadinginto Eordsea. If Strabo is correct in namingAlcomense as a town on the Erigon, its situationappears to have been above Cranium, forbelow that town, or between it and the junctionof the Erigon with the Axius, Uie TabularItinerary shows that we ought to place Erastus(the orthography is not quite certain) and Stobi.By Ptolemy both these towns are ascribed to Pela-ionia,and by other authorities Stobi is designateda city of Pteonia ; but these, and some other conflictingtestimonies of the same kind, are reconciled,if we admit that Deuriopus was sometimesconsidered a subdivision of Pelagonia, and the lattersometimes a subdivision of Pseonia.I have already remarked how exactly Livy's descriptionof Cerebrum, as well in relative positionas in its situation on a peninsula in a lake, agreeswith Kastoria. By means of this datum we havethe exact course of the march of Sulpicius on hisreturn from Pelagonia into Dassaretia. FromEordcea or Sarighioli he crossed a part of the plainPolyb. 1. 28, c. 8. Liv. ' Liv. 1. 43, c. 10, 18.1. 31, c. 39.xxvi.] illyria. 323of Gfrevena, and through Anaselltza to Kastoria,from whence his route to Pelium in Dassaretuicould have been no other than through the pass ofTzangon, which, being the only interruption in thegreat dorsal ridge of Northern Greece, was undoubtedlyone of the most frequented of the communicationsbetween the two sides of the country,and particularly from Orestis into DassaTCt'ia. Itwas precisely near Pelium that Arrian describesa remarkable pass, through which flowed the Eor-caius, leaving in one part space only for fourshields abreast ' ; a description which correspondsso exactly with the pass of Tzangon, both as to theriver and the breadth of one part of the pass, thatthe identity can hardly be questioned. Peliumwas situated at the foot of a woody mountain, nearthe pass ; a description which may be appliedeither to Potassa or to Puyani, hut the former hasthe preference by its name, which seems to be avulgar sounding of ritjXiaffcro.The march of Alexander in approaching Pelium,as well as his subsequent progress to Pelinua^umin Thessaly, may furnish some further illustrationsof the relative chorography. He was returningfrom an expedition against the Getae, who dweltbeyond the Danube, and had arrived in the countryof the Agrianes and Penes, when he receivedintelligence that Clitus and Glacial, who sharedbetween them all maritime lyra, had declaredagainst him, and had prevailed upon the Autariata;to attack him on the route. But Langres, king ofIL.Arrian. hiccup. AlcX. I. ■[chap.the Agriones, having frustrated the latter design byinvading the country of the AutariaUe, Alexanderwas enabled to march without interruption alongthe Erigon, and from thence to Pelium ', near whichthe Illyrianss were encamped. After some operationswhich are .not very clearly described, he surprisedthe illyrian camp in the night, when Glacialfled, pursued by Alexander as far as the mountainsof the Taulantii, while Clitus retired intoPelium, from whence, after having burnt the city,he proceeded to join Glacial in Calantha. Soonafter this event Alexander received advice of therevolt of Thebes, when, crossing Eordsea and Eli-mea,and passing the mountains of the Tympaniand Paraveei, he arrived in a^ven days at Perineumin Thessaly.Without the comparison afforded by Livy's accountof the proceedings of Sulpicius, it might besupposed from the circumstances stated by Arrian,that Pelium was not far from the Erigon, or thename Eordaicus might lead to the impressionthat Pelium was in Eordsea, instead of havingXXVIII. 1 ILLYRIA. 395data, the historian has probably omitted to mentionthat Alexander returned home to Pella beforebe received intelligence of the revolt of Thebes :on which supposition the road to Linnaeus wouldhave led through the centre, first of Eordsea andthen of Elimeia, as Arrian relates.If the situation of Pelium as deduced from thecombined evidence of Arrian and Livy be correct,it will follow that Dassaretia comprehended notonly the great valley which contains the lake ofLycknidus, but also the plain of Korytza : andthat plain being an extensive corn country, the inferenceaccords with that abundance of grain inDassaretia which enabled Sulpicius to save ibisown stock while he passed through that district,and which induced lira afterwards to send backhis foragers thither, though he was encamped inan equally fertile plain, but of which he had notthe same military possession.The western part of Dassaretia was a contrastto the eastern, consisting entirely of lofty andrugged mountains intersected by branches of theriver Apsus: its extent was very great. If Bertbe the site of Antipatria, as I have shown somereason for supposing, it will follow that the Dassa-rctcE possessed all the mountainous country lyingbetween Korytza and Berat, beyond which latter thefrontiers of the Dassarctce met those of the ,Byliioncs, and Charles of Epirus. On thenorth they bordered on the Eordeti and Pedestal,and partly on the Taulantii, while to the eastwardthe crest of the great central ridge very naturallyformed the line of demarcation between tlieiu and3S6 ILLTRIA. [chap.the Peldgones, Bi, and Orestes, or in otherwords, between lyra and Macedonia. It resultsfrom these boundaries that Dassareda was not lesstitian 60 miles in length, and as much in breadth,an extent such as we are in some measure led toexpect from Polybius, who in addition to thetowns on the lake of Lycbnidus, represents theDebate, Pissantini, Caltcceni, and PirustSB, allastribes of Daeaaretia '.The situation of some of these tribes may bededuced from the testimony of the same author,H8 preserved in the Latin text of Livy*. WhenSulpicias was encamped on the Apes betweenDyrrhachium and Apologia, before he advancedinto Lyncestis, he sent Apustius against the neighbouringpossessions of Philip*. Corragum, Geranium,and Oi^essns, were captured, not withoutresistance ; after which, Apustius laid siege toAntipatria, a large city in a narrow pass remarkablefor the strength of its position and walls.Having taken this place he slew the men, destroyedthe walls, burnt the town, and gave upXxvi.] ILLTRIA. 327the plunder to his Soldiers, which so intimidatedthe people of Coercion, that they surrendered tohim, although their city was well garrisoned andfortified. Ilion, another town, was taken by force,after which the Romans, in returning to Sulpiciusloaded with plunder, were attacked at the passageof the river by Athenagoras, one of the most distinguishedof Philip's officers', but without sufferingmuch damage.Geranium (Gertuuium ?) and Coercion seem tobe the same places which in the text of Polybiusare written Gentis and Chrysondion, for he namesthere together with Antipatria as frontier placeswhich Scerdilaidas had taken from Philip, andwhich the latter retook in the second year of theSocial war, B.C. "221. As Geranium and Antipatriawere in Phcebatis, and Orgessus was a townof the Pissantini, it seems probable, assuming -47*-patria to have been at Brat, that the Powhatanchiefly inhabited the valley of the Uzumi, andthe Pissantini that of the Devol ; and that asGeranium was attacked by Apustius before Antipatria,it was lower on the Uziimi than herat,perhaps, near the junction of the two rivers.To the eastward of it on the Devol, may beplaced Orgessus, and somewhat nearer than eitherto the camp of Sulpicius, Corraguntthe first namedAUienagoru was a pur of the Macedonian army whichpuratu*. He led the Mace was stationed on Mount As-dorianat the first engagement nous, at the Aoi fauces, and heof cavalry against Sulpicius hail the honour of repulsingin Lyrics. In the ensuing the Romains iu the liuttlc- ofyear he commanded the portion Cynoscephala?.328 ILLYRIA. [chap.of the three. Qxirion and Ilium seem to havebeen in the valley of the Uzdmi above Merit onthe slopes of Tumor. This great mountain stillbears probably its ancient name, of which theGreek form was Tomarua. It is easy to concavethat, like the names of mountains and rivers ingeneral, Tom<5r was a generic word belonging tothe aboriginal language of Epics, and that henceit became attached also to the more celebratedmountain near Dodona. The ancient fortress nearthe modem village of Tumor may, like that village,have borne the same name as the mountainitself, according to a custom which seems to havebeen prevalent in Greece in every £^e.In the same chapter of Polybius just referredto, the historian proceeds to relate that Philip,after having recovered the three towns of Phoe-baths abovementioned, proceeded to capture otherplaces in Dassaretia, namely, Creoniam and serious,(not the same place as Vertus,) and fourtowns on the lake Lychnitis, namely, Enchelarise,Ceram, Nation, and Boer, then Bantia of the ,and Oi^essus oF the Pissantini. That theXXVIII.] MACEDONIA. 329least may have approached the southern end ofthe lake ohliqiicly from the pass of Candia, so asentirely to avoid the western shore. I am inclinedto believe that the road in the Jerusalem itinerarypassed round the southern end of the lake, andthat Patrie was situated at that extremity.The Pirustffi would seem to have been on thenorthern frontier of Dassaretia, as they joined theTaulantii and some other more northerly syrians,to assist the Romans in the reduction of Genius '.They probably occupied an intermediate tract betweenthe Pissantini, on the lower part of the Devol,and the southern extremity of the lake Lychnitis,in which case there seems to remain only the plainof Korytza to the left of the Eordaicus for thesituation of the Caliccent. Possibly Korytza maybethe site of Bantia.Dec. 6. — Quitting Kozani for Servia at 7.45,Turkish time, we leave Akbar, by the Greekscalled Nizvoro, or 'Izvoro, not far to the left, at theextremity of the vineyards of Kozani, then descendover downs covered with com-celts, and interspersedwith small villages, until at 8.45, hadrian,about the same size as Akbar, is 1^ miledistant on the left of the road at the foot of theGhioz-tepe ; all these places are Turkish. At 10.6we arrive at the river Injekara, or Vistritza, whichis bordered by white cliffs along the left bank,and on the opposite side by low level ground : followthe sands on the bank of the river for nineminutes, then cross it in a broad flat-bottomed boat,330 Macedonia. IJCHAP.capable f)f containing ten or twelve baffles, and inan boor and 8 minutes from the river reach S^Tia, baring passed over rich meadows and a fertileplain, beyond which is an ascent of 20 minutesto the town.S^rvia * contains about 500 TaAish looses, anda few Greek. It is situated on the northern sideof an opening, in the ridge which commences atthe gorges of the Vlstritza, near Verria, and terminatesin Uie mountains of Kbassii, to the northof Trikkata. The most valuable produce of thecelts of Servia is a small species of tobacco, bearinga yellow leaf like that of Yenidje. Tbe streetsof the town are bordered with' the herb which ishung to dry along the sides and galleries of thelooses, as well as round the yards attached to allthe better class of houses.Dec. 7. — The episcopal church of Servia, whichstands on a height rising from the lowest part ofthe mountain behind the town, is now in ruins, andthe bishop's house, which is in the town, is not inmuch better condition, though he still occupies it.The bishop, whom I visit this iXxviii.] MACEDONIA. 331ely, if the apostle crossed Mount Bermius, Serviawas in his way to Athens by Larissa, but it doesnot appear whether he went to Athens by sea orby land ; and even if we suppose the words wc imOaXaaaav ' to mean, that in order to elude his enemieshe departed from Berrhffia to the coast " asif he intended to embark," but that in reality hetravelled by land, it is much more probable thathe should have continued his way through Pieriaand by the direct and level road of Tempe, oreven by the pass of Petra, than that he shouldhave made a circuitous journey over two ranges ofmountains.Having dismissed the guards who were furnishedto me by Metjobon at Verria, I take sixothers from Aly Pasha's derventji at Servia, whois an Albanian Mussulman of Colonia, and setout for Livadhi, first visiting a ruined castle onthe summit of the hill above the episcopal church,and accompanied so far by the Albanian commandant,who when he finds that I have someknowledge of the distant objects in view from thecastle, shows great satisfaction in answering allmy geographical questions, for which he is wellqualified by his extensive knowledge of Macedonia,acquired in the course of his military services.All Tjersemba is seen from hence, inclosed byMount Burlno and the Ghioz-tepe ; between whichsummits the mountain of Siatista shows itselfnearly in a line with Kozani, and beyond it to theAct. Post. c. 17, '332 HACBDOiiu. [chap.left Siniitziko ; a little to ^e riot of thelatter Peristeri is also seen, which looks down onthe plains of the Erigon and Bitolia. To tbfnorth-eastward rises the great Dfaox4, or Sermnu,and to the right of it is seen Velvets, or Vd-vendor', a town of 300 phrases, which, thoughconspicuous by its minaret, is chiefly inhabitedby Greeks. Velvedh6 is 3 hours distant fnmiS<£rTia, and similarity situated on the same mountain; it lies in a line with the great ravine of theHaliacmon, through the opening of which appearsthe mountain above Pella.The castle of Servia was so placed as to commandthe ascent to the Portes, as the highestpoint of the pass is called, which here conductsfrom the banks of the HaSacmon into the valleyswatered by tributaries of the Penes. Being themost direct and easy passage across the Can^mnianridge, it is the natural gate between Macedoniaand PerrluBbia, and the position could not havebeen neglected by the ancients, though I havebeen unable to discover any Hellenic remains,either in the castle or town. It is now the mostXXVIll.] PERRII^BIA. 333fortification apparently of the same (late as thecastle, and once forming part of the same systemof defence. The road to Trikkala follows theeastern foot of the mountain as far as anotheropening between it and a round hill on the left,where it enters the valley of one of the branchesof the Titaresiiis. This roimd hill, which is visiblethrough the pass of Servia from Kozani, is calledVilla, a modem word equivalent to Phyte, and issaid to retain some vestiges of an ancient fortress.Instead of passing through the Portes, I pursue ahigher track along the southern face of the mountain,which stretches northward to Katafighi andthe gorges of the Vistritza above Verria. As weascend, the peak of Samaria appears to the northwestwardthrough the upper straits of the sameriver, or those which at the southern extremity ofMount Burino, near Kaliani, separate the plainsor valleys of Grevena and Venja from those ofTjersemba and Servia.Our route all the way to Livadhi follows theside of the mountain, gradually ascending andcrossing many deep ravines and rocky slopes ofdangerous footing. At about half way we beginto look down to the right upon a plain which extendsfive or six miles from the foot of this mountainto another called Amarbes, in the direction ofDheminiko. Amarbes is the principal summit ofthe Cambmiii monies : westward it is connected withanother named Bunasa, which rises from the leftbank of the Vislritza, opposite to Burino. Marblesis the great link which connects the Olympenechain behind Servia and Velvendo with the hills of334 pbbrhjeoia. [chap.Cassia, A small river flows through the middle ofthe plain on our right, and passes through a glenat its south-western end, near which it receivesanother stream from some copious sources issuingfrom the southern foot of Mount Am^rbes, wherethe Uvadhiotes hare some fulling mills; then,after making a lat angle to the eastward of itsformer course, enters another plain in which it isjoined by the Ellasonltiko, or River of Elasona, atAmurii, a small village not far from Dheminiko.The united stream is the Titaresius of Homer,which joins the Penata in the plain of Larissa.The branch from the mountain of Liv4dhi is nowcalled Vulgar or Sarandaforo. At a small distancefrom its right bank, near the Bc^haz, whereit quits the plain, is a village named Vuvala, and ametokhi of the monastery of Elassona, standing ona height at the foot of Mount Amarbes. The summitis encircled with the ruined wall of an ancientcity of some magnitude. This place, which is nearthe road from Servia to THkkala, is reckoned threehours from Livadhi, and is less than one to the rightof the road from Servia to Elassona. wliicli. afteXXVllI.] PERBHXBIA. 335plain within some miles of it. The town contains800 houses, situated in a rocky hollow below apeak in the range of mountains which extend fromhence as far as the inanition plain of Katerina, andthe right bank of the Vistritza, near Verria. Thehighest summit of these mountains is a conspicuousobject from Saloniki, and has already beenmentioned as one of the chief points of the Olympenechain '.Livadhi is a Wallachia colony of ancient date,and is hence often called Vlakho-Livadho. Theother Vlakhiote villages in this vicinity are Kok-kinoplo, on the side of 'Elymbo, three hours' distantfrom hence towards Tzaritzena, Fera at thesame distance towards Katerina, and Neokhorisituated between Servia and Livadhi, in a loftysituation on the mountain, an hour to the left ofthe road by which we came. Kokkinoplo hasabout 200 houses, Fera 100, and Neo-florio 20or 30. Near Fera there is said to be an ancientquarry. These villages live chiefly by the manufactureof the coarse woollen cloth called skuti, ofwhich are made the cloaks named KinriraiQ, in Italiancape, extensively used in Greece and theAdriatic. The cloth is of two kinds, white andblack, and is made shaggy in the inside : it issent to Venice and Trieste in pieces called xyla,which are two peeks long and four or four and ahalf hands broad. The Kalarytiutes, who manufacturethe same kind of cloth in their own mountains,and whose merchants reside in the Adriatic,See above, p. 297.336 PERRHiGBIA. [CHAP.are in the habit of buying up that which is madeby the Livadhiotes, and of sending it to some merchant,generally a Venetian, at Salonlki, whoships it to the Kalarytiote merchant in the Adriatic,changing two piastres and a half per fortunaof 140 xyla as spedizionario. The Livadhi6tesmake annually from 150 to 200 fortunate. Theygrow very little com, but possess an abundance ofsheep, goats, horses, and mules. Like the Salarythey are proud of the excellent air and waterof their town, but are so nice on the subject of thelatter as sometimes to send three hours, in order toprocure the choicest. The lake of Kastoria suppliesthem with fish at twenty>iive or thirty paras theoke, better than the sea-fish which is sold at Salonfor forty-five. On the other hand, the climateis so severe in winter, that the inhabitants are sometimessnowed up in their houses for several days,and are forced to drink melted snow, not beingable to get at their wells and springs. It is now ahard frost, and we found it very difficult onarriving to drag our loaded horses up the steepXXVril.] PF.BRII.EBIA. 337a niouument of mi Albanian cliieriain, who waskilled in fighting against the robbers of Olympusabout thirty years ago.It is now twenty-two years since Aly Pashaby his Dervent-Agalik obtained the command atLis'ddhi, since which time he has always been thefarmer of its revenues. Its importance to lirais chiefly derived from its proximity to the passleading from Elasona or Servia into the maritimeplains of Macedonia, and which is at once the mostdirect and least difficult of the routes across theOlympene barrier. In this pass one hour and ahalf from Livadhi stands the village of Aio Dhi-mitre, and one hour and a half farther, exactly onthe Zygos, are the ruins of the village of Petra,which being a name recorded in ancient history isvery useful in elucidating the geography of thisfrontier of Macedonia and Thessaly. Petra is describedto me as situated on a great insulated rockwhich is naturally <T^i<Tfievij, or separated from theadjoining mountain : the road passes through theopening and then descends into the plain of Kate-ring,which, being undoubtedly a part of theancient Pieria of Macedonia, the situation of Petrathus illustrates Livy, who shows that Petra was atown of Pieria on the frontier of that province, inthe pass which led into the maritime plain fromPerrhaebia. ' The distance from Livadhi to Katerinaby St. Demetrius is reckoned ten hours. There isanother road which leads over the same ridgefrom Servia, by Velvets, to Katerina ; but it is■ Liv. 1. 30. c. 2G ; 1. 14, f. 32 ; 1. 45. c. 41.PERRUABIA. [chap.sot SO easy as the pass of Petra : and it was a communication,if it existed anciently, not from thessalyinto Macedonia, but from Elimeia of Upperinto Pieria of Lower Macedonia.I have already observed, that the mountainswhich rise from the right bank of the Vistritza,and extend from the plain of Grevena to that ofVeiria, were the ancient Cambunii, mentionedby Livy, from whom it is further manifest, thatthe pass of Servia is the de61e in the same mountains,named Volustana ', the security of whichappeared so important to Perseus on the approachof the consul Q. Marcius Philippus, in the thirdyear of the last Macedonic war, that he occupiedit with 10,000 men. It was probably the samepass through which Perseus had entered thessalyin the first year of the war*, the same bywhich the consul Hostilius invaded Macedoniain the following year, and one of the roads intoDeinde situ supera^s tnonti-buB, quos Carabines vacant,descendit ad (Tripoli vacant)Azorum Pytliium et Dolicbeninsolences. Haec tria oppidapautiaper cantata quia besidesLarisBieis sederunt, vita tamenpresent met in seditionconcessenint. Benign his appellation,baud dubious PerrhiE-bos quoque idem facturoa, urenihil cunctatis qui intolerant,primo advent recept.Cyretias obpugnare cactus,&c.— Liv. 1. 42, c. 53.• Liv. 1. 44, c. 2. In theword Volustana the V representsprobably the B, whichwas so common an initial inMacedonian names of places ;the two last syllables, maya,are perhaps the Macedonic formof iTTcya, and have reference tothe pass, the entire name inGreek being BuXoE area.Prospectus inde (Perseus aCitie sc.) toto exercitus Eor-dream pctcns, ad Begomteraquern vocant lacus position castri,postern die in Elimcam adHaliacmoua effluvium process] t.Macedonia contemplated by Marcius when he wasencamped between Azorus and Doliche, and beforehe had determined upon forcing his way acrossMount Olympus by Lapathus'. Upon comparingthe descriptions which the historian has left us ofthese transactions, there cannot remain a doubtthat the valley lying between the Cambrianmountains and Ohjmpits, bordering to the northwardon Belinda and Pieria, and which extendfrom Portes and the mountain of Livadhi southwardto within a few miles of Elasona, constitutedthe division of Perrhmhia named TripoUtis; andit seems equally evident from two other occurrences,one of which happened in the first Macedonicwar*, the other hi the campaign of Antiochus9 years afterwards \ that PerrhEebia proper,Alias per Pythium placetvia (in Macedonian fc.) a!iUper Cambunios monies, quaprior anno duxerat Hostiliusconsul : alias praeter Ascuridcmpaludem . . . Per eodem diesPerseus, quum adpropinqunre diripiunt ; qui Mall^pamboston scirct, quod iter petulant voluntary in deditturba csset ignores, omnes saltustDBidcrc presides statut.In jugum Cambuniorum mon-tim(Volustana ipse vocant)decern mila Icvis armaturecum duce Aaclepiodoto mittil ;ad castellum quod super Ascu-ride paludem erat (Lapathusdecatur locus) Hippias tenerepnesidio justus. Ipse cum re-liquid copies primo circa Dium,Sic^Liv. 1, 44, c. 2.Timor omnes qui circum-contentBccbcn paludem, rclictisurbis, monte cocgit peter.j£toli, inopia prsdee inde averse,in Perrhaebiam ire pergunl.Cyreliaa ibi vi sapient fcedcqneEocietatemque accept!. ExPerrhaebia Gamp bos pelenliAmyiiander auctor erat, &c. —z 2Intra dccimum diem, quumPleas venerate. Cranonem . . .cecil (Antiochus sc.) inde el Metropolis et hiscircumspect castella recept :omniaque jam region is ejus,peter Atrocem et Gyrtonem,potentate grant : turn adoredPERRHXBIA.[chap.which contained the city of the Perrheehi, Cyreticerand other towns, lay to the southward of the Tri-politics,confining on Pelasgiotis and the LariaasBa,and that it comprehended the valleys of Elassonaand Dheminiko.It is by means of these several passages ofLivy, following Polybius, that we are enabled toclear up the obscurity which Strabo, or his defectivetext, have thrown on the geography of thisquarter of Greece, by naming towns in conjunctionwhich were very wide of each other, and byconfounding Perrhsebia Tripolitis, with PelagoniaTripolitis, which was near eighty miles distant'.constitute . . . Pereadem diei Menander . ■ ■occupant Perineum ; et Menip-pua . in Peirhiebiun professMallKaoi et Cy leda cepit,depopnlataaque est arum .Hia rapdm peiactia,LariMam ad rem recent. —Id. 1. 3d, c. 10.TfonMnt yavv 4 OcXoyo-mimic 'Ohivtta ward rov 'lavawora/ioy, dnj(ou<ra 'Aj^wpov rqcTpiroKlnSof vraSlovf citron koI(Ear^V irXtioior Si xai al 'AXn>-ftittil ml Atylvioy nil EipttrotRoi at roS'Iotwc t'C TOf U^ffior•v/i^Xo/.— Stisbo, p. 327.The most difficult part ofthis passage is the leap &omStymbara of the Deuriopes andXxvi.] I>ERRH.EBIA. MlPerrheebia Tripolitis was so named as containingthe three cities of Pythium, Azorus, andDoliche. Of these, Pythium appears to havestood exactly at the foot of Olympus, as well fromits having been the point from which Xenagoras,a geometrician and poet, measured the perpendicularheight of Olympus ', as from its havingbeen in the road across the mountain by Petra,since both Livy and Plutarch couple Pythiumwith Petra in describing the route by whichScipio Nasica crossed Mount Olympus into therear of the position of Perseus on the Snipes'.There seems no question, therefore, that Pythiumstood on the angle of the plain between Kok-kinoplo and Livadhi, though I have not been ableto ascertain the existence of any remains in thatsituation. We learn from the epigram just referredto, that the name of Pythium was derivedfrom a temple of Apollo Pythias, in whose honourAsorus, AJcomena;, and Euro Europus on or near the lowerpus, were all names found both Axiua, and there were citiesin Thessaly, and in Mace of the same names in Upperdonia. There was an AIco- Thessaly, near j£ginium andmote on the Erigon, an the Ion.OiiKiifiirov Kopu^Sc "ri Qv&iou ' AmoKKavoQ'Itpiv, v^K EX" (""P^C Ka&tToy S' iftirptt)HXijpri [liy icxdca araSluiv fiiay, aura iii' airrijHXitipiiiy TfTpairiSf Xiiird/id'Oi' ^cyiBii'EiijiiiXov a fiiy vii!; iB^KiTO jura KiXciiOouXcirajxipqc' (TV S" &yai X'^'f" ''°' <<'^^'< ^ioov,Xenagoras. ap. Plutarch, in P. emil,^H9Liv. 1. 44, c. 32. Plutarch, in Paul. emil.343 PBRRHABIA. [chap.it appears from another author that periodicalgames were there celebrated '.The ten stades of perpendicular altitude whichXeuagoras assigned to the summit of Olympusabove Pythium seem to be not &r from the troth,and what is uncommon in ancient computations of 'this kind, the error is more probably in defectthan in excess*. It may here be observed, thatthe name 'Elymbo, t. e. 'EXv^toc, which is nowapplied to the mountain, not only by its inhabitants,but throughout the adjacent parts of macedoniaand Thessaly, is probably not a moderncorruption, but the ancient dialectic form, for thecholic tribes of Greece often substituted the epsilonfor the omicron, as in the instance of 'Opx'^fivof;, which the Boeotian called 'E(>^o^cvoc.If Pythium was in the situation which I haveindicated, we may with some probability placeAzorus at Vuv41a; for, as Strabo remarks thatAzorus was 120 stades distant from Oxyneia onthe Ion *, which was a branch of the Peneius, itmay be inferred, whether the distance be correctornot, that Azorus was the most south-westerlyXXVIII.] PEBRU.EB1A. 343the military operations of the ancients. Xerxes senthis host this way into Perrhaebia, after having employeda third of his army then encamped in Pieria,in preparing the road'. Brasidas, after his rapidmarch across Thessaly and Perrhasbia, in the eighthyear of the Peloponnesian war, crossed by the samepass to Dium'. Agesilaus, returning into Greecefrom Asia Minor, in the year b. c. 394, enteredThessaly from Macedonia by the same route '.Cassander, in the year b. c. 316 traversed thesame delle, in proceeding from the Peloponnesusagainst Olympiass at Pydna *. And lastly, it furnishedto L. ^milius Paulus, in the year b. c.168, the means of forcing Perseus to retreat fromhis strong position on the Enipeus, as Boon ashelearnt that Scipio Nasica had overthrown theMacedonian garrison at Petra, and was descendinginto the plains in the rear of the king's positionon the Enipeus ^Dec. 8. — From Livadhi to Elassona 5 hours.At 4.50, Turkish time, we descend the mountain,and having reached its foot at the end of an hourand a half, soon leave to the right the plain of theSarandaforo and enter a valley separated from itby a small ridge of hills which branches northwardfrom the heights of Elassona. At the northernextremity of this ridge are some remains of a fortresson the summit of a peaked hill, which weHerodot. 1. 7, c. 132. ' DioUor. I. 19, c. 35.Thucyd. 1. 4, c. 78. ' Liv, 1. 44, c. 35.T^y abriiy tuiiaiv jfuipay, fiycai Xipi^e iropiiidji. — Diodorus14, c. 83.344 perrhj;bi\. [chap.leave a little on our right, and a few minutesafterwards arrive at the small village of Dtiklista,situated at the foot of the same heights, whereina ruined church are two fragments of Doriccolumns 2 feet 8 inches in diameter, and in theburying ground a sepulchral stone, together withsome squared blocks. These remains, combinedwith the name Duklista, seem to indicate thesite of Doliche, the third city of the TripoUtis.Here Kokkinoplo is two or three miles on theleft, on the edge of the snow on the ascent ofthe steepest part of 'Blymbo ; below it to thesouthward, at the foot of the mountain, is Sells,another large village. We now cross the plaintowards the mountain, and at 6.50 fall into theroad from Kettering to Elassona. On the right,at a distance of about eight miles, on the summitof a ridge which is the continuation of the southernend of Amarhea, appears the village of Besharitza ',and the large monastery of Ghianota', Four hoursbeyond them in the same direction is Dhlssikata,vulgarly Dhishkata ', a large village in the districtof Cassia, the mountains of which are seenextending to the southward and westward behindthe hills of Bessaritza. At 7.30, continuing alongthe same valley, we leave Bazar a quarter of anhour on the left of the road, and at 8. 10 Ormanli,both large villages, and both Turkish as theirnames indicate. A mile farther some heights terminatethe valley and separate it from that ofElassona ; having crossed these, we arrive at 9.50tSriirirapiTia. ' ViarfiTat- ^ iifffffitdra.XXVIII.] I'ERHIl/'EBIA. 345at the Panaghia of Etassona, a large ancient monasterysaid to have been built by the emperorAntoninus.The town of Elassona lies below the monastery onthe edge of the plain, and is divided into two partsby a rapid stream proceeding from an immensechasm which separates the great summit of Olympusfrom an inferior range which stretches fromnear Elassona to Tevtpe, and borders the northernside of the Lariss(Ean plain. This latter mountainI take to be the ancient Titania, as the river nowcalled the Elassonitiko is certainly the Titaresius,or Quotas ', The height on which the monasterystands is defended on either side by a deep ravine,in the eastern flows the Elassonitiko, in the westerna branch of it proceeding from the hills to thenorthward. Both these ravines, as well as thoseof some smaller torrents which open into them,consist of a white argillaceous soil worn into furrowsby the waters, like that of Zakytho and manyparts o{ Achaia, from which peculiarity, as Straboremarks, Homer derived the epithet which he hasapplied to Oloosson^. Of this the Greeks ofElassona are not ignorant ; they add, that at Seesare some remains of the Homeric Alone, which,according to Strabo, was afterwards called LeiStraho, p. 440.Ttpuauyopiudiiaa find rou Xiv fiaifiixut irdXdc "^Q' i'ayyo^. 'U346 PERRH^BIA. [chap.The modem name Elassona can hardly he calleda corruption, being in the usual Romaic form ofthe third case of 'EXaaauiv, as Menelaus writes thename. The initial H is only a dialectic variation,like ■'EXu/uroc for''OXi'/»7Toc, and 'Ep\ofiivoQ for ,all which were probably the ordinary localforms, although Homer and subsequent writersmay have preferred the O to the E, as beinggeneral iu other parts of Greece. The third o inthe Oloosson of Homer seems to have been insertedor omitted by the ancient poets as the versehappened to require it' ; so that the corruption ofthe modern name is confined to the first a.The hill of the monastery, defended by the tworavines, and in front falling abruptly to the plain,afforded a strong situation for the ancient city ofOloosson, or at least for its citadel. The onlyremains are a few fragments of walls, and somefoundations behind and around the monastery,consisting of large masses of rough stones andmortar, without any accurately hewn blocks inthe ancient style. These have probably been removedfor modem use, particularly for that ofbuilding and repairing the monastery itself, in thewalls of which some stones of this kind may beseen. In the church is an inscribed column, buttIAufq [trnjiaXt rovyofta Otr tov Ewpwra irora/iou, ov uAtifiwvi) fiiToroiiaaOuaa' Karl iroijjr^c Tirapijoio'' KoXti. —(fnaKTai Si vvy- dji^ia h' iiiroTf Strabo, p. 440.'OXu^iry KtivTai, oh voKv airu-Iltppal/lll.qi'Tvvuv ^aXavov t if 'OXoaaoviiiv yviac-Lycoph. V, U05.Xxviii PEHBHilBIA. 347the letters are so much defaced that I do notattempt to copy them. The library is well providedwith good editions of the classics, broughtfrom Germany by an Igumenos, who had residedthere 17 years, and who died here not long ago ;since which there has been nobody capable of readingthese books, the present monks being as ignorantand clownish as those of Mount Athos. I purchasefrom them a colossal votive hand of bronze,which was found in one of the ravines.The town of Elassona, containing about 400families is the capital of a district of 30 villages,many of which are large. The Voivoda whofarms the revenues is an Albanian, and has alarge house iu the town in the Turkish style.Three mosques and many houses in ruins on theleft side of the Elassonitiko show that the Mussulmanpopulation was formerly more numerous.The Greeks, who now form three fourths of theinhabitants, were then confined to the right bank.Their church in that quarter contains an inscribedmarble, much defaced, but evidently a record ofthe manumission of slaves, and of the sum whichthey paid on the occasion '.Dec. 9. — From Elassona in 35 minutes toTlaplrlfva, in vulgar pronunciation Tjaritjena, aGreek town of 7 or 800 houses, standing at theOne of these donna begins i\iv6ipoi8us vto Evi'oifoii tai^paiTijv tW/iiji'oi' 'Amyoyov ceuKt rj niXci A KB. So thatroC and ends cipyvpiou 22 denarii seems to have beenA K I). Another which has a the ordinary sum paid by thesimilar beginning ruts with freedman.iIke ■iiilHi if isar mw* a ladn^ J f umc m theUse ^<>*e» pa^iee id m smaB Incas cdled Sen,wUe^ i watt Aw art i^ ■•«« im tW pbm.TW ends are a Ten «U>F fiaesaiKe. Tore ucAc Hwm. Wi it Knot villi*of '^^■■J™* «Ucli ■» Mari b note dx» of AH Vmskk'* gonvtt-Tbe gauges of tkeEbasonmkaiBd Xonaretbesatan M cent bId die mpptr ng^aas a( Ofympmg,vfaeie are fennel lai Tides aad soBK cheatedxxviii.] PEnnn^BiA. 349pains, by two rivers flowing from the same cot, nrridge, in opposite directions. One of these isthe Elassonitiko, or Titaresius, the other the riverof PlataiDona ; the heads of the respectiveravines through which they flow, are separatedonly by a plain, at the southern foot of the upperheights of Olympus, which contains the village ofKarya, one of the largest on the mountain. Thisplain is about five miles long, in an E. and W.direction, and is the greatest level space uponOlympus. Like other similar plains on the mountainsof Greece, it supplies only rye and pasturefor flocks. On the fir-clad heights above it, to thenorth, stands the monastery of the Holy Trinity ',situated near a torrent which flows from thencethrough a part of the plain of Karya and then toPlatamona. St. Triadhaha was for many years afavourite haunt of the robbers of 'Elymbo, until bythe magic touch of Alj-'s sword the villages of themountain were converted into tjiftliks of his own,and the robbers into armatolt for their protection.Southward of the plain of Karya, and dividedfrom it only by a ridge, is the parallel valley ofEzero, about half as lai^e as that of Karya, and socalled from a lake which occupies the greater partof it, and which the inhabitants of the village ofEzero endeavoured to draw ofi" into a neighbouringravine, but were obliged to desist after havingwrought several years at it. The lake of Ezero isevidently the ancient Ascuris. Eastward of thisplain is another, not far distant from the summitstn,lu T,m360 PBRRHiEBIA. [Clap.which inclose the pass of Tempe to the northward ;it is separated only by a ridge from a cultivatedregion around the town of mpsani, or lUpsiant ',which looks down upon t^e maritime level at themonth of the Peneus, and southward is opposed tothe fiice of Mount Ossa and Ambelakia. On theridge to the westward of Rapsani are the remainsof an ancient fortress, probably Lapathus, of whichname Rapsani may perhaps be a corruption. Inlike manner as the plain of Kary4 and the noisesof the rivers Elassonitiko and Platamona form aseparation, between the great Olympus and its subordinatesummits, which extend to the plains ofElass6na and Larissa, and to Tempe, so these lattermountains are subdivided by the plain of Ezeroand that near it to the eastward. The western portionof them was evidently the Mount Titarus adjacentto Olympus noticed by Strabo \ the easternprobably bore the same name as the fortress Lapa-thus which stood upon one of its summits. The distancefrom Kary4 to Ezero is reckoned two hours,and from the latter to Rapsani three hours. BetweenNarva and Elassona there are two other viUairiXxviii.] PERRHJEBIA. 3.51plain to Karya, and in the other form the sourcesof the Feria, or river of Tzar'itzena. Konlspoliappears to correspond to the Eudierum of Livy,which was fifteen miles from the Roman camp,between Azorus and Doliche, in the direction ofAsciiris and Lapathus '. The sources of the principalbranch of the Titaresiiis are in the greatflank of Olympus, between Skamnia and Sells,and particularly at a great perennial spring situatedtwo or three hours to the north-east of Elas-son : after quitting the gorges of Olympus it approachesElassona from the north-eastward, turnssouthward through the town, thence flows westwardnear the foot of the hills on the northernside of the plain, and quitting it at the westernextremity passes between hills into the valley ofDheminiko, where it joins the Sarandaforo, orbranch from the mountains of Livadhi, nearAmurii.Dec. 10.— At 3.40, Turkish time, leavingTzaritzena, we continue to cross the plain ofOloosson, not far from the foot of Mount Titarus,and at the south-eastern corner ascend a passcalled the derveni of Meluna, where the roadtraverses a low rocky ridge which connects Titaruswith the mountain of Turnavo, and on the descentcommands a prospect over the superb plain ofPelasgiotis as far as the entrance of Tempe andMount Ossa. Beyond the Peneius, to the right of0$9a, is seen the lake of Karatjair, the ancientNesBoms.LLiv. 1. 44, c. 3.352 PERHII-TIBIA. [chap. XXVllI.At 5.10 we arrive at the foot of the heights ofMeluna, and enter the plain at the small Turkishvillage of Karadere (black valley) called by theGreeks Ligara, then turning to the right and followingthe foot of the mountain of Turnavo, crossat 5.35 a small stream just below the mati, orsource where it issues from the foot of the mountain,and forms a small lake and marsh in theplain to our left. Here a large Turkish village,named Karadjoli, appears across the plain on theside of Mount Titartis, two or three miles on ourleft. Some conspicuous remains of the Hellenicwalls, inclosing the face of the hill, show it to betheposition of a city of some importance.Continuing to wind to the right along the footof the mountain of Turnavo, we cross at 6.33another rivulet flowing from a source on our right,called Krya-vrysi, pass a large tumulus to theleft, and at 6.48 arrive in the town of Turnavo, orTymavo ', which stands in the plain, but not farfrom the mountain.Toupvajioc, Tiipyapoi.CHAPTER XXIX.Thessaly. *Tumavo — Manufactures — Kastn — Tatarii — Larissa — PaleaLarissa, Crannon — Argus — Atrax — Metropolis — Karalar —Mantiariani, Sycurium — First Campaign of the Perth War —Scea — Mopsium — Phalanna — Elateiaia — Gorton — Kiserli —MakrikLori — Vale of Dereli — Baba— Ascent of Mount QuaAmbelakia, its productions, ic.^ Lykostomo, Gonnui —Pass of Lyk6stomo, Tempe — River Penes — Ancient descriptionof Temps — Gonnocondylut — Charax — Castle of Tempt.Tornado contains 1500 families, of these only 70are Mahometan, a number which compared withthe six mosques still existing, shows how muchthe Turkish population has diminished. It is saidthat there were once 4000 houses, which the greatnumber of those in ruins, or uninhabited, renderscredible. The causes to which the depopulationis ascribed, are several successive years of plague,the first Russian war which brought the Albaniansinto Thessaly in great numbers, and lastly, theacquisition of the place by Aly Pasha, which liasdriven away the Turks. Tumavo, like Tzaritzena,is a name of Sclavonic origin, and shows that acolony of that race, perhaps from Turnavo in Bulgaria,was once settled here, of which no othertrace than the name now remains. Another lyricname is found at the lake and village Ezero, in354 Thessaly. [chap.Mount TitaruB, between Tzaritzena and Ripsani.These are the more remarkable, as there arefew if any others in the great eastern Theatalo-Macedonian range to the southward of Vodhen4.Like Tzaritzena, Tumavo has been and is stillindebted for its importance to the weaving anddyeing of the stuffs made of cotton, or of a mixtureof silk and cotton called bukhasi4 and aladja,and to the dyeing of cotton thread, which is chieflyBold to the Ambelakiotes. Long towels in theTurkish and Greek fashion interwoven with goldthreads, and shawls for the head and waist, are alsomade here. There are three dyeing manufactories ;but the looms are all in private houses ; these arereckoned to produce daily 1200 KOfifxana, or piecesof seven peeks each. There are only 200 workingdays in the year, so numerous are the Greekholidays. Ninety okes of thread are made everydayin the town ; the surrounding villages supplyone third of that which is used in the looms, andall that which is dyed for exportation. Tzaritzenamakes as many stuffs as Tumavo, but does notdye so much thread. As at Tzaritzena, Siutlsta,XXIX.] TBESSALIA. 355Porte upon this occasion, and Hands the see burthenedwith a debt of 300 purses, bearing the customaryhigh interest, which he finds the more difficultto pay, as the exportation of grain from Thessalyis forbidden to all but the agents of government,which disables the bishop's flock from contributingto the payment of his demands uponthem, or at least supplies an excuse for withholdingthem. Almost all the Greek, bishoprics areburthened in the same manner with debt ; butlike the public debts of other countries, they formabout of union between individuals and the authorities,and in this country have the advantageof saving the former from the dangers of hoardingthe only alternative with those who are fearfulof the risks of commerce. The necessity of beingprepared to pay the interest gives the bishops alsosomething more than a personal plea for enforcingthe collection of their dues from the clergy andlaity, in which they often find great difficulty.Aly Pasha's bishops are generally assisted by HisHighness's buyurti, supported sometimes, especiallyin the case of the bishop of loannina, by apalikari or two, to ensure attention to it. It washyAly's influence at Constantinople that thebishop of Larissa obtained his promotion, thePasha finding it useful to the support of his influencein this part of Thessaly to have the chiefChristian authority subservient to him, and in thehands of one who has long resided at his court.The largest house at present in Turnavo was builtby Mukhtar Pasha for a young Anxious of thisA a 2366 TRESSALIA. [CIIAP.place, whom Alar has lately, upon complaint of hisson's wife, ordered to be put to death, but whohas been saved and concealed by Mnkhtar.There are many fragments of antiquity in differentparts of the town, some of which it is noteasy to obtain a sight of, as they are in privatehouses : they are all said to have been broughtfrom a height half an hour below Ttimavo calledKastri. At a well in the town, a large sepulchralstone represents a woman sitting in a chair, witha couch before her on which lies a child stretchingout its hands to join those of the mother. Theattitudes and drapery indicate a high antiquity. Inthe churches are a few sepulchral stelie, with theremains of names on them. The most interestingmonument is in the court which surrounds the episcopalchurch and palace, where a plain quadrant'gnlar block of white marble is inscribed on one ofthe narrow sides with four lines in the .colic orThessalian dialect : it is a dedication to ApolloSerious by Sosipatnis, son of Polemarchides, whohad held the offices of Hieromnemon and Arches'.XXIX.] Thessaly. 3o7The lands of TamaTO produce com, wine, andcotton, but are not extensive, being boande^l at afew miles' distance bv those of Larissa to thesouth, and to the east and north-east bv the Koni-aro-gloria, named Kazaklari, Misalari, Karadjoli.All these places, as irell as Tatarii and Marina, areinhabited entirely bv Turks, whose appellation ofKoniaridbes indicate? that they are remains (^ theoriginal settlers from Ionia or IcontMrn, who camehere before the conquest of Constantinople. Theyare employed entirely in the cultivation of the soil,the surplus produce of which suffices to siipplvthem with their other wants. The are poor andinoffensive, and their name is a bve-word of contemptamong the Albanians, who esteem nothingbut the power derived from the sword and thetufek.Reapers in the plain of Tumavo receive from80 to 100 paras a daw, but without provision orwine : these high wages are not undeserved, as theheat in harvest is so excessive as often to causesickness and even death among the labourers. Inthe vineyards they have generally 50 paras a day,with meat and wine, but no bread. The wineorigin of the Etruscan ; for so called as showing thingsthe l.ariMieaii plain was one profitable (iTuipc^) bv meansof the peculiar seats of the of his oracles. The possessiveFelasgi, and was named Pelas- adjective instead of the not,goths to the latest period of in the second case, to expressaotiqiiitf . The epithet KcpCyoc the name of the father, appearhere applied to Apollo, is found from mass other inscriptionsin Lycophron, v. 208, where to have been a Thespian castlescholiast lays that lie was torn.358 TBB88ALIA. [CHAP.made here would be good were it not for the hastewith which it is drawn off iron the fhiit before thefermentation is complete. As usual throughoutGreece, water is added to it before it is sold in thewine-houses ; but there is no mixture here of theresin, which in the poorer liquors of Spins, Attica,land the Morea, serves to check, in B<Mne degree, theacetous fermentation. The wine called IlnXivoc isflavoured with several herbs, and has a taste by nomeans agreeable. The cotton, like that of Thessalyin general, is reckoned superior to the Macedonian,and second only to that of Magnesia adShan, and to some peculiar kinds of the cottonof Smyrna.The mountain above the town is known by thename of Kriliri ' : its summit lies a little to thewestward of a line drawn from Ela886na to Tornado.The ridge has the appearance of extendingto the southward as far as the KHsiira, or openingnoticed on my former journey, through which thePenmu issue into the LarisatBan plain, but in factthere is another similar opening but narrower,about an hour to the southward of Turnavo.XXIX.] Thessaly. 359considerable stream ; but this is sufficiently accountedfor by the jrono^ara, for irrigating gardensand fields of maize, cotton, and tobacco, which interceptits waters in the plain of Dheminiko andvalley of Dhamaai, and by a canal which carrieswater to Larissa, But notwithstanding these diversions,it is sometimes a respectable river at Tornado,as a bridge of fifteen arches at the entranceof the town testifies. Even now the bed, althoughapparently dry, is said to abound in dangerousquicksands, concealing a considerable quantity ofwater.Sometimes the higher classes of Greeks showgreater ignorance even than the peasantry. Themaster of the house in which 1 lodge, one of therichest men in the place, and who has resided inGermany, asks me for a herb to turn copper intogold, and learns, for the first time in his life, thatthe stream which flows by Turnavo is the same asthat at Elassona, and that it has its origin in MountOlympus. There are two routes from Turnavo toTempe ; one leading to Dereli, on the northern side0? the fauces ; the other to Ambelakia, on the southernside. Tiie former of course does not cross the Sa-samaria,but passes below Karadjoli and along thefoot of Mount Titmtts into the vale of Dereli, whichhas a communication by a bridge with Baba, a townsituated on the right bank of the river below ,at the entrance of the only road throughthe strait. The other road from Turnavo to Babacrosses the plain to a ferry over the Salamvria, inadistrict of small Koniaric villages called Barium.This ferry is midway to the northern extremity of360 Thessaly. [CHAP.the lake Karatjair, or Lessons, where the roadjoins that from Larissa to Bad, and then ascendsan opening in a rocky ridge which here bounds theplain of the Peneius, and separates it from the valeof Kiserli at the foot of Mount Osm. The roadthen follows that valley, without any farther interruptionof heights, to Baba.Dec. 11. — A heavy fall of rain yesterday evening,and a tfaQnder-storm at night, are succeededhy fair weather. In the afternoon I proceed toLarissa, crossing the bridge, and arriving intwenty-seven minutes at Kastri. At a small villagenamed Mari, two miles to the right, is alarge artificial tumulus, similar to that already remarkedin the opposite direction. Kastil is undoubtedlythe site of a Hellenic town, thoughthere now remains nothing but the foundations ofa square tower of those times on the summit of thehill, near which are many excavations which havebeen made for extracting wrought masses of stone,which have been transported to Tfimavo. Thehill and surrounding fields are strewed with frag-meritsof ancient pottery. Proceeding From henceXXIX.] Thessaly. 361and at its foot a Turkish burying-ground containsamong the tomb-stones the fragment of a Doricfluted shaft, five feet three inches in circumference.The height is called Magula, a common name foran insulated hill in a plain, especially when preservingthe vestiges of former buildings ; it standsin the midst of a district of small Turkish villagesnamed Tatarii.Leaving the Magula, which is about half anhour from the left bank of the Peneius, at 7.27, wehalt at 7.45 at a khan at one of the makhalas ofTatarii, near a very extensive Turkish burying-ground,in which, among many ancient sepulchralmonuments and fragments of antiquity, I findanother dedication to Apollo, under his Tressilianname Plus, with the addition of the epithet Temples'. ^lian alludes to the worship of Apollo atTempe in his description of that celebrated valley * ;and it is easy to conceive that the deity may havebeen worshipped in some of the neighbouring citiesunder the same appellation. From the khan thebridge of Clarissa is just one hour distant.Dec. 13. — The road from Larissa to the ruinswhich the Greeks call Palea Larissa, and absurdlysuppose to be the site of the ancient city, divergesa few degrees to the right of the direct road toFersala, and at the distance of five or six milesenters upon a low undulated tract which separatesthe lowest level, or that reaching to the banks of'An-XouFi Te/iirtiVy, Aio^^" ' julian. Var. Hist, 1. 3,Xlc Zarupou iXtv&ipta. — V. c. 1.Inscription, No. 147.362 THESBALIA. [CHAP.the river, from another rather higher. The latterthigh now little cultivated, ia fertile, and wasobviously the: territory of one of the chief cities ofThessaly. It extends nine or ten miles southeastwardfrom the foot of the hill of Alifaka, as faras the ridge which separates this plain (iY)m thePhanaUan valley. Ai the beginning of the undulatedground, one hour and five minutes fran clarissa,several squared stones, and a piece of a flutedDoric column, occur in a spot where no Turkishburying-ground or remains of habitations appear.It is perhaps the site of a solitary temple. Tenminutes farther is Hassan Tatarii, a small village,below which are two or three son at afountain, some ancient wells, and several wroughtstones.At the end of two hours and twenty-sevenminutes from Larissa we arrive at Hadjilar, a^iftlik belonging to Hadji Hall Aga of Larissa, butinhabited only by the Greeks who cultivate hislands. My lodging here is a cottage of the bettersort, but of a construction common throughoutXXIX.] Thessaly. 363titian of baskets, between two of which there is anopening serving for the communication between theupper and lower compartments of the cottage.Half an hour from Hadjilar, in the direction ofFersala, is the place called Palea Larissa, a namewhich was undoubtedly attached to it when theremains of antiquity were much more considerablethan they are at present. It supplies an exampleof the manner in which the ancient citiesof the more fertile parts of Greece have graduallybeen obliterated, although built by a people withwhom durability was the principal object. Besidesapplying the ordinary materials to reconstruction,the Turks are in the habit of searching for wroughtstones of white marble, for the purpose of convertingthem into tomb-stones, by which means ancientsculptures and inscriptions are often defacedto make way for the rude representation of aTurkish turban, or for some words in Arabic.Even when the ancient letters have escapederasure, the monument having been removed toa distance from its original position may only misleadthe geographical enquirer. In rocky situations,and the poorer parts of the country, theremains have a better chance of preservation thanin such fertile plains as these, where large moderntowns have succeeded the ancient cities, and wherestone being scarce, every village finds it convenientto resort to the ancient sites for materials.At Palea Larissa, the son, or stone coffins of theancient cemetery, have been particularly in demand,as well in Larissa as in all the villagesaround Hadjilar, where they arc used as water364 Thessaly. [Clap.troughs. They were in such request, that thepeople of this village finding that they were sometimessunk three or four feet deep in the ground,were in the habit of sounding for them with ironrods. But Abdim Bey, chief Aykn of Clarissa, informedme yesterday that he had forbidden thefurther search, lest the Porte, hearing false accountsof the proceeding, should suppose that treasurehad been discovered. Notwithstanding thespoliations to which the ancient remains have beenBO long exposed, some foundations of the walls ofthe town, or more probably of the citadel, may betraced along the edge of a quadrangular heightcalled Paleokastro, which is nearly a mile in circumference,and towards the upper part of whichare some vestiges of a transverse wall forming adouble inclosure. This height, and all the fieldsaround, are covered with pottery, and on the sideof the height, or on the rise of the hills behind it,are eight or nine small tumuli. Here the soriwere found, and some of them are still left above-ground,not having been carried away after theyXXIX.] THEB8ALIA. 365ward, the road from Laisse to Maskoluri crossesthe heights into the plain of the Enipeus.Dec. 14. — The most interesting of the monumentsfound at Palea Larissa have been removed fromthence and deposited by the Greeks, who generallyshow this respect for the works of their ancestors, atthe little village church of Hadjilar. The first to bementioned is an inscription of forty lines, in smallcharacters of the best times, wanting four or fivelines at the commencement, as well as a few lettersat the beginning and end of every line, but stillpreserving enough to prove Palea Larissa to be thesite of Crannon', or as the name is written on themarble Canon '. This inscription is in the thessalydialect, among the peculiarities of which isthe conversion of the Hellenic Q into OY, so thatTown TAFOYN FNOYMAS occurs for Ton tarnrNQMAS. The name of the people is writtenKPANOYNNIOI ; ONAAOYMA represents ANA-anima,and resembles the ONEBEIKE of the inscriptionof Turnavo ; of this form another instanceis found in the words ^A^IEMA ONPPA^EIEN KIONA AieiNON, which are repeated. Theobject of this record is the very common one ofCrannon la placed in the ' On the coins wc findPeutinger table on the road Span, KPANNO, KPANNn-from Larissa to Phaedra in the NIHN. The single or doubleManiac gulf, 15 m.p. from the letter was generally a matterformer, and 38 m. p. from the of indifference. KPANNOY-Inter, which nearly accords NIOYN is also found on somewith the situation of Palea of the coins, and in like man-clarissarelatively to Larissa ner Toiufirovv, ^ipaiaur, onand the gulf, those nf Goinphi and Pierce.366 Thessaly. [Chap.a vote of citizenship to certain foreign benefactorsof the city'. A atone in the wall of . the church,upon which a Hermes on a pedestal is representedin relief, is inscribed with the words EPMAOX60NI0Y*, in very neat characters well preserved.On a handsome pedestal in the churchyardare the words NIKASinnOX NIKOYNEIOS',where the last word, which in Attica and mostother parts of Greece would have been N1K0N02,exemplifies both the provincial custom of convertingQ into OY, and that of employing the patronymicadjective instead of the father's name in ^esecond case. On turning up a marble lyingin the church,. I. find that it is sculptured in lowrelief, without any inscription, and represents afemale placing a chaplet on the head of a horse,a large dog standing by. The priest allows me tocarry it away on condition of leaving a present forthe church. ,Ip one of the cottages is a sepulchralstone representing a man with a small dog leapingup to caress hit, — the drapery heavy and figureunfinished. While Was copying the inscriptionXXrX.] THE8BAUA. 367near the right bank of the Peneius. The roadpasses by Vaughan, a small village lying at thefoot of the hill, and then over the ridge, leavingthe summit to the left. We return to Larissa in theafternoon by the same route by which we came.Dec, lb. — At 4.24, Turkish, having crossed thebridge of Larissa, I pursue westward for about aquarter of an hour a kalderim, or causeway alongthe side of an inundation which is formed by theriver in winter, and then crossing the plain withthe river at a short distance on the left, arrive, at0.7, at a spot where some ancient foundations, twoor three covers of sori, and several squared blocksare scattered on the ground. In a neighbouringfield lies a fragment of a Doric column, of whichthe chord of the fluting is six inches. An inundationextends from hence to the river, which ishalf a mile distant. A third of a mile to the rightare six tumuli standing nearly in a line, andstretching three quarters of a mile from east towest ; the two in the middle are large, particularlyone of them, the others arc small and low. Behindone of those in the middle there is a seventh.Tumuli being generally indications of sites of highantiquity, these probably mark the position of theHomeric Orissa ; the remains in the road may bethose of its successor Argura, which Strabo placesexactly in this situation '.'H ficv oiv "Apyiffffa ^ virile ff AydfiiiTOV roraftiay tl\BV'Apyovpa cri ry Iltiyci^ Keirai. Ueppaiiloi-Strabo, p. 440. —'Ywi(iK€iTai S av-nii ' Argai. ir Stephen in'Apyoupa.TirrapanoyTa rralloit, rf to Eustathius (in II. B. v, 738)ra/iy TrXij^iafouffn Roi avrt}- Bays int in some of the cope*Thessaly. [chap.Proceeding from hence at 5.17, we soon arriveon the bank of the river, and following it, pass at5.47 for 7 minutes over fields covered with stonesand pottery, on low eminences which terminate inan earthy cliff overhanging the river's hank. Fiveminutes beyond the end of this stony ground isanother tube or tumulus on the right of the road,and as much farther one more.At 6.45 we arrive at the ferry of Gunitza, whichis a small Greek village on the opposite or rightbank of the Salamvria, just where it emerges intotile plain from the opening more than once mentioned,which is a rocky gorge about half a milelong. A road ascends the left bank of the riveralong the pass to Zarko, and another branchesfrom it to Dhamasi 1^ hour distant. The fields onthe left bank of the river just opposite to Gunitza,both on the slope of the hill and In the plain, arecovered with stones and fragments of ancient pottery,and in one place there are foundations ofa Hellenic wall. On the summit also are considerableremains of a wall of loose stones extendingfrom thence to a lower precipice of thehill. The latter is very rocky, and so abrupt,particularly towards the river, as hardly to haverequired any artificial fortification in that part.Just within the pass a copious source of waterissues from the foot of the height. This place,now called Sidhiro-peliko ', agrees so entirelyof Homer the word was'Apyeia, ' ZiSifpo-irfKiKog means aand that the place was founded place where chipping of ironby the sons of Larissa, taught are found,ter of Pegasus.XXIX.] Thessaly. 36!)with that of Atrax, which stood on the Peneius,ten miles from Larissa, that I have no doubt ofthe identity, though little of Hellenic antiquityremains here. The strength of the height is inperfect conformity with the successful resistance ofAtrax against the consul Quiuctius, in the yearB.C. 198'. Neither Livy nor Strabo', indeed,state on which bank of the Peneius Atrax stood,but as the former remarks that the inhabitantswere Perrhaebi, and in another place shows itsvicinity to other Perrhsebian towns ', the left bankis the more probable-havingcrossed the ferry to Gunitza, I therefind in a church a sepulchral marble erected inmemory of one Curious, by his wife Melete,daughter of Sosias^. On the outside of the village,a great number of mill-stones are collected,which are made in a neighbouring quarry, andare here in preparation to be embarked on theriver. Just below the village the river is partlydiverted as a canal for mills and irrigation. Theferry is the ordinary communication from Tornado,the Larissaan plain, and Elassona, towardsHadjilar and Fersala.After having recrossed the river, and dined atthe fountain on the bank, the weather clear andwarm as in an English May, we proceed toTumavo, setting out at 8,30, and riding along thefoot of the rocky heights with the plain on theLiv. 1. 32, c. 15. 17.Liv. 1. 36, c.13.Strabo, p. 438.V. Inscriptionn, N<VOL. in.Bb370 TBESSAUA. [chap.right, until at 9.12 we cross a small canal derivedfrom the Elassonitiko, or Titaremts, and which is carriedfrom hence directly across the plain to Larissa.I have before observed, that this canal and theirrigations at Dhamasi, and in the plan of Amurii,deprive the river of so much water, that at Tornadothe sandy bed absorbs all the rest. Theopening in the ridge of Kritiri, through which theriver issues, is similar to that of Gunitza, — steeprocky heights on either side leading space onlyfor the river. The pass is about 2 miles in length,and begins to widen a little below Dhamasi ; beyondwhich village it forms an extensive plain. At9.22 the late tumulus near Mari is upon arising ground near the right of the road ; and at9.45, after having crossed the bed of the Elas-sonitiko, I again enter Tumavo. The JjarisstBonplain to the north of the Penitus is reckoned notBO fertile as that to the south, although this yearit produced 20 to 1, and from 15 to 18 is not anuncommon return. The com of Dhamasi is notBO productive, but is reckoned better than that ofJtXIX.] TIIESSALIA. 371Dasiarch '. The iufereiict; to be ilrawn from thisinscription is that Kastri is the position of Metropolis,since it is not very likely that the gymna-search should have been an alien. That there wasa city named Metropolis in this part of the countrydifferent from that of Upper Thessaly which wasrear Thorax and Tricca", there are proofs in Ivyand Stephens', From the historian we learnthat Antiochus, in the year 191 B.C. having sailedfrom Chalcis, and landed at Deraetrias, first tookPera', then Crannon, then Cyphers, Metropolis,and all the neighbouring fortresses, except Atraxand Gyrton, after which he encamped before Larissa,with the intention of besieging that place.But a portion of the Roman army under PiusClaudius, wiio had been detached by Bsbius fromDassaretia, having arrived at Gonnus, and Antiochus,who saw their fires, having mistaken there foran indication of the arrival of the whole allied forceof Philip and the Romans, he was so much alarmedthat, taking into consideration also the advancedseason, he returned to Demerits, after having remainedbefore Larissa only one day, during whichhe was rejoined by his allies of Athamania andjEtolia, who had previously quitted his army onhostile expeditions, of which the TripoUtis ofPerrhiebia and Pelinnagura were the most distantpoints. It is evident that these operations were,O; ftariaiLOi niTfaior *i- ' Liv. 1. 36, c. 10.— Mijrpi-XolcviSov Mi]TpojrDXi'ri(i' yufi- toXic rcraprij QiaaaXiatraaiap^iiaayTa. — V. Inscribe Ofi-arij. res fii-u QtH'tion, No. 15.t. maniac— StephrStrain, p. 437.372 Thessaly. [CHAP .except in the single instance of the excursion toPeliniiEeum, confined to the Pelasgiotis and Per-rhasbia ; consequently, that the Metropolis therementioned was in the same part of Thessaly, anddistinct from that of Upper Thessaly, which wasnot far from Gomphi and ^ginium, and wastaken by Flamininus on his descent into that partof Thessaly after the battle of the Sons '. Andthus we have an explanation of the distinctionwhich Stephens has made between the Metropolisof Thessaly and that of Upper Thessaly.Dec. 16.— The plain having been dried, andthe paths improved by the late ene weather, Ireturn to Larissa this afternoon by the circuitousroute of Mari, and from thence directly to thecity, for the most part along the canal derivedfrom the Titaregius. The circuit is not so greatas by Talari, but one sixth longer than by thedirect paved road, which is about ten miles.Dec. 17. — At 8.30, Turkish time, leaving Larissawith horses of the post, and taking the roadto Aghia, I observe, as we clear the town, at leastsixteen tumuli in the adjacent part of the plain.After a halt of 10 minutes at a tjiftlik belongingto Vel" Pasha, we continue our direction towardsa rocky point conspicuous from Larissa. Thispoint is the southern extremity of the rocky ridgeextending from thence 10 or 12 miles in a northerlydirection to the Salamvria, which separates thatend of it from Kondo-vuni, as the eastern part ofthe range of Titarus is called. Approaching theXXIX.] Thessaly. 373rocky point, we cross the Asmak, or profundity, adeep watercourse which carries the superfluouswaters of the lake Karatjair, or Lessons, to thelake of Kara. In seasons of rain the Asmak isimpassable, but now it has only water standing inpools, in which small fish are caught. Soon afterhaving passed it, we are abreast of the rockypoint, and at 11.15 arrive at a tjiftlik of AbdimBey, called Karalar, having left the Turkish villageof Marmariani on the slope of the range ofOssa, 2 miles on our left. Not having providedmyself with a letter from Abdim, 1 find some difficultyin obtaining a lodging here, but at lengthfind refuge in a small cottage, sending our horsesto the khan Two miles and a half beyondKaralar is Gkiuksan, another tjiftlik on thefoot of some low ridges which branch from Ossatowards Vellum. About an hour to the south ofGkiuksan is the village of Kastri, at the foot of ahill which stands advanced in front of the heightsof Pelium, and is inclosed by the walls of a fortress,which has an appearance of Roman or lowerGreek times, but may possibly be Hellenic ; for itis evident that the people of Thessaly were notalways in the habit of employing the massivemasonry of the southern parts of Greece, notwithstandingthat they occupied the original seats ofthe Pelasgi, who seem to have taught the Greeksthat mode of building. But in many parts of theextensive plains of Thessaly, quarries from whichlarge homogeneous masses might be extracted,such as are found in the walls of the cities ofsouthern Greece and the Peloponnesus, wereso ^H374 Thessaly. [CHAP.distant, that the labour and expence of fortifyingin that manner would have been enormous.An hour and a half beyond Gkiukaan is Aia,properly Aghia', called Ghiaur Yenidje by theTurks, standing on some heights near the foot ofthe steepest part of Mount Ossa, exactly in theopening between Ossa and Pelium, and not morethan 2 hours fixim the sea. From Aia to Volo thedistance is 10 hours, leaving the lake of Kara onthe left, about half way ; in the opposite directionthe road from Aia to Ambelakia crosses the maritimeface of Mount Ossa, where are several smallvillages among the woods, and a path practicableonly by mules.Dec. 18.— We leave Karaiar at 3.40, Turkish,but lose twenty minutes by taking the wrong roadand wandering in a wood which stretches fromBarbarians into the plain, A little below thatvillage are some fragments of white marble, andmany stones in the fields. A stream of waterwhich flows through the wood originates in aSource in the mountain above Barbarians calledDedi Kapelar. The seven gates where a tank hasXXIX.] Thessaly. 375Sycurium was situated at a distance of about tenmiles from Larissa, at the foot of Mount Ossa, onthe southern side, looking upon the Thessalianplains in that direction, and backed by Macedoniaand Magnesia, abounding in fountains of perennialwater, and commodiously placed for collectingcorn from the neighbouring territories of Cran-nonand Pierce '.The consul, P. Lucilius Crassus, commander ofthe Roman army opposed to Perseus, who hadmarched through Epirus and Athamania to Gom-phi in Upper Thessaly, considered himself fortunatein finding that part of the country free fromthe enemy, as his army had suffered severely incrossing the mountains. After a few days' repose,he continued his route towards Larissa, which wasin possession of the Romans, and pitched his campat Tripoli Scea, a village on the right bank of thePeneius, three miles above that city ^ Here hewas joined by the brothers, Eugene and Attains,of Pertains, with a considerable reinforcement ofinfantry and a small body of Greek cavalry, chieflyThessalian. Perseus, being superior in cavalry,endeavoured to draw the consul out of his positionby laying waste the Pherfea ; but not succeeding inthis design, he marched from Securing to the dis-liv.I. 42, c. 54, et acq. from a place called Tripoli.The vulgar reading ia — But we know of no such townad LariHsam in china part af the country; anddicit. Inde, quum tria millia as It is clear that the Roanferia beset a Tripoli (Steam camp was not far from LarisBO,voc'ani) super Peneus amnem the true reading is peibapiiposuit castra (c, 55). which im " ad Tripoli."plies that Sicca wa three miles376 TUES8AL1A. [chap.tance of a mile from the Roman camp, where hearrived at the fourth hour of the day. A partialcombat ensued midway between the two camps,chiefly of cavalry and light infantry, in which ,chief of the Gauls, was slain. Perseusthen returned to Sycurium. On the following daybe made a similar attempt, and aa the troops hadbefore suffered from a want of water in a marchof twelve miles over a plain where little waterwas to be found, they now carried a supply with .them in wagons. But the Romans still remainedwithin their camp, and were equally cautiousduring several successive days on which Perseusrepeated the experiment. The king then movedhis army to a distance of five miles from the enemy,entrenched his position, and on the followingday, drawing out his infantry at the same place asbefore, advanced at sunrise with all his light-armedand cavalry to the Roman camp. As hemade his appearance at a much earlier hour thanon the former occasions, the Romans were takenby surprise ; the consul, however, having drawni his3EXIX.] Thessaly. 377having crossed the river in the night, thus gave aproof of conscious weakness, such as was likely tohave led to a complete overthrow. The king nowremoved to Mopsium, and the Romans, withoutquitting the bank of the river, retired to a safersituation, where they received a reinforcement of2000 Numidia cavalry, with infantry in equalnumbers, and twenty-two elephants. This positionwas probably not far from Atrax.Mopsium, although described only by the historianas a bill midway between Larissa and Tempe',was a Tressilian city of some importance, as welearn from other authorities, and from its coins,and it was of high antiquity, as the name was saidto have been derived from Mopsus, a Naphtha, whoaccompanied the Argonauts. Its ruined walls arestill conspicuous, exactly in the situation mentionedby Livy ; that is to say, midway between Larissaand Tempe, near the northern end of the lakeKaratjair or Lessons, just where the road fromthe one to the other crosses the ridge which I Havealready described as extending from a rocky pointnear Karalar to the Salamvria, not far from thewestern extremity of Tempe. Mount Mopsiumseparates the great Larisscean plain from the valeof Kiserli at the foot of Mount Ossa.Ad Mopdam posuit ca*- Ethnic was Moi^oc, but thetra (Perseus sc.) tumulus hie coin are inscribed Mui^e'wv,inter Tempe et Clarissa. me the dialectic form of Moi/^'-dies est. — Liv. 1. 41, c> 61, •>>>-, from Moi^cvt, like Kickpiclitiy for Kupiiuiv from Strabo, p. 441. — Stephan. pitvt-in Hoil/tov. He adds, that the378 THBBSALIA. [Chap.From Mopsium, after making proposals ofpeace, which had no effect in consequence of theunreasonable demands of the consul, Perseus re-turned to Sycarium, and while in that positionmade an oDsucceaaful attempt to set fire to thecom which the Romans had been reaping, andhad collected in heaps before their tents ; soonafter which, the consul, who had exhausted thecountry around him, removed into the Pannoniafor the sake of further supplies. The two campswere now separated by a plain not less deficientin water, and much wider than when the contendingforces were respectively at Secundum andScea. The king, therefore, in advancing againstthe eneiny, began his march from Sycurium atnoon, halted in the evening at some distance shortof the Romans, and the next morning surprisedthem by occupying all the hills around their campwith the Macedonian cavalry. As they still declinedan engagement, Perseus sent orders for hisinfantry to return to Sycurium, and soon ai^erwartlsretired with his horse, followed for a short distanceXXIX.] Thessaly. 379though surrounded hy the Macedonians, resisteduntil the consul arrived to their relief. Uponhearing of his approach, Perseus sent to the campat Mopsium for the phalanx, but in the meantime,having engaged with the Romans and sustainedconsiderable loss, he was obliged to retreat beforethe succour could arrive. The advancing phalanxmet the prisoners and waggons taken from theRomans in a narrow pass, which so impeded theirprogress that they killed the prisoners, and threwthe waggons over a precipice ; soon after whichthey met Perseus and his forces retiring in confusion.Fortunately for bim, the consul was asnegligent in following up his advantage as theking himself had been at the battle of Scea. Afew days afterwards, Perseus, leaving a stronggarrison in Gonnus, and a smaller body at Phil,for the purpose of gaining over the Magnates andother neighbouring people, retired into Macedonia.Lucilius then moved to Gonnus, but findingit impregnable, turned towards Mallet, whichhe took and destroyed ; then, reducing the Tripodand other parts of Perrhsebia, he went intowinter-quarters at Larissa, distributing his armyamong the cities of Thessaly.If we admit Crannon to have been at PaleaLarissa, Si/curium at Marmariani, and Mopsium atthe ancient remains midway between Larissa andTempe, nothing can be clearer, on an inspection ofthe real scene of action, than the preceding narrativeof the first campaign of the Persic war. Wemay farther infer from it, that the remains at are those of Phalaena ; for it is levithat when Perseus placed himself the secondevident ^Htime ^^H380 TBBSSALIA. [CHAP.at Mopsium, the position of the RomaoB was onthe opposite side of the great LarisxBon plain, andconsequently that PhxUanna was either the ancientcity which stood at Kastri, or that at Karadjoli;Tatarii, the third ancient site in this plain, beingtoo near to Mopsium, and having only a plain traversedby a river between it and the site of MopnufR, whereas the narrative requires hills and apass. If Kaatri be taken for the site of Metropolis,it will follow that Phalanna was at Karadjoli ; aposition according much better than that of Kastri'with the Homeric name Orthe, which, in theopinion of some critics, reported by Strabo, wasthe same as the citadel of Phalanna ' ; for Orthe isexactly descriptive of such a steep rocky hill as thatof Karadjoli, and was a name scarcely applicable tosituations in the plain such as those of Kastri andTatarii. This position of Phalanna accords moreoverwith its having been considered a PerrhtBfnantown, as well as Gonnus*, which was similarlysituated as to the Elastic plain.From Marmariani we cross a small rocky ridgeLittle Kiaerli, Amanda, a large Turkish village,called by the Greeks Makrikhori, is two miles onour left, on the side of the ridge of Mopsium. At6.48 we halt at a fountain, where the road beginsto ascend Mount Ossa towards Ambelakia. Onthe opposite side of the river a beautiful semicircularplain presents itself, extending to the foot ofMount Olympus, and containing the Turkish townof Dereli, situated a mile and a half from the river,and occupying a large space of ground amongvineyards and gardens, which are separated fromthe river by a wood of linaria. The river entersthis valley from the great Lariss^an plain througha pass formed by the northern end of the heightof Makrikhori, or northern extremity of MountMopsium, opposed to Kondoviini, or the extremityof Mount Titarus. In the Klisura, or pass, the riveris crossed by a bridge named that of Denies, abovewhich, on the height of Makrikhori, are some remainsof the walls of an ancient city. In a few words,Livy shows this to have been the site of Elateiaia,and Gonnus to have occupied the vale of Dereli ',It was between Kondovuni and Karadjoli, atthe foot of Mount Titarus, that I conceive thelast action of the first campaign of the Persic warto have occurred, when Perseus, after having captureda large body of the enemy who were engagedin collecting the com of the Phalannteanplain, surrounded L. Pompous and HOO Romans,upon a height which seems to have been one of. , , . Elation et adeunt : magis Gonnus. — LireGonnum. Itaque oppida in 1. 42, c. 54.&»eibu9 sunt, quite TempeTHESSAUA. [chap.the last halls of Mount Titarus. The pass in whichPerseus In his retreat was met by his advancingphalanx, was probably near the bridge of Vernesi ;for although Livy has not mentioned the river inhis description of this affair, the previous positionsand movements of the two contending armiesshow that it must have flowed between the twocamps, and must therefore have been crossed andrecrossed by Perseus in the operations of that day.The pass of Vernesi, or of Latent, is precisely suitedto the circumstances related by the historian, especiallyif we suppose a bridge to have existed in thesame situation as at present, which would in somemeasure account also for Livy '8 silence as to thecrossing of the river.If the edges of the great plain to the northwardof Larissa were occupied, as I have supposed,by Atrax, Metropolis, Phalanna, Elateiaia,and Mopsium,- — Gyrton is the only place to whichthe remains at Tatarii can be attributed, supposingGyrton to have stood in this plain, on which pointit must be confessed there is conflicting testimony.Strabo, by twice connecting Gyrton with themouth of the Peneius ', seems to show that it wasbelow the pass of Tempe ; and on that supposition,the epitomizer of his seventh book, by addingthat it was near the Peneius and the foot ofMount Olympus', will require it to be placed onthe left bank of the river. But the Peneius belowTempe having been the boundary of Magnesia andMacedonia, such a situation is very improbable,Stnibo. pp. 4;l9, 411. ' Strabo (Epit. 1. 7) p. 32fl.XXrX.J TIIF-SSALIA. 383as Gyrton waa a Thessalian town. Nor could itbe reconciled with Livy, whose circumstantial testimony,derived from Polybius, is far preferable tothe vague indications of the geographer, and whoseems evidently to require Gyrton to have been inthe vicinity of Phalanna, Atrax, and Larissa, or insome part of the same plains in which those citiesstood. When Perseus descended into them fromTripolitis, or the northern division of Perrhaebia,before his first occupation of the position of Sycu-rum, he encamped, after having taken Cyretiaeand Mite, in the southern part of PerrhBebia, atPhalanna, and the next day moved to Gyrton,from whence, on finding the place defended by astrong garrison of Romans and Thessalonians, heturned away to Elateiaia and Gonnus. Such amarch is quite incomprehensible, on the suppositionthat Gyrton was below Tempe. Tatarii,therefore, I take to have been the site of Gyrton.Its distance from Larissa seems to accord with theproximity of Gyrton to that city, as deducible froma fact mentioned by Romanus, the biographer ofHippocrates of Cos ; namely, that the sepulchre ofthat celebrated physician stood on the road whichleads from Gyrton to Larissa : such a centralsituation in this fertile plain was well adapted tothe importance and opulence which the tenor ofhistory and other evidence attaches to Gyrton'.See Ihe coins of Gyrton, lanius applies to it the epithetand it* mention by Livy, Poly opulent,biua, Strabo and Pliny. Apol-'HXvOt i' a'f fci^k jrpoXtwwj' Vv^Tuira Kdpwj'oiKairtilnz. Argon, 1. 1, v. 57-TIIES9ALIA. [CII.IP.From the pass of Vernesi, or Elateiaia, the Peneuswinds majestically along the vale of Detail toData, where begin the straits of Tempe, or BabaBogbazi, as the defile is called by the Turks.On the foot of Kondovuni, half way between thebridge of Vemesi and Dereli, stands the smallTurkish village of Rughin ; and two miles fromDereli, in the opposite direction towards Tempe,another larger named Balamiit ; the latter is alittle removed from the river, and nearly oppositeto Baba. Half way between Dereli and Calamus,on some rocky heights at the foot of a point ofMount Olympus, about a mile from the river, aresome remains of a Hellenic city, mixed with otherruins of a later date. The place is called Lykos-toino, or the Wolf's Mouth, a name still appliedby the Greeks to the pass of Tempe, but whichoccurs as that of a town in the Byzantine history asearly as the eleventh century, together with severalother names still existing iu Macedonia andThessaly, as Salaries, Dominions, Triccala,Serbia, Ostrobus, Achris '. Lykostomo, or Lykos-tomio, has continued from those ages to the presentto give title to a bishop of the ecclesiasticalprovince of Thessalonica, whose ordinary residenceis Ambelakia.From our meridian halt at the fountain weascend to Ambelakia in one hour and eighteenminutes, by a winding path, along the woodyflanks of Mount Kissavo, looking down to the lefton the village and bridge of Baba. Ambelakia, aAnna Comment, 1. 5.XXIX.] Tiir.ssAi.iA. 3H5Greek town of about six liuudrttl families, is situatedin a hollow included between two counterfortsof the mountain, which, descending steeply tothe river, form together with the still more abruptsides of Olympus, the southern or western entranceof the pass of Lykostomo, or Ternpe. The entirehollow around Ambelakia is covered with vineyards(whence the name), intermixed with theoak, olive, fig, and cypress. The overhangingmountain is covered with oaks, and completes thebeauty of one of the most delightful summer retreatsin Greece. To the westward is seen thePeneius, winding through the valleys of Amandaand Derell, until a little beyond Baba, and immediatelybelow Ambelakia, it enters the precipitousstraits. To the northward the snowy summits ofOli/mpus present themselves, towering above thewoody slopes and rocks which surround the valeof Derell or overhang the strait of Tcnipe ; andthough not less than twenty miles distant, appearby the effects of their magnitude, of the clearnessof the atmosphere, and of the small difference ofthe angle under which all the summits are seen,to be very little farther from Ambelakia than therocks on the opposite side of the river. No viewcan present a closer and more complete contrastof the sublime and terrific with the tranquil andbeautiful ; the former represented by the precipicesof Ossa and Oli/mpus, the latter by the windingriver and the villages of the valley reposingamidst gardens, meadows, corn-fields, scatteredtrees, and detached groves of oak and ilex.Among the nearer heights of Olympus, whichVOL. in. c c386 Thessaly. [CII4P.rise above the eastern extremity of Tempe, is seenRapaani, or Rapsiani, a town containing a greaternumber of fanes than Ambelakia, but bj nomeans so opulent.The inhabitants of Bapsani are cbie6y employedin the manufacture of amadis, or mixed stuffs ofsilk and cotton ; those of Ambelakia in dyeing redcotton thread, which is sent overland to Germanyand Hungary. The principal Ambelakiotes haveresided many years in Christendom, apeak'Ger-nan, and though rather too mercantile in theirideas, are agreeable in manners and comparativelyenlightened. They maintain a Hellenicschool, which seems to mike good progress, underthe superintendence and encouragement of theresident bishop. But notwithstanding these marksof superior civilization, there is no place where theGreek Si\wiHti is more prevalent than at Amelia.Party spirit, or envy and jealousy, have dividedindividuals, families, and relationships ; and althoughsmall disputes are generally terminated bythe archons, the Ambelakiotes have often the follyXXIX.] TIIESSAI.IA. 397is partly spun by the women and children of theplace itself. It ia all formed by the spindle. Therizari or madder', more vulgarly aXilapt, whichforms the chief ingredient of the dye, is importedfrom Smyrna, and crushed here in mills turnedby horses. The process, as well as 1 can comprehend,or the Ambelakiotes are willing to explainit, consists of three parts ; first the washing,in which oil is used ; secondly, the impregnationwith animal matter, in which the blood of oxenseems to be the chief ingredient ; and thirdly, theapplication of the dye. The value of the thread,which costs three or four piastres an oke, is morethan doubled by the process. Nevertheless, theultimate gain is by no means excessive, the freightto Belgrade being not less than 60 piastres the horseload, and two years being often required to give aprofitable return on the first outlay. Another inconvenienceis the increasing expence of themanufacture in consequence of the scarcity ofmadder, which grows wild on the mountains ofAsia Minor, and for which the cultivated rootcannot be substituted without injury to the dye.From 150 to 200 thousand okes of thread are sentto Germany every year, where it is chiefly employedin stuffs, of which a large portion is sentto Spain for its American colonies. Some threadis dyed blue at Ambelakia for the use of the Thessalianlooms. Not many years ago, the manufacturersof Ambelakia, or in other words thewhole town, formed a single company, in which,388 THE8BALIA. [cMAP-'as in the ships of the ^gesan, and many Greekcommercial enterprizes, every labourer had ashare. The members residing abroad secured tothe company all the profits of brokerage andagency. Nothing could be more economical andprofitable than such a management. They arenow divided into five or six companies, conductedupon the same principles, but by no means withan equal degree of advantage. They were all ingreat danger last year in consequence of the numerousfailures at Vienna; they now cannot receivetheir remittances here on account of the lowvalue of the florin, and they apprehend ruin if thepaper of Vienna should be discredited. Ivo, thechief merchant, has the reputation of being wortha million piastres, which, though not more than60,0002. sterling, is a large sum in this impoverishedempire '.One of the ancient cities of Ossa was celebrated,as Ambelakia is in the present day, for its reddye, but according to Lucretius it was procuredfrom a shell-fish '.XXIX.]Thessalythe name Hippocrates was not long since broughtto light there, and a small Hercules in bronze,which I have purchased from the Ambelakioteinto whose hands it had fallen. These remainsBeen to leave no doubt that the Byzantine Lycos-tomium ' was built on the site of the HellenicGonnus ; for as this city appears from the testimonyof Herodotus to have been on the northern side ofthe Peneus*, there cannot remain a doubt, onconsidering the several passages of Livy in whichits mention occurs, that it was situated in the valleyof Dereli '.Eight or nine years ago the Turkish villages ofthe valley of Uereli joined some other allies in apredatory expedition against Ambelukia, and attackedthe place with 3,000 men. The Greeksadvanced to the height westward of the town,where now stands a ruined windmill, but wereobliged to retreat before superior numbers. Theassailants burnt some of the outer houses uf thetown, but could not penetrate into it. The war1. 4, cAuKoordfiiavCantacuz. 1. 2,19.Herodot. 1.7, c. 128. 173.Rex (Philippus <r.) effusocurae Tempe petit. Ibi adGonnoa diem unum subatitit. —Liv. 1. 33, c. 10.Oppidum Gonni viginti mil-hiaah Mariana beat in ipaiafaucibua aaltus quite Temjicappellant situni. — Liv. 1. 36,. . Elotiarft (ioItaque oppida in faucibussunt que Tempe account ; nineGonnus. — Liv. t. 42, c. 54.Ad Gonnum . . . ante ipsaTempe in faucibus altum Macedonia,ctaustni tutissima prse-bet, et in Tlieasaliam opportuneMacedonians decorum.c. 67.Hie locus (Tempe ic.)per quatuor distant local prfc-stirs regina fuit inaessua; unumin primo aditti ad Gentiumerat Liv. 1. 44, c. 6.390 Thessaly [Chap.ci^tiniied for some days, when the Beys of Larissainterfered aud put ao end to it.Dec. 19. — This morning the atmosphere is sodiaphanous that I am able to distinguish the castle(tf Saloniki, and to connect it by the sextant withseveral important points ; though its direct distanceis not much less than 60 geographical miles. Butwhile distant objects are so clear, die whole of Tempeis covered with mist. A messenger from Viennabrings die news of the bate of Jena, intelligencewhich seems not more agreeable to the Arbelathan it is to myself. They have for many- years been in the habit of maintaining a regularpost, which was due every 15 days, but the messengerbeing a footman as far as Seisin, and thewar and troubles in Serra having thrown manyimpediments in the way, he now arrives veryirregularly.Dec. 20. — From Ambelakia to Litokhoro. Thesnows of Olympus had just received a golden tingefrom the rays of the sing sun, when we beganour descent into the strait, or narrowest part of theXXIX.] THBSSALIA. 391upon the rocks, where the space between the footof the precipices of Ossa and the river is sufficientonly for the road, which is about 20 feet abovethe wafer. Here a current of cold air issuing froma small cavern, gives to the place the name ofavifioiTfTpa. The wind proceeds, probably, fromthe channel of one of the subterraneous streams ofwater, of which there are many in the pass, rushingfrom the rocks into the Salamvria. The riverflows with a steady and tranquil current, exceptwhere its course is interrupted by islands, or wheredams have been constructed for intercepting fish.After having passed some marks of chariot-wheelsin the rock, we arrive at 3.55 at a spotwhere the bank is supported by the remains of aHellenic wall, and at 4.8 at the ruins of a castlebuilt of small stones and mortar, standing on oneside of an immense fissure in the precipices ofOssa, which afford an extremely rocky, thoughnot impracticable descent from the heights intothe vale. Between the castle and the river therewas space only for the road, nor is the level anywider between the opposite bank and the precipicesof Olynijnis, where several caverns are seen,some of which retain traces of painting. Theywere once probably ascetic retreats ; for one ofthem near the river side is still a church, dedicatedto the Holy Trinity. It may formerly, perhaps,have been sacred to Pan and the Nymphs.As to the altar, or temple of Apollo Temples,which once existed in Tempe, sonic of the circumstancesattending his worship seem to require amore open situation than these narrowest parts ofthe strait, and Babu appears the most probable392 Thessaly. I^CBAP.situation for it. The ceremonies performed therewere commemorative of the purification of Apolloby order of Jupiter, after which he was said tohave proceeded to Delphi, bearing in his hand abranch of bay gathered in the valley. Hence thevictors in the Pythia were crowned with bay fromTempe, and the Delphi every nine years senthither a Theory, which, having approached thealtar of Apollo in procession, sacrificed to thedeity, sang hymns, and cut branches of bay. Onother occasion, the inhabitants of the surroundingparts of Thessaly were in the habit of assemblingin Tempe for sacrifices, symposia, and parties ofpleasure, and sometimes, according to ^lian, sonumerous were the offerings, that the whole airwas perfumed with the incense '.At 4.18 we leave the castle, and at 4.30 beginto ascend a root of Ossa, of which the slope ismore gradual than before, but which terminatingat the river's bank in a precipice, made it necessarythat the road should pass over the hill. Thetraces of the ancient road, cut in the rock, and wideXXIX.] Thessaly. 393ridge to the river side, and at 4.53 arrive at theend of the wolf mouth, where a fine source ofwater, larger than any in the pass, rushes fromthe foot of the rocks into the river.The walk of one hour and eight minutesfrom the foot of the mountain of Ambeliikiato the eastern extremity of the pass, with a horsewhose pace I have measured, will give a distanceof about four miles and a half for thelength of the road through Tempe. In this spacethe opening between Ossa and Olympus is in somepoints less than 100 yards, comprehending in factno more than the breadth of a road, in additionto that of the river, which is here much compressedwithin its ordinary breadth in the plains,and not more than 50 yards across. On thenorthern bank there are places where it seemsimpossible that a road could ever have existed, sothat the communication was probably maintainedanciently as it is now, by means of two bridges,or by ferries. It is evident, at least, from themarks of wheels, and the Latin inscription, thatthe via military, or main route, was in the presenttrack.In some parts of the pass there is sufficientspace for little grassy levels, and even in the narrowestplaces the river's bank is overshadowed bylarge plane trees throwing out their roots into thestream. In the meadows where the ground admitsit, are copses of evergreens, in which Apollo'sown Daphne ' is mixed with the wild olive, theiMurus noUUu, still en lied Ail^fi).394 THEsa^UA. [chap.arbutus, the agnus castes, the pandarus, and thelentisk, festooned in many places with wild grapesand other climbers. The limestone cliffs rise withequal abruptness on either side, but their whiteand bare sides are beautifully relieved by patchesof dwarf oaks, velanidhies, and a variety of thecommon shrubs of Greece *, while occasional openingsafford a glimpse of some of the nearer heightsof the two mountains, clothed with large oak andfirs ; in other places, where both sides of the ravineare equally precipitous, a small portion of thezenith only is visible.Of the ancient descriptions of Tempe by Livy,Pliny, and ^lian ', that of Livy alone seems toTheophrastus (Hist. Plant.1. 4, c. 6) nodcea the poplar,plane, and ash, aa growingin these mountains ; the differentspecies of oak are nowmore common than any of them.But the manufactories of have thinned the woodsof OsM.news, artus juxta Compos,interlude Oasam et OlympusnemoToaa convulse definesquingentia amadis, dimidio ejusspatii navigable. In eo curseTempe vocantur quinque milliapasBuum longitudine et fermeseaquijugeri latitude, ultravisum hominis attollentibua seXXIX.]have been written by an eye witness, who was notLivy himself, but Polybius. It is remarkable thatStrabo reverses the true interpretation of Homer'scomparison of the Peneius and Titaresius ' ; and^Ltvo^ row " 'OXiifJirov cui rijc'Offing' opi ^i your' emir btrtp-iniitiXa Ko! oily iiiri riot Bilatfipotr/fos htaxiaiiiiia- ».al favorcixtrai X'-P'O". ol to fiirfiiJKOt («■! j-((rffapai.oiTQ ciiJKtiirraSiovi, roy /ify wXaroci rflfief I or I trXiOpvv, rp St traintXiioi- oKiyf. ^lafipO H fii-trou abriiu u taXovfifroc i> Hi'AoiiToi irora/uii aa^piovai ko!tpynCon-Qt rov riTfctiov tvilfoiliiyur, Ainrpi/Joc f ijf" ;KQi travToiairaQ 6 rdirocourof, oiiK ai-Optairivijt X"P"^ipyd, dXXa ^^acuif aS/rifiaTa,Brt (Xn^fSavc ■yfVtoii' i X'^P°^-KiTTOQ jiiv yap n-oXuc tai iJ/laXa Xdirioc fi'aKpif^Ei koI rc-OijXi KoJ eii:i(i' Tuy tiiyci'ui' i/i-iriXui' tfar^ rwv I'U'fjXut' CfV-Cpwi' dfcpiTd tai tniiiiriijioiitrairoic' ToXXq ei final, 4 fiiripoc a&roi' Tov irriyo*' ([sal iriaKiaiei ref it'rpac'iTfil ccifi'ij [liy vm\av6artf opalii TO xXouCof jra^ Kai e<n-.»'o^akfiiiy raWjyupic. 'Er aveti roJc Xtioij Kui KoSq/iei'OtcnXoij ri cm roiKiXa train iiro-cpafuti ouvix^iCi <>' "ip? BipovtKaTii^vyeiv ocoijrdpoic flSioro■arayiuyia & Kai fi'SuKTir dafii-yu>t ij,v\aadai. Xtafi^iovai reKn'i Kpijyai initial Kali in^iiva/iaTa v^drwv i/mxpui' Lvii irilii-iiiiffrui'. Al'yirai U ri vOararara eai roi Xouoa/iEMiic ayu'711/1/3 dXXdrfldi. Kar^foufft fclai opwOlc oXXoc fiXXlJ finnrap-fiiyol, tal ^laXurrn oi pouviKoi,Kdi liTTianriy ti [lata raf dcoacRoi n-apuTf^Touaii' dTTaiiuc volffui- i/^OJ'p Liii roS fiiXnvt tuvKOfiaroy rwf Tapioiriuf d<pari-cayrrt. Tap' tiro rt pa Zt rouirora/JOu ni oiarpi/Jni" iiffii- a!5rpo(lpii/iti'ai Kal ai dvi'iTravXat'lid fiiauv Si rwv TifiTrui- 6Htjniot rotation cp)(iTai v^oXgKal rpfwt rpo'iiiy (Xai'ou Slmfy.TloXXil ii ira' avrovSiOKid ic Tirvapajti^vxArur liySpuv Kal tuvil,ripT^fiivmv icXdSuiy rlKrtTaibit girl irXiioTo*' r^c rtjiipat ah-tinyrpol/Kovaay dwoirriyiiy T^rdrr'ira Kai irapix'"' '"'C vXi-oval rXiiy hard if-uxtc- — ^1ian.Var. Hist. I. 3, c. 1.To ftiy holy Iliji'doii Kada-poy ioTty vSuip, to Se too Xiwapoy tK riot SXijc- —Strabo, p. 441.396 THESSAUA. [chap.the same may be suspected of Pliny and ^lian,especially from the words iXalov Univ of the latter.They were misled, probably, by the epithet «pyw-(KtSti'vfic, applied by Homer to the Peneius, inferringfrom it that the water of that river was translucent,whereas the apparent reluctance of the waterof the Titaresius to join with that of the Peneittaarises from the former being clear and the lattermuddy. Even in the description of Tempe byLivy, some reason may be found for suspectingthat he has added embellishments foreign tothe authority from which he borrowed ; for indescribing' the terrible sound of the Peneius, heapproaches more nearly to the poetical exaggerationof Ovid ' than to the truth. Althoughthe river is now full, it is not remarkable for itsEst nemus Hsemonue pnerupta quod undique cUuditSylvia, vocant Tempe. Per quw Peneius ab imoEffused Pinto spumosis volyitui undid :Dejection gravi tenues agitantia &inoBNubia conduct, aanimasque aspergine sylvasImplant et sonitu plusquam vicina fatigue.Hffic domus, liEcc medea. haec aunt penetralia nXXIX. 1THESSAUA.rapidity, and nothing mean be more tranquil andsteady than its ordinary course. On rare occasionsonly, after heavy falls of rain, it rushes with impetuositythrough the pass, and then sometimes effectsconsiderable damage in the maritime plain.Although tbe.re may never have been any roadthrough Tempe along tb left bank of the river,there were routes from Gonnus to several places(y,;v^^.v<^W)n the heights on that side, and from thence intoCP the maritime plains. One of these probably followedthe same track as the modern path fromDereli to Ezero and Rapsani, by the lake Ascuri$and LapathuSy from which fortress there seems tolaye been a descent to the river in the Pass ofTempe, since Livy in naming Gonnus, Condyle,Charax, and '' the castle which stood in the road,"as the four fortresses which defended Tempe, adds(that Charax was near Lapathus '. Charax there-haecdrcuin sedes late contest localityVestibulum ut molli vellum fronde vivere.Epithet. Pel. et The. v. 285Of the trees here mentioned,the anna Cupressus, or pyramidalkind of Cypress, whichby the contrast of its form andcolour with those of other treesis one of the most beautiful embellishmentsof Greek scenery,is not to be found growing naturally.Nor is it a commonnative in any part of Greece,but has generally been plantedfor the decoration of gardens,mosques, and cemeteries.^ Hie locus (Tempe sc) tarnsuapte natura infests per quatuordistant local presidesregis fuit insessus; unum inprimo adieu ad Gonnum erat :alterum Condylon castella in-expugnabili, tertium circa quem Charta appellant,quantum vise ipse, quaet media et angustissima wallisest, inpositum, quam vel decerngratis pueri £Eu;ile est. — Liv.1. 44, c. 6.398 TRSSBAUA. [chap.fore was cm the left bank of the rirer, probably atan opening which ascends from that bank nearlyopposite to the inscribed rock, and which leads tolUtpsani.® As to Condylon, the second castle mentionedbj the historian, it seems also to hare beenon the left; bank of the rirer, for it was sometimescalled Gonno-CondyloB, which explains likewisewhy the Perrhsbi (Crowns itself having been aPerrheebic town) claimed Ceylon from Philipwhen tfaeir claims were submitted to a Romancommission at Tempe in the year b. c. 185'.Condylon therefore |m>baUy stood on the leftbank of the rirer between Calamus and the ascentto Ripsani.^- The fourth castle which Livy mentions withoutnaming, could hardly have been any other thanthat c^ which the ruins still exist, half a mile tothe westward of the inscribed rock, and which defendedthe only weak point on the right bank ;for the historian has exactly described it as overhangingthe road itself, in one of the narrowestparts of the Pass : it would be hypercritical to ob-xxix.]Thessaly. 399rock, there may be some doubt whether it relatesto defensive works erected by Longinus in Tempe,or merely to the repairing of the road. MuoireTiara was a common expression, to signify themaking of a road ; and, combined with the excavatedrock upon which the words are engraved,leave little doubt that the cutting of the rock wasa part at least of the labour commemorated by theinscription. Lucius Cassius Longinus was seat bvCsBsar from lIljTia into Thessaly with a legion ofnew levies, and 'iOO horse, at the same time thatC. Calvisius Sabines proceeded into ^lolia witha smaller force, and Cneius Dominions Calvin's intoMacedonia with two legions and 500 cavalry' '.Calvisius was well received in £folia; but thessalywas divided into two parties, one of whichwas strongly opposed to Cffisar. Besides these,Longinus had to contend with the cavalry of Cots,king of Thrace, an ally of Pompey, which werehovering about Thessaly, When Scipio, therefore,made an attempt from his camp on the Hali-acmoD ' to surprise Longinus, the latter, althoughScipio was speedily recalled in order to saveFavonius from the superior forces of Dominus,was so terrified on receiving intelligence of theapproach of Scipio, and on seeing some of thecavalry of Cots, which he mistook for that ofScipio, that he retreated towards the mountainswhich separated Thessaly from Ambracia, andC. 1. 3, c ' Between Green and Siam— See vol. i. p. 314.dThessaly. [CHAP. XXIX.even began to traverse them '. Caesar makes nofarther mention of Longinus, who probably, likeDominus, joined Caesar at ingenium on his arrivalin Thessaly, after the battle of Dyrrhachium. Itseems very improbable from these circumstancesthat Longinus could have had time to effect anygreat works in Tempe. Were it not that the firstletter of the inscription is certainly not C, I shouldbe more . disposed to attribute the work to CaiusCassius Longinus, who, after having been consulin the year 171 b. c, served in Thessaly underthe consol Hostilius, in the following year, andwho, if he had not quitted the army when in thesubsequent year it was under the command of theconsul, Q. Marcius Philippus, would have had anundoubted right to style himself Pro. Cos. inan inscription— a right which is not so evident inthe case of Lucius, the officer of Caesar. WhenMarcius was preparing his winter quarters at Heracleia,on the coast of Macedonia, to the northwardof Tempe, the historian expressly states, thatfor the sake of securing his supplies from Thes-chapterXXX.MACEDONIA.Bridge of Salamvria — Knritza — Homole — Platamona, HeracleaRiver of Platntnona, Apilai — Litokhoro — Mount Olympus —Malathria, Dium — River Baphyrus — Spiglii — Katerina —Passage of Olympus by the Consul Marcia — Callipeuce,PkUa, River £nipciu. LibEllirium, Pimple— March of ikeConsul beyond Dium — Agaisa: — fall — River Mili/s —/fatera—Ascordu*—Ayin — K\tto — OlA Kitro— Eleaiicr-okhori —-position of Perseus oa the Enipcus — Defeat of theMacedonians at Petra — Battle of Ptjdna — Pydna — Methone —AioTUs — Rivera llaliacmon, Lijdias, Alius — Return to .After emerging from the pass we traverse theplain, which extends from the exit of Tape tothe sea, and cross the Salainvria at 5.15 by abridge, at which on the right bank is a toll-houseand at the opposite end a khan. The course ofthe river from this point is at first northerly, afterwhich it turns to the See. ail in that directioncrosses a maritime plain of four or five miles inbreadth. At its mouth it is separated only fromthe foot of Mount Kissavo, or Ossa, by a lagooncommunicating with the sea, in which there is afishery. On the adjacent part of Ossa is a largemonastery of St. Demetrius, and about two milesVOL, III. D d402 Macedonia. [CHAP.beyond it Karttza, a lai^e village situated justbelow the peak of Ossa, to the Nee.The part of the mountain which lies betweenTempe and Karitza is the ancient Homole, a namewhich appears sometimes to have been employedmerely as a synonym of Ossa '. A town of thesame name, otherwise Homolium, or the city ofthe Homolienses ^, stood at the foot of the mountain,but the ancient authorities differ as to itsexact position : Scylax and Strabo seem to concurin placing it on the right bank of the Peneius,near the exit of Tempe ^ ; that is to say, at a distanceof several miles from the sea ; whereas thetwo poets of the Argonauts represent Homole assituated on the sea shore, and the order of namesin Apologies even interposes another town, Eury-menes, between it and Tempe *. To discover somePauMtn. Boot. c. 8. Uov, VlayviinKnQ irtSXtwc, 4Theorist. Idyll. 7, t. 103. ivTfwofdTovxmaitdy. — ScylaxVii. ^n. 1. 7, v. 675. Stein ■A/i/Bporio.pbtD. in 'OiiSKi), To /icv olv 'OftiXiovXXX.] MACEDONIA. 403remains of the city itself is the only mode of clearingup this difficulty ; for it cannot be explainedby the changes effected by the Peneiiis, which, likethe other great rivers of Greece, has, by the formationof new land at its mouth, increased the breadthof the plain below Tempe ; and appears to havetaken, in consequence of the accumulation, a newdirection towards the sea. The ancient mouthof the river seems indicated by a low point whichis exactly opposite to the chasm of Tempe, and inaline with the general course of the river throughthe pass.The Salamvria now divides the districts of Larissaand Katerina, as it formerly separated Thessalyfrom Macedonia or Magnesia from Pieria.Having crossed the bridge usually called that ofLaspokhori from a neighbouring village we followMtAXoi' unto TOTaftdio i^iiXiiv A/iipoio pitOpa.Ki70(>- S" Eupf/iti-at re TroXvuXvarout ri ijiapayyiic'Oaaiji: Oi/\vfneo<u r' ^«![iai:oi-' aurum iiriiTaKXlria ftaW^raia, Kavarrrpaltiv iiTtp ilJKpqi','llyvaay ivfV\ioi, irniigc Ayifioio flt'on-tc-'llpi if vtaaofu.KHin.y 'Afioi aVmXXe KoXitvriQpiiiKlif. Apollon. Argon. 1. 1, v. 592.Tiirafq V airii;pvif6f.¥ &Kp)) Kai Sifirioc axr^,^ySi) li Skins, AoXowug r tivt^alviro a^fa,'Ayxia\6s ff 'OfiAXi}, ptiOpov ff AXi/iuptc Avavpov,(al, 'AfiOpov — iyauXou.)'Oc Cri JToWitf yaiai' U'l fityoKo^poiioy viuip.OiiKiifivov Bi (iaOvaKoiriKoti wpiji^ac ipvfirovtEiaiSpaKoy Mifuai mi 'A6ui StvSpiiiia ni^i^r.Orpli. Argon, v. 462.od 2404 MACEDONIA. [Clap.the river for near half an hour, and then traverse amuddy part of the plain, gradually approachingthe sea. The soil of this maritime level is fertile,but little cultivated ; and a great part of it iscovered with shrubs which shelter a great quantityof game. Maize is grown on the slopes of themountains by the Greek inhabitants of some villages,of which the principal, besides Rapsani, areKrania, in a lofty situation to the north of Rapsani,containing about 150 families, and Pyrgotos, immediatelybelow Krania. Farther to the northare several smaller villages. At 6.25 we passround the extremity of a root of the mountain, andat 7.20, after having followed the sea shore for ashort time, halt at a pleasant kiosk, shaded bylai^e plane trees, and standing near the beach,just below the hill of Platamona on the south,where a rivulet flows through the building intothe sea.Platamona, the derivation of which, accordingto Miletus, is vXarua fiovn, or the level monastery,in allusion to its situation in the plain, appears-\XX.] MACEDONIA. 405of one of the two ancient towns which history placeson this coast between Diiim and the frontier ofMagnesia, namely, Heracleia and Philaa : for reasonswhich will be stated hereafter, I am disposedto believe that it was the former.After having dined at the kiosk, we proceed at8.5 to cross the neck of the hill of Platamona,descend again into the plain, which is uncultivatedas far as the neighbourhood of Katerina, and at8.50 cross the river of Platamona just aljovc itsjunction with the sea : this is a wide torrent descendingfrom an immense chasm which separatesthe highest part of Oli/mpus from the inferiorsummits terminating in the cliff's of Tempe. IfPlatamona was the site of Heracleia, the lower partof this ravine will correspond to that defile or forestof Callipeuiv, through which the Romans enteredthe maritime plain to the northward of Heracleia,after their perilous descent from near Lapathus,under the conduct of the consul Marcius, whoamong the other difficulties of the undertaking,had to contend with his own age and corpulence '.The appearance of the mountain from our road issufficient to show how arduous must have been thetask of conveying elephants by such a precipitousroute. The historian relates that in the steepestplaces a succession of bridges or platforms wereconstructed ; and that a^ soon as an elephant hadobtained a footing on one of them, the supportsRomulus imperator major sexaginta omnis ct prargmvia406 UACBIK)NIA. [chap.being cut away, he was forced to slide down oahis feet or rump to the next bridge.The river of Platamona is not noticed by anyancient author, except Pliny, who places an ApUoMnear Heracleia'. The river is sometimes dangerous,but is now dry ; for the weather ever since weleftSaloniki, with the exception of one dayat Verriaand another at Tumavo, has been quite free ironrain ; the last ten days have been even warm in theafternoon, and the sky without a cloud. A gentlenorth-eastern breeze has generally risen in thelatter part of the day bringing with it a frost atnight, which lasts all the ensuing day where theground is shaded by high mountains or woods,but in other places yields to the power of the sunat an early hour. At U.12, Leftokarya, a Greekvillage, is three miles on our left, on the lowestfalls of Olympus. At 9.45 we quit the directroad, which follows a line parallel to the shore,and mount a long, barren slope, to Litokhoro,where we arrive at 10.45 the ascent having beenvery stow in consequence of our tired horses andXXX.] Macedonia. 407precipices of which form a beautiful contrast withthe rich woody heights on either side of the greatchasm above Litokhoro. From the village andopening, the ground falls on both sides of the riverin a ioiigfvfn slope to the sea side, terminatingto the south at the river of Platamona, and tothe north extending to the plain of Katerina. Thetorrent flows from Litokhoro in a wide bed betweenprecipitous banks, which gradually diminish inheight to the sea. On the opposite side of thegulf are seen Saloniki, Cape Karabumii, MountKhortiutzi, and a range of mountains which appearto form a continued range from the latter summitas far as the extreme Cape of Pallene. It is reckonedfour hours from hence to the monastery ofSt. Dionysius, which is situated just below thesummit of Oli/mpus, not far from the head of thegreat ravine of Litokhoro. The Litokhorltes fabricateskutia, or cloth for making capons, and haveseveral fulling mills in the ravine above the village.Dec. 21 . — This morning, the sky still continuingcloudless, and the atmosphere of that extremeclearness which is its characteristic in Greece inthe Bue days of winter, the summit of the broadOlympus, as Homer so justly describes it', presentsitself between the precipitous sides of theravine of Litokhoro, with a still more admirableand imposing grandeur than yesterday evening,/lanpoc'a the epithet which thai is iyayrupos, from its bc-thepoet inmost frequently bi ing more snowy than any otherlaches (u Olympus. Next to mountain in Gfccce.40fiwbcD the sm, being bcliiad the nio — !« ■, 1^ iteeastern inde eoiD|HuatiTely dark, bat aided alearned of the Ckakidie cost nd hill; thelining Mm DOW Bgfats up the aiowy ntniink ofObfuqms, as veil as all the rocks, woods, torre ante ,and precipices below it ; disbognisbes tbera fromone another by the strongest shaading, aad Beemato bring them all within half tfa^ real distance.At 3.10, Turkish time, we begin to descend theslope obliquely into the plain of Katraina. Thegnraad is stony, barren, and quite DDcnltiTated.Near the bottom an odd church, situated in a littlegrove of trees at a small distance from the left ofthe road, contains some ancient squared Locksof stone and some capitals of clans. Arrivedin the plain, we traverse, by a winding path, awood where ehmbs, particularly the pali orJerusalem thorn, £11 np the intervals betweengroves of handsome planes and oaks, and at 4.35arrive at Malathria ', a ^iftlik lately establishedby Vel Pasha, occupied by Greek labourers, whomhe has sent here, and managed by one of his Alba-xxx.]MACEDONIA. 409rows of houses is yet occupied. Five hundredyards below the tjiftlik, in a thick grove of treesand shrubs, are many copious springs of water,which unite and immediately form a large streamand a marsh, of which the discharge joins the seaat a bridge called Baba Kiupresi, in the directroad from Platamoua to Katerina. At the river'smouth, which is not far from the bridge, there isa skaloma frequented by small boats, which aredrawn up on the beach in bad weather.In the space between the village and the sources,where corn is growing among the stumps of theburnt bushes, I find some remains of a stadiumand theatre. None of the stone-work which maybesupposed to have formed the seats and superstructureof these monuments now exists, with theexception of two or three squared masses on theoutside of the theatre ; and as the soil is a fineblack mould, the effects of the seasons have reducedthem both to mere hillocks of earth, but retainingtheir original form and dimensions sufficiently toshow that the stadium was about equal in lengthto the other stadia of Greece, and that the theatrewas about 250 feet in diameter. Below the theatre,on the edge of the water, are the foundationsof a large building, and a detached stone whichseems to have belonged to a flight of steps.Some foundations of the walls of the city towhich these monuments belonged are visible alsoamong the bushes ; but it would be in vain toattempt to trace them iu such a labyrinth withouta guide, au assistance which I cannot succeed!CU ni ^m410 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.obtaining, even to show me some rutaed churcheswhich are said to exist among the palitiria, lest theconsequence to the poor Greeks should be anavania. I can only find one sepulchral stele, andthat so much buried in the ground that no inscriptionis visible. There is a tumulus with a flat- summit, about 500 yards to the southward of thetheatre, and at an equal distance from the sea.There can be no doubt that here stood thefamous Dium, which, though uot large, was oneof the leading cities of Macedonia *, and the greatbulwark of its maritime frontier to the south.Nevertheless, it was easily occupied, and almostdestroyed in the Social War by the ^tolians,whose capital soon paid the debt of cruelty anddestruction which they contracted on that occasion*. In the Persic war Dium seems to havethoroughly recovered that disaster, and by the importanceof its situation it became at length aRoman colony *. The remains near the sourcesare probably those of the temple of Jupiter Olympus,from which the city received its name ; forwe are informed that public game called Olym-Xxx'] MACEDONIA.Jupiter Olympus at Diuni '. The theatre andstadium served doubtless for that celebration, andthey formed probably part of the "Upon, as atOlympia, Nemea, and the Isthmus. It is clearfrom Livy that the temple was not within thecity ', in which particular it resembled manyother great temples in Greece. The historian,however, is not correct in asserting that the distancebetween Olympus and the sea was littlemore than a mile, as indeed his own descriptionof the place might alone give reason to suspect,since he adds, that half the space was occupied bythe marsh of the Baphyrus, thus leaving; littlemore than half a mile for the temple, theatre,stadium, and city, as well as for a level spacebetween the walls and the foot of the mountain ^.Pausanias seems to have had a more correct ideaof the distance ; for he states, that on proceedingtwenty stades from Dium towards the mountain,there stood a monument, which, according to theDiodor. 1. 17, c. 16.— Stepinv.CoBHUl prasmiaso Papiliood exploring passus ttrcaDium, postquam potere omniitin omiica partes unimadvorCit,secundus castri fervent adDium, metarique sub ipso temple,ne quid sbcto in loco violjusait. Ipse urbera in-dresses, &c. — !. 44, c. J.Nam quum 01jiiij)i railii'csmontis paulo plus quam millepassim ad mare rel in quantspatium cujus dominium locioccupant ostium late reatagnansBapliyri omnia, piirteni plaisiraut Jovis templum aut oppidumtenet : rdiquum perexi-guam fossa medica valloqueclnudi potcrat et sacrum admanum silvestrisquo ntnteria;tantum erat ut wei mums turresquc excilari potesUv.1.44, c. 6.J118 Macedon. [CIIAP.Taste, contained the bones of Orpheus'. Theriver Baphyrus or Bapiiyras, though so shortiu its course, aod enveloped in marshes, was astream of some celebrity. It is noticed by Lyco-chron *, and by the poet Archestratus, who in thecourse of his travels. Asia yaarpifiapyiav, noticedthe excellence of the nvBi^, or cuttle-fish of theriver Baphyrus, at the Pierian Dium, and recordedit in the same verse iu which he celebratedthose of Ambracia ^ Pausanias asserts that thiswas the same river named Helicon, which, afterflowing 75 stades above ground, had then a subterraneouscourse of 2*2 stades, and on its reappearancebecame navigable under the name ofBaphyras.Dium is one among numerous instances of ancientcities of opulence and celebrity, situated inthe most unhealthy spots. In some of those placesthe cultivation and draining which attend a densepopulation may have afforded a remedy to thenatural inconvenience more or less effectual, butneither the nature of the place nor ancient testimonyadmit the probability that the marsh ofDium was ever drained. Its effects, combined'liicn a kx ^iou Ti)v iwl to pcvfia aij>arii^cTat to uto rourovpoi Kal araSta jrpac\t)Xvd6Ti tari rJjc yiJQ' SiaXtiirov Si fiaLiKooi Ki'uf Ti coTiv iy Civ i.~a! Fora sho i>ai c'lKoirt trust,iiriSiifia Viri ry kiovi uSpia Xi'- avEiiri to vSiap asser xai ovofiaOu' ij(ttli TO ticrrd rou'Op^iuic Bafupac uri 'EXu-iucoc Xa/iuvi; ISpia Ada oi iTix^pW ^- Kariiiriv is OaXaaaav yavviiro-yovai. 'Pti ii kuI rorafiog poc. — Pisan. BcBot. c. 30.'E\ttbiv iixc< araoloiy ((Jtii^ij- ' I,yc-oi>h. v. 27't-Koyra nlvTC TrpoeXOuir. H tu ' Ap. Athcn. I. 7, c. 22.XXX.] MACEDONIA. 413with that of the too great vicinity of the steepsides of Olympus, could hardly have failed inhaving a pernicious effect upon the salubrity ofthe place ; aud iu fact, Mahithria is now considereda most unwholesome situation in the summer.Were not the evidence conclusive as tothe site of Diiim, it might be supposed from theresemblance, that the modern Malathria is acorruption of the ancient Libetlirium ; the similarityis to be attributed perhaps to the two nameshaving a common origin in some word of thsancient language of Macedonia.Leaving the tjiftlik at 6.20, we cross the plainby a winding road, and at 7.13 leave Audreotissatwo miles to the left. The village is situated onthe side of a long projection, advancing into thePierian plain from the mountains which reachfrom Olympus to the ravine of the Hnliacmon,where they are separated by that chasm in thegreat eastern ridge of Northern Greece from theportion of it which was anciently' named Bermius.The highest summit of the Pierian part of the rangerises about eight miles to the northward of Vlak-hohvadho, and is a conspicuous object in all thecountry to the eastward, particularly from SalonIts name seems from Pliny to have beenPierus '. Pausanias, in alluding to the mountainPieria as near Dium ^ may be supposed tohave referred to the mountains of this Macedonianprovince in a more comprehensive sense, and asincluding all the heights connected with Olympust414 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.which border the Pierian plain. A Scholiast ofApologies, alluding to the same ridges, describesPieria as a mountain of Thrace ', which was acorrect definition of it according to the most ancientchorography of this part of Greece.At 7.29 we pass through Spighi *, a lai villagein the plain, near the extremity of the ridge ofAndreotissa where it ends in a point, upon highwhich, in a very conspicuous situation, stands atumulus overgrown with trees. This monumentindicates perhaps the site of the principal town ofPieria, toward the middle of the province, or intermediatebetween Dim and Pythia. It would seemfi:t>m Stephens and Suits, that there was a citynamedPicrio*, which may have been here situated.At 7.40 we cross a clear and rapid stream, notedfor. the abundance of its fish, and which, thoughnow small, is said in times of rain to be wide, fullof quicksands, and dangerous to pass : this mayeasily be imagined, as it appears to receive mostof the water iron the northern end of Olympus,as well as those which descend from the southernXXX.] MACEDONIA. 415which lias eight or nine large villages in its dependency,besides tjiftliks, contains only 100 poorGreek houses, and as many Turkish. The produceof the plain is corn and fla-i, and the BeySal' is almost the only proprietor. Vel' Pashiis married to his sister, since which alliance thedistrict of Katerina has been free from thieves : onthe other hand Sale's new kinsman, the great ,having heard that the Bey had latelymade himself the heir of a deceased aga of Kate-ring,has just sent to borrow 15 purses of him.I here learn that all the land about Malathriawas entirely covered with bushes, until it waslately cleared by Vel' Pasha, who was temptedby the richness of the soil to establish a farmthere. Before that time the remains of antiquitywere probably known only to the shepherds. IndeedI had not heard of their existence when Iarrived at Malathria. The ruined churches, however,show that a Christian village of some importanceonce occupied the site, which had beenfor many years a desert when Vel took it in hand.The deep mould may conceal, perhaps, and preservemany fine remains of antiquity, for Dium wasnoted for its splendid buildings and the multitudeof its statues '. Here were deposited twenty-fiveof the works of Lysippus, representing theiratpoi, or peers of Alexander, who fell at the battleof the Granicus'.Having ascertained the site of Dium, it is notLiv. 1. 44, c. 7. — Vide ' ArriBii. de Exp. Alex. 1. t.not. I, p. 410.416 Macedonia. [CHAP.difficult, after the tour of mount Olympus which Ihave just made, to apply the history of the thirdand fourth years of the Persic war to the realtO[K>^phy, though for the complete elucidation ofthe former year, it would be desirable at the properseason to cross the mountain from Platamona toElassona, or the reverse ; and this would be themore interesting as Polybius, whose authority theLatin historian followed in his narrative of thatcampaign, was himself present in the passageacross Mount Olympus', having arrived in theRoman camp in Perrhsbia, on a mission from thecouncil of the Achaean league just before the movementbegan. The consul, Q. Marcius Philippus,having landed at Ambracia in the spring, with5000 men for the supply of the legions in Thessaly,marched from thence into the Thessalian plains,where he was met by his predecessor, Hostilius,who had moved for that purpose from his positionat Pharsalus. Marcius, assuming the commandof all the forces, then marched into Perrhsebia,where he encamped in the Tripolitis, betweenAzorus and Dolichc. iiitcndintr to carry theXXX.]MacedoniaVohistana (Servia) by wliicli Hostilius had invadedElimeia in the preceding year; 12,000under Hippias at Lapathus, above the lake Ascuris', and the remaining forces at Dium, fromwhence Perseus himself ranged the coast betweenDium, Heracleia, and Philaa, like a man in a stateof utter indecision.The consul having resolved to attempt the passageby Octolophus*, sent forward his son with4,000 men, under the command of M. Claudius,and followed immediately with his whole army.So difficult were the roads, that the advancedparty only marched 15 miles in two days, at theend of which they arrived at a tower named ; on the third day, at the end of sevenmites, they found themselves in the presence ofthe Macedonians under Hii)pias. Marcius, whohad reached the lake Ascuris when he receivedthe report of Claudius, continued his route untilhe arrived at the distance of a mile from theenemy, when he occupied some heights whichAd castellum, quod superAscuridem piJudem (Lapathusdecatur locus) Ilippiaa teneresaltem cum duodecim millionMacedon prsBidio jussua.-Liv. 144, (Consul! sententia stetit eosalt ducere ubi propter Octo-opiumdjximui regis castra.Liv. I. 44, c. 3. —Theselast words show that there hasbeen a loss of text nt the endVOL. III. tof the preceding book, wheresome mention was mode of theking's movements after his returninto Macedonia from anunsuccessful expedition intoAcamania in the middle ofwinter. It appears that in theensuing spring he had encampedat Octolophus, andhad retired from thence intoPierian on the approach of theRoman army.418 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.commanded a view of all the sea coast betweenDium and Philaa. *Octoh^hvs was probably near the issue of theTiresias, or Elassonitiko, from Mount Olytnptuinto the valley of Elassona. Ezero being the onlylake in the part of the Olympene ridges traversedby the Romans on this occasion, is evidently theAicuris, and the ancient remains at Konispolilying in the direction towards that lake from as well as from the Roman camp betweenAzorut and DoUche, seem to answer perfectly tothose of £udiertan : the latter interval moreover correspondingwith tolerable correctness to the fifteenmiles of the historian. The ruggedness of themountains sufficiently explains the length of timewhich it required for the Romans under Claudiusto reach Eudierum. Nor is the ancient castlenear Rapsani less adapted to Lapatkus, not onlyby its proximity to Tempe, as I before remarked,but by that part of Livy's narrative also, fromwhich we may infer that Lapathus, although describedas having been " super Ascuridem ■XXX. 1 MACEDONIA. 41 DAfter a day's repose the consul led Iii forcesagainst Hippias, and both on that day and thefollowing there was a continued combat, but oflight troops only, the nature of the ground not admittingof any more serious conflict. The fame andpower of Rome were at this moment in the utmostperil ; but the consul fully sensible of his hazardoussituation, judged that it would be still moredangerous to retreat than to advance, and Perseusfortunately having made no attempt to support orrelieve the fatigued troops of Hippias, the consulleft Popillius with a sufficient force to observe them,and began a descent to the maritime plain, inwhich at the end of four days of extreme labour,he pitched his camp between-Libethrium andHeracleia. Even here, had he not been opposedto an enemy who was under the influence of thatlamentation which is the surest prognostic offalling power, his position was still little betterthan desperate, as he was surrounded on everyside by strong passes, in the hands of superiorforces, and without means of obtaining sufficientsupplies for his army by sea. But his foolishopponent, as soon as he received intelligence ofthe approach of the consul, quitted his excellentposition at Diuni, ordered the garrisons to be withdrawnfrom Philaa and the positions above Tempe,and retreated to Pydna.The consul having detached Sp. Lucretiusagainst the enemy's posts in his rear, and toopen a communication with Larissa, advancedcautiously to Dium, which Perseus had unaccountablyabandoned, since it would have beenEe2420 MACEDONIA. [chap.easy for him, observes Livy, to have fortifiedthe space between the city and the mountainby a rampart and ditch, or even by walls andtowers, for which the neighbouring mountainwould have supplied ample materials of wood andstone. After having halted one day at Dium, theconsul proceeded to the river Mitys. Oo the nextday he received the submission of Amassed, and onthe following marched to the river Accords, butfinding that supplies became scarcer as he advanced,he returned to Dium, where he soon receivedthe grateful intelligence that Lucretius wasip possession of Philaa and Tempe, and had foundan abundance of provisions in these and the neighbouringfortresses. Marcius then retired fromDium to Philaa, for the sake of strengthening thatplace, and of supplying his soldiers with com, — amovement which having the appearance of avoidingthe enemy was not generally approved in theRoman army. Its immediate consequence was,that Perseus returned to Dium, and after havingrepaired the damage which the walls of the cityXXX.] MACEDONIA. 421The next operation of Marcius was against Heracleia,now the only place on the Pierian coastsouthward of the Enipeiis which was not in hispossession. It was situated five miles from Philaa,about midway between Tempe and Dium, on arock overhanging a river'. Being strong andwell garrisoned, and within sight of the king'sfires on the Enipeus, Heracleia made an obstinateresistance, but was at length taken by means ofthe KfpafKiiTov, or testudo, by which the assailantsadvanced to the wall upon the united shields of adense body of their comrades below them. TheRoman commander then removed his camp toHeracleia, ordered roads to be made into Thessaly,magazines to be erected at convenient places, andhuts for those who were to convey the supplies.From Livy's description of Heracleia, some doubtmay arise whether it was situated at Platamonaitself, or at the mouth of the river of the samename : either place would sufficiently suit thewords " media regions inter Dium Tempeque,"but Platamona cannot be said to overhang theriver which I suppose to be the Apilas of Pliny,being more than two miles distant from it. Onthe other hand there is no rocky height atthe mouth of the river, and Platamona beingthe only hill on this coast, and the only postpossessing any natural strength, is obviouslythe position in which the principal fortress islikely to have been situated. It would seem,therefore, that the " antics at the foot of the rockMedia regions inter Dium mente pomatum. — Liv. !.-14,Tempeque in rape anni immi- c. 8.422 MACEDONIA: [CHAP.of Heradeia" was no other than the rivulet whichflows through the kiosk at Platamona. Philaa havingbeen the frontier fortress of Macedonia towardsMagnetic, and distant 5 miles from Heracleia, appearsto have stood near the month of the Peneuson the left bank.Libethrium was situated, as evidently followsfrom the transactions related by Livy, betweenDium and Heracleia. Pausanias reports a tradition,that the town was once destroyed, togetherwith all its inhabitants, by the inundation of atorrent called Sus ; and that on the precedingday the tomb of Orpheus, which was near Liberhad been injured by another accident,which exposed the poet's bones to the light, andinduced the people of Dium to remove them to aspot 20 stades distant from their city towardsOlympus, where they erected a monument to him,consisting of an urn of stone upon a column '.The only two torrents which could have effectedsuch havoc as Pausanias states, are the rivers ofPlatamona and of Litokhoro. The former, however,was near Heracleia, and probably Jn theXXX,] MACEDONIA. 423site of Pipkin, for this birth-place of Orpheusappears to have been near Libethrium, and theBapliyrus ', and the oicorij, or aicoiriii rii/tn-Xijic ofthe poets, corresponds remarkably with the elevatedsituation of Litukhoro and its commandingprospect.It is not easy to afford any illustration of thethree marches of the Romans beyond Dium ; thefirst of which terminated at the river Mitys, thesecond at Agassse, and the third at the Accords ;for these names are not found in any other ancientauthority, unless the last be the same as the Acer-dos,which occurs, though not marked as a river,in the Tabular Itinerary, where it is placed at adistance of 12 m. p. short of Beroea', on the roadthither from Larissa by Tempe and Dium, whichcould not have been very different from the routeof Marcius. As Pydna is not mentioned in theconsul's march, he followed probably a directionmore westerly than that town, which was on thesea coast, and crossing the Pierian ridge descendedupon the Haliacmon, not far from where it issuesNufi^iBir rti flXavro Bii^uj)ou ydi'ocAij3)jflpiij»' ff vTfpSt IIi/JTXtiac HKoirSiy.Lytophron, v. 273Upirii wr 'Op^^ pniai/fuOa tov pa wot' uti)KdUiiiirir GpjjiKi ^ariicTat iui't)OtiaaApollon. 1. 1, V. 23.'Larissa 15 H. p. Olympus m. p. Animo 7 M. r, Bada10 M. p. Stenas (Tempe) 15 20 m. p. Arulos 15 m. p.m.p. Spatium 12 m.p. Bum Sacerdos 12 u. P. Bercea.(Dium) 12 M. r. Haters 12 Tab. Peutinget, Seg.^434 MACBDOmA. [CPAF.from the vines into the plain of Verra. Hiedistance of this point, indeed, from-Diuni, beingnot more than twenty-five miles in a straight line,is little for a three days* march ; bat the consulwas suspicious of some hidden deign in theenemy's retreat, and was chiefly intent upon collectingsupplies, whence he may be supposed tohave made small progress in direct distance. TheMitys was perhaps the river of Katerina, andAgasttB may have been situated about midwaybetween Kateiioa and the passage of the Vistritza,in the way to Verria. I should have suspectedthat Scorns was an error for Atreus, and thatthe river which the Romans reached was the Hali-amon itself, which, as I have before remarked,bore the name of Atreus in the lower part of itscourse. The Sacerdos of die Itinerary, however,is opposed to this opinion by its resemblance toScorns, which may, therefore, have been a tributaryof the Haliacmon, joining it from the rightand having a town upon it of the same name.Katerina so nearly approaches in sound to theMalera, which is the first place occurring in theXXX.] MACEDONIA. 425Katerina ; but this excess is less than a due proportionof that which occurs on the whole linefrom Dium to Berrhcea, which is 78 m. p. in theTable, and less about 36 English miles in directdistance, Bada in the same geographical documenthas some resemblance to Balla, or Villa,which we learn from Ptolemy and Pliny to havebeen a Pierian town '. In that case Valla wouldseem ta have been about midway between Diumand Berrhcea ; but I am more inclined to placeValla in the mountainous part of Pieria, becausewe are told by an author cited by Stephens thatthe inhabitants of Valla were removed to Pythium *,and Pythium was in Perrhabia, at the southwesternfoot of the Pierian mountains. PossiblyVelvendo may have derived its appellation from acorruption of Valla.Dec. 22. — At 5.7, Turkish time, we proceedfrom Katerina with the mensis, and follow a goodcarriage-road across the beautiful Pierian plain,which is here near ten miles in breadth from thesea to the woody falls of the Olympene range, orMount Pierus.The soil is excellent, but very partially cultivated: large trees occur at intervals, and towardsthe sea are some extensive woods, which are famedamong the sportsmen of Salouiki for their pheasants.A place on the shore where boats anchorin fair weather, or are drawn up in foul, serves forthe skaloma of Katerina.Stolen. 1. 3, c. 13.— Plin. ' Theagenes ap. Stephan.J426 MACEINHilA. [chap.At 6 the plain terminates, and we be to crama range of low hills, which, adwaaang &(Mn thePierian mountain, meet the shore at the nf»di-western angle of the JTtermme Golf. At 6.7 wearrive at Kntjok (or little) Ayaa : Boyuk (or Great)Ayan is one mile on the left. Both these Villagesere the property of Say Bey. The labourerswho inhabit them romish aU the labour, cattle,and instruments of agriculture, care seed-erafrom the Bey, and share half the crop afterthe dhekada has been deducted from it. Atlittle Ayao, in the wall of a church which is surroundedby some ancient foundations of squaredblocks, is a piece of a statue with drapery of fineworkmanship, and an inscribed stone, erected byone Aphelion in memory of bis fetter of the samename'.Continuing to cross the heights where the variedSurface is clothed with a beautiful mixture of richconi-land and woods, we have half a mile on ourright, on the slope towards the sea, two tumuliflooding close bother, one with a fiat top, theother peaked. They indicate the vicinity of theXXX.] MACEDONIA. 427of the road contains a Corinthian capital and manywrought blocks of stone. Kitro, which is one hourand eight minutes from Ayan, stands at two milesfrom the sea, on a hill which although of inconsiderableheight is one of the highest of these maritimeridges. Though now consisting only of thehouses of a few Greek labourers, with that of aTurkish subashi, placed here by the Bey of Kate-ring,to whom the greater part of the land belongs,Kitro retains proofs of former importance in sixchurches, three of which are in ruins, and in severalTurkish pyrghi in the same state.In all the churches are to be seen squared blocksof Hellenic times, together with some remains ofarchitecture which are chiefly of later date. Atoneof the churches are three sepulchral stelsebearing inscriptions, only one of which is in acapable condition. It is a memorial of a commonform, followed by two elegiac couplets showingthat the monument was erected by Arte-minoresto his brothers Marinus and Spores ofHeracleia, who were twins '. Another church,which is almost new, contains a sepulchral monument,erected by oneUlpia, for herself, in her lifetime.Like the former, it is engraved in charactersindicating a late date in the Roman Empire.'Aprifiilvpot Eiaptyf xal Ssrdpy roi dlik^'it fifties X"P"'-Tilt KaraifOiiiii-ovs SiSiipovi cuo f lurac aplarovc^iapii>6v rii/ifios Kal Xvipov ilat\a\ir'Alaric ? 'Hpdi.'Xiia ra! 'AprtfiiCuipoi i Tiiiaq\aivoy n'^^i'poic ^tujior irtpOc rd^v.V. Inscription, No. 157>V. Inscription, No. 15B.428 MACEOOHU. [crap.Around the latter church are some aaaeat iban-adonis, and in another part of the hill of Kitio asorts, which is now employed for the reservoir aidie public fountain, its lid serving for a tronimdemeath. On leaving Kitro at 1.33, we takedie road to its skala, which is merely an c^>enbeach near the lagoon before mentioned ; bat attwo-thirds of the distance, we cross the fields to thelefi^ and hall into a carriage-road which leads alongthe coast from Materia to Elefibero-khori withoutpassing through Kitro.A little further, we arrive at 9. 10 at some rainscalled Paleokastro, or Pales Kitros, consisting onlyof the foundations of a small oblong rectangularcastle which occupied the summit of a cliff on thesea side. In one place a piece of wall remains,formed of small stones and mortar intermixed withpieces of Roman tiles. Some square blocks amongthe foundations are the only appearances of Hellenicantiquity, nor is there any thing in the situation orconstruction of this castle that tends to refer it tothose times. After a halt of ten minutes, we proceedFor a short distance near the brow of the cliffsXXX.] MACEDONIA. 429for which there is at present no sale. The Turkishgranaries in these parts are immense square woodencases, with a kiosk at the top : they are generallythe most conspicuous buildings in the village.The Turkish houses correspond to the naturalfertility of the soil, and are spacious and tolerablycommodious. Beyond Elefthero-khori, on theslope of the same hills, stands Kulindros ', andthen Libanova', about seven miles from Elefthero-khori, near the point of the heights where theyproject farthest into the maritime plain. Rulingis the largest of the three villages.The Epitomizer of Strabo, and a Scholiast ofDemosthenes, assert that the KtVpoc of their timewas the same place as the ancient Pydna * ; but astheir authority is of no great weight, not muchbetter indeed than the opinion of a modern Greekwould be, and as the facts of history seem to requirea more southern position for Pydna, I aminclined to place it at Ayan, Kitro itself havingprobably risen in the middle ages upon the decayof Pydna and Methone in an intermediate positionbetween those two Hellenic cities.When Perseus heard of the approach of the newconsul L. ^milius Paulus, as successor to Q. MarciusPhilippus, in the command of the Romanarmy in Macedonia, among other preparatory measuresby land and sea, he sent 5000 Macedoniansto garrison Pythium and Petra, in order that hiscamp on the Enipeus might not be turned throughKoi-X.vrp<ic. ' Strabo, (Epit. 1.7) p. 330,\iifiic)lyo(ia. — School. in Demosth, Olyi^4»he nAyreJ at Ae a^^^^miamfill iWiiiM fertile Jefctc rf Ac Fapi ■!, wUcfcii sacral l T a piiril i a « af Mar itmg ifc- NowMfartjaJ wag Alae c&nL he was heed to retreatto Pfdva ia ceaMqwarc of kis A u. fc»i ^ia Ae past of Petra hariag be ovoAron byP. Sdpio ?i«Ka, who had bea k^ ^m^t kI br the «wal*i exert aoa, Q. Savannas■ecie cy vas wwcntial to the ,Scipio had been detached with5000 hosea area horn the caaip in frrait of theEoipeiH to Hcfadeia, for the pretended purposeof ben there embarked on ■ maiitiine expedition^aiDtt die Macedonian coast ; but fldtere, vaifWndof emb ari dng, he i^aced himself under the guidanceof two Peirfaa^iiaiis, who conducted him by adicnitons march to Pytfaiam on the fonith watchof the third day *. Their route was probablythrough Tempe, and by Phalaena, Oloosson, andDoliche, to Pytfaiam, — a distance of more thanflxty miles, — and consequently requiring the timewhich Livy has stated upon the incontestable an-xxx.]Macedonia. 431tarcli to refer to ; but as in questioning the accuracyof Polybius upon an important circumstancerelating to it, he has given us an intimation of thestatement of the Greek historian, we have thus themeans of choosing between the two authorities onthis point. Polybius, as we have seen from Livy,represented Scipio detachment to have been 5000strong. Plutarch, on the contrary, on the authorityof a letter of Scipio to a certain king, assertsthat they amounted to more than 8000. Anotherdisagreement is of smaller moment, or rather is nomore than natural ; Polybius, an old soldier, wassatisfied with saying that the enemy were surprisedin their sleep, and driven before the Romans ;while Scipio, who was in lira first campaign, tooka pleasure in relating that there was a brisk actionon the mountain, that he himself killed a Thracian,and that Milo, the Macedonian commander, fled inhis shirt.During the three days in which Scipio was effectinghia circuitous route, the consul arrested theattention of Perseus by skirmishes of light infantry,which chiefly took place between the precipitousbanks inclosing the bed of the river : on the thirdday he made a demonstration of crossing the rivernear the mouth. These operations had the desiredeffect, for they were suddenly interrupted by theunexpected intelligence which the king receivedfrom a Cretan deserter', of the attack and defeatLivy wya ! — Tertii die mare brachium tranaitum abstinuit (Consul tc.) titania. Perseus quod in qc\i-drgiessuB ad tniam parted caa- lis erat ••"••■••; theIrotum veluti per devexum in remainder is lost, but may beMACEDONIA.[Chap.of bis forces at Petra. Thus threatened with anassault from the enemy on both sides, he made arapid retreat to Pydna, while the consul, havingeffected a junction with Nasica, followed the enemywith all possible expedition, and at mid-day hadadvanced so near to the king's position at Pydnathat it was a question whether, notwithstandingthe heat and the fatigue of the troops, he shouldnot then attack the Macedonians. The distancefrom the Empeaa to Ayan being not more than afour or five hours' march, the whole operationmight have been effected in the long days near thesummer solstice, when the event occurred ', — butnot very easily if Pydna had stood at Kitro.supplied from the followingwords of Plutarch: Ty Tltfotl,riy AtfilKiof drptfxovyra hardjfiiptii' opus Kal iii Xayiio-(Uvf TO yiyiiuvoy, dmSpde (•:r$c oiov Epic abrifiti^t iJKifttiyvMy T^y mpioioy riy 'Pw-fealty. Plutarch then proceed!,1 defiance of probablyfore the battle, fixes its exactdate to the 22d June, 168 B.C.and shows the " pride noneSeptembre" of levy to be erroneous,although i^ is consistentwith some other datesin 1. 45, c. 1, 8, as well u withthe Bipovt ^r iipa fOlyoyrot ofXXX.] MACEDONIA, 4:J3The description of the field of battle furnishesanother argument in favour of the opinion, thatPydna wa at Ayan. Ivy, Strabo, and Plutarch,agree in showing that the hostile encounteroccurred in the plain before Pydna, which wastraversed by a small river, and bordered byheights affording a convenient retreat and shelterto the light infantry, while the plain atone containedthe level ground necessary for the phalanx,circumstances which accord perfectly with theplain extending from Katerlna to the heights ofAyan, whereas the entire country from the latterto Elefthero-khori, in the midst of which Kitro issituated, affords no sufficient plain, but consists,with the exception of some small level spaces onthe sea shore, entirely of the last falls of a mountain,which Plutarch names Locris,The hostile camps were separated during one nightby the river. On the following day the action wasbrought on by an accident, and had not been longengaged on the whole line, when Perseus set anexample of flight, which was followed by all hiscavalry ; the phalanx nevertheless resisted withobstinacy, but when at length the consul had succeededin penetrating it, the overthrow of the Macedonianswas so complete, that 20,000 were slain,and more than 10,000 made prisoners, with a lossof only 100 killed on the side of the Romans.It appears from Diodorus, that Pydna stoodoriginally on the sea side, but that Archelaus,king of Macedonia, having taken it in the yearB.C. 411, removed it to a distance of 20 stadesVOL. ni. V f434 Macedonia. [CHAP.fifom the shore '. This distance accords with thatoi the heights of Ayan from the sea, as well aswith the relation which the same historian hasleft uB of the capture of Pydna by Cassander.Towards the close of the year b.c. 316, Olympiass,the mother of Alexander, retired into Pydna witha large army, attended by cavalry and elephants.Cassander being unable to besiege the place onaccount of die season, encamped around it, formeda circumvallation terminating at either end atthe sea, and blockaded the port with his ships*.Olympiass resisted until the spring, when her suppliestotally failing, the horses and beasts of burthenhaving been devoured, the elephants havingdied ', great numbers of the men having perishedof disease and starvation, and others having deserted,the queen herself attempted to escape bysea but was taken prisoner. The fall of Pydnawas followed by the surrender of Fella and to Cassander, who was not long in confirmingbis claim to the Macedonian throne, bymarrying the sister of Alexander, by putting hisXXX.] MACEDONIA. 435Kitro of the port of Pythia, but the coast liasdoubtless undergone a considerable change bymeans of the alluvion of Olympus, and the Pierianmountain.As Methone is named in the Pericles of Scy-lax — as it was one of the Greek colonies establishedin early times on tins coast, then considered apart of Thrace, and as it was possessed by Athenswhen she was mistress of the seas ', there can belittledoubt that it was upon or very near theshore. Elefthero-khori is so advantageous a situationthat we can hardly suppose it to have beenneglected by the ancients ; and it is for this reasonprincipally, that 1 conceive it to have been thesite of Methone, for its distance from Ayan iscertainly greater than the 40 stades which theepitomizer of Strabo places between Pydna andMethone. The epitome, however, is not much tobe depended upon in this passage, as it names theHaliacimn in the place of the river of Katerina andan Erigon in that of the Haliacmon ; whereas theonly Erigon known from ancient history was abranch of the Axius, which joined it 80 milesinland.As Alors is stated to have been situated betweenthe Haliacmon and Lydiass by Scylax *,Thucyd. 1. 6, c. 7. — Scy- ' 'A«o it Ilqvcioii workmanlax in tAwaZovia. — Demosth. HaKiiivts law tByoc cal koX-Olynth. I.— Diodor. 1. 16, C. 84. iron Ofp/in7oc' irpiri| jtAicStrabo. (Epit. 1. 7) p. 330. — Marc&iv/ac, 'Hpo»:\tiW iiov,Plutarch in Qu. Gr. slates that niiZya ironic 'EXXi^ric. MieiiT)Methane was a colony of Ere roXic 'EXAijt-lc, sal 'AXiocfiu*-tria. Torof/oc, ' Wufot ironic ta «■«-436 MACEDONIA. [Chap.whose correct enumeration of the other placesbetween the Peneius and Thesaalonica entitleshim to confidence in this particular, it seems tohave stood not far from Kapsokhori, the positionof which, opposite to the innermost part of theTheTJitaie gulf, agrees with the description of Alorsgiven by Stephaous'. Perhaps Palea-hora,near Kapsokhori, may have received its namefrom its preserving some remains of Aims.Dec. 23. — The wind being " from the Vardar,"according to the local phrase, and consequentlyfair for the City, I descend over rich hills andthrough small woods of oaks, and embark at theskala of Elefthero-khori, which is a little more thanhalf an hour distant from the village where thehills terminate, and the great plain begins, whichis watered by the Vistritza, Karasmak, and Vard-h&ri, and occupied in great part by the lake of langorPeUa. Elefthero-khori seems thus to be thenatural frontier of Pieria and Bottieea. Besides thelake oiPeUa, the maritime part of the plain containsa long succession of I^oons, beginning near Elef-XXX.] MACEDONIA. 437tween the Axius and the Echidorus'. They producean abundance offish and salt. Of the latter,large leaps are seen near the extremity oi' theheights of Elefthero-khori on the water-side. Agentle breeze carries his at the rate of five milesan hour along the coast; in an hour and a halfwe arrive at a projecting cape formed by the alluvionof the Haliacmon. In the time of Herodotusthis river was joined by the Lydiass, or dischargeof the lake of Pella, but a change has now takenplace in the course of the latter, which joins notthe Haliaauon hut the Axius. The Haliacmonitself appears to have moved its lower course tothe eastward of late, so that in time, perhaps, allthe three rivers may unite before they join the sea.In all the large rivers of Greece, similar changesof direction in the lower parts of their course areobservable. The new soil which is brought down bythe water, and distributed along the shore by thesea, acted upon by prevailing winds and currents,produces a continual change of obstacles and ofrelative levels in the maritime plain, which speedilygives a new course to the waters, even in the landwhich is not of the latest formation. The jointstream formed by the LydJas and Axius is stillnavigable into the lake, and probably up to Pella,as it was in ancient times. After having passedCape Karasmak, which is exactly opposite to theouter extremity of Cape Karabumu, the wind. . . . ^'E-xiilupov, r.KIt iropiu t\oz ri ix-abyKpqffTWWliwk rf(>&l>.H>t p"-"/"V'--HcHJtlot. 1. 7, u. 1• la Uvy^yiiit: \iipK' •.«"'«J438 ucsKMu. [chap.heaads as a Ende, aad ve f to u t A man ithan before, bat ia half aa knag, at 6 o'clockTnrkbh, arrive at a seeood point, about midwaybetween the Vntiitta and Tardkui, «iiere nnentamsjiA bdoogii^ to g«il»H* are cm*|4oj'ed in catfhfog diell-fiah and tictopodhia,while at no great distance fran them some lateiqaadnns of wild swans are floating' lazily wt thegcntly-swellii^ snrbce, and spear to enjoy thefine weather. To the ri^it, the cliffs <tf Kara-bombextend for three or for miles in length.The citie seen finn Salmtki is the westernmostpint. This consjMCDOos transitory seems, fromDionyntu of HaliiianiasBas, who consulted someearly Greek writers, to have been once the platformof a temple of Venus, said to hare beenfounded by .eneas'. There cannot be a morebeautiful situation for such a building. At 6.25we are opposite the mouth of the Vardhari, whichnow joins the sea in a bay between the last capewhich we passed and another called Kazik-bumu,which we pass at 6.51. It is not improbable thatCHAPTER XXXI.MACEDONIA.Comparative Geography of Macedonia — River Galliko, Echi-dort — Doiran, Tatian — Gallicum — Stuff — Siena of theAxTut — Idomene — Invasion of Sitalcet—Moant Cerciut — Oor-tytia — E uroput^A I mop ia — Em a ih ia^~Mcedi — Asphyxia —Antonius — Mygdonia — Crosbie — Mount Cissiu — BoltiatceChalcidenses — Apollonia of Chalcidice — Olynthus — Apol-ita of Mygdonia — Lett — Pteonia — Strumitza, AslraumRoman roads from Stobi — Velesa, Bytozora — Alnutna,Desudaba, Medica — Ivorina, Jampkori/ia — Mount Scom'tiu —Denthelelce, Bern — Istipp, Attapus^Gh.\\\slenii\, Paulalia —Veranda, Ulpianaa — Towns on the Mallet — Skopia, Scupi —Edict of Ampkipolu after the conquest by /Vi u'/uj— Limitsof the ^r region — Coins of the Telrareky.Having been prevented by the occurrence of hostilitiesbetween England and the Porte from prosecutingmy travels in Macedonia, I can here onlyoffer a few remarks on the comparative geographyof those parts of that celebrated province of Greecewhich 1 have not visited, illustrated by such an imperfectdelineation as oral information can supply.I have already remarked, that between Salonikiand the Vardhari a river called Galliko crosses theroad. This is evidently the Echidorus of Herodotus,and as in the Tabular Itinerary, Gallicumis the name of a place situated 16 m. p. fromJ440 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.Tbessalonica, on the Roman road to Stobi ' ; itwould seem that in this, as in some other instanceswhich might be mentioned, the ancientname of the river had fallen into disuse, and hadbeen replaced by that of a town which stood uponits banks. Hence also we perceive that the roadto Stobi followed the valley of the Echidorus, andnot that of the Axius. Next to Gallicum on thisroute occurred Tauriana, to which the modernDoghirin, or Do'iran, corresponds so nearly inname that we can hardly doubt of the identity,the more so as the road thither from Saloniki ledin the direction of the course of the Galliko. Noris the distance of Do'iran from Saloniki very differentfrom the 33 m. p. which the Table placesbetween Thessalonica and Tauriana. Do'iran hasbeen described to me as a town situated on asmall lake which discharges itself into anotherlake, and that into the Axius. Kilkitj beingnearly midway from Saloniki to Do'iran, seems tooccupy the site of Gallicum.Stobi, upon which the road was directed asXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 441city near it, in memory of a victory over thosetroublesome neighbours, and which he proposedto call Perles, in honour of his son. At theRoman conquest, Slobi m'Bs made the place ofdeposit of salt for the supply of the Dardan, themonopoly of which was given to the third Macedonia'. Some vestiges probably still exist toprove its exact site, although I have not beenable to obtain any account of them. Accordingto the Tabular Itinerary, it stood 47 m. p, fromHeracleia of Lyncus, which was in the Via Egnatia,and 55 M. p. from Tauriana ; aud as the sum ofthe Tabular distances from Heracleia to Stobi,aud from Stobi to Serdica, now Sofia, is not greatertitian the real distance from the site of Heracleianear Filurina to Sofia, we may infer that Stobiwas in the direct road from Heracleia to Serdica.Hence its position appears to have been on theJ£jigon, ten or twelve miles above the junction ofthat river with the Axius, a situation which agreeswith Livy, inasmuch as he describes Stobi as atown of Pajoiiia, in the district Deuriopus, whichwas watered by the Erigon. Strabo, indeed,who names three towns of Deuriopus, and addsthat they were all situated on the Erigon, hasnot noticed Stohi ', but possibly he may haveconsidered the lower part of that river as in Pela-ionia,for the respective confines of these districtswere very uncertain, especially after the Romanconquest.Liv. 1. 33, f. 19; 1. 39, ' Strabo, p. 327.e. 53; 1. 45, c. 29.442 Macedonia. [Chap.On the road in the Tabular Itinerary franTauriana to Stobi occur the following distancesand names : — 20 h, p. Idomene, 12 m. p. Siena,11 H. p. Antigoneiaia, 12 h. p. Stobi'; where theSiena or Straits are evidently the pass now calledDemli^api, or Iron gate, where the rirer Vardfaariis closely bordered by perpendicular rocks, whichin one place have been excavated for the road.Idomene consequently stood on the Vardhari, 12Roman miles below the Demirkapi, and probablyon the right bank, as it is included by Ptolemy inEmathia, a province bounded eastward by theAxius, which river may be supposed to have formedin remote times a protection to the Mathias townsfrom the barbarians of Pceonia and Thrace. Theseevidences as to the situation of Idomene, althoughnot yet confirmed by the discovery of any ancientremains, already furnish a valuable illustrationof Thucydides, whose narrative of the invasion ofMacedonia by the Thracian, under Sitalces kingof the Odrysee, in the third year of the Peloponnesianwar contains some incidental remarks onXxii.] HACEDOIflA. 443several subject cities on the Thracian coast, theking was accompanied by Agnon of Athens, aswell as by a pretender to the Macedonian throne,in the person of Aniyntas, a nephew of Perdiccaathe reigning monarch. As the authority of Sitalcesextended from the shores of the Euxine and Propontisto the frontiers of Macedonia, where eventhe Pseoniau tribes to the left of the Strymon weresubject to him, he was enabled to enter Macedoniawith no less than a hundred and fifty thousand men,one third of whom were cavalry. His route fromThrace into Macedonia crossed Mount Heroine,leaving the Paroles on his right, the Sintii andMfedi on his left, and descended upon the Axiusat Idomene ; from thence he moved by Gortyma,Atlanta, and Europus, into the maritime plain,but instead of proceeding to Cyrrhus and Pella,he turned to the left and ravaged Mygdonia, Cres-ionia,and Anthems, without entering Bottiasa,still less Pieria, both of which were wiikin Cyrrhusand Pella'.From a previous knowledge of the relative situationsof Sintice, Idomene, and Pella, it may confidentlybe inferred, that the Thracianss invadedMacedonia from the plain of Serres, then considereda part of Thrace, and that crossing themountains which close that plain to the westward,and separate it from the valley of the Axius, theytniro Si Kal I'c njv &XXiiy fffw ii TOUTuif Ic "}»■ Boitio/bvdpiHTtp^ [leWijf lai Kvppou' e. 100.444 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.entered the latter not far below the straits of Derairkapi passing near Doiran. Hence the mountainsat the extremity of the StrrhtBan plain areidentified with Cercine, and Roberts appears tohave been not far from Bo'iran. This is in somemeasure confirmed by Hierocles, who names Dio-bonisnext to Idomene among the towns of theConsular Macedonia under the Byzantine empire '.From Idomene the Thracianss evidently descendedthe valley of the Axius, until arriving in the greatmaritime plain, a little to the eastward of Pella,they turned from thence to the left towards .As Gorgonia and Europus, which occurred betweenIdomene and the plains of Cyrrhus andPella, are placed by Ptolemy together with Ido-menin Emathia, it is probable that like Idomenethey stood on the right bank of the Axius belowthat city. Not far above the entrance of the greatmaritime plain, the site of Europus may perhapshereafter be recognized by that strength of positionwhich enabled it to resist the invaders. We haveXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 445infer that it was the chief town of the ancient districtAlmopia. As Almopia was one of the earliestacquisitions of the Temenida; ', it was evidentlycontiguous to the original seat of the Macedonianmonarchy about Berrhoea and Edessa. Theother districts were Pieria on the south, Bottieeaon the east, and Geordie on the west. Almopia,therefore, was on the north ; being the same countrynow called Modena, which borders immediatelyupon the ancient capital of Macedonia to theNee. And this accords sufficiently with the intimationgiven by Tbucydides, that the next conquestsof the kings were in Anthems, Crestonia,and Bisaltia: that is to say, after having obtained allthe country to the right of the Axius, they crossedthat river, and increased their dominions as far asthe Pieces and Sintii ; though they were still excludedfrom the greater part of the sea coast bythe Greek colonies of Pieria and Mygdonia, andthose which occupied the whole of the Chalcidicpeninsula. Homer, whose writings are long anteriorto the Argive colony of the Temenidte ',alludes only to two provinces beyond the GreekThucycl. 1. 2, c 99. game, when appearing thereThere is nothing to im as a competitor for the prize,peach the general truth of the - — Herodot. 1. 5, c. '22. Justin,early history of Macedonia, 1. 7, c. 2. — But the origin ofthough that of its kings he the name Macedonia it scenafore Amyntas I. is obscure, impossible to ascertain, amidstAlexander, son of Amyntas, conflicting testimony of almostwho reigned at the Persian equal weight.— Herodot. 1. 1,invasion made out his Greek c. 56; 1. 9, c. 43. — Hesiodgenealogy to the satisfaction of Felonious et Clideraua ap.the judges at (he Olympic Constant. Porch. Them. 2.446 Macedonia. [chap.cities of Thessaly ; lying between them and Pannoniaand Thrace — namely, Pieria and Emathia *.By the first he probably intended the country betweenthe Peneius and Haliacmon, or as Hesioddescribes Pieria, around Mount Olympus'; bythe latter that beautiful region beyond the latterriver, and on the eastern side of the Olyn^pauridge, which protected on all sides by mountainsor marshes, at a secure bat not inconvenient distancefrom the sea, gifted with three magnificentpositions for cities or fortresses in Verra, Nausea,and Vodhena, blessed with every variety of elevationand aspect, of mountain, wood, fertile plain,running water, and lake, was admirably adaptedto be the nursery of the giant monarchy of Macedonia,where its wealth and power might thrive,and increase, until the time came for the augmentationof its territory on every side.I have already observed that Niausta, the middleof the three towns just alluded to, standsprobably on the site of the ancient Citium, a veryremarkable name, as, like the Citium of Cyprus,XXZT.] MACEDONIA. 447at the head of the Tbermaic Gulf for a colony,which could not venture to establish itself in amaritime site. It appears from Justin, that a portionof Emathia was occupied by the Bruges ', whowere expelled from thence by the Temenidfe ; andHerodotus, in stating that the gardens of Midas,who was their king, were situated at the foot ofMount Erratum', seems to show that their situationwas around Berrhcea.It is not surprising that Emathia in later timesshould have had more extensive boundaries thanthose which Homer may have understood, or thatPtolemy should have advanced its limits to the rightbank of the Axius, Polybius, indeed, and Livy, histranscriber in this place, assert, contrary to the tendencyof Homer's notice of Emathia and Pteonia,that Emathia was formerly called Pseonia' ; but thismay be reconciled by supposing that Emathia, beforeits colonization, was inhabited by the Pasonianrace ; whereas Pieria, the other province mentionedby Homer, is acknowledged to have been occupiedby a Thracian people before its conquest by theTemenidae, whence Orpheus was called a Thracian,and Pydna and Methone in Pieria were describedas Greek colonies on the coast of Thrace.It is not easy to reconcile the situation of theMsedi, as indicated in the passage of Thucydidesdescriptive of the march of Sitalces, with othertestimonies as to that people. They there appearto have dwelt, together with the Sintii, to the left• The same people as the ' Herodot. I. 8, c. 138.Phrases of Asia. The initial ' Polyb. 1. 24, c. 8.— Liv.B in the place of « was a Ma I. 40. c. 3.caledonian ritxot.448 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.of the route of the Thracianss over Mount Cercineinto Macedonia ; whereas, according to otherauthors, as will be seen more fully hereafter, theMeed occupied the country at the sources of theAxius and Margus (now Vardhari and Morava) aswell in the reign of Philip, son of Demetrius, asunderthe Roman emperors ; nor does any authorbut Tbucydides notice any Msedi near Lower Macedonia.Possibly they had become extinct in thecourse of the two centuries intervening between thereigns of Perdiccas and Philip, or had migrated toMount ScomiuB, like the Pieres to Mount ,and the Bottisei into the Chalcidic peninsula.It is clear, at least, that the Mspdi couldnot have occupied any great extent of territory tothe south of the route of Sitalces ; for in the countrywhich is bounded northward by that line,southward by the ridge of Mount Khortiatzi, eastwardby the Strymonic plain, and westward bythat of the Anus, and which is a space not morethan equal to a square of forty geographical milesthe side, we have to place Mygikmia, Crestonia,XXXI.] Macedonia. 449probably the boundary of Mygdonia towards Basaltic,which latter extended to the Sintice northward,and eastward to the Strymon, on the rightbank of which it inclined Euporia '.The maritime part of Mygdonia formed a districtcalled Aniphaxitia, a chorographical distinctionfirst occurring in Polybius, who seems todivide all the great plain at the head of the Ther-mainGulf into Amphaxitis and Bottisea*, andwhich is found three centuries later in Ptolemy,The Amphaxii coined their own money ; but asno mention of a town of Asphyxia occurs in history,and the silence of Ptolemy is adverse to thesupposition, those coins were probably struck atThessalonica *,■ Ptolemy. I. 3, c. 13.Polyb. 1. 5, c. 98.Ptolemy introduces twice among the of Macedonia, in nuncinstance placing under thatname the mouths of the Echi-chorus and Arius, with Thessaloniansas the only town, whichaccords generally with Polybius,and particularly withStrabo, who says, 6 'A^ioc £t-aipiiy rhv n BorriQia*' xai T^^'Aft^a£iTiy y^v. In the otherplace, Ptolemy includes Stagand Arethusa in ,which if it were correct,would indicate that aportion of Amphaxitis, verydistant from the Axis, wasseparated from the remainderby a part of Mygdonia, forPtolemy himself names Apologiaamong the towns of Myg-donia, which wc know to havebeen exactly interposed betweenThessalonica and Arethusa.But it is not probablethat any places so far from theArius as Arethusa and Stagwere even considered inthe Amphaxitis ; the word isperhaps a textual errorMr. Milliner has latelypublished a silver tetradrachm,inscribed MaKt^dvui^ 'A^^n-f/uii', exactly resembling someother coins of the Macedonians,after the fall of the monarchy.XXXI.]was a place near Thessalonica ', and Fhilerus amiSteps appear to have occupied inland situationsin the same part of the country '.The Crossed, Crossed, or Crisis, was sometimesconsidered a portion of Mygdonia ^ but is distinguishedfrom it by Herodotus, who describes theCrossed as comprehending all the maritime countryon the Thermaic Gulf, from Potidaea to thebay of Thermo, where Mygdonia commenced '.The cities of Crossed were Lipaxus, Cambria,Liseea, Gigonus, Camps, Smile, and ^neia. Ofthese, Gigonus and seneca alone are noticed bylater writers : of ^neia, coins are still extant witha type referring to the reputed foundation of thecity by eneas after the Trojan war*. The situationsboth of ^neia and Gigonus may be presumedfrom their having been situated near two capes *,and from there being no promontories worthy ofHeaven. ap. Stephen, in"AXrdc.PUn. 1.4,c. 10.— ^schin.lie ills. legat. — Stephan. inStrabo ap. Stephan. inSpouts. — Dionysius of Halicarnassus(1. 1, c. 49) names theinhabitants Kpovodlct.Scymn. Ch. v. 627-Dionys. Hal. ubi"Oc f^neias jc.) xpiara fit 'ValtrfKov ottiitYLlaaou Tap' airvv ThisW6y « riv esp. . Kai yljv TiffHerodot. 1. 7, c.Lycophr. V. 123C,etSch(il.Liv. 1. 40, c. 4. — Dionysiaubi sup. — Vir. ^n. 1. 3.V. 16.— Stephen. in Atvda.—Scylax in MowSoe/o.Sci. "PaieijXoc Mate sri KOI ► S>Toxic' Klsffoc ^c Spot Maircfo- ofviae, ^yff" <! Alrtlac /itra r^c mGg2Lycophr. v. 1236.Ii Tqc T point fxri^t KaiavTOV Alloy itpoaayipcv--Thf Scholiast appearMACEDONIA. [Chap.notice on tlm coast, except the little Karabumu,the great Karabumu, and the cape of Apanotui,the first of which 13 so near to The:ssaloQica, andso inconsiderable compared with the great ,that it can hardly enter into the question.Of the two others, the great Kambumii being aboutIOg.h. indirect distance from Tbessaloiiica, denisto be sufficiently identified by this circumstancewith the Cape ^neium of Scymnns, as we learnfrom livy, that the town of ^neia was fifteen Romanmiles from Thessalonica '. He adds, indeed,that it was opposite to Pydna, which, if it werecorrect, would imply an error in the distance juststated, as the two conditions are incompatible, andwould lead us to place Jena and Cape j:ETieitcmat Apanomi, which is nearly opposite to the site ofPydna. It is evident, however, from the order ofnames in Herodotus, that Gigonus was the moresouthern of the two capes, and from another factwhich occurs in history, that its situation wasnearly that of Apanomi. We learn from Thucydides,that in the year before the beginning of thePeloponnesian War, an Athenian force which hadbeen employed against Perdiccas marched in threedays from Berrhcea to Gigonus, from whence theyproceeded against Potidgea '. Gigonus, therefore,was not more than an ordinary day's march fromPotidcBa, which can hardly be said of Karabuniil ;to have confounded anus of Mag. in voce. — Ptolemy (1. 3,Thrace, and jEneia of Mace c. 13) notices the same cape,donia. but under the name Egonis.r/ywuc, uirpa fura^ii ylan- ' Liv. 1. 44, c. 10,iorias lai nfU^t'ijc— Etymon. ' Thucjd. I. 1. c. 61 .^XXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 453whereas, placing Gigonus at Apanomi, we havefour days' march of about twenty miles each, thesecond to Saloniki, and the third to Apanomi.Stephens also favours the more southerly situationof Gigonus by intimating that its territory confinedupon that of Palace', which was probablytrue in later times, when the intermediate placesmentioned by Herodotus having fallen to decay,the maritime country was divided between Thessalonica,Mneia, Gigonus, and Cassandra. Still,however, I am inclined to defer to Livy's wordsadversus Putnam, so far as to look for ^'Eneia onthe southern rather than the eastern side of CapeKaraburnu, the former better answering moreoverto the same author's 15 m, p. from Thessalonica.In illustration of the great number of townswhich in the time of Herodotus occupied Palleneand Crossed, it may he worthy of remark that thisis now considered the most fertile and best cultivatedpart of Macedonia, and the advantage ofthe harbour of Apanomi, added to that of a richsurrounding territory, will equally account for thatplace having retained its pre-eminence both inancient and modern times.Missus was a mountain (with a town of the samename) which a comparison of Xenophon and Lyco-chron seems to identify with Khortiatzi, the formerby mentioning it among the mountains which producedbeasts of prey, the latter by describing itas a lofty summit not far from Rheecelus, whichappears from Lycophron to have been the nameriywyog, iriiXic ©pyKfjc, wpoai^/n Tjj HaW^yp. — Slepli;priati. ^454 Maddox. fCHtf.of tb rr""™—*^^ ****** Vm^JatLSnmm^mA UiCftf *.I caonoc leafiL. bideed. that Ae Fnak mia— hor eonsnk, man of «iM»e e*mmU\ liniiimi are oaor near Mount KborttalzL or dnt At nlb^cs searit, are ever disturbed br the fiinnidable habituateof Mount CisHu remunerated W Xenophon, sackas the lion, ounce*, Irnx, panther, and bear; butKhortiatzi is the ooIt high mountain within a moderatedistance of the site of .MMoa which we canconceive to have been the haunt of those animals.That the town CSnaiwas not &r from Saloniki , seemsevident from its having contributed, together with£oeia and Cbalastra, to people Theesalooica *.Alton it has been generally found CDOTcnientto apply the name ChalatBtx to the whole of thegreat peninsula lying southward of the ridge ofMount Khortiatzi, in consequence of the influencewhich the XoAnSumc T^mc, or people of Chalcidicrace, enjoyed in that country in the meridian periodof Greek history, the original Cbalcidice did notcomprehend Cross nor the districts of Acanthusand Stages, which were colonies of Andros;that of Potidaea, a colony of Corinth *Xxxv.] Macedonia. 455were in subsequent times written BoTuahi, and theircountry Bornvil, to distinguish them from the BoreOF Inhabitants of BorTtta, or Borrta, a districtand town to the westward oF the Axius'. The principalpossession of the Chalcidenses, in the earliesttime of their migration, seems to have been thepeninsula of Sithonia, and their port and fortressto have been Torone ; from thence, they extendedtheir power inland, until at length they occupiedall the part of Mygdonia to the southward of theridges which stretch westward from Nizvoro, togetherwith the Cruse.The Chalcidenses were indebted to the Persiansfor the acquisition of Olynthus. Artabazus, on hisreturn from the Hellespont, whither he had escortedXerxes after his defeat at Salamis, having reducedOlynthus together with some other places in thisquarter which had revolted from his master, slewall the BottiEei, who had garrisoned Olynthus, andgave up the place to the Chalcidenses '. The after this period seem to have been the humbleallies of the Chalcidenses, with whom we findthem joined on two occasions *. Spartolus, whichCompare Thucyd. I. 1, c.57, 65, 1. 2, c. 79, 101, andEtymon. Mag. in Borrtm, whereBorriK'), ^ XaX^aiinj y^obviously to be Domicil J/XaXjci^iiL^ yS- That BorTfa'njc,the gentile of Bdrriia, belongedto the wsBlem Bottifeis is confirmedby the coins, inscribedBoTTtnriui', which resemblethose of Pella. On the otherhand, one of the silver coins,inscribed Domo/ui', is preciselysimilar both in type andfabric to those of the Chalcisimpressed with thehead of Apollo and his lyre.Tiff ci iriKiv irapafifoiKpiTojioiiX^ Tnpuimi^ inrpo-f Kai r}i XaXmSiKy yiyi'troi Hut 'OXvtSov \a\xtlifci(Txo»'.— Herod. 1. 8, c. 127.Thucyd. I. I, c. 6R; I, Z,c.7tf.4S6 MAtrEDtHOA. sour.was at DO great distance from OlyBtfao* ' lo theiwjrtliward, belonged to them, and was periu|atheir capital. Scotus, another town near Olvn*tba« *, was of sufficient importance to be mentioned,together with Spartolaa, in the treaty betweenSparta and Athens, in the tenth rear of the PeloponnesianWar '. Angela * and Giacomo. or )ltl-corns ', are two other names which may be assignedto the interior of Cbalcidice.Proof is wanting of there baring been a town ofChalcis in any part of the country occupied by thecolonists of Eubtta. Stephens, who enumeratesfive cities of that name, is silent as to anr such inthe Thracian Cbalcidice, and Eudoxus, whom hecites, merely describes Chalcis as the coast Livingbetween Athos and Pallene *. Aristotle also, whoknew Macedonia well, employs Chalcis or Chalcisof Thrace, as the name of a district, not atown '. Nevertheless, it can scarcely be doubtedthat before the time when Olynthus became subjectto the Cbalcidenses, and at length obtained thesupremacy over their other towns, there was a chiefXXXI.]Macedonia.the head of Apollo on one side, and on the reversehis lyre with the legend XaXictStwv ; for that thesewere the coins of the Thracian Chalcidenses, andnot oP the Enbocan, I can have no doubt, havingfound several of them in or near the country of theformer people, and not one in any other part ofGreece, while those of Chalcis in Euboea bearingthe eagle and serpent on one side, and a femalehead on the other, are everywhere extremely numerous.The coins of the Chalcidenses of Thracewere the produce perhaps of the mines of Sidliero-kappa, to the possession of which the colony mayhave been in great measure indebted for its prosperity.The Acantliii may have derived the silverof their fine coins from the same source.The name of the ancient capital of Chalcis Iconceive to have been Apollonia, in conformitywith that worship of Apollo which is recorded onthe coins ; for that there was an Apollonia of Chalcidicedifferent from Apollonia of Mygdonia, isclearly shown by Athenians and Xenophon : anauthor cited by the former remarks that two riversflowed from Apollonia into the lagoon Bolyca, nearOlynthus ' ; from the latter we learn that Apolloniawas only ten or twelve miles from Olynthus'; whenceIHegesandrua ap. Athen. 1.8, c. 3.Xenopb. Hellen. 1. S, c.3. The circum stances relatedby Xenophon show that thereIB no numerical error in thisdistance : six hundred Olynthuscavalry ravaged the landsof the Apologists, and advancedabout midday to thewalls of Apollonia, when Der-dos,prince of Elimeia, whohappened to be in the city withhis horsemen, suddenly issuingfrom the gates, put them toflight, and pursued them 90stades, slaying many, until theywere driven quite lo the wallsof OlynUms.ABBJUCSDOVU.[=■Iil is evident that the Apologia tended Itwo authors was on the southern side of the ridgeswhich intersect the Ckalddic peoiosQia itoax eastto west. Apollonia of Mygdonia, on the otb^had, as the indubitable testiinoaj of Sc Lukeand the idoeraTies demonstrate, stood to the Dortfa-wan) of the same mooDlains, od the direct road&om Thessalonica to Ampbipolig, br the pass ofArethusa '. In fact, the ruiitft of this ApoUammare still to be seen exactly io that line to thesooth of Pazarudhi, at a place preserving' theancient name in a committed form, and nearly atthe proportionate distance between Thessolooicaand AmtpUpoBs indicated by the Itioerarieskwkid> I hftTC bdm ■iilMiil. itmer. M ApoBoioM, m. p. 17Aniphip:Ii m. p. 30. — ,\ntor.and tie epitonuier of St»bo,It ei. Wm«I- p-KO.that there was a fourth u noT~::essal^cica — .\polIcitia m.great ciiLanoe- It was not sop.3d .^cLf hif^Ii «. ?. 33.—Ear, howtTtr. as tiii^i beAii:c=. I-.- f. 330.5-.;7joit-ii ~::: icw tito writ20 hap. Metersfor the better authority oflisscTp IS. Apollonia-30.Utv 1. 3S, c- 41' manifestly— Tab. Pennug.shots that tbev haTe incorrectness.o.Iv ces^:b«l it as tavins beenC:vitii .Vmphipolin — westward oftbeNestas,tance Pf=rir:A «. 10. M.:Qlica::i-.hi; :: »a: between BaronetFiT.^liii A~'-husi n. 10.act .\bdfTa. or =■:■: less than 20Mic*;^ A^'-:t:i^ m.U. M-.;-raises tai tfc* eastward of thatratio HfncUuttibiii h. 11.river. NoristheeiriscreoftbeH->:=idr I>j.>dra k. U. ChrisListcriar: c:; this questionas TiiiiLcEira m. 13. — lie:.w::i?jt irpT^Tt. f.T StephensHkrcic:. p. o>)j.evM«-t;j illness to tfce sameBcifdcj ±e .\fv!:c*Qta of.^lollonia, when returning to itsChild ind MvzdcEJA. and i«*n'iMi bj Danoatfa«c«3 he d*-tXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 459The distance of the Chalcidic Apologia fromOlynthus, stated by Xenophon, and the circumstanceof its not being in the direction of Acanthus,which his narrative also indicates, combineto place it at or near PoHghero, which, like Apologiaof old, is now the chief town of the Chalcidice.Spartolus would seem from the transactionsrelated by Thucydides not to have been so far fromOlynthus as Apollonia wa, which is somewhatconfirmed by Isaeus, who describes it as Spartolusof the Olysia ', or territory of Olynthus. It was inconsequenceof the complaints of the Apolloniansof Chalcidice and of the Acanthus, that the lacedaemoniansent an army against Olynthus, which,after losing two of its commanders, succeeded inthe fourth campaign, b.c. 379, in reducing the cityto submission'.When Olynthus became a part of Chalcidice, Itis not surprising that its maritime situation shouldhave caused it gradually to eclipse the ancientcapital. It was particularly after the PeloponnesianWar, that it became one of the greatest citiesin Greece, made successful war with Macedonia,took Pella from Amyntas', and was of such importanceto the league which it headed, that whenscribes it aa Uie " Apollonia of (Herodot. 1. 1, c. Fig. Scytheloans of Thrace," (liKoin-ii ch. V. 665, 675).itvTipi), rwv fire QjUfKiit 'liiyw, ' lame orate. ubi supra.^v Aij^oirflfyijc ^ija-iv. — Step Xenoph, Hellen. 1. 5, c. S.plan. in 'AruXKwtla.) The * jVI Bpycigc luyiarii riXitionian of Thrace were so cal 'OXu^Boc.— Oxen. Hellen. 1. 5,led because Abdera was a colo c. 2.ny of Claimants and Tea, 'OXu»*)c ironic /ivpiafSpot-and Msronea ft colony of Chins, — Diodor. excerpt. Ex. 1.rMO Macedonia. [CBAV.redacftl bv Philip, it was followed in its sobmu-sion by thirty-two other towns '.Xor can there be any difficulty in conceiving, thatwhen Ghalcidice bad been between three and forcenturies subject to Rome, the received choro^npfajof the cooler should have been different from thatwhich prevailed In the time of its freedom. Ptolemyappears to have divided the whole peninsulainto two parts, Chalcidice and Paralia ; for thus Iread the word which in all the printed copies of hisworks is Paria *. Paralia contained all the maritimecountry between the bay of Thesealonica andDerrhis the Cape of Sithonia : thus the westerncoast of Sithonia was at that time included in Pa-alia,and the eastern in Ghalcidice, together withAcanthus, the entire peninsula of Acte, and all themaritime country adjacent to the Strymonic Gulf,as far north an Bromiscas, with the exception ofStageira.Livy mentions an Antigoneiaia of Crisis between^■Eneia and Pallene ' : it was perhaps one of theIOWD5 of that coast noticed bv Herodotus, whichhad been repaired bv one of the Antigone. BvPtolemy it is summed Sahara, probably inorder to distinguish it bv this adjunct from anotherMacedonian Antigoneiaia on the road from theSiena of the Axius to Stobi. As Cheese andMorbus are placed bv Ptolemy together withDemosth. Philip. 3. — Mr, Apollo, and the word X.\.A-groningen has lately engraved XIAEIIN his lyre,a town of the Coincidences of ' Plolem. 1. 3, c. 13.Thrace, on which the letters ' Liv. 1, 44, e. 10.0.\YN6 "surround the head ofS.XXXI.] MACEDONIA. 461Antigoneiaia Sahara in Paralia, ami their namesdo not occur in the periplue of the fleet of Xerxes,they were places perhaps in the bay of Thessalonians,between the city and Cape jEndum, orKaraburnii. Ptolemy has not noticed either thiscape or the city jEnoia.On the road from Thessalonica to Apologia ofMygdonia, a Melissiirgi occurs in two of the Itineraries: this place still preserves its ancient namein the usual Romaic form of Melissurgus, and isinhabited by honey-makers, as the word implies.It was 20 or 21 m. p. from Thessalonica. Thethird, or Jerusalem Itinerary, seems to have followeda different line from Apologia to Thessalonians,leaving probably the summit of Khortiatzi tothe right, whereas the two others seem to havepassed on the opposite side of it. But both roadsevidently crossed that mountain, the Romans havingseldom allowed such an obstacle to divert themfrom their direction. The modem barbarians, onthe contrary, have found a circuit by the pass ofKhaivat, which avoids the ridge entirely, moreconvenient for the caravan route to Constantinople; and in consequence of this change, theyfollow the northern shore of the lakes, instead ofthe heights on the southern side of them, whichwas the direction of the ancient road. Theseroutes reunite in the pass of Arethusa, now calledthat of Besikia, and by the Turks the Rumill Ghazi,as being one of the most important defiles onthis great line of communication.In the list of Greek bishoprics as arranged by theemperor Leo the philosopher, Letee, conjointly^MMACBDOKIA. [chap.Rending, was the aee of a bishop subordinate to themetropolitan of The^salooica, aod styled o AvecRoi 'PtvrlviK. Rending having been at or sear thepass of Besikia, it would seem that Letee was Dotfar from thence, which agrees with the intimationsderived from the ancient as to the positionof Letee, the lake of Besikia having been in M^g-donia ', aod Iste being named by Ptolemy nextto Apologia of Mygdonia '. On the other hand,it seems difficult to find a place for late in theMacedonian valley, if Stephanas is right in assertingthe existence of a town Bolbe, since in thatcase this valley seems sufficiently occupied byHole, Apologia, and Anthems. Possibly Marove may be the site of Letee, or Sokho, if we placeMo at Lakhana.I shall now offer a few remarks on Pseonia, ageographical denomination, which prior to theAngelic colonization of Emathia, appears to havecomprehended the entire country afterwards calledMacedonia, with the exception of that portion ofit which was considered a part of Thrace. Asthe Macedonian kingdom increased, Paeonia wascurtailed of its dimensions on every side, thoughthe name still continued to be applied in a generalsense to the great belt of interior country whichcovered Upper and Lower Macedonia to the N,and N, E., and a portion of which was a monarchynominally independent of Macedonia until fiftyyears after the death of Alexander the Great.Tric banks of the Axius seem to have been theI Thucytl. 1. I, e. ros. ' Stolen. 1. 3, c. 13.rxXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 463centre of the Devonian power, from the lime whenPyraechmes and Asteropseus led the Pieonians tothe assistance of Priam ', down to the latest existenceof the monarchy. When the Temenidre hadacquired Emathia, Almopia, Crestonia, and Myg-donia, the kings of Pceonia still continued to ruleover the country beyond the straits of the Axius,until Philip, son of Amyntas, twice reduced themto terms, and they were at length subdued byAlexander', after which they were probably submissiveto the Macedonian sovereigns *. Thecoins of Audoleon, who reigned at that time, andwho adopted after the death of Alexander thecommon types of that prince and his successors*,prove the civilization of Paeonia under its kings.Diodorus informs ns that Cassander assisted Au-cleonagainst the Autariatse, an Illyrian people,and that having conquered them, he transported20,000 men, women, and children, to Mount Or-bells",whence we may infer that regal Paeonialay between the Autariatae and Mount Orbelus.11. B. V. 848, ♦. V. 154.—V. et Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 99.Diodor. 1. 19, c. 2. 4. 22;1. 17.C.8.An inscribed marble recentlydiscovered in the acropolisof Athens records an interchangeof good offices betweenthe Athenians and Au-cleonin the archonship ofMittimus, B. c. 3S4, or a fewyears after the succession ofPhilip, son of Amyntas, andAudoleon, to their respectivethrones, and two years afterPhilip is stated by Diodorusto have reduced the king ofPeeonia to submission. If thisAudoleon was the same as thecotemporary of Cassander, hereigned at least fifty years.The head of Alexander inthe character of young Hercules,and on the obverse, thefigure of Jupiter Metaphors.Diodor. 1. 20, c. 19.464 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.From a comparison of Appian and Strabo, as wellas iirom an incident in the life of Alexander theGreat,' to which I before adverted', it is evidentthat the Aatariatse bordered to the eastward uponthe Afpianes and Bessi, to the south upon theMsedi and Dardan, and in the other directions onthe Arise and Scordisci. Upon the whole, therefore,it is consistent with history and the generalchorography of the countries to the northward ofMacedonia, to conclude that regal Peeonia comprehendedall the central and most fertile part ofthe more extended Pseonia, and that it was situatedabove the straits of the Axius, occupying all -the countries on the upper branches of that river,with the exception of those districts towards thesources of the Erigon, which had been united withUpper Macedonia. Bylazora, although describedby Polybius as the chief city of Pseonia, was notthe capital of the kingdom, perhaps on account ofthe inconvenience of its proximity to the Dardan.The royal residence, as we learn from Polysenns,was situated on the river Astycus *, evidently theX5CXI.] MACEDONIA. 465Vravnitza, or river of Isti, which, next to theErigon, is the greatest of the tributaries of theAxius.Of the tribes on the Thracian frontier of Pseoniawhich were subject to Macedonia, as early atleast as the reign of Philip, son of Amyntas,I have already shown reasons for believing thatthe Odoinanti occupied the whole of Mount Orpheusfrom above the Siena of the Strymon near themodern Demirissar to Zikhua inclusive, wherethey confined on Mount Pang(Euin. Thus theirnorth-western portion lay to the right of Sitalces ashecrossed Mount Cercine : and their general situationaccords with the description of Thucydides,according to whom they dwelt beyond the Strymonto the north ' ; that is to say, to the northward of theLower Strj'mon, where alone the river has such aneasterly course as can justify the historian's expression.It is observable, that the Panaei, whom Thucydidescouples with the Odoraanti, are stated byStephens to have been a tribe of the Stones'.These authorities agree, therefore, in confirmingthe situation of the Odomanti just indicated.Between Meleuiko and Petritzi, above Demiris-sdr and the Strymonic straits, the main branch ofthe Struma, or Strymon, is joined by a large tributarynamed Strumitza, upon which stands a townof the same name, situated a day's journey beyondPetritzi, in the road from Serres to Velesa. Stn'i-Thucyd. 1.2, c. 101 ; 1. 5. ' Stpphaii. in n i6.vol,. III. n h466 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.mirza I am disposed to identify nntb the ancientAstrseum, to which Philip sent his son Demetrius,when he gave directions for his death to Midas,governor of PEEooia ', though it was not there thatDidas executed his orders, but at Heracleia (Sin-rica)having invited Demetrius thither on the occasionof a festival during which [Maison was administeredto the prince. Didae, in return for hisservices, was favoured by Perseus when he cameto the throne ; and hence we find Didas, at thebeginning of the Persic war, commanding a bodyof 3000 men, who consisted of Stones, Paroraei,Paretrymonii, and Agrianes *. The Pa;onian monarchywas then extinct, and its territory, withthe exception probably of a part occupied bythe Dardan, had been united to the Macedoniankingdom ; from which fact, and the names of thepeople who were governed by Didas, it seems evidentthat the Pseonian province, at that period ofthe Macedonian monarchy, comprehended the valleysof the Upper Strymon and Upper Axius, withthe intermediate mountains, and including thecountry of the Agrianes, who dwelt near the sourcesof the Strymon '. Astrseum seems to have been acentral position in this country, and the provincialseat of government. The site of Strumitza was welladapted to be thechief fortress of such hardy tribes ;its strength is particularly attested by NicephorusGregoras, when he was sent in a. d. 1326 to SkopiaLiv. 1. 40, c. 24. ' Strabo. (Epit. 1, 7)Liv, 1. 42, C.51. p, 331.'>W3IXXI.]MACEDONIA.on a mission to the Krai of Servia from the EmperorAndroniciis the elder : he relates, that afterhaving travelled half a night and one day from aferry of the Strymon, he arrived at Strumitza, afortress 6o lofty that the men on the walls lookedfrom the plain like birds '.Ptolemy, in assigning to the Jests Dobcrua aawell as ^Btraeum, shows those two places to havebeen at no great distance from one another; whichis true, on the supposition that jEstrcBum or ,was at Strumitza, and Dohcnis near Dog-hiram'. Strymon, Struma, Atreus, and Strutseem to be all dialectic modifications ofNicephor. Greg. 1. 8, c.14. Gregoras had been preceptorof Uie children of Meto-china, for which reason he waachosen by the Emperor for amission, one of the objects ofwhich was to persuade thewidow of Holm Pala;oIogus,who was the Kral'a mother inlawand the daughter of Meto-china, to return to Constantinople.Gregoras was accompaniedby one of the lady'sbrothers. Of his journey asfar as the Strymon he relatesonly that the country was atthat moment deserted in consequenceof an expected invasionof Scythian. And itseems in general to have beennearly in its present state. Atthe Strymon, for instance, he11 hfound only a single ferry-boat,which required the greater partof the day to carry over his150 beasts of burthen. Hisplace of crossing was probablynear Deniirissar, for had itbeen lower he could not havereached Strumitza at the endof the next day. The timidityand inexperience of the pedagoguemagnified the alarmsand difficulties which he metwith in prosecuting his journeyduring the greater part of thenight through the forest beyondthe Strymon, and which affordedhim au opportunity ofshoeing his learning by comparingthe darkness to thecaverns of Twnarus and Trophies.Stellar46S Macedonia. [chap.some original word of Macedonia, meaning river.The name Attract, as I have already remarked,wall applied to the lower part of the Ha&aemtim,and Visbitza seems to be nothing more than thecorruption, or modem Bulgaria form of Attunes.The town of Strumitza, therefore, as well as itspredecessor Aatrseum, I conceive to have taken itsname from the river on which it stood, as beingthe position of greatest importance upon thatgreat branch of the Strymon, and the naturalcapital of its valley. The name implies the lesserStrymon.In the north-western part of Pseonia, the principalplace under the Romans, as 1 before hinted,was Stobi. From this point four roads are drawnin the Tabular Itinerary ' One proceeded northwestto Scupi, and from thence north to Missus,a position on the great sonth-eastem route fromViminacium on the Danube to Byzantium, — thesecond north-eastward to Serdica 100 m. p. southeastof Naissus, on the same route *, — the thirdXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 469south-eastward to Thessalonica, and the fourthsouth-westward to Heracleia; the last forming acommunication with that central point on the ViaEgnatia, or great Roman road from Apollonia toThessalonica, leading through Stobi from all theplaces on the three former routes.In the valleys which arc watered by the confluentsof the Upper ylxiiM, and which were traversedby the two roads branching northward from Stobi,there are three considerable towns, of which themodern names sufficiently resemble the ancient, tolead at once to a presumption of identity. Theseare Skopia, Veleaa, and Istipp. In regard to thefirst there can be no question, as the name whichin Ptolemy and Hierocles is SkoWoi, is still foundin the same form in the history of NicephorusBrycnnius at the beginning of the twelfth century,though Skopia, the present Greek form, isused by Anna Comnena at an earlier period, andat a later by Nicephorus Gregoras, who has exactlydescribed Skopia as situated on the hanksof the Axius, which was then, as it is now, calledBapBapiov '. It may be objected, perhaps, that thenumber of m. p. between this place and Stobi ismuch greater in the Table than the real distancefrom Skopia to the supposed site of Stobi; but asthe Table often fails in the accuracy of its numbers,particularly in excess ; and as there can beno doubt as to Scupi, we are fully authorized inthis instance in preferring to that authority theNittplior. Greg. 1. 8, c. U, 1. S, c. 2.470 MACEDONIA. [cBAP.evidence derived from the agreement of the supposedBite of l:>tohi with all the other requisitesderived from ancient testimony.The identity of Velesa, or Velesso ', with Byla-born, besides the similarity of sound in modern Greekpronunciation, is supported by the circumstantialevidence of history. Advantageously placed on theUpper Axius, in the midst of the fertile countrywatered by that river and its branches, and on theedge of the mountains which here separated Paeoniafrom Illyria, Bylazora was well qualified by situationto become "the greatest city of Livonia,"while the situation of Velesa exactly illustrates thefurther remark of Polybius, that Bylazora was nearthe passes leading from the Dardanice into Macedonia' ; that is to say, through Pannonia, for whichreason it was taken and fortified by Philip, son ofDemetrius, as a barrier against the Dardan, previouslyto his descent into Greece in the last yearof the Social War. As the Pseonian power wasthen extinct, it was probably from the Dardanthat Philip took the city, and it may have beenupon the ground of their temporary possession ofthe western part of Pseonia that the Dardan, onthe division of Macedonia into four regions at theRoman conquest, claimed Paeonia of the Senateof Rome, as having formerly belonged to them '.BiXifra, BeXttTOTs, /3o\ac rat attb r^E AopSavH;^BvXa^^oipa, ficylm-iiy oiaay tic MaKc^oflav. — Polyb. I. 5,rr,i n«.Liv. I. 45, e.39.1/^XXXI.] Macedonia. 47 1It may be thought, perhaps, an objection to thisposition of Bylazora, that the name is not found inthe Tabular Itinerary on the road from Stofn toSaipi, although Velesa lies exactly in that line :I am inclined to believe that it does occur underthe very corrupted form of Anasarca,Bylazora is again mentioned in the history ofthat eventful year, b.c. 168, when Perseus, notlong before the battle of Pydna, endeavoured toobtain the mercenary services of 20,000 Gauls,who in the expectation of being employed by him,had advanced in equal numbers of horse and footas far as Desudaba in Medica. Perseus with theview of drawing them into Macedonia, moved withhalf his army from the river Enipeus in Pieria toAlmana on the Axius, which was 75 miles distantfrom Desudaba. Having ordered supplies to bein readiness on the intended route of the Gauls,he sent a messenger to Desudaba, requiring theGallic army to advance to Bylazora, and invitingtheir chiefs to visit him at Almana, where he gavethem to understand by the messenger that he hadprepared some rich presents for them, by thesemeans hoping to obtain the services of the Gaulswithout farther expence. But they were not apeople to be so duped : they refused to movebeyond Desudaba until they should receive thestipulated present of ten pieces of gold for eachhorseman, five for each foot soldier, and 1000 foreach chief, and such an advance of treasure beingmore than the avaricious monarch could consentto advance, the Gauls returned to the Danube472 MACEDONIA. [CBAV^ravaging the parts of Thrace through which theyAs Perseus had left a most formidable enemyill PerrhaBbia and Pieria on this occasion, we cannotsuppose that he advanced farther up the Axiusthan was absolutely necessary. Almana, therefore,was probably below the straits of Demirkapi,between the Sepia and Idomene, and Desudabahaving been 75 m.p. distant from thence, on thedirect route to the Danube by the valley of theMargus, will fall at or near Kumanovo, on one ofthe confluents of the Upper Axius. This indeedis nearly the greatest southern extent that can begiven to Medica towards Peeonia aud the respectivesituations oi Desudaba, Bylazora and Ananiasjust indicated, will then perfectly agree withthe circumstances stated by the historian, audthe more so as PereeaB had undertaken to furnishthe Gauls with provisions, and as Bylazora,the intermediate station, was in the middle of themost fertile part of Pseonia. Medica thus placedaccords also with the remark of Strabo, thatthe Ma;di bordered eastward on the Thunatae ofDardaniaia', for the Dardaniaia extended to Skopia,Liv. 1. 44, c. 27. If the value, to a quarter of a mil-aureahero mentioned were the Iron of sovereigns. But Livyregale jiumisma I'liili/ipi, one thought that the late of Perseusn hardly wonder at the hesi- depended upon it, and that i:nation of Perseus, for the the Gauls had marched intoamount of this marching rao- Thessaly, there would haveney alone, would have been been no escape for the Romans.almost equal in weight, with ' Strabo, p. 310.out coiisidtriiii; the relative/"V3tXXl.] MACEDONIA. 473and the Thunatee therefore we may suppose tobave been a tribe of the Dardan, possessing themodem Katzaniki. If the southern boundary ofthe Mcedi was near Kumdnovo that people musthave possessed the sources of the eastern branchof the Morava, or Margus, and its upper valleys,in one of which Urania, or Ivorina, has very muchthe sound of Jamphorina, the capital of the Mcsdi,which was taken by Philip, son of Demetrius, inthe year b, c. 211. On this occasion the king,whose design it was by previous intimidation tokeep his troublesome neighbours quiet, while heshould be employed in Greece against the italians,had first assaulted Oricus and Apologia,from whence he marched into Pelagonia, took acity of the Dardan ', which had facilitated theentrance of that people into Macedonia on theaide of Pelagonia, and then passed through Pela-ionia,Lyncus, and Bottifea, into Thessaly ', Thesituation of the Mtedi is farther illustrated by thefruitless excursion of the same king of Macedoniato the summit of Mount Hsemus in the vain expectationof beholding from thence at once theAdriatic and Black Sea, the Danube and the Alps.He arrived at the foot of the mountain in sevendays from Stobi, passing through the country of theMidi ; after a laborious ascent of three days, and aTbe-name of this city may scribere. It stood probablyperhaps have been mentioned to the northward of Stobi otby Polybius, from whom Ijivy Stymbara, a country yet un-borrowedhis narrative, ami explored by modem travellers.may have been lost hither by ' Liv. 1, 26, c. 25,the Latin liislorlnn or hi Uhti-474 Macedonia. [CHAP.descent on his retain of two, be rejoined fair campin Medica ' ; thence made an incursion into thecountry of the Dentheletee for the sake of provision,re-entered that of the Mtedi, where he receivedthe momentary submission of a place namedPetra, and from thence returned into Macedonia.It seems evident from the number of days' march,that the mountain visited by Philip, and namedHEemua by the historian, could have been no otherthan that which by two of the best authorities isdenominated Somnus, or Scombrus *, being thatcluster of great summits between Ghiuatendil andSofia, which sends tributaries to all the great riversof the northern part of European Turkey ; forthis, in fact is the moat central point of the continent,and nearly equidistant from the Euxine, the^gsean, the Adriatic, and Uie Danube. The would seem from the circumstance mentionedby the historian to have bordered on theMeed towards the south-east. Tenus itself waschiefly occupied by the Bessi ', who from theirfastnesses defied the power of Rome until the reignof Augustus *, aud according to Pliny extendedXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 475Astibon, the third of the ancient towns ofP^onia, the names of which still subsist in acorrupted form, was on the road from Stobi toSerdica. It is now by the Turks called Isti,and stands exactly on that line, at a distancefrom each of those ancient sites which, as well asour present imperfect geographical materials admitof judging, sufficiently corresponds with thenumbers in the Table. It occupies probably thesite of the capital of the kings of Pseonia, whichappears from Polynenus to have been situated on ariver named Astycus '. The modern Djustendil orGhiustendil equally accords with the Pautalia ofthe Table, and the situation of Ghiustendil at thesources of the Strymon is remarkably in accordancevrith the figure of a river god, accompaniedby the legend "S-t^vhuv on some of the autonomouscoins of Pautalia, as well as with the lettersENnAIQ, which on other coins show that thePautaliotae considered themselves to be Paionians,like the other inhabitants of the banks of thatriver. On another coin of Pautalia the productionsof its territory are alluded to, namely, gold,silver, wine, and com*, which accords with Ghius-tendril. In the reign of Hadrian, the people both80 incorrect are the gene one of the branches of the Nile,mlityof the names in the Table, while Astaboros and Astasobas,that Astibon is liable to bus names equally of Macedonicpicton. If the town and river foundation, were attached to twobore the same name, as seems other tributaries of the samelikely, it was perhaps neither great river.Astycus nor Astibon, but As ' Eckhel. num. vet, vol. ij.tapes, for AstapuB was applied p. 'M,by the Macedonian Greeks to476 ILLTRIA. [Chap.of Pautalia and the neighbouring Serdica addedUlpian to the name of their town, probably inconsequence of some bennet received iToin thatemperor. This title in the case of Pantalia wouldseem at first sight to warrant the supposition, thatit was the same place as Ulpianaa, which, aocording to Procopius, was rebuilt by Justinian,with the name of Justinianaa Secunda*, and themodem name Gfaiustendil lends an appearance ofconfirmation to this faj^pothesis by its resemblanceto Justinianaa. But there is an insurmountableobjection to this hypothesis. Both Procopius andHierocles notice Ulpianaa and Pautalia as distinctplaces, to which we may add, that Ptolemy as well88 Hierocles ascribes Ulpianaa to Dardaniaia, whichseems never to have extended far to the eastwardof Scupi, or Skopia. A further argument againstthe identity arises from a comparison of the TabularItinerary with a passage in Romances, whorelates that Theodemir being at Naissus, sent abody of troops, under his son Theodoric, throughCastrum Hercules to Ulpianaa *, where CastrumIlcrculis ia evidently the same as the Ad HeiXXXI.] ILLYRIA. 477From a place named Ilammeno, which wus inthat road, at an uncertain distance from Scupi,but evidently in a New, direction, and probablynot very far from it, there was a branch to thewestward leading to Missus, now Less, near themonth of the JJrilon. Of the ancient places onthis route, Veranda bears some similitude insound to the modern Prisrend, though it must beadmitted that the proportion of distances on theroute, even without any addition for the intervalbetween Scupi and Hammer, would place The-ranafarther westward. As Ulpianaa does notoccur either on this road nor on that from ScipioNaissus, it lay probably between them in thecountry' to the northward of Prisrend, which iswatered by the western branch of the Morava,perhaps at the modern Pristine. Beyond l^ie-rana the route to Missus seems to have falleninto the valley of the Maikis, where I should bedisposed to look for Fabulous, Orevcnia, and theother names in the route of the Table ; for on themore direct line occurred the " solitudes of Scotus,"which mountain being described incidentallyby Livy as lying in the way from Stymbarato Scotia, and again as giving rise to the Originswhich flowed through the lake Lsibeatis to Scotia',seems clearly to have comprehended the greatsummits on either side of the Drilon, where itscourse is from east to west.The important position of Scupi at the debouchfrom the lydian mountains into the plains ofPaeonia and the Upper Axius, caused it in allLiv. 1. 43. c. 20; 1. 44, <.■. 31.478 Illyria. [Chap.ages to be the frontier town of lyra towardsMacedonia. There is no evidence of its erahaving been possessed by the kings of Macedoniaor of Pfeonia. Under the Romans it was ascribedto Dardaniaia, as well in the time of Ptolemy \ aiin the fifth century, when it was the capital ofducal Dardaniaia *. The position " ad fines," whichin the Tabular Itinerary stands at 35 h. p. beyondAnauBara (Bylazora) on the road from Scupi toStobi, would seem to indicate that the Romanshad there fixed the boundaries of Dardaniaia andMacedonia, and consequently that they had givenBylazora to Dardaniaia, thus yielding in part tothe demand which the Dardan had made, on theestablishment of the tetrarchy of Macedonia afarthe conquest by ^mitius.Scupi was probably seldom under the completeauthority of Constantinople. In the reign ofMichael PalEBologus it was wrested from the Emperorby the Servians, and became the residenceof the Krai'. Here Nicephorus Gregorasmet the court of the apxwv ruv Tpi/BaAXwv, as helearnedly denominated the Krai, wlicXXXI.]MACEDONIA(Serres '), Meleniko, Strumitza, and Kastoria, andretaining Servia (the town), Bcrrlicea, Silesia ',Gynaecocastruni ', Mygdoniu, and the towns on theStrymon, as far as the district of Serra and themountains of Tandessano'. It may he not unworthyof remark, that in the histories of AnnaComnena, Gregoras, and Cantacuzenua', severalother existing names occur, as : — on the Illyi-ianfrontiers, Libra (Atupn), Velesso (BtXtuaoc), Pril-lap (rTpiXAojroc), Morava (Mof»a/3a), and Pristine(XlpioTiivoQ), which last Cantacuzenns describes asasmall town without walls (icw^ij oTiij^^iaroc) : —towards Thessaly, Servia (2tp/3ia), Castri (Kaa-rpiov) ", Lykostomi (AuKo<iro>«ov), and Platamona(UXaranCiv Tonic irapaBaXaaala) : — to the eastward,Rending ("PtvTtva) and Dhrama (Ap^a), besidesZikhna (Ztxva) and Meleniko (MtXev«oc) ; — andnear Edessa and Berrhoea, 'Ostrovo COffTpo/Boc),Nota (None), and Staridhola (SropigoXo), withsome others which might probably be found byCantocuzenus, contrary toall other writers, always pyesthis place the name of ttpai ;but in fact, Sins, Sirra;, SergeantPherffi, as well as Ucrcea,seem to be merely dialectic variationsof the same name,Aima Comnena, an olderauthor, uses the modem nameVodhena.rvvaiitiiMOTpoy, Turc.Avrethiasar.ra opi) Tov TayTtaaavovKoXou/Mi"! : apparently thegreat mountain on the northernside of the plain of Senna, transientOrbelus.Sec Anna Comnena, 1, 5,6, 12. Niceph. Gregory. ubisup. Cantacux. 1. 1, 3, 4,but particularly 1. 3.that the Kastri alluded to cannoteasily be identified. Itmay either have been the near Tumavo, or that tothe S. W. of Aghia.480 MACBDOKIA. [Chap.a diligent search. Sosk^s (Swmcoc) appears fromAnna Consent to have been between the lakeof 'Ofltrovo and S^rvia".I shall here subjoin, as containing' a compendiousview of Macedonian geography, the edictfor the division of Macedonia into four regions,issued by the authority of the Roman Senate B. c.167, the year after the conquest '. It was read atAmphipolis to the assembled Macedonians byL. ^milius Paulus, and then explained to themin Greek by Co. Octaves the praetor: —Una fore et primam parted quod agri interStiymonem et Nestum amnem sit: accessionhic parti trans Nestum ad orieotem versus quaPerseus tenuiraet vices, castella, oppida, presterMnnm et Maroneam et Abdera : trans Strymonemautem vei^ntia ad occasum, Bisalttcam omnescum Heraclea quam Sinticen appellant. Secundafore region, quam ab ort Strymo amnis prester Sinticen Heraclea etBasaltes ; ab occasu qua Axius terminate fluids,addition pEeonibus qui prope Axiiim lumen ad re-XXXI.] MACEDONIA, 481Bora monte, una parte confines lyric, alteraEpiro. Capita, region ubi cecilia fervent,prise regions AmphJpolim, secundus Thessalonians,treatise Pelham, quarter Pelagian fecit. Eocecilia see quousque regions indica, pecuniaryconferred, ibi magistrates creari jussit • • • •.Regionibus use admires barbarism easent (exceptaenim tertio. omnes grant) pernnisit ut prtesidiaarmata in fidus extremis habere.hj this celebrated decree the Macedonians werecalled free, each city was to govern itself by magistratesannually chosen, and the Romans were toreceive half the amount of tribute formerly paidto the kings, the distribution and collection ofwhich was probably the principal business of thecouncils of the four regions ; for none but thepeople of the extreme frontiers towards the barbarianswere allowed to defend themselves by arms,so that the military power was entirely Roman.In order to break up more effectually the nationalunion, no person was allowed to contract marriage,or to purchase land or buildings, but within his ownregion. They were permitted to smelt copper andiron on paying half the tax which the kings hadreceived ; but the Romans reserved to themselvesthe right of working the mines of gold and silver,and of felling naval timber, as well as the importationof salt, which, as the Third Region only wasto have the right of selling it to the Dardan, wasprobably made for the profit of the conquerors onthe shore of the Thermaic Gulf. No wonder thatthe Macedonians compared this division of theircountry ami interruption of the mutual intercourseVOL. III. 1 i^482 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.between the several parts of it to the lacerationand disjointing of an animal body', or that theyshould have been ready to join a few years afterwardsin the revolt of Andriscus'. The historianthen remarks : —Pars prima Basaltes habet fortissimos vires (transNestum amnem insolent et circa Strymonem) etmiiltas frugum proprieties et metal et opportunitiesAmphipolis, que objecta claudia omnes aboriente sole in Macedonian! aditus. Secunda parsceleberritnas urges, Thessalonians et Cassandrahabet ; ad hoc Pallenen fertile et frugiferamterram : maritime quoque opportunities ei presentportus ad Throne ac montera Tho (jEnegevocant hung) alii ad insula Euboea, alii adHellespont opportune verse. Tertian regio noblesurges Edessa et Bertram et Pelham habetet Vettiorum bellingham gentes ; incomes quoquepermultos Gallos et Illyrian impigros cultures.Quartan region Eordsl et Lyncestse et Pela-goneinsolent : cuncta his Atintania et Syphiliset Eliiniotis ; frigid haec omnis durance cultet aspera plata est ; cultorum quoque angelaterrae similis habet ; ferocious eos et adcolie barbarafaint, nunc bello exercises nunc in pacemiscentes rites sums.After all that has been offered on the situationof the districts and places Iiere mentioned, scarcelyany explanation is necessary beyond a referenceJlegionatim commercial in- tanquam animaiia in artusita vidcri acetate, Liv. 1. 45, c. 30,Liv. Epit. 1. 49,XXXI. J Macedonia. 483to the Map at the end of this volume. Macedonia,Prima comprehended all the former possessions ofPerseus in Thrace to the eastward of the Nestus,with the exception of the three principal maritimecities between that river and the Chersonese ; andit contained all the country between the Nestusand Strymon probably as far as the sources ofthose rivers, together with Sintice and Bisaltia, tothe right of the Strymon. Amphipolis, the capitalof this region, is justly described as the greatdefence of Macedonia from the eastward ; andwe have an illustration of the allusion made by thehistorian to the mines of Mount Panga^um, whichAnipliipolis commanded, in the numerous existingsilver coins of the time of the tetrarchy bearingthe head of the Amphipolitan deity Diana Tauruswith an obverse representing the club ofHercules within a garland of oak, and the legendMaKtSuvbiv TTpwriic : tliesc coins were evidently struckat Amphipulis.The second Macedonia comprehended all thecountry between the Strymon and Axius, exceptthe Sintice and Bisaltia, and extended as fartowards the sources of both rivers as the boundaryof the Macedonian kingdom had reached. Theeastern turn of the Strymon below Serres shows atonce why the Sintice and Bisaltia were exceptedfrom the countries between the Strymon and Axius,Amphipoliiii in tenth temple of Minerva, olluiledplum Di.iaee quam Tauropulon to by Thucydides as standingvocant . . . . — Liv. 1.44, c. 4-1. on the acropolis of Amphipolis,The types of the coins of was not the principal temple ofAmphipolis often refer to this the Ainphipolitse.deity, whence it would seem thatVOL, 111. I i 2\484 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.and placed in the first instead of the second Macedonia.The second region waa the richest andmost populous of the four, no part of Macedoniabeing comparable in fertility and other advantagesto Mygdonia, Chalcldice, and the three contiguouspeninsulas, where the historian especiallynotices the productive Pallene, and the convenienthavens of Torone and Athos. The name £nea,which Livy attaches to the harbour of Athos, isnot found I believe in any other author, nor is itcertain to which of the ports of Acte it applies.The third region is very clearly described asbounded by the sea, by the Axles, and by thePeneius, on three sides — as containing the citiesPella, Edessa, and Berrhoea, and as extendingnorthward to Mount Bora, where its limits weresuch that it was the only one of the three provincesnot in contact with the Barbarians, the nearestof whom were the Dardan. Hence Mount Bora,which is not noticed by any other author, appearsto have been the summit northward of Modena,now called Nitje, one of the chief links in theOiympene or eastern chain, of which the others areBermius, Pierus, Olympus, Ossa, and Pelion.This great ridge terminates in a northerly directionat the fork of the Eriyon and Axiits. Here, therefore,the Third Region terminated, and thus Pseo-nia was interposed between the northern extremityof the Third Region and the Illyi'i;ms. The Patagoniansto the westward of the Axius, were an exceptionto the definition otherwise given of theextent of Ihe Third Region, as they lay beyondMount Bora to flic New. ; and hence the parti-xxxi.]MACEDONIA. 485ocular mention of the Paeonlana in the edict, whichrefers undoubtedly, like History at this period ingeneral, not to the original Pwouia in its fullestextent, but to the limited portion of it which hadformed a monarchy, until, about a century beforethe Roman conquest, it was incorporated with Macedonia.The portion of Pannonia separated fromthe rest of that country, and attributed to theThird Macedonia, while the remainder of it wasattached to the Second, was situated on the lowerErigon around Stobi, and this city was decreed tobe the place of deposit for the salt, sold to theDardan, the monopoly of which was given to theThird Macedonia.To the fourth division remained every thing beyondthe district of Stobi to the west and southwest,as well as all the country beyond the crest ofthe Ohjmpene range, as far as illyria and Epirus.The historian enumerates the following districts ascomposing it ; namely, Pelagonia, Lyncestis, Eor-sea, Etimiotis, and Atintania, where he has obviouslyomitted Orestis, which lay between Atintaniaand the rest of Upper Macedonia. Thus it appearsthat the Fourth Macedonia extended nearly toBerat and Tepeleni, and included Konitza. Tothe southward its limits were nearly those of themodem districts of Grevena and Trikkala, whereUpper Macedonia confined upon Uppei- ThessalyThe warlike nation of the Vettii, mentioned togetherwith Fella, Edessa, and Berrhoea, as formingII ' Strabo. p. 430. 437.part of the third region, are evidently the Botti«i,and this allusion to them, showing that they werestill of some importance, ftceords with the apparentdate of their coins. The Chalcidic BottiatEe hadprobably been long extinct. Numismatic evidence,therefore, concurs with Polybius and Strabo, inshowing that the great maritime plains after theRoman conquest were divided between the Bottiteiand Amphaxii. The chief place of the latter, aswe learn from Ptolemy, was Thessalonica, that ofthe former probably Alors. The strength of thebelli cosa gens" of Bottiaea was derived from theintersection of rivers and marshes, natural defenceswhich have maintained in the same position someunmixed Greeks to the present day in the midstof surrounding Bulgarians and Turks.There exists a silver tetradrachm with the legendMaKiZavutv StuTf'pai,', coined probably at Thessalonica,of which city no money bearing its namehas been found more ancient than the Romanempire. The silver of the mines of Nizvoro mayhave supplied the coinage of the Second Macedonia.No silver money of the Third and Fourth Macedoniahas been discovered, nor is it known thateither of those regions possessed mines. The onlyother coin bearing an allusion to the tetrarcliy,besides those I have mentioned, is a small one inbronze, so rare that I met with only one. It isinscribed M. rtraprijc, and presents on one side theDioscuri on horseback, on the other the head ofMinerva. But there is another coin of the FourthMacedonia in the Caesarian Museum, bearing ahead of Jupiter, and on the obverse the commonXXXI.] MACEDONIA. 487Macedonian type of a club within a garland ofoak, with the legend MowSovwv rtropTtjc- We areto infer from Livy that these were struck at Patagonia.The rarity of all the money of the Macedoniantetrarchy, except that which was coined at ,is to be attributed to the shortness of itsduration. Only 18 years after the edict of ,Andriscus, calling himself Philip, son ofPerseus, reconquered all Macedonia ', but wasdefeated and taken in the following year, by Q.Ciecilius Menelaus, after which the Macedonianswere made tributary', and the country was probablygoverned by a praetor, like Achaia after thedestruction of Corinth, which occurred two yearsafterwards, b.c. 146. From that time to the reignof Augustus, the Romans had the troublesomeduty of defending Macedonia against the peopleof Illyria and Thrace, and during that time theyestablished colonies at Philippi, Pella, Stobi, andDium.Toto Macedonian! aut ' Porphyry. ap. Euseb. p.voluntary incolentium autarmis 178.occupant. — Liv. Epit. I. 49.CHAPTER XXXII.FOURTH Journey.Epirus, ACARNANIA, £Folia.Prevyzft — ^AJm Petro, Anaetorhim — Tonics — Riga — Nisi —Balimbey — Lutraki — Katuna — Hellenic dty^Makhala —ExjtttUlion ofAgenlaiu into Acanutnia — Skortua — Lygontzi^Prodhromo — ^Agtkultore and productions of Aeantamia —Forest of Manina — Podholovitza — Gniia — Hellenic ruin «!•led Pale Mam — Return to Guria— Mastuu — Anatoliko —Mesolon^.Prbttza, March 1809. — Since my visit to thisplace in 1805, the Porte having found that verylittle accrued to it from Prevyza and the otherex Venetian places, after paying the expences ofCHAP. Xxxi.] EPIRUS. 489them over to a man whom he cannot control,and who has already treated them with everykind of vexation. Prevyza has been the principalsufferer. Its alliance with the French when theplace was taken by assault in 1798, furnished theVezir with an excuse for extortion and cruelty,which has lasted ever since, and the population isnow reduced to less than half its number at thatperiod. In 1807, when the war broke out betweenRussia and the Porte, the Prevyzans wereobliged to labour at an entrenchment across thepeninsula near two miles in length, to constructwhich the Pasha sent for men from all parts of histerritory, as far as Katerina beyond Mount Olympus,and gave them nothing but a ration of romana,or black bread. In this light soil, with fewpalisades to support it, this entrenchment is alreadyfalling to ruin. Afterwards his new fortress andserai were constructed in the same manner, by anangora or compulsory labour.Since his bargain with the Porte, Al considershimself absolved from the necessity of keeping anymeasures with the Prevyzans, giving away theirland to his Albanians, sending whole families topeople new tjiftliks in unhealthy situations, andquartering his soldiers upon those whom he hasallowed to remain. But notwithstanding the forcedlabour, which has given him materials as well asconstruction at little cost, Prevyza has been veryexpensive to the Vezir : Albanian soldiers must bepaid, the fortress armed, and the palace furnishedfrom his own pocket, and the maritime situationhas required the aid of some small vessels, which490 Epirus. [Chap.could only be obtained by purchase. Parga,moreover, though he has paid for it, be has notmuch prospect of obtaining. Nevertheless, hisbargain is an excellent one, on account of themilitary importance of the places, and the Facilitieswhich they give him in making further acquitNations in Tzamuria.The only part of the ancient privileges of Prevyzanow remaining, is its system of taxation. Thepresent revenue of the Crown is as follows : —Linaria (fisheries)Dhekatia (tithe of produce of land)Dogana (custom-house)Monopoly of bread . , .of tobaccoof butchers' meatof rak( (brandy)of playing cardsof TO Tripaiiu (the ferryto Punta) . . .of sealing tanned leatherof gunpowderof station, the publicweighingof the retail of oilPiastres.22,00010,00015,000loo1 JSofiiarpov, a capitation tax uponcattle fed in the pastures ofPrevyzaTotal 69,400XXXII.] Epirus. 491All the articles are farmed except the do^aiia,which is collected by a person named by theVezir. Under the Venetians the same practiceobtained, and the different heads of revenue weresold by auction every six years. The amount wasthen about 18,000 or 20,000 piastres a year. Theincrease has been chiefly owing to the debasementof the coin, and to the great increase of late yearsin the produces the fisheries. For the same reason,the livari of Vutziotro, which, united withsome other branches of revenue, produced, in 1805,only fifty-five purses, is now alone let to the sameavvrpotfiia, of which the bishop of loannina is thehead, for eighty purses.The revenue of Vonitza consists of the same articles,and amounts in value to 20,000 piastres ayear. That of Pai^a to 10,000. So that deductingthe latter, the Vezlr has given 800 purses foralife annuity of 200 at the age of sixty, andhaving as good a prospect of keeping his headupon his shoulders as any man in his station inTurkey.The excavations which have been made at Nicolfor the purpose of obtaining materials for thefortress and palace of the Vezlr at Prevyza, havenot led to any interesting discoveries, partly itseems because the city having been hastily built,more in the Roman than Greek manner, littlemore was found than fragments of walls formed oftiles, mortar, and broken stones, unfit for the purposeof the masons, and which did not much encouragethem to persevere. By order of the Vezir,the sculptured pieces were set apart, but the onlyA402 GPiiuis. [tfBAp:result has been two inscriptions, which have beenplaced at the gate of the Serai. One of these ' iaa dedication to Augustus by the Mallotaj, orpeople of Malleus, a great maritime city of Cilicia ;the other*, which from the form of the lettersseems to be of a later period of the Empire, wasin honour of a praetorian prefect of Macedonia,who was tribune of the first legion surnamed theMinerva Pia Fidelis, procurator of the corn ofEpirus, procurator of the province of Pontus andBithynia, and procurator of the dismission of theEmperor '. The monument was raised agreeablyto a decree of the council (of Nicopolis) by Mester,a freedman of the Emperor, iu token of hisgratitude to the prefect, of whom he was (heassistant*. Several of the letters iu the inscriptionrequire to be supplied, particularly in theprefect's name, which seems to have been LuciusOfellius Mains.March 15. — At 3 p. m. we make sail for Vonitzain a large sakkoleva belonging to the Vezir, whichhas a covered deck and cabin, and is rigged withtwo high latine sails and a small sail aft. A freshmaestrale soon carries us past punta; and alongthe side of a woody plain, on the southern shore ofHiSuJ'/tiE, (iriTpuTy Unto riDva-raKvni^f ^li^aiTTOv, Mvijrr^pS(/3aoTDu aTTtXtiflepoc ^oij6utavTov Kara Toi .iiii^taiia j-^s/louX^C TVf ~tlioy (fctpytTT)!-. —V. Inscription, No. 100.Procurator a diniissionibusIAurotpdropi Kaiaapi Bfoiifiji Sijiaar^ MaXXuirai. — V.Inscription, No. 159.AovkI^ 'OftXXi'y May,Mawfociac tTrdpxy, ifl xai ticrqt wpaiTiiipia^, jjiXiiipx'f' Xiye-ii'oc d Mivfp/3iac, fua(/3oiit,niarije^ tVirpdjrj) airov 'Hirfipov,(Tirpdiry ivap}(iai lioyrou vuiimperator.Adductor.XSXIl.] ACARNANIA. 493the Gulf of Prevyza, beyond which towards thelake of Vulgaris are heights clothed with largertrees'. On the northern side of the gulf the coastis higher, and forms a peninsula in which is ahamlet of five or six houses, called Skafidhaki,and below it a lagoon, communicating, by a scaallopening, with the sea, aud having a fishery whichbelongs to Artaa.Having crossed the Gulf of Prevyza to its southeasternextremity, I land at the ruins of Anchoring,for such i shall venture to denominate a circuitof Hellenic foundations, surrounding a rockypromontory between two hays, and following thecrest of some heights which embrace a Httle plainon the shore of the smaller or southern bay, wherea small church of 'Airs Petro gives name to theplace. The distance of these ruins from Puntaaccords exactly with the forty stades placed byStrabo between Actium and Sanatorium.The circumference of the town was less than twoSee the route through ihiii country in Vol, I. ji, 173.[WO ^m494 ACAKNAKIA. [CBAF.miles. Id most parts foundations ODly ave traceablej but to the southward there are remains ofseveral towers : the interior wall of the acBopoIuiu part subsists also, and between it and a marshin the middle of the plain are some fbandatioiia,apparently those of the [teribolus of a temple.From the vestiges of a gate at the eastern angle ofthe town, a walk of an hour across the heightswhich fall north-eastward to the commodious littleharbour of St. Mark, leads me in a south-easterlydirection to the limeoi, or limni of V6nitza, fromwhence there are two roads to the town ; that tothe right by a stone causeway aloifg the southernside of the limni, at the foot of a steep hill coveredwith brushwood, from the foot of which issues abody of water so large as to render the limnialmost fresh. I follow the northern shore, passingfor a mile through a wood of bramble, myrtle,mastic, dwarf easter, and ilex, to Mortar, atthe entrance of the limni, from whence I cross inthe ferry-boat to Vonitza, to the house of Kyr K.,with whom I lodged on my former visit to thisXXXII. j ACARNANIA. 495paleokastro called Ruga induces me to land. Itis a Hellenic fortress, about half a mile in circumference,surrounded on three sides by a lakeabout 500 yards wide, beyond which are heightscovered with thick woods. The lake communicatesat its two extremities with the sea in seasonsof rain, but at present is separated by anarrow beach. The walls are more or less preservedin the whole circuit ; and in one or twoplaces there are some foundations of rectangulartowers of the ordinary kind. Near one of them apiece of wall, which is standing to the height oftwelve feet, is a complete specimen of the second orpolygonal kind of Greek masonry : the stones beingof various shapes, accurately fitted to one anotherwithout cement, and none of them rectangular.On the summit of this wall are a few other masseswhich seem to show that the upper courses of thewalls were of more regular masonry. Perhapsthese, as well as the towers, were repairs or additionsto the original work. The inclosed space,which is one of the very few ploughed spots onthis woody shore, is not much above the level ofthe sea.From Ruga we follow the coast, with a favourablebreeze, and soon pass Cape Khaliki, which isa sandy point projecting from a low woody cape.The wind falls as we approach Nisi, and in consequenceof the turn of the coast becomes contrary.So that it is eight in the evening before we anchoropposite to this tjiftlik of the Vezir, which is builtin the usual manner of this part of the countrythat is to say, the dwellings inclose a quadrantMAm de t■ stack are modeledIfe oal^ flstnacekip wtirh g » faagg ""'■g g^c- SfMne boats ofKj¥ K- of Roma hi»Mg he tot suuceufdia ff ■■■g ia die Wt of Nia. we hare a i^entih]iB]i|ier of fak, aad keep oat tke nJd with a Ui^fire, tkoagh aot vikkoat hmbc iBCODTadeiice from*»»^». IB toe H BO cleaner. Mj companionsdeep upon a eaipet fay tkc fire ; I spread oit mattressia tke farther part of tke cottage where is sTwcd floor made of a few hanks.The tjiftKk of Axis phrases Amie cornfieldsamong the vdani oaks which cover the heightsbetween it and Cape Khaliki ; in the other directionthere is a marshy bottom, grown with ladies,oaks, and other trees, and (requested by wildbogs *. Those who hunt them say that the animalgenerally makes directly at the man who woundsdescription of them are the red deer, the (allowdeer, and roe.March 17. — The wind being contrary for ,and the passage round the inner curve ofthe bay of Nisi being muddy for loaded horses,we cross the bay in boats, and ride up to Paling,or Balm Bey. This operation, as we have anescort of thirty Albanians besides our own baggage,takes us till 10.30. Pali-bey is anotherfarm of the Vezir, having a few kalambokki andcorn-fields and flocks belonging to it, in the midstof the woods. It differs only from Nisi in havinga larger house, by way of a seriii or pyrgo, and agarden of fine lemon and cypress trees attached tothe house, with a few kalyvia on the outside of the(quadrangle. We had intended to pass the lastnight here had the wind been more favourable.The level which separates the farm from the seais covered with large plane trees, together withsome oaks, both common and velani, wild pears,paliuria, and other shrubs. In the most marshyparts ashes are numerous ; this tree, which is notvery common in Greece, is generally called byits ancient name Amelia, but is here known bythat of Fraxo, an abbreviation of the Latin Frax-ins. The hills behind the tjiftlik are clothedwith oaks, velanidhies, and linaria ; beyondthem, three miles from Pali-bey, formerly stoodAlius Strand, and beyond it Persona and Vus-tri.Beyond a peaked snowy summit, 2 hoursto the southward of the summit of the mountain ofPergandi, was the monastery Lobo, reckoned 4 hoursfrom Pali-bey. 'I'hese and twenty other villagesVOL. III. K k498 ACABKAKIA. [chap.or monasteries in this part «X Germania are novdeserted aad ruined. On the western side of themountains were Zav^rdha, Skl&Tcoa, Raiiiai, Sj*nodhi, and Bogoni4, former all large villages, batnow reduced to insignificance, or totally deserted.Having remained at Palm-bey until our Albanianshave dined, we leave it at 12.20, and at1 cross a stream shaded by iHrge planes, andflowing from the soothe inde of die summit ofthe mountain of V4maka. After passing over aroot of the same his, we proceed along the sideof them until, at 1.20, they slope into the narrowharbour of Lutraki, where on its western side areaDogana and Aula surrounded with a wall ; fromthe head of the harbour we proceed through anarrow gorge, called Dhafiu^ ', from the numerousbay trees which grow here, and which aremixed with hashes of Paliuri and wild Kharub * ;the bills on either side are covered with thickunderwood. This is a strong pass, and like thoseof Amvrakia and Kekhrenia, may be consideredone of the gates of Alabama. At Lutr&ki, andXXXIl.l ACAIINANIA. 401)tain, through which leads the road to Amvrakla.Leaving this to the left, we mount the hill throughravines shaded with olives, and at 3.55 arrive atKatuna, at the house of Mr. George Mavromati.Katuna is situated on a fertile range of hills, whichare divided by an elevated valley from MountBumiato ; on one side of this valley, beyond a hill,is the river which, taking its rise near Combats,joins the sea between Pali-bey and Lutraki.The heights of Katuna extend southward, with alittle inclination to the east, for a distance of about12 miles. This ridge consists of hard limestone,covered with a stratum of fertile soil, which feedsnumerous sheep and oxen, and has some intervalscultivated with wheat and barley. These and theproduce of the velauidbiea scattered in the woods,once supported a considerable population in thetowns of Katuna and Makhala, which are nowmere villages, and in several subordinate placesnow abandoned. The ^toUan plains, though stiltcultivated to a considerable extent, and betterpeopled than Acarnania, have declined nearly inthe same proportion, and among the Beys ofVrakliori, some of whom formerly derived 3000/.a year from their landed property, not one hasnow a third of that income.In Katuna there remain not more than fortyinhabited houses ; seventy were abandoned in thecourse of the last year, chiefly in consequence ofthe excessive expence attending the quartering ofAlbanians, who all pass through this derveni intheir way to or from ^tol'ia, or the south-westernparts o^ Acarnania. This grievance has particular600 ACARNANIA. [chap.early pressed upon them since the death of YusiifAga, the Valide Kiayassy, when Aly obtainedthe Mnkata of Karlili, and immediately sent hisAlbanians into the country. He is now makinghis first visit in person. His chief object is tosubstitute his own Albanians for the Greek arma-told,who under the command of their captainswere in the service and pay of the villages. Assoon as his intentions were known, many of thearmatoli fled into the islands, and returned fromthence as robbers. The individual among themwhose enterprize and knowledge of the countryrenders him at present most formidable, is namedDhrako Griva ', first cousin of the Katziko- Iannis,two celebrated characters of the same stamp,whom the Vezir succeeded in destroying.Griva began his career at an early age, likemost of these heroes, by entering into a band ofrobbers, to whom he recommended himself by Insactivity, hardiness, and cruelty'. It was his practiceto tie every Musulman who foil into his hands,or any unfortunate Christian who had given himotl'ence, to a tree, to be fired at by his followers asamark. Having rendered himself the terror ofthe villages of Karlili, and long defied the effortsof the Vezir as Derwent Agni, he was at length, atthe Pasha's suggestion, taken into the serviceand pay of the district as captain of armatoli, tokeep the country clear of thieves. Ho was afterwardsdisgraced by the same influence, and supersededbv Ktitziko lanni, because he could not, orXXXII.] ACAHNANIA. 501would not (as it is said), murder Mitjo ' Mavro-iiiati of Katuiia for His Highness. Griva had then110 other resource than to enter into the Russianservice in the Islands, from which he passed intothat of the French, and in both has succeeded intormenting the Vezir by continual depredations onhis territories'. Varna, a village once of 400families, but now deserted, is at present the principalresort of the thieves. To the spoliation ofthe clefts is to be added that of the Albanianssent against them ; these, together with the similareffects of the collection of troops in 1807against the Russians at Lefkadha, and of thosenow assembled to observe the French, have almostdepopulated the entire country around MountBumisto, or between the Astrachan gulf and Leu-tatiansea.The Vezir, when he halted here the day beforeyesterday, lodged at the house of the son of thevery Mavromati whom he had formerly put todeath. Mitjo was a man of considerable property,and much beloved in Acarnania, where he longacted as agent of Kurt Pasha in the managementof the armatoli and police of this province. HisHlT^ot, familiarity, orXaiicvTim, aa the modemGreeks say, for A>);il)r(>toc.In October 1809, ho becameOUT prisoner at the captureof Conte, together with hiacomrades in the French service.The greater part of them enteredinto I lie Greek regimentswliieli were then simnel. Grivadid cot like the tenn of service,which rendered him liableto be sent to any port of theMediterranean, and preferredtrusting to Aly, who acceptedhia older of services, taking careto retain a port of hia family aaapledge of his fidelity, andm;i(lc him fcoledji ol'and FlagbiJ."d502 ACARHANIA. [CHAP.friendship with Kurt was a crime in the eyes dA\^, which Mitjo's inches rendered unpardonable.Conscious of the injury he had done to the family,the Veztr ordered the house to be searched beforehe entered it, though when he announced to Mar*romani at Pr^vyza that he intended to lodge withhim in passing through Kattma, he pretendednever to have heard that his old friend Mitjo,as he called him, was dead. After dining atLatina he went forward to Makhal^, accompaniedby 1600 Albanians, whose pay is four months inarrear. Scarcely any chieftain bat Aiy couldtake such a liberty with these men, as there isnothing on which Albanians are so sensitive. Inthe meantime, rove Kv^pvm, he quarters them onthe places which he passes through, and thus theycan live without pay, which they have no doubt ofreceiving in the end, that beit^ a point in whichAiy dares not deceive them.March 18. — The view from Katuna, thoughconfined by the mountains to the west and east,commands some distant objects through the open-xxxii.]ACARNANIA. 503how insecure the country is supposed to be beyondthe range of the Albanian muskets.Half a mile below the lowest houses of Katuna,a little on the left of the road to Makhala, is theupper extremity of a Hellenic fortress which occupiesthe slope of the ridge of Katuna on its easterside. The valley into which it descends is acontinuation of that which we followed yesterdaycoming from Lutruki, being the same as that 1described on the 18th of June, 1805, as includedbetween the parallel ridges of Amvrakia and Ka-tune.The existing remains consist of foundationsof regular masonry belonging to an acropolis whichsurrounded a theatre-shaped piece of ground at thehead of a water-course : vestiges of the town wallsare seen also on the descent towards the valley,and I am told there are others quite at the footof the mountain. The city, therefore, was largeas well as important by its position, which commandedthe principal passage from Epirus throughAcamania into ^tolia. It is supposed by thelearned of this part of the country to be Conope,because there is a small village, situated a fewmiles to the south-west, named Konopitza. Co-trope,however, was certainly beyond the Achcloiu,m jEtolia ; and Konopitza no more indicates theposition of Conope than Amvrakia does that ofA moravia.Our road continues to follow the crest of theridge over heights remarkable for their varietyof form, and for many immense circular cavities,covered within with trees, and at the bottom ofsome of which are deep jwols of water. Thei604 ACAKNANIA. [cHAP.trees are chiefly linaria, and the rocks, as generallyill this part of Acarnania, a hard yellowlimestone, or marble, which is very handsomewhen polished. The Iicights are uncultivated,but produce a fine herbage, affording an excellentpasture for sheep. At 3 p. m., after havingridden 50 minutes from the Paleokastro, themonastery of Agrilio is a mile and a half to theleft, on a point of land on the western side ofthe lake of Valto or Amvrakia, opposite to thatpart of the mountain of Kekhrenia which I descendedon the way from that village to Amvrakia.The projection on which Agrilio stands, is anabrupt termination of the ridge beginning on theeastern side of Lutmki, and upon which standthe villages Sparta, Amvrakia, and Stand. BelowAgrilio is the narrowest and deepest part of thelake. In dry summers nothing remains but a circularpool in that part, all the rest being dry ormuddy. It is the opinion at Katuna, that bymeans of a few canals of drainage, and at the expenceof about 60 purses, all but the pool nearAgrilio might be made capable of bearing maizeor any otlicr kind of grain in abundance. Someparts of the edges of the lake when dry are nowcultivated in that manner, as I witnessed belowAmvrakia on my former journey.We now leave the few dispersed Houses whichform the village of Konopitza, or Konopina, twomiles on the right, and at 3.35 pass through theruins of the village of 'Anno, from whence camethe family of that name which is now one of the)principal in Cel'aluniii, On the opposite slope ofXXXll.] ACARNANIA. 505the mountain of Kekhrenia were formerly Alpitzaand Makri, from which latter came the Makris ofZante. At 3.50 we halt for a quarter of an hourat a large well of ancient construction resemblinganother which I observed close to the walls of thePaleokastro of Katuna. Several others, all probablyworks of the ancient Greeks, are said toexist in this ridge, which is totally deficient insuperficial sources. All the larger houses atKatuna and Makhala are provided with cisternsfor collecting rain water. At 4.45 we pass Papacyor Palates, standing on the crest of theridge, and now containing only a few cottages, andthere arrive in sight of a valley to the westward,included on one side by the mountains which protrudefrom Bumisto towards Tragamesti, and onthe other by the ridge which, trending westerlyfrom that of Makhala, borders the great plain of theAchelous to the north-west. In an opening betweenthe two ranges the sea appears. On the oppositeside of the valley, at the foot of the hills towardsTragamesti, are the villages of Babini, Maker,and Khrysovitzi, lying in that order from southeastto north-west. At 5.15 we arrive at thehighest point of the ridge, where stands a ruinedwindmill, visible from Katuna, and which is a conspicuousobject to all the surrounding country.Immediately below it begin the houses of the villageof Makhala, which are dispersed over a slopefalling towards the plain of the Aches.It may be a question, whether the lake of Agrilio,or the marsh between Katuna and Lutraki, was the506 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.scene of a transaction of the year b. c. 391, whichis related by Xenophon '. The AcIiEeans, whowere in possession of Calydon, finding themselvesgreatly annoyed by the Carnations, who wereassisted by some Athenians and Boeotian, cravedthe succour of the Lacedaemonian, who sent Age-silas,with two raoite and some allies, to join theAchaean. Agesilaus, previously to entering thehostile territory, sent a message to Stratus, threateningto destroy the whole country unless theCanadians quitted their alliance and joined thatof Sparta ; but they disregarded his menaces, retiredinto their cities, and drove their cattle to adistant part of the country. Agesilaus then enteredAcamania, and destroyed every thing withinhis reach ; but marched not more than ten or twelveBlades each day, by which mode of proceeding, atthe end of fourteen or fifteen days, he had thrownthe Acarnanians so much oflP their guard, that manyof them resumed their rural employments. He thenmade a sudden march of 160 stades in one day toa lake surrounded by mountains, where the greaterpart of the cattle of the Acarnanians was collected *,and thus captured a great quantity of horses, oxen,and sheep, besides men, all which he sold thenext day. In the evening he was attacked by theAcarnanians and forced to descend from his positionon the heights, into a plain and meadow onthe bank of the lake, from whence there was onlyXenoph. Hellcn. ). 4, C. C. fioirKii/iara rwr 'AkripriiidH'tTTi 71(1' Xifjnjy, irijii ijy rii 9)[£^ov ffi'iirn 7if.XXXII.] &CARNANIA. 507a narrow and difficult outlet across the mountains '.By this pass Agesilaus attempted to retreat on thefollowing day, but the Acarnanians had occupiedthe mountains on either side of it, from whencetheir light armed annoyed their opponents byMissiles, easily escaping into shelter when pursuedby the cavalry or hopHtBe. The Canadianhoplitffi, with the greater part of their peltastse,were posted on the summit of the mountain to theleft of the enemy's line of march ; and this mountainhappened to be the more accessible of thetwo to horsemen and hoplitse. Agesilaus, therefore,after sacrificing, during which operationmany of his troops were wounded, ordered anadvance upon the height to his left. All thehoplitse who bad arrived at 15 years beyond theage of puberty ran forward, preceded by the cavalry,and followed by Agesilaus himself with theremainder of the forces. In this manner theyreached, and slew or put to flight the Acarnanianson the declivity of the mountain, by whom theyhad been annoyed. Nor did those on the summitof the ridge wait for the encounter, though thepeltastsB had slain some of the horsemen andhorses of the enemy in the ascent. The loss ofthe Acarnanians on this day was about 300.Agesilaus then continued to ravage the country,and even presented himself at the request of theAchaean before some of the cities, but none Carnatic. [CHAP.rendered to him ; and as the autumn was advancing,he decided upon retiring from Acarnania,replying to the Achaean, who requested him toremain, so long at least as to prevent the Acar-maniacs from sowing their com, that the morethey sowed the more inclined they would be topeace. Hia retreat through ^tolia, adds thehistorian, was by passes through which it wouldhave been impossible for any numbers to havefound their way, had the j^tolians, who hoped forhis assistance in the recovery of Naupactus, beendesirous of preventing him '.Although the Valto, or lake of Agrilio, mayseem better to deserve the description of a \ifivTiin the present lime of the year than that betweenKatuna and Lutraki, there is probably little differencein their dimensions in the season of theexpedition of Agesilaus. Both are surrounded bymountains, that of Valto more closely ; but forthat reason it was less adapted to the assemblageof the Acarnanian cattle than the lake of Lutraki,wliicli has at all times a greater extent of pasturearound it. The latter had also the advantage ofbeing farther removed from the frontier oi JEtolia,whereas the southern extremity of the lake ofAgrilio is not many miles from Stratus and theAciidous. The ravine therefore by which I ascendedfrom the marsh of Lutraki to Katunaseems to have been the defile in which the Acar-iianiaiis opposed the Spartans. In this case theXxxi.] ACAHNANIA. 509hill of Kati'ina itself was the position of the Acar-naiiiaii hoplitie and peltastae, which was taken bythe bold charge of the Spartans. There is indeedanother opening conducting from the marsh ofLutraki, which leads towards Amvrakia ; but asthis would have carried Agesilaus farther from thefrontier, and would have obliged him to marchalong one side or the other of the lake of Agrilio,both difficult routes, and that to the westwarddefended by the fortified town near Katuna, it isnot probable that he should have ventured intoso hazardous a situation. It seems evident, moreover,that he retreated by the same route bywhich he had arrived, that is to say, into theplain of Aetos ; for on this side of the ridge ofKatuna lay the principal extent and the morefertile parts of Acarnania, through which he hadmade his fifteen marches, probably in variousdirections, as convenience or plunder prompted.The last day's march of 160 stades, by whichhe surprised the Carnations, would seem fromthe distance to have been begun from a positionon the Achelmts. It is almost unnecessary topoint out how perfectly the geography of jEloliajustifies the remark of Xenophon, as to the difficultywhich Agesilaus would have found in retreatingthrough that country to Calydon, had the.■^tolians been adverse to him, his only routesbeing along one side or other of the lake ofApokuro, or through the passes of Zygos, or ifhe entered the maritime plains from Acarnania,along the borders of the lagoons of Anatuliko andMesolonghi.dMan I9l— TW luimul aiming bc^^ lU-aha,row— ds a wa^mitetmt pni^ect. As MI racognbe totfae mia MiiimI Oljliili,i1 hi ir wlh I Ml Ici wiw^iMToidlna nd 'Ohio, ■ the Mors, to vUck anhoe added, die SmdaMoiddko of £& ad AcIbrra Vota near Dymc Bat the p riT i stal objectsare the MU^nt pbiaa, with their noble linenA lakes, Ae positions of Sfrnfai, Thermal andCimoprT the great sanmiitB called Anchovy andViena, and Meant Rigid, near NiaKprneha. Inthe midst of the basin which Hea to the westwardof the ridge of Makhala, and which is sononiMiedOD the other sides by Mount Bomisto, br the mountainstowards die sea coast, and bj that whichcopes oo the opposite side to the right bank aS theAehebms, rises an insulted height, surrounded1^ Hellenic walls, od the western point of whichstands a monastery, called Porta, properly i onfr II^nvF. In the lower part of the in-closure a mined tower is conspicuous, having eightcourses of regular masonry still standing, and cmXXXII.] ACARHANIA. 511winter and spring it suffers from cold, and in theend of the summer and autumn from the vicinityof the Valto of Agrilio and the effluvia of the mudwhich ia continually stirred up by the wild hogs.Makhala, Katuna, Zavitza, Tragamesti, Katokhiand Amnii, now reduced to inconsiderable villages,were all flourishing towns in the time ofKurt Pasha. Katuna was considered the richestand most polished. Many families have migratedfrom these places to the islands.From Makhala to Skortus takes us an hour andtwenty minutes, with our Albanians on foot. AtSkortus there are only two families left. Theruins of the village stand at the foot of a smallheight, surrounded with an ancient Greek wall, ofwhich there remain in some places two or threecourses of regular masonry. From hence I proceedto the summit of the hill of Lygovltzi, whichrises immediately above Skortus, in search of someruins which a woman of the latter place, probablyfor the sake of getting rid of us, described as afiiya Kaarpov, but where 1 find nothing, after anascent through a thick wood of velanldhi oaks,and over difficult rocky paths, but the ruins offour or five churches among the trees, and on thesummit some remains of a small castle, apparentlyof the same date as the churches. I have sincebeen informed, however, that among the woods onthe south-eastern face of the hill, the walls aretraceable of an ancient Hellenic city, which, by itsposition relatively to Conope at Anghelo-Kastro,would seem to have been Metropolis.The persons left in charge of the monastery,on ^H612 . ACARNANIA. [Chair.perceiving our approach, locked it up and fledinto the wood, taking us for thieves. My AlbanianPalikaria had not only climbed up the billonfoot, but found their way into the buildingbefore I could reach the summit on horseback.The monks have not occupied the house sincethe country has been tormented by the frequentincursions of robbers from the islands : its landedproperty is considerable, but not so large as that ofVlokho. There is a neat small church, a listen,and several cells.The prospect from the monastery, which standsjust below the summit, repays the trouble of ascendingthe hill. To the south are seen Kastro Torn,and the plains of Ses and Achaia ; to thenorth-eastward the mountains of 'Agrafa, fromwhence extends the hilly country which terminatesin the plain of Vrakbori, bounded on the See. bythe lake and hills of Apokuro, and the great ridgeof Zygos or Aracynthus. Beyond the mountainsof Apokuro are seen those of Krivari, ending tothe south in Mount Rigani over 'Epakto. TheXX XH,] ACAHNANIA. 513ing in fish and wild fowl, and discharging a copiousstream into the Bachelors, the broad bed ol"which is separated only from the lake by a narrowplain. The junction of this discharge of the lakewith the Achelous occurs a little below that of theriver anciently called Cyatkus, which flows fromthe lake of Vrakhori and joins the main river oppositeto Anghelokastro. Two miles below theunion of the discharge from the lake of Lygovitzi,the Aches is joined by a second tributary on theright bank proceeding from a marsh, and betweenthem on the same side by a third smaller stream.The broad white bed of the Achelous, from whichit derives the modem name Aspro, is widest betweenthe site of Stratus at Surovigli and the lakeof Lygovitzi. On the right bank, between Suro-villi, the extremity of the mountain of Kekhreniaand the northern side of the lake of Lygovitzi, is atriangular plain, once the chief support of Stratus,but now almost entirely uncultivated, as it alwayshas been in the memory of the present Carnalthough nothing inferior in natural fertilityto that of Vrakhori.Having dined upon some provisions broughtwith us from Makhala, very much in the manner ofthe clefts, whom we are taken for, we descendthrough woods of velanidhi, among which are afew corn-fields, and some horses belonging to themonastery, into the direct road from Skortiis toProdhromo, — pass through some large flocks ofsheep, which are attended by Vlakhiote Karagu-niches of Mount Pints, and arrive at ProdhromoVOL. m. L 1IACARNANIA. [chap.at half-past 4 p. h. The distance from Skortus isan hour and a quarter.Prodhromo ' stands exactly opposite to Khryso-vitzi as Skortus does to Babini. In the valleybetween the two former, and about a mile in adirect line from Prodhromo, rises an insulatedhill, the summit and one side of which are enclosedwith the remains of Hellenic walls, the summitforming a separate inclosure. It appears to havebeen nothing more than a small fortified kwhi, likethat at Skortus, and very inferior in importanceto the cities which stood at Porta and near Katuna.Anciently it would seem that every village inAcarnania was walled, whence we may infer thattheir insecurity was almost as great as it is now.It may easily be conceived, indeed, that betweenthe sea pirates of the adjacent islands, who wereat ell times X>|i<rru{>Ec av^ptt*, and the aemi-bar-barons tribes of the Epirotic and ^tolian mountains,their position was one of continued vigilance.Its effects, however, had not injured their character; for Thucydides speaks favourably of theAcarnanians, and they seem not to have altogetherdegenerated when compared with other Greeks.The Proestos of Prodhromo, who is upwards ofseventy years of age, remembers when there were60 or 70 houses in his village : there are now onlysix. It is situated just on the skirt of the woodswhich occupy all the range of hills from Lygovitzito where they terminate in the plains towards themouth of the Aspro. The air is said to be verynpofpc^oc ' Homer, Od. O. 426, H. 426.XXXII.] ACARNANIA. 515healthy. Iii the valley, and on the slopes adjacentto this side of it, the Prodhrom'ites cultivatewheat and barley, and they gather vallonea', gall-nuts',and a seed or berry used in dyeing, calledfiiploawoQa^, on the hills. The soil is a dark-colouredfriable mould, like that of the greaterpart of Aoarnafiia. The grinia wheat, is sownfrom November to January, whenever there is aninterval of dry weather favourable to it : — thedhirainio from the 10th of February to the 25thof March (old style.) If the spring be very drythis yields no more than 3, 4, or 5, to 1 ; but itusually gives 10, while the grinia never more than6 or 7. The latter would perhaps yield as muchas the dhiminio if it were carefully cleared ofweeds, but this is seldom done in Greece. Barleyis sown iu the same season as grinia : the harvestis in the middle of June (old style.) Upon thekind of weather which leads to a good harvestthey have this proverb —Papa ava ■)^pitrr6ytva ariyva, 'Ta ^uirn-j^ioviafiiva, !<^ Mf rijv XaftTTpiiv jipiyoufuviiv. iTa fiTtapia yiofiiafiiva."Joy to a dry Christmas, a snowy Epiphany,and a rainy Easter, then the barns will be filled."The Sicilians say — Gennaro sicca borghese ricco,Priidhromo, like all the smaller villages of Karlis a Spahis, and pays two fifteenths of thecrop to the Spahi. The rest belongs to the Pro-chromate\ who is his own labourer, and pays allthe expences of cultivation. His condition, which(hXarlSi. ' Kijirt'^l. ' npnipo/iiriir.l12^516 ACAltNANlA. [chap.from this statement would seem to be independent,18 quite the reverse. The Hodja-bashi, or Prestonof Tragamesti, or of any other place upon the coastwhere the Prodhromite carries his corn or otherproduce for sale, presents him from communicatingwith the islanders, who would give him a goodprice, and forces himself in as an intermediatepurchaser, at a much lower : hence the currentprice of wheat here at present is not more that 3Jpiastres the kilo of 22 okes, which is equivalent toabout Ss. 6d. the bushel. The velanidbi, whichbeing procured for the trouble of gathering wouldbe a great advantage to the peasant, is monopolizedin the same manner by the Proesti, who givehim for the small sort, called yafiaBa, 30 piastresthe milliaja of 1000 lire grosse Venete. One ofmy companions tells me that he has himself latelybongbt a quantity from the primates of Karlili for37 piastres and sold it for 50, The large inferiorkind of volanidhi, called KayXa, sells at 12 piastresthe milliaja. Kikidhi, or gall-nuts, are sold bythe gatherers for 15 paras the oke, and merzosporothe same. The surrounding hills upon which theseproductions are gathered abound in stags, deer,roebuck, and wild boars, as well as in jackals,which make a dismal howling at night.Another disadvantage of which the Prodhro-mites, in common with the other small villagers ofAcat'jiajtia , complain is, that although surroundedwith pasture, they are unable to have any flocks,which all belong to the Vezir and his sons, or torich Turks, or to other persons who pay the Vezirfor permission to feed their flocks in this part ofXXXII.] ACARNANIA. 517the country, all which are in the care of Vlakhi-ones, or of Albanians from Mount Pints. But eventhis oppression, or that which prevents the industriousman from employing hid means in the mostadvantageous manner, or from carrying the fruitsof his labour to the best market, ia less grievousthan the direct taxes and extortions which oftendeprive him at one blow of his scanty earnings.The kcfaliatiko, or kharatj, is 7 piastres for everymale above ten years old, in which is includedhalf a piastre for the expences of the Proestos ofTragamesti, the chief town of the district, or ofthe persons alium he sends here to collect it.The voting, which is paid to the Spahi, is a capitationtax of 60 paras for every married, and of 30paras for every unmarried man. To xP'i) O'" ^'^^dues, as the taxes are denominated collectively,amount at Prodhromo to near 500 piastres a yearfor each family, a large part of which consists ofthe share of an arbitrary imposition laid upon thevillage by the Proestos of Tragamesti in acquittanceof the demand which the Vezir makes uponKarlili, to defray the expence of troops, or journeys,or wars, or upon any other pretence, and forthe amount of which he is supposed to be accountableto the Porte, but does not account to any one.The Hodja-bashis assemble and divide the burthenamong the different districts, according totheir population. Each of them afterwards addsto the sum the expences which he himself incurs,or pretends to have incurred, in journeys to attendthe Vezir, or for entertaining and lodging Turksand soldiers, or for horses in the public service,61 8 ACARNAMIA. [CHAP.or upon any other plausible pretext. The impositionupon the village being as arbitrary as thatof the Vezir upon die district, the ProeBt6s enricheshimself quickly, unless he should happento be a man of extraordinary humanity, of whomthere cannot be many in a country where honourand honesty are so little encouraged. In the territoryof the Vezir they are particularly rare ; forit is his usual policy to appoint the worst men tohe primates, sat he may make them di^oigewhen they are full of plunder; after which heoften allows them to begin their extortions anew.In the smaller villages where the chief is styledprot6gbero, or chief alderman, he arranges in likemanner the mode of payment of the khr6i amongthe families, and generally in the Vezir's territories,or at least in those where his authority isfirmly established, one person is charged with thisoffice, or at most two in the large towns, whereas,in the Elefthero-khoria of Greece, it is the commoncustom for all the primate, or arkhondes,to meet and allot the taxes. If there be jealousyXXXII.] ACARNANIA. 519lie is obliged to give to the Albanian soldiers,although it is only upon such extraordinaryoccasions as the present progress of the Vezirthat small villages Situated so far out of theroute as Prodliromo feel the inconvenience in itshighest degree by the actual presence of the detestedpalikaria. Must Bey, of Konitza, who wasquartered upon Makhala, after having been suppliedwith provision and forage for himself and 250followers, insisted upon a present of 100 piastres atdeparture, hut was contented with 45. This wasan unpardonable extortion, even by the laws of theAly code, and would meet with punishment if itwere made known to him, as he only allows thechief armatolos to demand presents in this manner.The poor Makhaliotes, however, stand probablytoo much in awe of the resentment of theAlbanians to complain of the injury.March 20. — From Prodhromo to Bodholovitza ',distance 4 hours 7 minutes, with Albanians onfoot. We set out at 9.25, ascend the pass whichlies immediately at the back of Prodhromo, andin less than half au hour arrive at the summit ofthe ridge, when there appears before us a vastextent of veianldhi woods, frequented only byrobbers, or by Karagunidhes with their flocks,and traversed by winding paths difficult for ahorse, and much more so for baggage. This iscalled the forest of Manina. I had taken a pathto the left of the direct road, with a view of endingmy way to some ruins on the bank of the Aspro,620 ACARNANlA. [CIIAP.called Paled Mani, but now perceive that it cannotbe effected with the baggage horses. As thebolu-bashi of our Albanian escort declares at thesame time that we are too few to be separated inthese perilous times and places, we regain thecommon route from Prodhromo, having lost about8 minutes by the detour. Our guide from points out — ' ''.ere three Turks weremurdered two yes f robbers who camefrown the Islands, hed by the Russians.During a halt wh lake, from 11.40 to12.30, to dine at a little opening in themidst of the forest, sc lies of Karagunidheapass us ; they consist of women and children,walking by thi )f the horses, whichcarry the tents, maize, ey, and all the domesticfurniture. The infants are in baskets slungover the shoulders of the women, who with theirbodies bent forward and a hurried step, dragalong a horse, or a string of two or three horses,and are employed at the same time in spinningwool. These persons are Vlakhiotes from themountains of Kalarytes, and are on their way tothe plains of Katokhi, where the men have precededthem with their flocks. The forest consistsentirely of the velani oak, which never grows to agreat height, but is sometimes broad and spreadsinto a great number of branches. The little underwoodthere is, consists chiefly of the paliuri andwild kharub. The khrysoxylo (Continue) used asayellow dye, is also found here. Half an hourfrom Podholovitza, we emerge from the forest andenter on the plain which extends along the banksXXXII.] ACARNANIA. 521of the Aspro to the sea. Though generally inundatedin winter, it is now dry. The soil, consistingof a stiff white clay, is now under the ploughfor the reception of kalanibokki, which they havenot the means here of irrigating artificially.Podholovttza consists only of a tower and a quadrangularinclosure of cottages surrounded by somewicker kalyvia ; it is situated at the foot of a smallheight, surmounted by a church, on the right hankof the Aspro, which being now collected into anarrower bed than in the plain of Vrakhori, andaugmented by the tributaries which join it nearAnghelokastro, may be compared to the Thamesat Staines. In summer it is very shallow, andmay be crossed on foot at Podholovitza ; but aquarter of a mile lower down, where a projectingrocky bank on the opposite side narrows the riverto fifty yards, it is never fordable. Here is theordinary ferry, and the only one except that ofKatokhi.We are informed by the people of Podholovitzathat an epidemic disorder now reigning in KarllHhas lately carried off six persons in the village.We therefore cross to Guria, which is situatedabout the same distance below the ferry that is above it. Here I find that the Xoi/jiktj,as they call the sickness, was much exaggeratedat Podholovitza, in order to frighten us away fromthence, and that it has been worse here, though inneither place does it appear to be of a very malignantnature ; for though hardly a Greek house inthis village out of 30 or 40 has escaped it, two orthree persons only have died. It is said to begin522 ACARNAHIA. [CHAP.with head-ache and fever ; but if the patient isblooded, which is almost their only remedy, begenerally recovers in fifteen days. There are kfew Turkish families at Guria, and a little moaqoewithout a minaret. Below Gniia the river spreadsover a large space, and has some sandy islands init. It then takes a long bend to the left towardsthe extreme point of the hills which slope fromStain into the plain. In the opening betweenthis point and some heights towards the mouth ofthe river, appears the village of Magula, on asmall eminence in the plain, and Palea Katuna atthe foot of the hill to the right. Katokhi ia hidby a projection of them.Our Albanian escort consists partly of Mahometanand partly of Christians, who are all fromthe country near Bert and Colonia. Since wegot rid at Makhala of a bolubashi who had persuadedsome of the Mussulman that it was beneaththeir dignity to march before ghauts, wehave had no difficulties with any of them, andhave kept them in perfect good humour by presentingthem with a sheep or two every eveningXXXII.] ACARNANIA . 523curacy, and permission to look through my telescopeis an ample reward.Nothing can be more dissimilar than the Albanianmanners and those of the Osmanlis, the mostindolent and phlegmatic of human beings, unlesswhen roused by some extraordinary excitement.In one respect, however, the two people accord, —namely, the love of gaming, though it is forbiddenby the religion of Mahomet. As the Albaniansoldier seldom burthens himself with provisions,he commonly solaces himself at a bait upon theroad with a pinch of snuff and a draught of water.On arriving at a village, the first thing they generallydo is to form a party at cards with heaps ofparas, while those who do not play look on. Ayoung man, who particularly distinguishes himselfby his activity, named Alius, informs me, that inhis younger days, like many of the Albanian soldiers,he attended cattle in his native mountains,and that at Area, a place on Mount Trebusin, twohours from Klisura to the north-eastward, fivehours from Tepeleni, and eight from Remedy, hewas often in the habit of finding ancient coins ofsilver and copper.March 21. — Having procured some horses atGuria for some of the escort, and mounted otherson the post-horses which we brought for the baggagefrom Prevyza, I cross the ferry with twelveof the palikaria, and proceed in an hour and a halfto Palea Mani. The road is a horse-path, which,after crossing the little plain of Podholo\'it2a, followsa narrow level on the bank of the Achelous.along the edge of the forest at the foot of the lowestwest ^H624 ACABHANIJuslopes of the hills of Manina. Palea Mani is theraodem name of a Hellenic fortress standing uponone of the points of these hills, in the thickest partof the woods. As in the ruins of Stratus, one of thegates stood very near an arm of the Ackelous, whichis separated from the main stream by a portion ofits broad gravelly bed. This gate is eight feet wide,diminishing towards the top, which is formed bytwo opposite stones hollowed into a curve, but notquite meeting, and covered in the middle with asingle quadrangular stone ten feet in length, threefeet and a quarter in height, and two feet aad aquarter in the lower dimension or soft. I remarkedthe same kind of construction in a smallgate at Samaria. Beams similar to the upperstone of the gate covered the passage in its wholelength of eighteen feet ; but of these only two remainin their places. This gateway leads into asmall court of an irregular pentagonal form, whichwas defended externally on the side to the right inentering by a lower open to the court. Nearlyopposite to the tower, a small gate leads from thecourt into the principal inclosure of the town orfortress. This inner gate standing on a slope, thebeams of stone above the door project beyond oneanother like steps, and there are probably somecorresponding steps below, which are now buriedin the ruins and earth. The natives call the outergate the Avloporta ', being in fact the entrance ofa sort of aliXii, or ante-chamber, of the fortress,which formed a good protection to the inner gate.Xxxvi.] ACARNANIA. !i'2-'>I have never seen any Similar example of this kindof outwork .From the inner gate the two walls of the principalinclosure mount the height to a small quadrangularacropolis at the summit of the hill, thewall to the right more directly, that to the left embracinga larger portion of the height, but both incurved lines, and that to the left in the upper part,forming a second curve, concave towards the exterior.The acropolis has an outer enclosure flankedby towers : both this and the Avioporta are obviouslyposterior additions to the original work, beingof more regular masonry, while that of the body ofthe place was entirely polygonal, without towers,and of an irregular plan, bearing strongly thecharacter of a rude people, who possessed little ofthe science of military architecture as it existed inthe more civilized parts of Greece. Such, in fact,was the condition of Acarnania before the age ofAlexander. The original walls are in some partsnear eleven feet in thickness, but are formed inthe middle of rubble and are faced only with largecemented masses. Among the posterior additionsare the remains of a tower at the lower partof the citadel, of which ten or twelve courses ofregular masonry remain on one side, and a smallpart of the adjacent side. The thickness of thewall here consists of single stones, not more thantwo feet and a half or three feet thick. In themid-height of the remaining courses there is aloop-hole, or window, with a course of masonrynarrower than the rest, and projecting a fewiSS6 ACARNANIA. [chap.inches; there 13 a similar projection also at thefoot of the wall.The defence of the acropolis on the lower sidetowards the town is partly formed by a perpendicularexcavation of the rock, upon which a wallhas been built consisting of irregular blocks exactlyfitted to the rock and to one another. Theruins are in no part more than eight or ten feethigh, except at the Avlo-porta. The inclosedspace is so extremely rugged that one is surprisedhow such a place could ever have been inhabited,nor is there a single excavated foundation to befound. The greatest length, which is from theAcropolis to the Avloporta, is about GOO yards.In position this ruin seems to accord perfectlywith Old Cenis, which Strabo describes as a desertedplace situated on the Aclielous, midwaybetween Stratus and the sea. It is not to be inferred,however, that the Old Cenis', so called inthe time of Strabo, was the same city which wasfounded by Alcmteon after the Trojan war, andnamed (Enema in honour of Census ; for Thucydidesclearly indicates that place as identical withRoi Si Aiyia (lege Oin'n) editions of Strabo, since it is^t val aunt (irJ rjJ Torafi^ (ju clear, from ii ^Sl- in contradictSi fiiV iraXniii olr Extinction toijjr''Xa"^, that StrabooiKoufifVij, 'labor nVe'jjouffd rise meant Oivi'a, or the city of theTt BaXaTTTis Kai Ttjs £7()oVou, ?/ (Eniad^E, the orthography ofSi yvv iiD-oi' IflcoftiimyTa ara which is certain, from variousiiovi vjTEp fiji' <'t.>3oAije Cii\ov- authors, from its coins, andffu.— Strabo, p. 4.10. from the derivation of theIt is surprising that the word name.Aij'id is still retained in all theXxxi.] ACARNANIA. 527the famous city of the CEniadse near the mouth ofthe Achelous '. It would seem, therefore, that theruins at Palea Mani are those of a small and very-ancientcity of the Acarnanes, which, having beendeserted long before the age of Strabo, and its historyforgotten, had improperly received in his timethe name of Old CEneia, as often occurs in theinstance of ruins and deserted sites. It may possiblyhave been Erysiche, mentioned by the poetAlcman, which Stephens improperly confoundswith the city of tEniadse, as seems evident fromApollodorus, whom Strabo cites to show that theErysichaei were an inland people of Acarnania *.In later times, in consequence of the commandingsituation in the pass leading along the right bankof the Achelous from the upper to the maritimeplain, the original work may have been repairedand furnished with towers to serve as a fortress.Some part of the remains at the acropolis consistsof Roman tiles, mixed with-small stones andmortar, built on the Hellenic wall. As the passnaturally divided the territory of the Canada' fromthat of the Metro polite, to one of those two peopleprobably the fortress belonged. At present thereis no road to the northward beyond Palea Mani ;the wide branching bed of the Achelous, themarshes and lake at the foot of the steep woodymountain of Lygovitzi, and the thick forest .1. 2, c, 102. nods ^^nv 'AroXXiiaupoc X(-Stephan. in 'i.pvai\ri, ycirfiai, iv 'AKuftav fxifiyitTai.OWtiaZai. Oii^ 'EjiuiTij^n^a; KaXvlaivioiT5c li /uaoyalai tarry fifty oHi iroifi^r, 'AWd ZapilaivThir 'Ai:npyat'lay 'Epvat}(aioue nV ^Kpa;. — Strabo, p, 460.528 ^.TOLiA. [chap.tween the latter and Palea Mani, being impassable,except to the shepherds and peasants of theneighbourhood. The woods around the ruin consistof oak, ilex, maple, and various kinds of underwood,festooned with wild grapes.On the opposite side of the river stands a smalltjiftlik and pyrgo called St, Elias, around whichthe lower falls of Zygos reach to the river side,and are covered with the cultivated fields belongingto Stamna. This village, distant three or fourmiles to the south-eastward, is situated upon aridge, sloping on one side into a narrow plain onthe bank of the Aspro, and on the other to thelagoon of Anatoliko, on the border of whichStamna has a skala and some magazines. AtAnghelokastro, which is two or three miles to thenorth-eastward of St. Elias, is a ruined castle ofmiddle times, standing upon the lowest heights ofZygos, with a small village below it in the comerof the Aeolian plain. The mountain above and Stamna is separated from thehighest woody summit of Zygos, upon whichstands Kliieriisova, by the pass of Klisura, alreadydescribed as leading directly through the lofty-ridgeof Aracynthus, by a narrow rocky cleftforming a natural gate of communication betweenmaritime jEtolia and the great interior plain ',Having returned from Palea Mani to Guria, weproceed in the afternoon to Anatoliko, over a plainof the same clayey white soil before remarked,and producing maize, wheat, barley, and flax. ItScf Vol. I. pp. 11<). l.'>4.XXXII.] stolid. 529is marshy in some places, and near Anatoliko ■!>artificially drained. In the parts most distantfrom the mountains dhiminio is not sown, as littlerain falls in the spring, and they have not themeans of irrigation. The distance from Guria tothe ferry of Auatoliku is two hours mensis pace ;hilt in a direct line much less, because the roadmakes a great turn to avoid the ridge, which,sloping from Stamna, ends in a point at whichstands a liamlct called Mastuu, where we arrived inforty minutes from Guria. In approaching we pass through some of its gardens andolive plantations, at the foot of a hill which isquite unconnected with the heights of Stamna,and borders the lagoon on the west almost as faras the outer sea. Having crossed the lagoon in amonoxylo, we proceed to the house of an iatnSs,who is brother-in-law of my travelling companionK . The island of Anatoliko is about threemiles distant from the northern extremity of thelagoon at the foot of the ridge of Stamna, and amile distant from the bank on either side to theeast and west. The island is so small as to beentirely covered with the town, which containsabout 400 houses. Though some of these arclarge, the place is not at present in a flourishingstate. Being, like Mesolonghi, supported chieflyby the profits of its ships and maritime commerce,it has suffered by the war, and many of the lowerorders are deprived of their employment as sailors.The territory extends three or four miles alongeither shore of the lagoon, and produces corn foral»out two months" consumption, wine rather moreVOL, III. M mire ^HF53U stolid. [chap.than sufficient for the place, with a quantity ofoil which admits of an export to the value of40,000 piastres in the alternate years, when thefull olive crop occur. The fresh and salted fishfrom the lake furnish a traffic with Zakytho andother neighbouring places. The Vezir takes 46purses a year for the fishery and other revenues ofthe crown from the priest of Anatoliko, who sharethe farm with other principal persons of the place.These 23,000 piastres include 700 kharatjes, togetherwith the imposts of the two villages of Matildaand Neo-florio, near the mouth of the Aspro,My host the latros says, that during the sityears he has lived here he has been five years ill ;while the natives have not such bad health — amelancholy state of affairs for the doctor, but whichwould be much more so were it not that accordingto the common custom in Greece he receives sfixed stipend. From the looks of the inhabitantsI should not have supposed the place healthy :indeed, the narrowness of the lagoon in this partand the woody mountains which inclose it on threesides, seem far less favourable to health than theopen and well-ventilated situation of Mesolonghi,where the people in every sense of the word are awell-looking race. The small quantity of salt heldin solution by the water at Anatoliko, as I wassurprised to find on tasting it, may also affect thequality of the air : the lagoon towards Mesolonghi,on the contrary, is as salt as the sea. This showsthat all the northern part of the lake is chieflyformed by springs from the surrounding mountains,of which indeed there are several to be seenXxxi.] .ETOLIA, 531on the neighbouring shore, particularly one nearKHsura, and another near a fresh-water marshopposite to the town to the eastward. Thoughthe water of the former is considered much thebetter, the monoxyla are more frequently sentto the latter because it is nearer. In the townthere are only cisterns for rain water.March 22. — From Anatoliko the ruined millabove Makhala ia visible to the N.N.W, ; and alittle to the left of it is seen the hill of Lygovitzi,then Mount Bumisto in a line with Stamna, anda pointed height to the southward of that villageon the same ridge, called St. Elias. In all otherdirections the view is much circumscribed by theneighbouring part of Mount Zygos and by theheight on the western side of the lagoon.The distance in a direct line from Anatoliko toMesolonghi is about 6 g, m. With a monoxylo itis almost double the distance, on account of a longlow cape which separates the lagoon of Anatolikofrom that of Mesolonghi, leaving only a communicationbetween them half a mile broad, betweenthe extremity of the cape and the mamma or threadof land which separates all the lagoons from theopen sea. Having landed on the eastern shore at3 P.M. we proceed to Mesolonghi by land. Alreadyhave the post-meridian thunder-showers,which characterize the Grecian spring, commenced.Both yesterday and to-day the cloudscollected on the mountains about noon, and fellafterwards in rain accompanied with lightning.After an hour's ride, we are obliged to take shelterfrom one of these storms in a tower at the Alike:M m 2A533 JE^oUA. [crap. XXXII.or salt-works, which are situated to the right ofthe road, on the narrow point of land. Thesesalt-works belong to Mesolonghi, and produce28000 piastres a year. Instead of repeated suppliesof water being let into the salt-pans, as atLefkadha, by which each pan produces a thicknessof a foot or two of salt, and only the lowerpart of the salt is impure, it is here gathered asfast as each admission of water ia evaporated ; theconsequence of which is, that a great quantity ofearth ia mixed with the salt, and only small portionsof it are white and pure. There is anotherBait-work in the lagoon of Bokhori. As soon asthe weather clears we proceed, and soon enterthe olive-ground, gardens, and marshy ditchesof Mesolonghi. In the town I find the VezirA15' and all hia court.CHAPTER XXXIII..flTOLlA, ACAHNANIA.Kurt-agB, Call/don — Temple of Diana Lapkria — River EvenuMMount Chalcis — To Aia Triadhaha — Neokhori — Stamna —CEtoio-Acarnanian agriculture — Return to Neokhori — Magula— Kurtzolari — Katokhi — Trikardho-kastto, (Eniadce —March of Philip from Limited to CEniadee — Phateice— MedianMetropolis —-Conope, IthoTia, Pteanium — Elteus — ArlemilaOxeia — Lakes Melile, Cynia, Uria — Lake of Calt/dtm —Course of the Aehelout below (Eniadep.March 25. — Kurt-aga, the site of Calydon, is aride of 1 hour and 35 minutes from Mesolonghi,Midway, opposite to the eastern termination of thelagoon of Mesolonghi, at a IfvyaXan, or farm belongingto Stathaki, one of the priest of Mesolonghi,are some remains of ancient buildings,resembling Roman baths. Two chambers subsistwhich have curved and arched niches in the walls,and on the outside several boles, one of which ispartly filled with indurated sediment formed bya long continued course of water. These remainsmark, perhaps, the position of Halicyrna, whichPliny states to have been near Pleuron, and534 .Stout. [Coat.Strabo describes as a tntfoi Situated 30 stedabelow CalydoD towards the sea.'The first object which arrests the attention odapproaching the remains of CalyeUm, is a wall ofregular masonry formed of quadrangular blochabout three feet in their longest dimension, andstanding on the side of a projecting hill, fromwhich many of the stones have rolled down intothe bed of a smtdl torrent. This wall formed partof an oblong quadrangular building, inclosing allthe summit of the height, which being muchsteeper towards the torrent than on the other sides,required in that part the support of a strong buttress,or projection from the quadrangle ; this isthe portion of the building which is now so conspicuous;its height is about 18 feet. Aa thisruin is entirely separate from the enclosure ofthe city, it is probably the remains of the peribolusof a temple, such edifices having often beenplaced on the outside of Greek cities, where,protected by their sanctity, they were left opento the use of the surrounding country. Al-xxxiii.]JETOLIA. 535don '. Diana Laphraa, or Lapland, was anotherof the protecting deities of the Caledonia, and wasworshipped perhaps in the same temple, or in anadjoining sanctuary. When Augustus founded ,and peopled it in part with the inhabitants ofCalydon, he directed the statue of Diana LaphrseatQ be given to the new colony, where it was placedin the acropolis, in a temple dedicated to the goddess,who was honoured with an annual festival, aprocession, and a very cruel sacrifice'. The remainsof the walls of Calydon are traceable in theirwhole circuit of near two miles and a half; theysubsist in most parts to the height of three or fourfeet, and are formed of the same kind of masonryas the peribolus of the temple. They includedthe last falls of Mount Zygos towards the riverFidhari or Venus, with the exception of the extremepoint, which was excluded. On the westernaide the wall descends along the left bank of thetorrent lee fore-mentioned, until, after receiving thewaters from the slopes of the city itself, throughan opening made in the wall to admit their passage,the torrent changes its course from southto west, and flows parallel to the longer side ofthe peribolus into the plain. Between the peribolusand the part of the city wall opposite to itare several foundations. The breadth of the citywas very much diminished at the southern extremity,so as to present a small front towards theSvenns. On the east the walls ascended the crestirtpi a Ti)v KaKvCuyn mari * Pausan. Archaic. c. 18. —TV Tov Aai^paiou 'AwvXXurvoc Sec Travels in the Morea,lipuy. — Strabo, p. 439. vol, II. p. 127.^6 £Folia. [Clapsa narrow ridge to the acropolis, in a convexform, and were protected in the steepest part towardsthe citadel by some short flanks.The northern front of the city crossed a ridgewhich connects the heights occupied by the citywith the neighbouring part of Mount Zygoa; inthe middle of this side, on the highest part of theridge, was the acropolis, which was well protectedwith towers without, and within consisted of arectangular inclosure unequally subdivided by across wall. Many parts of the inclosure of thelower town are flanked by towers, and foundationsof terraces are observable on the slope of the hillwithin the inclosure. There was a large gate onthe south-eastern side of the town, and small onesin other places, I searched in vain for any vestigesof a theatre, or for any remains of civil architecture.At the foot of the ridge, the crest of whichis occupied by the eastern walls, flows a smallbranch of the Silenus, and another waters thesimilar parallel valley of Potaniula, which villageis only half an hour to the north-eastward, but notin sight.have taken it for granted that these are theruins of Calydon, though it must be admitted thatthe writer who indicates their situation most preciselyis not among the best of geographical authorities.1 allude to Pliny, who says that Calydonwas near the Evenus, about 1-^ miles from thesea ', which accords exactly with this position.But he is strongly supported by probability. It isPlin. Hen. I. I, t, 2.XXXIII.] stolid. 537evident that the fertile plain of Calydoti, over-againstthe land uf Pelops, in which fifty fields ofvineyards and arable were offered to Meleager',could have been no other than that which liesbetween Mount Varaasova and the lagoon ofMesolonghi, uor is it easy to conceive that theextensive remains at Kurt-aga are those of anyless important city, placed as they are so centrallywith regard to that plain, and in so commandinga situation at the entrance of the vale of theEvenus, where that river issues from the interiorvalleys into the maritime plain. As to the epithetswhich Homer gives to Calydon, it must heconfessed that ipawri seems more suitable to thissite than either viTpi\tttaa or anrtivri, both of whichwould be better applied to that immense mass ofKoup^c'c r' tfi&^ovTO Kai AlruXoi funj(apiiai, ,)('Afifi v6\tv KaXvSuva Kai iiWiiXovt iy&piiov'Ai'ruXo! fiiy, ifivyiftcvCH KaXufwvoc cpacf-qc'Koupqrcc li, tta:rpa6icty fUfiaiSrit 'Apij'i.II. I. V. 525.'OttdSi Tiororot- ircSwr KaXtif iv >-oc tpacvflc'Ef6a fiiv ^raiyoy rifict'ot npitaWct i\lo6at ■'*■»,u llirrriKoyriyvov' ro [liv fjfiiav oWoriioio, •}, 'tifuav a i^<Xqf &p««ii' Ttfi'eto Ta[uv8ai. ,J II. I. v. 577. ,Im tiaXvCwr fiiv si yale UlXortlat x^*"*1 'Ev aVTiwopBfiolc rise ixova ihSai/iova.Eurip. Melcag. ap. Lucian. Samp,XaXKtCa r" dyylaXov KaXu^iivd r« »-irpi/io£rof.640.AiTUfioiaiv tivnaai ■ . . ,II. N. V638 .stolid. [chap.rock anciently named Chalcis, and now Harasswhich rise directly in face of the ruins, onthe opposite side of the river. In truth, the situationis as low as it could have been, not to be inthe plain; Strabo, indeed, seems to have beensensible that the epithets wtrpij*"*"! and a'lirttvri werenot very well adapted to Calydon, since he re-marts that they are to be applied to the district.From the summit which rises above the ruins,the ridge of Zygos branches westward to the Aspro,and that of Apokuro northward to its union withMount Viena, having the lake of Apokuro on itswestern side, and the valley of the Fidhari on itseastern. From Mount Varassova branch the greatridges of Kravari, which though like Apokuro,covered in the higher parts with forests, was wellcultivated by the inhabitants of numerous Elef-therokhoria, until the country fell into the handsof Al)' Pasha, since which event the populationhas greatly diminished, and some of the largestvillages are now almost deserted. Not long agosome person informed the Pasha that the daughterof the Proestos of Megadhendhro, a village in thevale of the Evenus, 5 or 6 hours above Calydon,was a girl of extraordinary beauty ; he demandedher accordingly of the father, who thought it betterto comply than to fly from the country, andabandon all his property : a few days before Iarrived at Prevyza she was received into thePasha's harem there, and was sent to loanninaon the Vezir's departure.In a valley at the back of Mount Varassova,where stood the village of Perthori, now deserted,"\XXXIII.] stolid. 539and below it Mavromati, are said to be somewell preserved remains of an ancient Greek fortress.It was probably only a subordinate castle,as the towns of Chalets and Macyn^a were verynear the sea shore. Admitting the ruins at Kurt-agato be those of Cahjdon, there can be littlehesitation in considering the Pneumonia, which asI have before shown was the territory next to theCalydonm in a westerly direction, to have beenthat which is now attached to Meaolonghi. Havingagain examined the remains at Ghyflokastro,behind Mesolonghi, 1 find that a low rockyheight, separated by a branch of the plain ofMesolonghi from the foot of the mountain of KyriaIrini, was entirely surrounded by walls. Someparts of the masonry are constructed in the mostregular Hellenic manner, and others are of narrowstones laid carelessly without cement, amongwhich are seen some very large wrought blocks,the work apparently of a remote age. The wallsseem not only to have surrounded the summit,but to have extended also over a lower heightwhich is connected with the mountain of KyriaIrini, and which advances farther into the plain.I observe also the foundations of a tower or otherquadrangular building at the fool of the height inthe plain. 1 have before remarked that these areprobably the ruins of the Pleupon of Homer ',and that Kyria Irini was the city which the Pleu-ronii built on Mount Aracynthus, after the destructionof the former by Demetrius jStolicus *.II. B. v.639i N. V. 2l7i ' SUsbo, p 151.V. 116. See Vol. I. p. 118.A540 .XTOUA. [cHir.It is remarkable, that among the numerous Hcao-looghites, by whom I hare been visited, one ooljhas ever been at the Castle of KyHa Irini, and btprobably would never hare gone there, had he notaccompanied an Englishman.March 26.— The Greeks of Karlili, paiticDlarijof that part of it which constituted the ancientAcamania, enjoyed, until the time of Ai Pasha,a considerable share of security and prosperityhad a profitable traffic in cattle and provisionswith the Islands ; and although the countrywas often infested by robbers and pirates whohad a secure refuge in some of the smallerislands, the armatoli kept them in check : therewas generally a good understanding between thechief Greeks of Catania and the Derwent-aga,and they received some advantage iron Karlilihaving been an imperial appanage. They speakwith great respect and regret of Kurt Pasha, theguardian of the Dervenia to whom Al succeeded.In consequence of the easy circumstances of manyof the Acarnaman families, education received aXXXIII.] XTOLIA. 541tahiti, but do not speak very favourably of theirhonesty or regard to truth. The people of Mesolonghiand Anatoliko are regarded as >paponvaXo\,or fish-brained, and OtoKoq, an Ithacan, seems tobe a common term of contempt. The Leucadians,as a part of their own nation, are well spoken of,and I believe not unreservedly.The Mesolongliites are agreed in commendationof the conduct of Thir Aga of Konispoli, whofor the last year has been their governor. Nobodyunderstands better than an Albanian how to conducthimself in office when there exists a controlover the avaricious disposition which invariablyobtains the ascendency when there is nothing toprevent it. The Vezir, wishing to act with moderationtowards Mesolonghi at the beginning of hisgovernment of this place, sent purposely a personashis deputy wiio was suited to execute that intention,and he is now about to employ Tahlr Aga,with the advantage of the reputation which he hasgained at Mesolonghi in a similar mission in Kra-var.Aly's authority over Mesolonghi and Anato-like is derived solely from his office of Derwent Aga,and his farm of the mire, six-sevenths of which heunderwent yearly from some Turks at Constantinople,and has purchased the other seventh from oneSal)- Aga of Mesolonghi, who possessed it for life.The plain extending from Mesolonghi to Bokharaand the sea, although clayey is fertile andtolerably cultivated. Near the shore is a chain oflagoons, of which the eastern, belonging to Bokhara,is much the largest. It is valuable for itssalt-work and fisheries. The greater part of thelabour in the plain is performed by men ofi542 jGtolia. [chap.KefkloDJa and Zukytho. The Kefalonltes, whowork in the vineyards, earn from 40 to 45 parasa day, with wine. The Zakythini are reckonedthe best reapers. The chief produce of the Islandsbeing grapes and currants, the principal harvestoccurs there later than on the continent ; whiletheir small quantity of com is reaped earlier, andthus their labourers obtain employment on thecontinent without losing any at home, and payfor a part of the provisions with which the continentsupplies the Islands. In the territory of Bok-born the land belongs to Turks : the Greek farmersreceive the seed from the landlord and pay himhalf the crop after the deduction of the dhekatia.March 27. — After 36 hours of a southerly wind,with rain, the weather improving, I embark to-dayin a monoxylo, accompanied by six others, to conveythe servants, baggage, and Albanian escort,and in two hours cross the lagoon to Aia Triadhaha,a small monastery situated on the extreme point ofthe ridge which borders the western shore of thelagoon of Anatoliko. Our monosyla move aboutthree miles an hour ; they have large square sails,but these add very little to the velocity unless theboat is lightly laden. That in which I am embarkedmoves as quick with a single pole, as anotherfull of Albanians with the sail set and twomen punting : the pole, by which a man at thestern gives the motion, is about ten feet long, withthroe prongs at the end. The water varies indepth from one foot to four. Fish are taken, as inthe linaria of Artaa, by kalamotes ', or chambersxxxii.] stolid. 543made of reeds fixed at the passages by which thefish pass from the lake into the sea. The kala-motesare left open from January till May 15, oldstyle, when the water of the lagoon becoming hotor the breeding being complete, the fish begin toreturn to the sea, and each sort of fish having itsseason for returning, they are caught in this mannerall the summer and autumn. The weatherstill continues showery and disagreeable. At 2.50we leave Aha Triadhaha, and proceed along the footof the height, on the other side of which, to theright, is the lagoon of Anatoliko. The hill iscovered with olives, and adorned with all theflowers and verdure of an advanced spring, althoughscarcely a leaf was to be seen in the interior.To the left a watery bog extends for five orsix miles in the direction of the sea and the mouthof the Aspro. Opposite to the opening which leadsto Anatoliko, between Mastuu and the northern extremityof the ridge which we have been following,we leave the road to Mastii and Guria on theright, and cross the plain over swamps, ditches,and marshy grounds, among which are many vineyards,to Neo Khori, on the left bank of the Asproa village containing 80 families, of which 30 areTurks. A portion of it is a tjiftllk of MukhtarPasha. Magula is a mile lower down the river,standing on a small eminence in the plain : oppositeto it, on the other side of the river, isKatokhi, on a similar height at the extremity ofthe hills which begin about Palea Katuua andend near Katokhi. These hills are entirely separatedfrom those of Manina by a plain whichbegins from the bank of the Aspro opposite to\644 £Folia. (Chap.Guria, and ends in a great marsh extending to thefoot of a rocky height called Khalk'itza, near Petals.The complexion of the inhabitants of shows the badness of the air; nor can it beotherwise, surrounded as the place is, in so manydirections, by extensive marshes.March 28. — The VezSr having carried awaythe two irfparEpialc, or ferry-boats of Katokhi andGuriii, to convey his Albanians across the river atsome place in the plain of Vrakhori, because thelate rains have rendered the fords there impracticable,I proceed to Stamna, there to remain in abetter lodging and pleasant situation until wecan devise some mode of crossing the river.Leaving Neokhori at 8.30, we follow the hank, ofthe Aspro, and in a little more than an hour arriveat Guria, from whence, ascending the ridge ofStamna by a rugged path, we pass at 10.15 thehamlet of St. Elias, at the foot of a peaked heightwhich is very remarkable in all directions around,and at 10.45 arrive at Stamna, where I occupythe house of the Hodja-bashi, Demetrius Tzimbn-raki, who is now at Vrakhori, with the other Proestiof Karlili assembled at that place to meet the Vezir,who left Stamna on the 25th and travelled to Vraiall the way in his KorZi, a clumsy Germanfour wheeled carriage. Several of these primatesare in great trepidation, fearful of the effects of thepart which they necessarily took against the Vezir,when the deputy of Yusuf, the Valide Kiayassy,governed this province.Staninit, once a considerable town, now containsonly 80 families ; and not a fifth part of its lands,which belong entirely to Greeks, is cultivated,xxxi.] .ETOLiA. 545although it has suffered less in proportion thanmany places in Acamania, from not being in theline of the most frequented communications. Itedecline dates from the first Russian war, whenOrloff sent hither a Kefalonite to originate a rebellionin aid of Catherine's war with Turkey.Flags were made, under which men, women, andchildren assembled, to establish their liberty andindependence ; very soon, however, some Albaniansmarched against them from Vrakhori, slaughteredthe men, made slaves of the women and children,and pillaged the houses ; and thus ended theepanastasis of Stamna.The lands of the larger Greek proprietors in thesurrounding parts oi Acamania and^toUa are generallyworked in the same manner as the Turkishtjiftliks, by a metayer, the terms varying accordingto the nature of the produce and quality of the land.The land-owner makes a yearly commutation withthe Turkish farmer of the mire, and on bad laudssometimes derives no advantage, but that of takingthe dhekatia in kind, which is one eighth or twofifteenths of the crop. In this case the cultivator isat all the expences. Where the land is particularlygood, it is common for the owner to furnish theseed, and for the cultivator, after bearing all theother expences, to account for half the crop, deductingthe dhekatia. In ordinary kinds of arablea third is received by the proprietor upon thesame conditions, or he supplies seed and stockand pays all the expences, the farmer contributingonly his labour, and receiving a fifth of the cropafter the dhekatia is deducted. In the culture ofmaize this mode is general in WeBtam Gexcept that the peasant receives a fourth iiof a fifth, because the labour and attention rwis greater, and the expence of seed for maize iscompared to the produce, which is generallto ooe in the gross. The seeds on an ear ofare from three to five hundred, and there arethree heads on one stem. A measure of \tis the common proportion of seed for a strewsquare of 1 12 feet) of wheat, or for five stremirokka, as maize is here called. The only ex]imposed upon the Acarnanian metayer in ordcases, is half the essence of threshing, callednistiko in wheat and barley, and stumhistiirokka ; the first being performed by horses calone or threshing-floor, the latter by a stick.When maize is irrigated, the crop is seldomgood as when it is watered only by the sjrains ; but it is in particular situations only oimountains that these can be depended upon,irrigated fields of rokka are chiefly near the rThe crop of this grain is usually followed byxxxiii-l jetolia. 547nearly as good as fallow. It seems, however, thatthe two successive crops of wheat generally occur onland which has lain some time fallow ; an advantagewhich the cultivator in Greece can generallyobtain, as land is more plentiful than labour. Bythe same means they often change the position oftheir plantations of rokka on the river side, andobtain crops of wheat and rokka alternately withoutany manure. It is even doubted whether thechange of ground be necessary, as the torrentsfrom the mountains, and the inundation of theriver, deposit fresh soil every year. Dhiminiowheat is not sown in the plains, but higher up theriver where it can be irrigated, and in some partsof the mountains, where they are sure of rain inthe spring, it gives fifteen to one. This grain isnot thought fit for use until the .January after thecrop, but will keep three years : the grinia is notgood beyond the year.There is a mode of preparing the land for wheat,barley, flax, and beans, with the hoe, as in Sicily,without ploughing. The hoers come from Kefa-ionia, provisions are furnished by the master, andare paid for by the labourer out of his share ofthe crop, which is half, after the dhekatia hasbeen deducted. The produce with the hoe hmore plentiful, the plough being too light for thesoil, and often weighing not more than the yoke.The corn measures used here are the ko^oc andKoSapa ; the former is a fifth greater than thekoiXdv of Constantinople, and is generally reckonedto contain 26 okes ; the sahara 15 okes. Themore opulent cultivators have four or five oxen toN n 2548 .ETOLiA. [chap.each zevgari or plough-yoke, and consider thatthey can plough 60 striata with them. Thesubjoined figure will show the form and constructionof the plough (opOTpoi-, apirpt, or aXirpi).J or wished at either endc< learned in the middlea da peg, called thenamed slvalma*, theoiiie: id ot winch embraces that of the stovari,or beam *, and ib tied to it by cords. The BtoTiriat the other end enters the aletropodha, or plough-foot*,which at the upper end is embraced by andlushed to the khiroladhi, or handle'. The stovariforms an angle in the middle, where it is piercedby the spsithi, or sheath ', which is steadied by aspina, or peg ', and at the lower end enters thealetropodha through the middle of a trifurcatedpiece, one end of which is tended into the lowerend of the aletropodha, and covered with the yni,or share '" ; the two other branches, called theftcra, or wings ", serve to throw out the clods onXXXIII.] ,ETOI.IA. 549either side as the plough advances. The zygos is6 feet 8 inches long, and 11 inches in circumference; the aletropodha 4 feet 1 inch followingthe bend, and 1 foot 4 inches in circumference atthe head ; the stovari 7 feet 2 inches long, and1 foot 2 inches in circumference at the spina ; thesivalma 3 feet long ; the khiroladlii 1 foot 10 inches ;the fera and apathy each 2 feet 1 inch ; the ynlweighs 3 okes. This is the plough drawn hyoxen, for buffalos the dimensions are larger, or atleast the share is heavier, weighing 5 okes. Theconstruction is the same in every part of Acarnaniaand jEtolia, or at least with little variation. AtMakhala the wings are two separate pieces of ironinserted into the sides of the aletropodha. Thevukendro ' is a pointed stick, near seven feet inlength, to goad the oxen.My absent host, who has the reputation of beingone of the few Proesti in Karlili that do notplunder their districts, has in consequence of hismoderation no more than 500/. a year out of aconsiderable landed property, which income isfarther diminished by the Vezir's demands uponhim. He keeps only two men and two womenservants, has no glass to his windows, and onlyone room tolerably furnished.The mode in which the Vezir put to death thetwo brothers Katziko-Ianni, who lived at Plaghia,opposite to Lefkadha, furnishes a good exampleof Albanian policy. He had long been on apparentterms of friendly intercourse with them,550 .CTOUA. [chap.but amidst which there was strong mistrust ontheir part. One brother at a time had oftenvisited him when he came to Miftika ; he was convincedthat little would be gained by destroyingonly one of them, and they were aware of thedanger there would be in both placing themselvesin his power. At length by bribery and promiseshe persuaded them to carry off from Lcfkadfaa thefamily of a Greek captain of armatoli, who was arefugee with the Russians, and to deliver these captivesto him. By this action they lost their creditwith the Russians. The Vezir then called BekirAga, the commander of my Albanian escort, whorelates the story to me, and who is usually calledfrom his love of gaming Bekir Violator. Bekir isof Herat, and left the service of Ibrahim Pasha forthat of Al', bringing with him 200 men, half fromBerat and the rest from Colonia and other places.The Vezir suddenly ordered Bekir to Karlili, tellinghim, that if he did not succeed in destroyingthe Katziko-Iannis, he had better drown himselfin one of the lakes. Upon receiving this command,Bekir sent a messenger to Plaghia, informingthe Katziko-Iannis that lie had a commissionfrom the Vezir against one Captain Ghiorgaki, anenemy of theirs, and requesting them to meet himand concert measures accordingly. Kitzo (Christ's)the elder of the brothers, fell into the snare,but not without having taken the precaution towrite to his brother, desiring him to remain atsome distance, that they might not both meetBekir Aga together. Bekir, who had foreseenthis, laid his plan so well that he intercepted theX X X 1 1 1 . ]-CTOLI A . 55 1letter. Kitzo, as soon as he saw his brother, exclaimed,"Why did you neglect what I said?we are both lost!" and so it turned out. TheVezir immediately wrote to the Russians, makinga merit of his having chastised the men who hadhad the audacity to carry oft' the family of aperson under their protection, and who had ufcencommitted depredations on travellers passingthrough the channel of Lefkadha ; which in factthey had done.Two years ago the Vezir took a famous Vlak-hiote captain of robbers, Katz-Andonio, one of thegreatest of the Kleftic heroes, and the subject ofmany a song. He ordered him to name the personsfrom whom he had received encouragementand presents. Antonio very coolly named allthe Vezir's enemies, including the Russians, withwhom the Turks were then at war. The Vezirknew that the robber was rich, and offered tospare Iiiss life for a share of his wealth, but withoutany effect upon him, as he knew Aly too well totrust to his promises. The Vezir then ordered ibislegs to be broken, which was done in the mostcruel manner, in the midst of a crowd of Turks,whom Antonio abused all the while, saying theywould not dare stand so near him if his legs werestill whole, and joking with a relative wbo wassuffering the same torture close by.Bekir lately accompanied a Frenchman, byorder of the Vezir, to collect cattle from the villages,in payment of a debt due by the Pasha forjewels, which having been assigned to the government,or commissary of provisions at Corfu, thei552 MTouA. [chap.garrison was to be supplied in this manner withbeef. The Vezir obliged the Proesti to guaranteehis payment of the cattle to the owners, allowingthe former to deduct the amount from their accountswith him. Between the two, the poorowners of course are in a bad way.St. Elias, two miles to the southward of Stamna,is distinguished from the tjifthk of the same nameon the left bank of the Aspro, opposite to PaleaMani, by the name of St. Elias at the Almond-trees'. Here I find an ancient cistern, shaped asbelow in the vertical section, and covered withinwith a coat of stucco.The pointed height whichrises above St, Elias commandsan extensive and interestingprospect. The mountain ofTragam^ti, and Mount Bdmisto terminate theview to the northward ; to the right of the latterappears Lygovitzi, the ruined mill above Makhala,and the whole course of the Aspro upwards to thesite of Stratus. From Petit to Mesolonghi arespread the maritime plains, marshes, and lagoons,beyond which appear Kefalonia, Zakytho, and£lis. To the eastward the mountains of Zygosimpede the prospect, and particularly the heightof the Panagliia, which rises from the plain at thehead of the lagoon of Anatoliko, leaving nothingseen of the interior of Italia, except the summitsof Mount Viena. All on this side of the heightof Panagliia is named Kato-Zygos, on the otherApano-Zygos.Xxxii.] .Stolid. 553On a projecting point of the Stamna ridge,half-way between Mastuu and the Aapro, are thefoundations of a fortified Kuifut, nearly of the samesize as those at Skortus and Prodhromo.April 1. — Return to Neokhori, and from thencevisit Magula, a name often attached, as in thepresent instance, to a small height in a plain, andtherefore wherever it occurs a likely place to findantiquities. But there are no such appearancesat this Magula. It is a village of 30 houses, belongingto Yakiib Bey, of Vrakhori, who takes athird of the crop, and makes an allowance for theseed, all the other expences being borne by thecultivators. Wheat and rokka are the only produceof the lands. The eminence upon which thevillage stands is half a mile distant from the leftbank of the Aspro and commands a view of theplains and marshes towards the mouth of theriver.Kurtzolari and Oxia' are conspicuous in thatdirection, the latter immediately to the left of themouth of the Aspro, the former a little farther tothe left ; Mesolonghi, the castle of Petra, andMount Varassova, are also seen from Magula.Kurtzolari is a high peaked mountain falling intosmall hills which form a promontory opposite toOxia, and which on the land side border theAcheloian plain. To the north-west, the heightsreach nearly to the mouth of the river ; at theopposite end are some marshes and lagoons whichextend with small intervals of plain to the westernKovprioXapt. — 'Oieia,554 £Tolls. [Clap.extremity of the great lagoons of Anatoliko andMesolonghi. Cattle feed upon the mountain, butwith the exception of two or three kalyvia thereare no habitations nearer to it than Magula. Inthe plain near its eastern extremity is & desertedconvent of St. John. The Kalughero who managesits property resides at Magula. The Proto-heropoints out to me a place on the last slope ofthe nearest part of Mount Kurtzolari, where standsa quadrangular Hellenic ruin, about the size ofone of the bouses in his village : the wall remainsin some parts to the height of six feet. He knowsof no other Paleo-kastro in that direction.The plain around Kurtzolari and Magula, aswell as that of Katokhi, on the opposite bank ofthe river, furnishes pasture to a great number ofcattle ; 5000 might easily be purchased here at aabort notice : they fatten especially on the youngshoots of the reeds in the marshes of Katokhi andTrikardlio. It is the custom to set fire to thesereeds in the summer, which causes a plentifulsupply of young shoots soon afterwards. Youngoxen are broken in for the plough by tying themby the horn to the old oxen when two years old,and tims allowing them to range about : wheneverthe young one is inclined to be frisky the old onecorrects him with his horn. When fit for labourhe is worth a hundred piastres ; the expence of hisboard and education is about '20 piastres. A cowor ox for slaughter is sold from the pasture to theIslanders for 35 piastres. The cow yields six orseven oket- of butter a year, only producing it foral)out tiiroc months; a buffalo cow yields 30 okesXXXIll.] ACABNANIA. 555of butter, and sella for 80 piastres ; a buffalo forlabour 150 piastres ; a buffalo skin for 40 or 50piastres; the skin of a large full-grown ox 15piastres. Butter 100 paras the oke. The peopleof Manila Lave the care of the greater part of thecattle to the left of the river, those of Katokhi tothe right : the monastery of Ai lanni possesses70 oxen.A Maguliote, describing to me the bad air ofthe place in summer, said, "When you wake inthe morning your head is so large ' ;" holding hisbands at some distance from his ears, as a poeticalmode of describing the waker's sensations. Theybelieve that Katpkhi and Neo-khori, especiallywhen the wind is southerly, are less unhealthy,and that the excessive heat of Magula is causedby the bill being of gypsum, but of which I sawno appearance.April 2. — The Skaloma at the mouth of theAchelous is known by the name of Salitza, or GreatSalitza'. A boat which I had sent for to Mesolonghihad advanced so far on its way to Katokhi,when a quarrel ensued among the boatmen, andthey returned to Mesoldnghi. 1 had just sent somepersons to drag up to Neokhori another boat whichhad arrived at Salitza ; when the regular ferryboatunexpectedly made its appearance, havingbeen sent down by the Vezir, as soon as he hadcrossed the river yesterday at Lepenu. At length,therefore, we are enabled to pass over to Katokhi,oral iq^tpitfvdc, to h^uXi * Tpavi) Sia'Xirj'a.556 Carnatic. [CHAP.where we lodge in the house of the Proestos,which commands a view down a long reach ofthe Athens, The bed of the river is here 400yards in breadth, and now quite full of water,though there has not been any rain even in themountains since the 27th, and the sky has beenwithout a cloud, with land and sea breezes inregular alternation, as usual near the coast insummer.Katokhi ' contains 100 families, and was onceundoubtedly a place of greater importance, havinga large ancient church of St. Pandeleemon ', whichie said to have been built by Theodora, wife ofJustinian. On a rock in the middle of the villagestands a tower with very thick walls, apparently ofthe same age as the church. A sepulchral stone,forming part of the altar in the church, is inscribedwith the name of Portion, the bod of Thuion, incharacters of the best Hellenic times'.April 3, — Four miles to the westward of is Trikardiio, or Trigardhokastro *, the modernname of the ruins of a large Hellenic city,which was undoubtedly Q'lnia, or the city of theCEuiada}, that place having been situated near themouth of the Achelous, on the frontier of Acar-nania towards TEtolia, opposite to the promontoryAraxes ^ and to that part of the Peloponnesuswhich was inhabited by the Dym^i, all whichK«ruxil. ' Thucyd, I. 1, c. Ill; 1. ;t,'Ayant \\avTi\uijiui>', c. 7.V. Inscription, No. 163. rout; yap Oir«i<'nc ti'i^daiT(](Vaptoi', TfynafiCo-i-'aa- avfiftaii-tt jrnpii fltiXnrrai' iiiriMT, Tjiiyapi o-KOtrrjH,!'. rji Ti'piirc Tf/c 'Ai,ii))iar(ac, ripXXXIII.] ACARNANIA. 557data will agree with Trikardho. The city occupiedan extensive insulated hill, in no part veryhigh, now covered with a forest of velani oaks,and which is half surrounded on the northern andeastern, which are the highest sides, by a greatmarshy lake, called the lake of Lesini, or Katoklii.In the opposite direction the height throws out alow projection towards the Acheloiis, which, makinga long semi-circular sweep round it, approachesnearest to the height on the western side. As atCall/don the lowest point of the hill was excludedfrom the walls, which formed a narrow inclosureat that extremity, and presented a very short fronttowards the river. The entire circuit of the fortificationstill exists, following the crest of theheight on the eastern and northern side, whereit falls abruptly to the marsh, but to the westwardleaving a considerable slope on the outside. Atthe highest or north-eastern point of the inclosure,a piece of wall with an adjoining tower subsist tothe height of 20 feet. The former has not a singlerectangular stone in it ; most of the polygons areequal to cubes of 2-i- and 3 feet, and the beautyTpoc AiriXouc avvamoyri ir<piT^r apyfif tou KopiffliaKOv k6\-Nov' Till ^' n«XoiroKvi(iTou fils ij vdXic ■ccrai'TiKpi'rei; ^apaXias rit riir Av^aiuviyyurra f ai>T% bxapxci roiKara rov'Apafov rubric" dirixiiyap oh wXf'iov ixaPo!yh, 1.4, c. GThe distance is100 states, even in a right line.Strabo is still wider of the truth,as he measures 100 stades &omAraxes to the island Doliche,probably the modem Makri.jj stir Ao\i)(a kiItqi KaraOivii^caE nil rqf iKJioX^y tou'AxcKyou iii\ovaa 'Apa&tv ri/cTail 'H\(luv &Kpat irrailoviticaro.-.— Strabo. p. 458.i556 ACAHNANIA. [chai.and accuracy of the workmanship are admirable,twi of this point, the inclosure falls towardswhich extends from hence 5 or 6 milesn( westward to Mount Khalkitza, a rocks steep,an 01 f mountain, which separates these plainsI valley of Tragarae&ti. Next occurs, pronthe same direction, a smalt gate in aretire ' ? of tl " ' ling to a large cavernin r( at the e walls full of water,ver ar and de lich, the sides of thecavern being per is inaccessible. Mjguide from Katokl to me as one of thecisterns of the anti ind adds that there isanother on the opp' of the hill. An inexhaustibleciel i y is, but entirely thework of nature. c the great marsh isBeen extending for ten n 3 in the direction ofKhrysovitn, where it reaches the hits, which areacontinuation of the mountain of Lygovitzi, andwhich unite westward with Khaikhitza, the mountainalready mentioned. About two thirds of thedistance from Trikardho to the eastern end ofKhalkitza rises a rocky island resembling the hillof Trikardho, and equally covered with trees andbushes. On another insulated hill near the northeasternextremity of the marsh, two or three milesfrom Palea Katuna, stands the monastery Lesini,which gives name to the lake. This island containsvineyards, and the monastery has monoxylafor communicating with the shore, where are itsherds, flocks, and cornfields.The marsh is so full of reeds that the water isscarcely anywhere apparent from Trikardho. ex-xxxiii,]ACARNANIAkept at the foot of the hill itself, where from somelarge deep pools issue several streams, which, joinedby others from the northern part of the marsh, formalarge river flowing into the sea at Petala, andwhich thus supplied a most convenient water communicationfrom the excellent port of Pet;ila up tothe very walls of the city. Beyond the cistern thewalls are extant only a few feet above the ground,and the heights are not much above the level ofthe marsh. Having followed them for a short distance,we arrive at what is called, and I believejustly, ro Xi^avt, or the port, the deep water reachingfrom hence to the sea at Petala. The annexeddelineation represents the form of the walls in thispart. Those marked a a a are of polygonalmasonry ; but the towers b b are more regular,particularly the larger, of which the outer face is26 feet long, and still subsists at one angle to theheight of 35 feet. It consists of nine regular andequal courses of masonry of two feel and a halfeach, between the ground, and a narrow projectingS60 acarnama. [chap,course, which was perhaps at half the height ofthe tower when it was complete. In the middle ofthe face of the tower all above the projection hasfallen, hut towards the angle the courses whichcompleted the tower above the projection remain.These courses are not so regular or equal, as thosebelow the projection. But the most remarkablepart of these works is the gate at c, which led fromthe port to the city, and terminated an oblique passagethrough the wall eight feet long, at the endof which there was a further length of one footten inches, where a projection on one side of thepassage corresponded to a retiring on the other.Though the passage is ruined, and the gate halfburied, the elevation of the upper part of the latteris perfectly preserved, and is one of the moat curiousruins in Greece, as it shows that the Greeks combinedthe use of the arch with that of polygonalmasonry. The opening is ten feet six inches inwidth ; the arch semicircular, or nearly so, and composedof nine stones one foot ten inches in thickness,of unequal breadth, but having concentricjunctions. There is not the least reason for supposingthis arch a posterior addition or repair to thesurrounding walls. The upper and under sides ofthe stones on either side of the opening below thearch are indeed horizontal, which gives the gatea less ancient appearance than the rest of thework; but in polygonal masonry, the angles ofthe towers, when they occur, which is not frequently,as well as the passages, are generally soconstructed : with this exception, all the stones inthe gate or near it are either trapezoidal, or haveACAB.VANlA.five or a greater number of unequal sides. Aboutfive feet above the top of the arch a quadrangularwindow, formed by three stones, crowns the ruin,the wail on either side of it having fallen. As thiswindow seems to have been made to give light tothe passage, there was probably another similargate and window at the other end, find the passageperhaps was relied throughout, the soffit of theexisting arch being oblique conformably to thedirection of the passage. At d the rock is cutperpendicularly. In one place above this naturalsubstruction, wiiicli is ten feet high, a part of theconstructed wall remains, formed of five or subsidedstones mixed with irregular quadrangles,fitted to the rock and to one another, with souniform a surface, and a junction so perfect, thatat a little distance it is ditHcult to perceive wherethe wall ends and the rock begins. In anotherplace where the excavated rock is higher, severalparallel constructed masses of masonry project fromthe rock, having the appearance of buttresses ; butas no support could have been wanted to such asubstruction, the intervening spaces were perhapsreceptacles for boats. One of these masses irasdetached itself bodily from the rock, againstwhich it was built, and lies upon the groundbelow.Having quitted the port, my guide conductsme through the woods of velani to the remainsof a theatre which stood near the middle of theancient city, and commanded a view towardsKurtzolari and the mouth of the Achelous. Itdifficult to determine ils exact dimensions or thevol. m. o od562 ACABNANIA. [chap.original number of seats, but the diameter at theorchestra appears to have been about eighty feet ;there are some foundations of a proscenium projectingforty-five feet, and twenty-eve rows of seatsstill exist cut out of the rock. The ruins andwoods of Trikardho are singularly picturesque,and the fine figures and dresses of the Albanians,as they scramble over the ruins or wind throughthe woods, furnish most appropriate accompanimentsto the scenery. The subjoined sketch willgive some idea of the situation if not of the exactform of the city, of which it is impossible to obtaina general view in consequence of the continualobstruction of the trees and broken ground.At a there is a small door crowned with a semicirculararch formed of five stones, and still lowerXxxiii ACARNANIA. 563towards the plain I remarked another door, which,although formed equally on the principle of thearch, has the curve on one side flatter than on theother. Near it is another door, the top of whichis formed in the common Hellenic manner, withstraight converging sides crowned with a singlestone.The walls in general are from eight to ten oreleven feet thick, filled up in the middle withrough materials and an abundance of mortar.In many parts they form curved instead of rightlines, having few towers, but many short flanks ;peculiarities which prove the great antiquity ofthose parts of the work, and lead to the beliefthat the towers where they exist have been asubsequent addition to the original fortification :an opinion which is also supported by the regularmasonry of the tower's, and in some places bythe mode in which they are connected with thewalls. The general use of towers would naturallybe accompanied with straight and with longer linesof wall, and evidently belonged to a more advancedstage of tile art of defence than that in which curves,or broken lines, or short flanks were used. All thetowers which I observed are closed at the hack, andproject a little from the line of wall within. Tiielower part of the inclosure towards the Achelousseems in general of a later date than the walls onthe upper parts of the hill. The circuit appears tomeabout equal to that of Calydon, and not quiteso great as that of Stratus.Genera is one of those cities the name of whicho o 2IJICIl ^664 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.always occurs iu history under that of the people,or CEniadae. Their coins of copper, which bearthe head of the tauriform Achelous, and the legendOINIAAAN, in the Doric dialect, are foundiu great numbers in the surrounding parts ofGreece. The position of (Eniadee comprehendedthe chief requisites of a Greek city : a plainand lake abounding in the necessaries and luxuriesof life ; with a height strengthened bythat lake, by marshes, and by two rivers, whichafforded an easy communication with two pointsof the coast, at a distance sufficient to leave nofears of surprise from the sea. Compared withsuch advantages, insalubrity was a considerationof little weight with the Greeks, as many of theirancient sites attest in Asia, Greece, and Italy. Insome instances, undoubtedly, the abandonment ofthe soil has caused the malaria, to which drainageand cultivation were ani-Ieutly a remedy But itseems impossible that the marshes of OEniadaecould have been drained to any great extent,such is their depth and magnitude. Placedon the right flank of the great line of defencewhich the Achelous afforded to the Acarnanesagainst their formidable neighbours of .^tolia, andof which Stratus protected in like manner the left,Q']niadae was of immense importance to the Canadiankoivov, though its situation at the extremityof that province, in an angle of the maritime plainthe greater part of which belonged to .^tolia, andpossibly the impatience of some possessions on theaeolian side of the liver caused it sometimes toXXXIII.] ACARNANIA,be politically dissevered from Acamania or evenin alliance with the italians.Twenty-three years prior to the Peloponnesianwar, (Eniadte resisted Pericles, who attempted toreduce it with a small Athenian squadron fromPagsB in the Regards, and who appears to havebeen induced to attack it as being the only city inAcarnania which was adverse to the alliance formedsoon afterwards between Athens and Acarnania'.Its policy was the same in the third year of thePeloponnesian war, when Portion with the Athenianfleet from Naupactus, made an incursion intoAcarnania for the purpose of ejecting the adverseparty from Attacks, Stratus, and some othertowns, but was deterred by the season from makingany attempt upon CEniadas, which in winter wastoo well protected by its marshes and inundations.In the following year, his son Ausonius, havingsummoned all the Acarnanes to his assistance,sailed up the Bachelors towards (Eniadie withtwelve ships from Naupactus; but his expeditionhad no other result than that of laying waste theterritory. It was not until the eighth year of thewar that the city was compelled by the otherAcarnanes, assisted by the strong fleet whichDemosthenes then commanded at Naupactus, tojoin the Athenian alliance *.When the /Etolians had increased their powerby the addition of the country afterwards calledj^tolia Epictetus, they became too powerful for theThucytl.i. 1, c. in ; i. 2. ' Thucyd. 1.38. Diodor. 1. U, c. 85; 1. 3, c. 7 ; 1. 4, c.J■S8S ACARKANIA. [chap.Acamanes, and having taken {Eniadse they expelledthe inhabitants, and treated them with suchcruelty that they were threatened with the vengeanceof Alexander the Great, who was divertedhowever hy more important affairs from ever executinghis menace ', Under his successors (F.niadaecontinued to be weak ; for Diodorus informs ugthat in the year b.c. 314, when Cassander marchedinto vEtolia to the assistance of the Acamanes, andheld a council with them on the river CampyluB,in which he recommended them to abandon theirminor fortresses and retire into Agrinium, Stratus,and Ithoria, the (Eniadse took refuge in the last ofthese places '.In process of time the italians obtained possessionof all the frontier towns of Acamania, and retainedthem until they were liberated by Philipson of Demetrius, in the first year of the SocialWar' B. c. 219. At that time Stratus, PhteteiiE,Metropolis, and (Eniadae, were all in the hands ofthe j^tolians. Philip, after having taken Embracesin the marshes of Ambracia, marched by Charadeto the Strait of Actiuvif which he crossed atPrevyza. Continuing his marli through Carnalduring which he «'as joined by 2000 Canadianinfantry and 200 cavalry, he took the city ofPhoetei'iB by capitulation after a siege of two days.On the following night lie captured or slew 500italians, who were marching to the relief of theplace in ignorance of its having fallen, and thenIDiod.ir. 1. 18, .:. B— .1. 19, c. 6Inrcli. in Alexaiid,Vol. I. p. 156.■' Polyb. 1-I.e. 03.moved into the Statics, where, encamping uponthe Achelous at a distance of ten stadia fromStratus, he laid waste the country, without meetingwith any resistance. From thence he marchedto Metropolis, and having burnt that city, whichthe jEtoliana abandoned on his approach, retiringinto the citadel, he then crossed the Achelous, ata distance of twenty stades from Conope, in theface of a body of italian cavalry, who retreatedinto that city as soon as his infantry had forded theriver. The king next attacked Ithoria, a fortressstrong both by art and nature, and which Stoodexactly in his road. The garrison deserted theplace as he approached, upon which he levelled itwith the ground, giving direction also for all theother castles ' in the neighbourhood to be destroyed.Having passed the Straits', he met with nofurther opposition, and could permit his army tosupply itself at leisure with every thing which thecountry afforded. Tn approaching (Eniadaj hetook Pabulum which was well built, but onlyseven stades in circuit ; and having totally destroyedit, floated down the materials to (Eniadae.On his approach the ^tolians retired into thecitadel but soon deserted it, upon which Philiptook possession of the place, and from thencemarched into the Calydonia, where he reduced acertain fortress named Eleens, which Attains had■f> T,)y woptiifi A( Arcana. [^CHAkJrecently strengthened and stored for the use of theitalians. After having ravaged the Calydonia,Pliiiip returned to (Eniadse, where he made use ofthe materials which he had brought from Pseaniuoi ■to fortify the citadel aud arsenal, uuii to unite -Ithe whole in one inclosure. But before he hadcompleted this work, intelligence of a threatenedirruption of the Dardan into Macedonia inducedhim to return home.(n the year B.C. 211, Cenis was taken by theRomans, under M. Valerian Ltevinus', and givenup, together with Nasus (perhaps Petala), to the^tolians, who were tien their allies, but it wastaken from them and restored to the Acarnaniana22 years afterwards, by the conditions of peace,which were dictated by the senate of Rome at the ■close of the Aeolian war ^. AFrom the slight resistance made by the ^tolians 'to Philip, and his subsequent fortifying of the city,it would seem either that the old Acarnanian fortressbad not been very strong, or that the yEtolianshad very much neglected its repairs. The harbourwhich Philip undertook to join to the city whenhe was interrupted by the news from Macedonia,was probably on the Achelous, near the metokhiof Panaghula, for the narrow inclosure of thispart of the town advancing towards the river,seems to indicate that the (Eniada; had a machinthat situation. It is scarcely possible to con-liv.I. L»(i, c. 21. Polylj. ' I.iv. I. 38, c. 11. Polyb.ACABNANIA,clive that that which is now called the humani,although it had a water communication with theharbour of Petala, could have been the placeintended liy the historian, as it is immediatelyunder one of the strongest parts of the height,which could not have been excluded from theoriginal fortress, and where the work bears evidenceof a remote antiquity.Thucydides in asserting that (Eniada> could notbe besieged in winter on account of the marshes,caused by the inundation of the Achelous, seemsto afford support to his own opinion as to therapid accumulation of soil at the mouth of thisriver ', since although the present season is nearlythat in which the waters are at the highest, thereis nothing to prevent an army from marching fromKatokhr, and investing the walls in more thanhalf the circumference, whence it would appearthat the surrounding plain is more elevated nowthan it was in ancient times. The increase ofpiny it UttSov opovc Sid AoXit-■flac Kali 'Aypauy nal 'A[i<pi\6-Xuy ,i itt ■J, liruBiv fit irapd Srpci-Tur xdXiv, «c BdXaaaav Sit^iutaiiToit wipiXilird^uy, &wopoyiraiil Veto roS i/Daroc iy j^nfii^nOTpaTcitiy, Kilvrui it cai riiyyfiauii' rus 'Ejfiydiuiy at iroXAiiiKarayrixpi Oiyiaiur, rois'A)(i\^OV rwf lajioXioy oiiiyclrij(mioaC uirrt fJC/nc uf I'lTOTfi^oc, Tpoo^oi a'ei, nai tibiTail yi/aiiiy ai Jiirelpuivrai' jAjrijOE Kai wdaui obK it tioW^ rii'iQv yjfiyf Toro gravity' to rtydp ptiifid lOTi fiiya Roi ironictea! doKcpiiv, a1 re rljaoi jrvicralKai fiXXr)Xaif ries wpotr^uimais,rji fiji aKt&dryvaOai, oiiyttafioiytyyoyrai, itapaWat I'oi oiitara frroI^OK Ktiiitvai oiic'i')(ovaai liiOfiac Sii'<^ovc touvSifroi; is TO itXayoc' tpij/joi Z'ob fitydXai — Thucyd.1. 2, .102.568 ACARNANIA. [Chaprecently strengthened and stored for the use of the^toliana. After having ravaged the Calydonia,Philip returned to (Eniadse, where he made ok <tfthe materials which he had brought from Pseanininto fortify the citadel and arsenal, and to unitethe whole in one inclosure. Bat before he hadcompleted this work, intelligence of a threatenedirruption of the Dardan into Macedonia inducedhim to return home.In the year b.c. 211, (Eniadee was taken by theRomans, under M. Valerian Leavings ', and givenup, together with Natus (perhaps Petala), to the^tolians, who were then their allies, but it wastaken from them and restored to the Acamaoiam22 years afterwards, by the conditions oi peace,which were dictated by the senate of Rome at theclose of the ^tolian war *.From the slight resistance made by the ^toliansto Philip, and his subsequent fortifying of the city,it would seem either that the old Canadian fortresshad not been very strong, or that the ^tolianshad very much neglected its repairs. The harbourXXXIII.]ocivc that that which is now called the limuni,although it had a water communication with theharbour of Petala, could have been the placeintended Ijy the historian, as it ia immediatelyunder one of the strongest parts of the height,which could not have been excluded from theoriginal fortress, and where the work bears evidenceof a remote antiquity.Thucydides in asserting that (Eniada; could notbe besieged in winter on account of the marshes,caused by the inundation of the Achelous, seemsto afford support to his own opinion as to therapid accumulation of soil at the mouth of thisriver', since although the present season is nearlythat in which the waters are at the highest, thereis nothing to prevent an army from marching fromKatokhi, and investing the walls in more thanhalf the circumference, whence it would appearthat the surrounding plain is more elevated nowthan it waa in ancient times. The increase ofir(oc xai 'Aypavy mi 'Ap^Xo-jfuc •■ol Std TOv 'AnaprariKovritiov, (ifwOiv (liy rapt Srpil-rur wuXi)', tac OaXaaaav Ctc£icicTap" Oifiaios rai nj x-dXivaitTott riptkifiydl^ut, HiropovOTpaTlvciv, Kfirrai ci Roi Tuyyiiaui- Tur '%y(fniluy al icoSXaiKaramtufiv Oinaiuy, rou'Ayi\^ov Tvv ixfioXiy oiiciy<iTixpu«ar &aTi fiiyac iii !•TOTiifiof, rpoa^ol Ufiriiv vi/aair al ^jrilpv,li Nul irdam oW iy irony jiyiay yifiorif toto ruBiiy' to tiyap ftvfiii ivTt fiiya cai roXvKoX CloX<po»', q" Tt y^rroi wnyaitat AXAqXaic r^j ■wpov\iia(ut,ry )if vtfOivrvilBat, iniyhtafioiyiyyoyrai, rapaXXiii tai ohi-jfovaat tiiOciat iiCZovc rriiivcnroi !£ ro wiXaytif ipijfiot coil fi€yti\ai, — Thucyd.I. 2,.102.£70 ACARNANIA. [Chap.soil, however, cannot be eo rapid as the ancientsimagined ; indeed, it is obviously slower than atthe mouths of many other rivers of Greece. Strabodescribes CEniadae as 70 stades above the mouthof the river \ which ia more than the distance ofTrikardho from thence in a direct line ; and Pausanias,who wrote six centuries after the Athenianhistorian, shows the failure of the earlier predictionsas to the Echinades, by his remark that they werenot yet joined to the continent, which he absurdlyendeavours to account for by the desolation of^tolia^ But it is evident that Thucydides wasnot very well acquainted with the locality. Hesupposed the marshes around the city to havebeen caused by the Achelous alone, and takes noother notice of the great expanse of lake or marshon the northern side of (Eniadm, which is permanent,which afforded a much greater protectionto the city than the Ackelous, and which has noconnection with that river, being formed entirelyby subterraneous springs, and by superficial torrentsfrom the hills, and having an outlet to thesea by a river totally separate from the Acliclous.Herodotus goes so far as to state, that half theEchinades had been united to the mainland bythe Achelous'. The only heights however nearthe coast, which have any strong appearance ofhaving undergone this change are, one which isStrabo, p. 4.iO, v. sup. (siege iq BdKatranp rciif 'Ej^'TO-p, 52(i. lady riiavif Trie fjftiactiQ tjlijPiiiisan. Arcade. c. 24. fiirfipoi' irtiroi'ijKt. — Herodot.tai out fldffra 'AxtXyou' 1. 2, c. 10.XXX in.] ACARNANMA. .OTIseparated by a narrow harbour from the island ofPetala, and that of Kurtzolari, similarly situatedwith respect to Oxia, between which and thesouthern foot of Kurtzolari is the port of Strokes,so named from three rocks near the shore, andwhich is well sheltered from the west by Oxia.There cannot be much doubt that Kurtzolari is theancient Artemita, which the poet Romanus coupleswith the islands Oxeiee, and which Artemidorus,Demetrius of Sceptic, and Pliny, attest to have beena peninsula in their time '. During two thousandyears, therefore, the coast has undergone littlechange, for Artemita is a peninsula as it was then,and Oxeia, though separated only from the shore bya strait of half a mile, is still an island. The pluralform of Those in Homer, and that of Oxeise, whichItiyti 'ApTifura' .But notwithstanding the distinctionof Stephens, the poetprobably alludes to the peninsulaArtemita, which traditionrecorded to have been once anRai Ij Ttparepov ce 'AprifiiTaXtyiificut, filia Tur 'Ejjirtieiui'rtitiiiy, tiTupoQ yiyon. KaiJiXXa{ it tUv slept tuv 'A^^iXyovvriolSuy TO avrh nffoc fli 'AprtfiirQ eirt'/laXAov.Stephan. in Aprtfiira.(Demetrius Sceptics, sc.) ra-oily,IV TTJz i"'" row jroro/ioiir po(r;(iiiriuc row vtXiiyovQ.-^Strabo, p. 59.Amnis Achelous e PintoAliens, atque Acamaniain ab^tolia dirimena, et Attemitaminsula assiduous text insectscontinent! annectens. — Fain.Hen. 1.4, c. 2.572 ACARNAMIA. [Chief.continued to the latest period of antiquity, and ueven now employed to comprehend Cremona andMakri as well as Oxia, may possibly have had itsorigin in the fact of Kurtzolfiri having once beenan island, though it so much resembles anislaadfrom the offing, and is so exactly of the same formand nature as the neighbouring Oxta, that theywere naturally coupled together in the nomenclatureof mariners, and the expression vq<roi 'O&mmay easily have obtained, although one of themwas a peninsula.Strabo in stating, without any accompanyingremark, the conflicting opinions of Artemidorusand Apollodonis, who wrote about a century beforehim, as to some of the places on the ^toliancoast, leaves great reason for supposing that hehad not himself seen this part of the country. Itis not surprising, therefore, that although he mayhave been generally well informed as to the namesand order of the places on or near the shores ofAcamania and ^tolia, he has failed in a moreprecise description of them. This in particularXxiii.] ACARNAKIA,lakes he distinguishes four: — 1, Melite, or thelake of CEniadae, which was 30 stades loii^ and20 broad. 2. Cynia, which was twice as muchhotly ill length and breadth. 3- Uria, which wasconsiderably smaller than either. 4. A large lakenear Calydqn, belonging to the Romans of Patrie.He adds, that Cynia communicated with the sea,but that Melite and Uria were separated from itby land half a stadium in breadth. There aremany difficulties in applying this description. Inthe first place, Melite, or the lake of (Eniadce,which we cannot suppose to be any other thanthat ofTrikardho, or Katokhi, is much larger thanStrabo asserts, and in his order of places fromwest to east, it ought to have occurred beforeinstead of after the Achelous. Again, if wesuppose "the large lake near Calhoun" to havebeen that of Bokhori, and consequently the lagoonof Anatoliko to have been Cynia, and that ofMesolonghi Uria, the dimensions which Straboassigns to Cynia will indeed be tolerably correct,but Uria ought to have been described as muchlarger instead of smaller than Cynia. Or if wesuppose the lagoons of Anatoliko and Mesolonghi,which in fact are but one lake, to have been theCynia, and Uria to have been the lagoon of Bokhori,Strabo 's dimensions of Cynia will thenbe not half the reality ; and where in that caseare we to look for the lake of Calydon ? Uponthe whole, setting aside the numbers as beingalways the most questionable part of the ancienttexts, and as relating in this instance to dimensionswhich may possibly have changed since tbin- —JA€ARNANIA. [cHAP,time of Strabo, I am inclined to believe that themarsh of Trikardho was Melite, the lagoon ofAuatoliku Cynia, that of Mesolonghi Uriah andthat of Bokhori the lake of Calydon, which belongedto the Romans of Patrie, and which is mentionedby the gastronomic poet Archestratus asproducing the labrax in great perfection'. It wasthe same perhaps as the Onthis which Nicanderconnects with Naupactus Rhypeeum and a loftymountain. The island of Doliche, which Strabosupposed to be the Dulichium of Homer, appearsto be the same which now bears the synonymousappellation of Makri, or Makrj', derived from itslong narrow form ; for it lies exactly as Strabodescribes Dolicha, opposite to (Eniadce and themouth of the Ac/ielous, though its distance fromthe promontory Araxes is almost the double ofthat which he slates.The march of Philip to CEniadje throws somelight on the relative situation of several Canadiantowns. PhoeteiEe, the first which he took,seems evidently to be the same place which inthe text of Thucydides is written Phytia. WhenEurylochus, the Spartan, whose movements fromDelphi through Locris to Proschium in iiiltolia Ihave before had occasion to refer to ', movedfrom the latter place towards Amphiiochia, heAp. Athen. 1. 7, c. 17.Nicaiid. ap. School. NifiiHd. Tlieriac. v. 214.■' Sec vol. II. p. (>i.5.xxxii.]ACARKAMIA.crossed the Achelous to the left of Stratus, passedfrom the territory of Stratus into that ofPhytia, then by the frontier of Medeonia into thedistrict of Linger, from whence he entered theAgrais ', As Stratus was the only city whichthe Acamanes had not abandoned, it is highlyprobable that Eurylochus left it aa far on hisright a^ he conveniently could ; in this case hisroute would exactly lie through the valley inwhich the ruins at Porta are situated. Supposing,therefore, LimiKBa to have been at Kerva-sara, we may infer from this passage of Thucydides,that the city which stood at Porta wasPhytia (Phceteue), and the ruins near Latinathose of Meteor.And this situation of Medeon accords with theoccurrence of its name in history on two otheroccasions. In the year B.C. 231, the v^tolianspdv avTtiv, if apioTtp^ ^* ")''/iXXqc ' AKapyaylav' sai iit\-06yTts ri!' ZTpariuv yvv, «x""povf ein rqc 't'lTi'as Kai aJflifM(2(w>«c fop' tox"'"''' '"■"">iui Aififalat tai i-ti^iaav tes'Aypaluy, oVKin 'AKapyavias,fiiXiac ^t iKfii/n. — Thucyd. 1, 3,c. 106.Stc'phanuB (in *oiria) showsBat the name is correct in thetext of Polybius, for he adds,that it was derived iron Phce-thus, son of AlcmfEon. It isfurther confirmed by an inscriptionwhich 1 copied at Punta,but iron which we learn alsottiat the gentile was not ^oi-riEuc, as Stephens and Polybiusmake it, but JiainiJi', likeAcaman. Poets is not to beconfounded with Phytteum,which, as I have already remarked(Vol. I. p. 155.) wasan ^tolian city, not fur fromThere's, lying on the right ofthe road which led to that cityIron the ford of the Achelous,near Stratus.676 ACABNANIA. [Chap.having subdued several towns in Acarnania, buthaving failed in persuading the Medeouii to jointhem, laid siege to Medeon, and had reduced itto great distress, when they were suddenly attackedby 5000 illyrian, sent in ships to thecoast near Medeon by Apron, king of illyria, fromwhom they had been hired by Demetrius II. kingof Macedonia, for this purpose. Landing at breakof day, either at Lutraki or at Kervasarii, theyattacked the vEtoIians, and assisted by the ,defeated them with great slaughter, takingtheir camp, arms, and baggage ', The oilier occurrencewhich illustrates the position of Medeonhas been already referred to'. It happened in theyear b. c. 191, when Antiochus marching fromNaupactus by Calydon and Lysimachus to Stratus,I there met the ^tolians as well as his own army,which had crossed j^tolia from the Maniac gulf.He then proceeded to bring over the Acarnanes,and to attack those who refused to join him. Hesurprised Medeon, and from thence moved forwardto Thyrsus, but retired upon hearing of the arrivalof the Roman fleet at Leucas \It is probable that Metropolis occupied the hillof Lvgovitzi, for the march of Philip seems clearlyto show that Metropolis was to the right of theAchelous, nearly opposite to Conope. This situationof Mi'tropolh, therefore, accords with thoseof Phii^lcifi; at Porta, of Stratus at Surovigli, andof Conope at Anghelokastro. Tiie steepness andXXXIII.] ACARNANIA. 577altitude of the hill of Lygovitzi explains theking's disinclination to lose any time in attackingthe iEtoltans, when they retired into thecitadel after having abandoned the town, and theordinary ford of the Achelojis was exactly in hisway from thence to Conope.Itkoria having stood below Conope in the anna,or straits of the Achelous, which were formed onone side by the extremity of Mount Zygos, andon the other by the heights and forest of Manina,probably stood at or near St. Elias, nearly oppositeto the ruined town at Palea Mani , I havebeen informed, indeed, that some vestiges of aHellenic fortress actually exist at St. Elias. Pa-annum1 conceive to have been the ancient sitebetween Mastuu and the Aspro. Although Polybiusdoes not remark that Philip recrossed theAchelous between Conope and (EniadsB, it is(evident that he must have done so, Qjlniadaahaving been upon the right or Acarnanian bankof the river, and the Macedonians having, asPolybius distinctly asserts, crossed it between Metropolisand Conope. But the historian is equallysilent as to a third passage of the river, whichwas unavoidable when Philip proceeded from(Eniad^ to the Calydonia.The Achelous below Katokhi flows for the distanceof two miles in the direction of Kurtzolari,Bnd then takes the turn towards Petala, in whichit approaches Trikardho ; from thence it againbends towards Kurtzolari, and joins the sea about.two miles to the north of Oxia and the entranceIII. p pI[chap. Xxxiiiof the channel between that island and Kurtzolari.The plain which extends from Trikardho to thesea, consists of fertile soil, and though not marshy,except in some places near the shore, is veryitlittle cultivated.