TRAVELS IN NORTHER GREECEMDCCCXCKimmLONDON :OILBBBT ft aiTinOTOK, miKTEM,•T. iOHK's BaDAEX.OXFORDVI PREFACE.appear trifling, and may have given to those whichare left no more interesting character than that ofa memoir in aid of history, serving also to exemplifymanners and language, in which little or nochange has yet been effected by the new politicalstate of a part of Greece.Ancient history and geography having been theAuthor's chief objects, their illustration occupiesa large portion of the work ; and, in consequenceof its foi, the remarks upon them are introduced,I must confess, with little observance of oi*der orconnexion. The only remedy for this inevitabledefect was a copious Index. The opinions on thosesubjects were generally formed upon the spot, ona careful examination of the ancient testimonies,by means of portable editions of the works whichmore particularly treat of Greece, or by extractsfrom others, made previously to the several journeys.It has indeed happened occasionally, that anew light has been thrown upon such questions byauthorities of less frequent occurrence, to which Ihad no access when in Greece ; but in these casesI have not thought it necessary to refer to thecircumstance when citing the author, as it has noPREFACE. Vlleffect upon the conclusion, and cannot be of anyinterest to the reader.The general map appended to these Volumes hasbeen constructed like that which accompanied my^^ Travels in the Morea," from the measurement of agreat number of angles with the sextant or theodolitefrom every eligible station, which was accessibleto me, no opportunity having been omitted ofobtaining a complete triangle, when circumstancesadmitted of it. In applying these geometricalobservations, I have had the benefit of some valuableinformation from John Hawkins, Esquire, ofSignor Park, in Sussex, who has had the kindnessto communicate to me some important angles measuredby him from the summits of the mountainsOssa and Plumy and from two other stations inthe eastern part of Thessaly. The coast-line hasthroughout been copied or corrected from theAdmiralty surveys, executed under the direction ofCaptains Smith and Copeland, of the Royal Navy,of which those made under the orders of the latterofficer are still unpublished. For this assistanceI am indebted to His Majesty's Hydrographer,Captain Beaufort.Till PREFACE.In the interior country, the Journal will sufficientlydistinguish the parts examined by me, fromthose in which the defects of distant or partialobservations could be supplied only by such oralinformation as can be gathered from an ignorantand uneducated people. It is scarcely necessaryto add, that in these parts the map is to be consideredonly as a first approximation.ftMany circumstances of no public interest haveretarded the appearance of these volumes, far beyondmy wish and intention. The delay, however,has afforded me the means of marking on the mapthe boundary-line, which, for the present formsthe continental frontier of liberated Greece.London,December 1835.CONTENTSOPVOLUME I.CHAPTER I.FIRST JOURNEY.Epirus.ProbArrival on the coast of Albania — ^Avl6na» Atdon — Kanina — ^Eri-kh6» Rheum — River Celydnnu — Sion Island, Season — Acre'veranda — ¥til6BBL,Pakuiui^Aapn Ruga — Cord — FortySaints,Oneibetimtf or Anckiasmiu — Nfvitza — D^vino — Moriens —Theriakh&tea — Argh7T6ka8tro — Valiant Khan — Libovo —Tepel^ni — Aoi Stena — ^Bantza — Course of the Visa belowTepd^i — Family and Court of Aly Pash ICHAPTER II.XPIBUS.Return from Tepel^ni — Liz4ti — Steps — Dhryndpoli — RiverB^txa — Kaxdhiki— The Gulimldhes— Zuldti— Pros of Skar-filia— S^tza— PaleavK— D^vino— Finiki. PiUmtce— Ci9»tefeof Phcmioe bff the B^friant — H^icramim — Antigoneiaia — PhanoieAlma — HadriancpoUa — Dry tiuipoftf— The Argyrini — Sailfrom the Forty Saints to Port Palermo — Ltikovo— Pik^mes —Sopot6 — Kieper6 — Chimera, CAtfiutra— Khimdriote towns :their troops manners, &c. — Return by sea to the Forty Saints-^Hezamili — ^Tetrtoisa — Cassiope^ Pontius — The Livluri orfishery — Buihrotmn j port Pehda — Lake, river, bay, anddistrict of Vutsdndrd— Lake Riza — Geography of the coast ofJSjptrM opposite to Cord. 56X CONTENTS.CHAPTER III.SECOND JOURNEY.stolid.PAQBLanding at Var4880va — Galatia — River Evenus — Bokhara — Cahf-don, Chalcis, Tiq)hias8us, Mania -— Mesolonghi — Pleuron,Prosckium, Pylene — Khier&sovo — Mount Zyg6», Aracynthus —Ston-gambo — Vrakh6ri — Chorography of Karlili — Kdvelo —Vlokh6 — Thermo — Mount PoMstolicum — River Ermitza —Zap&ndi — River Aspro, Aches — Stratus — Lepenti — GestureofThermus by Philip son of Demetrius — Metapa, Conope, Lysi-mamma, Olenus, lake Syria, Acre, 7HcAofit«fft, Phyt€Bum, Agri-num,Thestia 106CHAPTER IV.ACARNANIA, BPiaUS.Departure from Lepenti — Kekhreni&tza — Kekhrenid — AmvrakiiSparto — Stanu— Kervaaard — Spartovtini — lamina — Lutr&kiBalimbey — ^V6nitza — Punta Action — Pr^vyza — Port CathyEx Venetian places — NicopoUs — Mikhalltzi^ MU of ApoUo"^Sail from Pr^vyza to Salaghdra — Artaa, Afnbrada — RiverArachthus — Siege qf Ambrada by Fulfjvus — Anibracus^^CrcaieiaOrbits 167CHAPTER V.EPIRUS.Route from Artaa to loftnnina— Mariti— Khanopulo— Striving—Kometz&dhea — Koliddhes — ^Muliand^Pendepig&dhia— HarlemMount Oiytsika •— Pcstd — Ai Dhimitri — lo&nnina — Departurefor Suli — Rapsista— Varnishes— Tervitsiand — RiverLaki6tiko — Romances— Suli— Kughni— Kuki6 Ai DhondtoSamoniva— Kiltfa— Bira or Trypa— The Hill of Lightning-mountainof Takuritee—Klistira— River Acheron — Fanfiri—Glyky— Wars of the Suliotes — Departure from Kififa — Avariko— Seritzian&— Zerml—- Zerlia — harass— Kutzandpulo — KamaHna—Z&longo— Ruins of Cassope — Luro— Rants — Lflovo—River of St. George— Aqueduct of WtccjpoKf— St. George—Koli4dhe8—Pendepigidhia— Return to lodnnina 218CONTENTS. XICHAPTER VI.Epirus, MACEDONIA.PageAncient remains near Dhramisitis — Kalarjftes — Syrdko — VilizdMatztiki — Mount Kakardhista — Prospect from the summit —Departure from Io4nnina for Grevend— Dhrysko — DhipdtamoG6tzista — Khrysovitza — TriaKhdnia — Metzovo — Beratdri —Pros of Djanktirtara — Mount Citium — March of Perseus fromEttmeia to Stratus — Mild — Kranid — Kieper6 — River Venetian— Greene — River Vistdtza, or Inj^ara, Haliacmon —Si&tista — Klisifra of Sidtista — Sarighioli — JS^rissa — Camps qfSc^no and Domitius 263CHAPTER VII.MACEDONIA.River Pramdritza — > Sita — Sis&ni — Mount Sini&tziko^-Bog-liatzik6— Anaselitza — Bobdshti — Smighes — Kastoria — LakeCeletrum — Krdpista — Zelog6sh — Kapesnltza — De vel —Biklista — Klisdra of Tzangdn — Pli&ssa — Korytzd — Candia^Vot8k6p — Mo8kh6poli — Livdhari — Rivers Khelidh6ni andDev61 — Mounts Ostrovltza, 'Opari, L^nia — IHishari — Kom-m^o-lithiri — Dombr^ni — Mount Tom6r — village of Tom6rTomoritsa — Descent to BerILt — River Uz^mi — Bert, orBeligiid — ^Vezir Ibrahim — Mount Spire — Antipathy 316CHAPTER VIII.ILLYRIA, Epirus.From Ber4t to Apologia — Plain of Topaiti — Vakop61i — dotards— Ldari — Stairs— River I^itza — Radostin — Monasteryof P611ina — Poghiani — Apologia — Amantiaia, Bills, NoricumBivesnAouspCelydnus, and Poljfonthes — Nymphtsum — Returnto Merit — sand to lo&nnina — River Uzdmi — ^T6tjer — Venak6sMount Trebusin^Klisdra^ilot Stenor^Dtfeat qf Philip by T.Qmncftflf — Mounts Serous and Asnaus — Premedi — Zagoria,Kieperia, Eledsa — ^IJersdva-— Mount Nem^rtzika — Ostanitza—Pyrrhi Castra, and retreat qf PhiKp tkUher — K6nitza— RiversXII ContentsVidfla and Voidhomiti— Mavrov^i— Pog6ghiani— Rav^i —Retreat qf PhiHpflim Pyrrhi Castra to Mom LM^ofh—Sourcesof the River Kalamd— Kalbiki— Lykdstomo— lo^nnina 363Chapter IX.Epirus THB88ALIA.Departure from lo&nnina— Dhrysko — River Artaa— Tria Kh&niaM^tzoYO — Passage of the Zyg6s — Sources of the Salam-vii— Khan Malak^ssi — Khan Kotov&zdhi — River of KlinovoMeters — Kalab&ka or Stages, ^^iitiNii — Illustrations ofancient history — Mount K6txiaka — THkkala, river Lethmu,THceo— Khassii— Kardhiki— Kolokot6— Tsighi6U— GiisanoZarko— River SalamvHa, PdMiiM— AlSfaka — LknaaA^Cran-fionta — River Fersaliti, or Efdpeiu — F^rsala, Phandbu —Vrysid — 6hynek6ka8tro« Poena — Dhomok6, Ukaumaci —Plain of T^ukli—- Xyiiia, lake XyiMM— • AfaJtoc/orett — FurkaDerv^ni — arrival at Zitdni ' 409ADDITIONAL NOTES.Notes Chapter I.-— 1. Biography of Aiy Ptoha 4632. On the Valiant Khan 4973. On Arghyr6 kastro •• 499Note to Chapter IV.— 1. On the plan of NicopoUs by Mr.Donaldson 501Notes to Chapter v.— 1. On Suli 5013. OnPkurga ^.^ 523TRAVELSINNORTHERN GREECE.ERRATA, VOL. LPage 9, note, for Roman read Romaic49, line 15, ^.c/ur Velagrada read Vel^nula108, line 2, 25. p. Ill, 1.5. /w Fidhari read Figaro or Fidhari, ^Unpo\ or^lidpioy112, note 2, line 27, for KoiXd Kill read KoTXo, Kill189, line 6, for North-west read West~ 202, ~ 15, /or Posti1d(is read Kostaki(is303, — 17, /or d>npTtaut»a read tbtaprutuiifa425, — 16, for Void»Wa read Voiv6da432, note 1, for TJtycJrt read Tttyiori4.57, line 7, /or OavfidKov read QavfiaKov. In the note, last line, f/W^ 17.Moriens — Xlienakiiates — ^AignynMuunan^— v ttuave aoimu —Labovo — Tepeleni — Aoi Siena — Bantza — Course of the Visabelow Tepeleni — Family and Court of Aly Pasha.Dec. 9, 1804. — Auhn, which preserves its ancientname in the usual Homaic form of Avlona ^, convertedby the Italians into Valona, is about a mileand a half distant from the sea-beach, and haseight or ten minarets. On the sea side there is atolerable wharf, with an apology for a fort, in theshape of a square inclosure of ruinous walls, withVOL. I. B2 EPIRUS. [chap.towers and a few cannon. The town occupies ahollow thickly grow with olive trees, among whichare some gardens of herbs mixed with cypresses,poplars, and fruit trees. Beyond, are rugged hillsentirely covered with olives, and to the northwarda woody plain extending for a considerable distance,and forming a low shore except just at thenorthern entrance of the gulf, opposite to the islandSazona, where are some white cliffs of small elevationseparated from the plain by a lagoon, containingsalt works and a fishery.Two miles southward of the town rises a steephill, on the summit of which is the ruinous castleof Kanina, and on a ridge branching from it to thesouthward the scattered houses of a Turkish villageof the same name overtopped by two small minarets.Kanina is a name which occurs in the Byzantinehistory ^ It was built upon a Hellenicsite, as appears by some remains of masonry ofthat age among the walls. Not far to the southwardof the height of Kanina, begins a range ofsteep mountains separated only by a narrow valleyfrom the Acrocerauniaj which mountain presentsthe same forbidding aspect on this side as towardsthe sea, and forms a narrow steep ridge, woody,rocky, and terminating in a sharp summit whichcloses the valley about ten miles from the extremityof the gulf. This valley is a part of thedistrict of Khimara, and contains a large villagenamed Dukai, in Greek Dukadhes, below whichat the southern extremity of the gulf is the hare1 Anna Con. 1. i. p. 34. Paris.I.] Epirus. 3hour named Pashaliman by the natives, and PortoRagusa by the Italians, near the mouth of a riverwhich flows from the peak of the Acrocerauniathrough the valley of Dukadhes, Eastward of themouth of the river is a succession of lagoons, inthe midst of which are the ruins of Oricum, on adesert site now called Erikho ' — the last syllable accentedas in the ancient word, and £ substitutedfor O, which was not an uncommon dialecticchange among the ancients. The river of Du-ladieswould seem from Ptolemy to have beenthe Celydnus, although its position does not exactlyagree with his order of names, which places theCelydnus between Anion and Oricum'. PortoRagusa I take to be the Panormus which Strabodescribes as the port of Oricum '.The gulf of Avlona being surrounded, for themost part, by high mountains, is subject to suddenand violent squalls. When the wind blows strongfrom the westward, the road of Avlona is not consideredsafe, and the usual anchorage is underSdzona, the ancient Season, notorious among theRomans as a station of pirates. This island is mostconveniently placed to shelter this great bay justat the mouth of the Adriatic, and affords a safe entranceon either side into the bay ; for the cliffs infront of the lagoons of Avlona, the island itself, andthe cape which forms the extreme point of the Aero-annaComnena writes vttov avrcv 6 TL^vop^iOQ ical rd'lipiX^f p« 34. 389. Kepavvia opi^, &c. Strabo,» Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 13, 14. p. 316.Mara ^ '\iroXkwyiay Bv\- ' Plin. H. N. 1. 3, ad fin.Xiflun) Kal 'QpiKoVf ca t6 wi"b24 EPIRUS. [chap.ceraunian ridge, are all equally bold. The latterremarkable promontory is now called Glossa (perhapsits ancient name), and by the Italians .The depth of the gulf between Sazona andAvlona is from 10 to 15 fathoms, and towards thesouthern extremity much greater, except near Origwhere, as well as near Avlona, the depth is from2 to 4 fathoms. Every where the bottom is a toughmud, deposited from the surrounding mountains.Among a few ships now lying in the road of Avlona,is a Ragusan vessel loading fossil pitch from themine mentioned by Strabo ^ The mountain, at thefoot of which this mineral is found, is about threehours to the eastward of Avlona, and being conspicuousfrom off the coast, is marked in the Italiancharts under the name of Montagne della Pegola-Its real name is Kudhesi. Another ship is fromConstantinople, bound to Palermo with com ; athird, which has been three months from Venice,is of the species of Adriatic vessels called a Pillage,which differs not much from the Manner and Trapniccolo. It has a main-mast of a single stick fromFiume, almost as large as the main-mast of ourship', and twice as long. These vessels makequick passages with a fair wind, but are very unfitto contend with the Etesian breezes of summer,and still less with the equally obstinate and muchmore violent southerly gales in the autumn andwinter. In the month of October, 1802, I made apassage of ten days in one of these vessels, fromCorfu to Trieste, through the Dalmatian islands,> Strabo, p. 316. ' H. M. Sloop Bittern, Capt CorbettI.] EPIRUS. 5touching at several of them in the way. In thepresent season it is not uncommon for them to befour months in making the passage in the oppositedirection between the two ports. During theEtesian winds in summer, instances often occur ofthese vessels putting into the Rhizonic Gulf orBouche di Castro, with a contrary wind, whenthe masters proceed to Venice by land, make anagreement for the disposal of their cargo, and returnto the Bouche before the ship has sailed. Inthe winter the Bocchesi seldom pass their gulf, butleaving a man and boy aboard, join their familieson shore, and there remain till the spring.Dec. 10. — Having sailed out of the gulf in thenight with a light breeze at north, we speak avessel from Alexandria bound direct to Tunis, withpilgrims returning from Mecca.Dec. 11. — At noon at the foot of the Acrocerau-nan peak, on the slope below which stands thevillage Palasa, a name resembling that of the placewhere, according to Lucan, Caesar landed fromBrundusium previously to his operations againstPompey in lUyria *, but which Caesar namesPharsalus'. There can be little doubt that, in. • movitque Ceraunia nautis.Inde rape compare rates atque aequo classesCtirva sequiy quae jam vent fluctuate secundoLapse Palestine ends confixit arenas.Lucan. Pharsal. 1. 5, v. 457.Postridie terram attigit adversaries arbitrator ad meumCerauniorum. Sara inter et locum, qui appellate Pharsa-alia local periculo, quiet lus omnibus navies ad unanactuB stationed et portus incolumibus, milites exposure.omnes tiens, quos teneri ab —Caesar de B. Civ 1. 3, c. 6.6 EPIRUS. [chap.this instance, the poet is more correct than thegreat captain, who was so negligent of geography,(in Greece at least), that he has not named theplace in Thessaly, where he gained the greatestof all his victories : so that this is the only passagein the commentaries where the word Pharsalusoccurs. Ceesar's chief consideration in selectinghis place of debarkation on this coast, was to avoidthe harbours likely to be in the hands of the enemy,and to make himself master of Oricum, Apologia,and Dyrrhachium, before Pompey could arrivefrom Macedonia. Trusting, therefore, to his protectingfortune to carry him through the perilsboth of the enemy and the season, he embarkedseven legions and six hundred cavalry at Brundu-sum, in ships of burthen, for want of any others,arrived on the day after his departure at theCeraunia, where he found a quiet station for theships in the midst of rocks and dangerous places ;and having immediately landed his troops, sentback the ships to Italy the same night. By thispromptitude, Pompey arrived from Candavia intimeonly to save Dyrrhachium. Appian, thoughhe does not specify in what part of the Ceraunianmountains the landing was made, shows that itwas very near to Oricum, for he agrees with CsBsarin representing Oricum to have been taken withina day from the time of the landing ^ : he adds thatCaesar marched by night ; that on account of therugged and difficult country, he divided his forcesinto several bodies, which were reunited at daybreak,and that the Oricii having declared theirAppian. de Bel. Civ. 1. 2, c. 54. — Caesar, 1. 3, c. 11.I.] SPIRUB. 7unwillingness to resist the Roman Consul, thecommander of the garrison delivered up the keysto Caesar, The distance of the site of Oricum fromthe shore below Palasa, seems perfectly to agreewith these circumstances ; and there is in feet asmall harbour below Palasa, though it seemsrather diminutive for the force which Caesar disembarked.The Strata Bianca, so called in the Italiancharts, and known to the Greeks by the synonymAspri Ruga, is a broad torrent-bed very conspicuousat sea, which, originating in the summit ofthe mountain of Passa, descends directly to thesea to the northward of that village. To thesouthward of Palasa is a succession of villages onthe side of the mountain, as far as the entrance ofthe Channel of Corfu, all formerly belonging tothe Khimariote league ; but these, from Port Palerimosouthward, are now in the hands of Alj^ Pasha.Khimara, which now gives name to the Acroceraur-nan range, is a town, a little to the northward ofPort Palerimo, the ancient Panormus, describedby Strabo as a harbour in the midst of the Ce-reunionmountains \The great summit at the northern end of Corfii,named Pandokrdtora, and by the Italians Salvator,is now a conspicuous object to the south by east, anda little to the eastward of it the northern Cape ofCorfu, named St. Catherine. Master and Palmasare in a line ofi' the north west Cape of Corfu,and farther eastward 'OOwvovc (ItaL Fanu)y formingStrabo, p. 324.8 EPIRUS. [chap.an equilateral triangle with the two former. thongs,or Thrones, is an ancient name', and appearsfrom Procopius to have been applied in the pluralnumber to all the three islands*.Dec. 13th to 20th. — In quarantine at Corfu, inconsequenceof the fever at Gibraltar. The quarantineground is a small level space on the shorebelow the gate of the city, which still bears theFrench inscription Porte d'J^ire, but by theGreeks is called the gate of St. Nicolas, from asmall church which, with an adjoining apartment,is the only building on the ground. St. Nicolasis the patron of sailors, and his churches are oftenfound near the shore. His feast-day being on the18th, the. priest and his deacons were employedfor two or three days previously in weaving garlandsof myrtle to adorn the pictures, and in preparingbranches of bay and myrtle to stick aboutthe walls of the church.Dec. 20. — From the quarantine at eleven a. m.I cross over to the Forty Saints, a harbour on theEpirote coast, in an open boat, which carries acargo of oranges and lemons ; these fruits, with figs,rice, and oil, form the export trade of Corfu withthe Skala' of the Forty Saints, from whence arebrought in return, grain, fish, botargo, cattle, andFain. 1. 4| c. 12, School. lean language, and is used inLycopliron. v. 1027, 1034. — every part of the Levant toStephan. in "OOpwvoc. signify a port of trade, from theProcop. de B. Both. 1. 4, largest commercial city, to ac. 22. place where a single magazine2icdXa, in Turkish Iskele, is sufficient for the traffic of thehas been adopted from the Ita coast.I.] Epirus. 9wood. We row over in six hours, against a lightadverse air.Kyr G. Z., to whom I have a letter of recommendationfrom our minister, is collector of thecustoms of the Forty Saints, which is the chiefport of Delvino and its district. Having a sharealso in the fishery of Buthrotum^ he sells fish, bothfresh and salted, and retails wine and other commoditiesimported from Corfu. All these affairsare transacted in a small stone building: three-fourthsof the space within the walls are destinedto the shop and store which are on the bare ground,the remaining fourth, in which he dwells, is separatedfrom the rest by a floor half way up the wall,and a wooden partition in front, having two windowslooking down into the store. Around theapartment are ranged trunks and shelves containingthe collector's property and domestic utensils.Among them are some boxes full of salted jcc^aXoc,or grey mullets, making a powerful addition to thevarious odours, none of them very agreeable, whichare diffused through the apartment. At one endis a hearth, but no chimney, the smoke serving, asit effects its escape through the tiles, to cure thebotai^S or roes of the mullet, which, enclosedin the natural membrane as extracted from thefish, are suspended to the rafters, and after thesmoking will be dipped in melted wax. The befallsis produced in abundance in all the lagoons andlakes of Greece, which like that oiButhrotum have^ avyardpi\oy : the Roman form of the ancient M rdpixa ;literally, pickled eggs.10 EPIRUS. [chap.Ia communication with the sea ; and the botargo isa great resource to the Greeks during the severerfasts, when only a bloodless fish diet is allowed.Dec. 21. — On the northwestern side of the harbourof the Forty Saints are some extensive ruins,situated on a gentle slope by the sea side, at thefoot of the bare rocky hills of which all this part ofthe Epirote coast consists. The ruins are those ofa town of the better times of the Lower Empire.The walls forming an exact semicircle, the diameterof which is the sea beach, are flanked by abouttwenty towers ; and contain within them the remainsof churches, cisterns, and houses. At presentthe inclosure serves as a fold for the flocks of someAlbanians, who have left their native mountains,now covered with snow, in search of pasture, andwho are accompanied by their families ; some livingin tents, others in KoXv^ia or huts of light materials.This is the common practice of the mountaineers ofnorthern Greece, the far larger proportion of whomare Christians, either of Albanian or Vlakhioterace, but the present party are Musulman Lippe,from the mountains near Tepeleni.Between the walls of the ancient town and themodem houses of the Limeni, Skala, or Skiloma \are the remains of a suburb of the ruined town,and close to the houses of the Skala those of alarge church, which has long been in ruins, butstill retains the name of its saint, St. Basil'. Onits southern side are the ruins of a smaller churchof the same date, sacred to St. Nicolas'.r3 Xifxivi, if o'icaXa, or-to ' "Aytoc Batrlktioc.eKakiafxa, * "Ayioc Nc«:<5Xaoc.I]Epirus.The summit of the hill which rises at the backof the Skala is crowned by the ruins of the churchof the Forty Saints, which gives to this place thename of <nrovc *Ay£ovc ^pavra. A village on aheight, separated only from that of the church bya hollow, through which leads the road to Delvingbears the same name, as well as a small squarewhite-washed fort to which there is a paved zig-zi^path leading up the mountain from the Skala. Thevillage was built three years ago by Al Pasha,and is peopled by the cultivators and pastors of theneighbouring plain, from the former of whom, Alj^having lately made the land his own, receives athird of its produce. The fortress was added thissummer : it has two round towers at two of theopposite angles, and within the walls a dwellingfor the bulu-bashi^ The church of the FortySaints is said to have been partof a monastery, but nothing moreremains at present than the ruinedchurch, of the annexed form, whichwas covered with three domes andseven semi-domes.It was evidently coeval with the town below ;though part of the materials of the church, particularlyin the round arches of the windows, areRoman tiles, derived probably from some town of^ This Turkish title, meaningthe head of a military district,is bestowed upon any Albaniancommanding a few soldiers.The Greeks write the wordMTouXovftTTctcy but tic Albanianpronunciation is very likeBilibash.12 Epirus. [chap.an earlier age, which stood on the site of the existingruins on the shore of the harbour. AtKassopo in Corfu, nearly opposite to the FortySaints, are similar ruins of a town not so largeas that of the Forty Saints, with those of a castle,irregular in shape, and having no ruined buildingswithin its inclosure, and which stands on the summitof a hill rising from the shore of the harbourof Kass6po.The heights of the Forty Saints are ruled,sharp, honey-combed rocks of brown marble, witha little soil in the intervals, which bear squills andother plants usual on similar sites in Greece. Atthe Skala, a rough mole incloses a little cotton orbasin sufficient for the use of the small boats whichalone frequent the harbour, though it would beboth secure and convenient for large vessels, werethe commerce of this part of Epirus sufficient torequire them, as the bay has good anchorage andis well protected both from south-easterly and northwesterlygales ; in the latter direction, by a remarkablecape called Kefali ^ which with CapeSt. Catherine, or the northern extremity of Corfu,forms the entrance of the channel from the northward; in the opposite direction the harbour isprotected by the projecting coasts both of the continentand island. To-day, though it blows a galeof wind from the southward, there is no sea inthe port.As there is nothing between the Forty Saints1.] EPIRUS. 13and Port Palerimo deserving the name of a harbour,though there are creeks under the villages ofNivitza, Lukovo and Pik^mes, where small vesselstake shelter and are drawn up on the beach, theForty Saints can alone correspond to the ancientPortOnchesmus, which was the next to the southward ofPanormus, according to Ptolemy as well as StraboIt would seem from Cicero that Onchesmus, inhis time, was a place of some importance, and thatit was the ordinary point of departure from Epirus toItaly, the south-easterly breeze which was favourablefor making the passage, having been called an '.• Under the Constantinopolitan emperorsthe name Onchesmus assumed the form of Anchias^mus, which probably obtained the preference overOnchesmus in consequence of a tradition noticedby Dionysius of Halicarnassus, that the town wasnamed after Anchises, father of eneas '. Anchiseswas a city of the government of Old Epirus,together with Phcenice and Buthrotum ; the signatureof the bishops of Anchises is found tothe acts of the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedonyin the fifth century. The other bishops of Epiruswhose names are annexed to the acts are those ofDodona, Nicopolis, Eurhcea, Phcenice, Indianapolisand Corcyra.Dec. 22. — ^A Scirocco, which detained me yesterday,still continues, but though the gale hasPtolem. 1. 3. c. 14. Stab. nobis flavit ab Epiro lenissimusp. 824. Onchesmites. Cicero ad Attic.Brundusium venial Vii. 1. 7- ep. 2.calends. Decem. usi tu fell ' Dionys. Ant. Rom. 1. 1.citate navigate. Ita bell c. 51.14 Epirus. [chap.abated and the rain ceased, the Agoi&tes, (ItcJiotventuring,) are unwilling to go, and my host willnot take upon himself to oblige them, until someperson arrives from Delvino, who will report therivers practicable. The consequence is, that I amnot only detained this day, but the 23d Declikewise ; for although some horsemen arrivedyesterday, about 3 p.m., who had crossed theriver, it was then too late to depart, and at nightthe rain set in again in torrents with thunder andlightning, penetrating the bare tiles of the collector'sroof, and pouring down all night a blackstream from the smoky tiles. The tempest continuesthe greater part of the day, but the windhaving come to the north promises a change ofweather.The feasts, the fasts, and the fears of theGreeks, are a great impediment to the traveller.During their feasts they will not work ; the fasts,when prolonged and rigidly observed, render themunequal to any great exertion, while timidity isthe necessary consequence of the Turkish yokefollowing long ages of the debasing tyranny andsuperstition of the Byzantine empire. But throughthis unamiable covering the ancient national charactercontinually breaks forth ; to which, in thismountainous part of the country, is added a considerableportion of the industry and activity of anorthern race. Every traveller will occasionallybe disgusted with the meanness, lying, and cowardiceof the people, in the towns and in the partsof the country most frequented by travellers ; butit should be remembered that their vices arise1.] EPIRUS. 16from their condition, that deceit is the only defencewhich their tyrants have left them, and thatsuch defects are greater in proportion to that naturalgenius which is indisputably inherent in therace. They have a proverb, that the sweetestwine makes the sourest vinegar, which is well exemplifiedin their own character by means of amost corrupt despotic government acting upon afine natural genius.Dec. 24.— At 10, a.m., we set out in the rainfrom the Limeni, cross the hollow between themonastery and the village of the Forty Saints, andat the end of three quarters of an hour ford a smallstream descending from Nivitza into the Paula,which is the principal river of the plain of Delvino.The passage of this tributary is so difficult in consequenceof the rain, that there seems little chanceof the main stream being passable. Our conductors,moreover, are ignorant of the irlpajua, or properford of the latter river ; we are obliged thereforeto follow its bank upwards, until immediatelybelow Nivitza we meet a party of horsemen, whohave been making an attempt to cross withoutsuccess. We retire, therefore, for the night toNivitza.The mountain on the mid-slope of which thisvillage stands, is separated on either side by avalley from the rest of the maritime range, and isfortified to the eastward as well by the steepnessof the mountain as by the rapid river at the foot ofit. So rugged is the ascent, and so bad our cattle,that we are two hours in reaching the village fromthe river, the mules having fallen several times16 EPIRUB. [chap.under their loads. The Veadr's Bulu-bdshi, a roughAlbanian Musulman, receives us kindly as thefriends of his master, and we take up our lodgingat the best Greek house in the place. Many ofthe soldiers and inhabitants speak Italian ; one ofthem is son of a major in the Real CacciatoriAlbans of Naples, in which corps he himselfserved many years.Nivitza was once a large and flourishing town,and the most important of the independent Christiancommunities, which then extended along thewhole coast from Buthrotum to Auhn. By meansof the strength of its position it resisted all theattempts of A\^ Pashd to reduce it, until the year1798, when he persuaded the French to conniveat his conveying a body of Albanians in his ownvessels through the Straits; an operation which hadconstantly been interdicted by the Venetians onthe strength of their treaties with the Porte, butwhich was conceded on this occasion by the French,as they were then anxious to conciliate Al^^ with aview to their designs upon Turkey, and little suspectedperhaps the use which he intended to makeof their permission. He landed his troops at theScales of Nivitza and the Forty Saints ; and thebetter to ensure success, made choice of the morningof Easter Sunday for the time of attack, whenthe inhabitants were all disarmed and engaged inprayers. He thus made an easy conquest, notonly of Nivitza, but of two other villages to thenorthward, the possession of which has now givenhim all the coast as far as the town of Chimera.Nivitza and the two villages are now little betterI.] EPIRUS. 17than ruins ; their lands, divided into portions, arenumbered among the Pasha's tjiftliks ; and it is forthe use of those who cultivate them that the Pashdhas built the new village of the Forty Saints,while many of the inhabitants of Nivitza havebeen sent to labour on his farms near Trikkala inThessaly.Dec. 26. — A mile to the northward of Nivitza,on the same mountain, stands Aio Vasili, one ofthe villages which shared the fate of Nfvit^ : alittle below it a ridge which connects the mountainwith the range to the northward, is occupied by asmall square fortress, similar to that of the FortySaints, and which was erected by the Pasha soonafter he had obtained possession of Nivitza. Abouta mile below this castle is the Skala of Nivitza andSt. Basil, called Spilia. The rugged hills belowNivitza, to the eastward, are planted with olivesand vines : the plain produces Mein (maize),kalambokki' (Guinea corn), fascia (kidney-beans),rizi (rice), wheat, barley, and tobacco. Havingdescended the mountain, we cross the river at theextremity of the plain, near the opening where it^ The word jcaXa/xirojciciov not much is raised, and that(derived from its reed-like chiefly for feeding poultry,stem raXa/it, and applicable Mesiri from Mer (Egypt),therefore to every kind of which in this part of AlbaniaHoIcob) is much more com- means maize, is a misnomer,only applied in Greece to inasmuch as the Durra, ofmaize, or Indian com, of which which bread is commonlybread is made in every part of made in that country, is notthe country, than to the Sortie maize, but the (hiinea-gum, or Guinea com, of which com.VOL. I. C18 Epirus. [CIIAP.issues from the mountains : it is not very deep,but extremely rapid, and the stony bed is such aninsecure footing for the horses, that they tremblein crossing it. Both horse and rider must trust tothe guide who walks on foot beside them, supportsboth, and repeats his recommendation to the riderto look at the bank, and not at the water, whichcauses giddiness. I did not experience that effect,but the illusion of appearing to remain stationary,while really moving, was perfect. The sources ofthis river are in the mountains eastward of Chimera,and its course, for the most part, is througha narrow valley, in which is situated Alias.Half an hour beyond the river, we cross the torrentof Delvino, and at noon enter the pass of Delvino,from which the torrent flows. Kyr Christ Kandki,to whom I had letters, happens to be in the country,superintending his vineyards, but I am receivedin his house, and he returns home in the evening.Shelving, or D^vino ', is situated in an openingof the lower ridges of a high range of mountainswhich have a S.S.E. direction. The town is chieflyinhabited by Musulman Albanians, who have eightor ten small mosques. Of Greeks who occupy onlythe eastern suburb called Lake, there are aboutthirty families, ten of which bear the same surnameas KyrJChristo. The Bishop and K. are the chiefmen ; the former, who is now absent, styles himselfBishop of Chimera and Delvino, and is a suffraganof the Metropolitan of lo&nnina. TheTurkish houses occupy the sides of the hills onJ.J Epirus. 19either side of the torrent, for a distance of twomiles, being situated as usual in Albanian towns,at great distances from one another, with a viewto the frequent quarrels and wars among the^opacC) or family alliances, into which all Albaniancommunities are divided. The effects of these,and of a war between the Pasha Aljr and Mustafa,which lasted seven years, have left many of thehouses in ruins. The war ended by putting Al^^in possession of Delving, and sending Mustafa totake shelter in Tjamuria, where he now resides atVakalates, a small town two or three hours eastwardof Butkrotum.At the entrance of Delving, on a conspicuousheight, stands the deserted serai of Selim BeyKoka, a connection of Aljr Pashd, but who, havingtaken part with Mustn't, has not thought himselfsafe here, and has retired to Konispoli, where,however, he still enjoys the revenue of his landedproperty in the district of Delving. A little withinthe opening of the hills, a conical rock, projectingover the ravine, is crowned with a small castle inbad repair. The ground on either side of theravine abounds in springs and streamlets fallingdown to the torrent, and although the most unevenimaginable, bears olives and other fruit trees.The Pasha's palace is a heap of ruins, but therestill remain in the same quarter, on the northernside of the town, some good houses, pleasantlysituated among gardens, in which are orange-trees,cypresses, and poplars. The Christians of Divinomake wine, and comb and spin some importedc220 EPiRus. [chap.hemp into yam, from which they manufactureshoes. Swords too, such as the Albanians wear,are made here, and every part of their musketsexcept the barrels. Below the castle there is amiserable bazar.On account of the difficulty of passing the river,I had no opportunity of examining a Paleo-kastroat Finiki (4^ocvcici|), of which I received information.The name, however, is sufficient to show it to bethePhcenice of Strabo and Polybius, which theformer describes as being near Buthrotum, andwhich the itineraries place exactly in this positionbetween the Acroceraunia and Buthrotum : itstood on an insulated hill, in the middle of theplain between the river of Kaliasa, and another,named Vistiitza, which flows from the northeast,and beyond Finiki pursues a course nearlyparallel to the former river, as far as the lake, intowhich they separately fall.My host complains to me, in the usual style, ofthe hardships which his nation suffers from theTurks, and asks why the great powers of Europe,but particularly the English, will not assist inliberating their fellow-christians. It is not a veryagreeable task to explain, that nations seldom actbut from self-interest, that we have a cruel war onour hands, and that our present policy is to supportthe Turkish empire. The poor Greeks havenot much more to hope for at present from anyother nation. If either French or Russians, intheir military occupation of the country, wereobliged lo derive their resources from it, theI.] Epirus. 21Greeks might find the necessities of a French orRussian general not less fatal to their libertyand property than those of Aljr, whose officers arekept in the best possible order, however relentlesshis own extortion may be. The sentiments of theGreeks as well in this as in other parts of Greecewhich I have visited, show that the conduct of theRussians in the Greek expeditions of Catherine, aswell as in the administration of the PeninsularRepublic, has left a very unfavorable impression :so far from desiring the presence of these brethrenof their church, as might have been supposed, theymuch more commonly bestow upon them the appellationsof KAI^rcc and Tmu. On the other hand, theyseem quite ready to hail the arrival of the French,though they are cautious of giving utterance tothese sentiments, not so much from any fear oftheir own government, for at this moment theyhave perhaps more liberty of speech upon suchsubjects than any people on the continent ofEurope; but from doubts lest they should giveoffence to European governments or their agents,whose influence with the Turks might be fatal toan offending individual. My host admits, thatwere any pretended deliverers to land, there wouldhardly be the Greek who would venture to finishthem provisions, much less to join them, so muchdo they dread the Turkish sabre, and so littleenergy have they to act in their own behalf.Dec. 26. — ^At half past eight this morning webegin to ascend the mountain at the back ofDelvino. Its sides are covered with extensive22 Epirus. [chap.vineyards, yielding a light pleasant wine, butwhich generally turns sour before the summer.The pass leads between rugged and barrenhills, two of the highest summits of the range,until, at half past ten we arrive at the little villageof Kardhikdki, where are the sources of oneof the streams which contribute to form the .Here we fall in with some MusulmanAlbanians, hunting hares with greyhounds of alarge breed. The peasants are ploughing theground, with a light plough drawn by two oxen ;they afterwards break the clods with a hoe. At11.10 a hollow country is on our right, four orfive miles in diameter, surrounded by an amphitheatreof mountains, and watered by severalstreams, which unite to form the Vistritza. Theslopes, although intersected and broken by thetorrents in the most rugged, and wildest manner,are well clothed with vineyards and olive-trees.Having skirted the edge of this basin' as far asthe village of Mordent, we there join the roadfrom Vutzindro, which is hardly passable at thistime on account of the rivers. A little beyondM orzena is a Derveni, or guard-house \ in a spotwhere the road begins to descend into the plain ofAi^hyr6kastro through a narrow opening betweentwo very steep and lofty summits. The descentis long and rugged ; and it is not until 2 p.m.NrcpjScVi. The Greek form Guard-House as well as to theof the Turkish word Derwent Defile,is applied iu Greece to theI.] EPIRUB. 23that we arrive in the plain at the Derveni of ,or Gdibitza, so called from a small neighbouringvillage** Here the opening is no morethan a torrent-bed between lofty rocks. Thewretched mules which we took from the FortySaints move so slowly that the horizontal distancefrom Delvino to this place is probably not morethan 9 geographical miles. Nothing can be lessinviting or picturesque than the present appearanceof the valley of Ai^hyrokastro, though undoubtedlyit presents a very different appearancein spring, as its numerous villages and extensivecultivation show that it is one of the most flourishingdistricts in Albania. Those parts which arenow little better than a marsh in consequence ofthe perfect level, are in summer richly coveredwith corn, maize, and tobacco. Opposite to the plain is about five miles broad, boundedby two parallel mountains of varied surface, woody,and studded with villages in the lower parts, andrising above to steep ridges of calcareous rock, thesummits of which are now covered with snow, andthe bare sides furrowed with white charades, orbeds of winter torrents : along the middle of thevalley flows a river in a direction from south tonorth. Our road on emei^ng from the pass,changes from an eastern to a north-western direction,along die foot of the mountain ; and at theend of three miles we halt for the night, at thelittle village of Theriakhates K The Papas, inwhose house I lodge, is a cultivator of land.24 EPiRus. [chap.holding it of the Musulman lord of the village,who supplies seed and cattle, and takes half theproduce. He asserts that in summer, not onlythe plain is quite dry, but the river also, and thatthe air is not unhealthy. This perhaps is chieflyowing to the situation of the villages on the sidesof the hills. They are for the most part surroundedwith vineyards and a few olives. Oppositeto Theriakhates is the town of Libokhovo^situated, like Delvino, in an opening throughwhich appears a parallel range still higher thanthat which borders the plain, and with a greaterquantity of snow upon it. This high ridgeis called Nem^rtzika'. The pass of Libokhovoleads to Permit, or Premedl, which stands onthe eastern foot of Mount Nemertzika, in the valeof the Viosa. In the hollow country between thetwo ranges behind Libokhovo, and extending fromthence along the mountains towards Tepel^ni, isthe Albanian district of Licentia', in Greek Aiow-rl^flpiay the country of the Atovvr^Scc. These peopleare noted for their skill in the irrigation of land,and the management of aqueducts, and in thatcapacity obtain employment at Constantinople,and in other distant parts of the Turkish empire.To the south of the Liuntzidhes is the districtcalled Pogoniani, or Pogoyani, of which Dhel-vinaki is the chief place ; and to the north-east*Aifiwwxplio^, sound of u in turn. The wordNe/icpr(iica. is derived perhaps from Xoyyoc,^ The italic e is here em forest, with an Albanian sound,played to represent the English1.] EPIRUS. 25ward, that of Zagoria. The Zagoriani inhabitthe banks of a stream, which joins the Viosa betweenKlisura and Tepel6ni.Below Libokhovo, on the skirts of the plain, areseen some buildings where the snuff is made forwhich this valley is celebrated ; and in the midplain, which is here about four miles across, thePapas points out to me a mound near the left bankof the river, which by the description seems to beasmall theatre \ It is now inaccessible, the plainbeing a marsh quite up to the rocks of Theriak-hates. The whole valley is called by the GreeksDeropoli, which the Albanians pronounce Dero-pugh' : the river is named Dhryno, or Dryno, orDrunk, or river of Deropoli. Arghyrokastro, thechief town, contains about 2000 Musulman families; Libokhovo half that number ; in each areabout 100 Christian houses.The road to lo&nnina from the derveni of Grasfollows up the plain of Deropoli to the southward.At a quarter of an hour it crosses a branchof the Dryno, half an hour further another branch ;and a quarter of an hour beyond, the main streamof the river. The road soon afterwards ascendsthe eastern hills, from which many torrents descendinto the river, after having turned some more snuff-mills.It then enters Pogoyani, leaves DhelvindkiDr. Holland visited this present the Italian sound ofposition in the year 1813, and that combination. But it mayascertained that the ruin is be observed, that the Albaniansreally a small theatre, appears generally give this gutturalgently of Roman times. sound to the Greek lambda.The gl is intended to re-26 Epirus. [chaponthe left, crosses ain to the left bank of theDryno, which originates in the mountains aroundDhelvinakiy passes through the valleys of Xerovaltoand Tzerovina, crosses the Kalama near its sources,and from thence proceeds into the plain ofloannina.Dec. 27. — ^At half-past seven this morning wecontinue to skirt the foot of the mountain in anortherly direction, advancing very slowly throughrocky ground, or along the edge of the marshyplain, and leaving several small villages on theheights above us, until ten, when we arrive at thepoint of a low projecting ridge, where the river,wide, deep, and rapid, approaches so near to theheights as to leave only a passage for the road.On the point stands the village of Kuloritza, andon a similar projection, two miles further, thetown of Arghyrokastro.Not thinking it right to visit this place, as Aspasiaand the Kastrites^, or rather a powerfulparty in the town, are at present in a state of mutualconversation, we leave it on the left, and crossinga high narrow bridge of four arches below thetown, halt a little beyond it for twenty minutes ata fountain. The plain here is not more than amile and a half in breadth, and is all in pasture.Arghyrokastro occupies a large space of ground,being divided into separate clusters of houses,which aro defended from one another by deepravines. The mountain on which it stands is bareand deficient in water, and it is difficult to imagine^ oi KaoT^raic*1.] SPIRU8. 27a more disadvantageous situation, except with aview to the interminable disputes among the Albanianfares, for here the hostile families, separatedfrom each other by rocks and ravines, may cherishtheir quarrels for years together without any effectualresult.In the plain between Libokhovo and Arghyro*kastro, the Dryno is joined by the Sukha, whichrises in Mount Nem^rtzika, and after watering thefertile valley of the Liuntzidhes, to the eastward ofLibokhovo, enters the plain through a narrowopening on the northern side of that town. Havingreached a projection of the eastern hills, we coastthem for two or three miles, strike again across apart of the plain, and at 1*15 arrive at a Khancalled Valais, or in the Albanian pronunciation,Valiant, situated on th right bank of a torrentwhich descends obliquely from the mountain intothe Dryno. The Khan' is reckoned five hoursfrom Tepeleni ; the road thither lying along thefoot of the mountain, and over some low heightswhich project from it. Finding it impossible, withsuch cattle as we have, to reach Tepeleni to-night,we follow the torrent at the foot of the easternmountain, which here projects considerably intothe valley, and forms a variety of lower heights.Instead of stopping at Marian', which is at theentrance of these hills, we are induced, in searchof better accommodation, to proceed to Labovo,which is asserted to be only half an hour higherSee a note on Khan Va ' FKapiav^, Ka^yiavti,hare at the end of this volume.28 EPIRUB. [chaponthe mountain. We ascend accordingly by awinding path, which is not the better for beingpaved, as half the stones have been displaced bythe torrents, but see nothing of L4bovo for twohours, nor until we had entered the clouds, whichhave settled upon the hills with a southerly wind,and brought on rain.Aafiiro/3oc, vulgarly pronounced Liabovo, accordingto the guttural sound of the I in Albanian, issituated not far below one of the highest summitsof the range, but in a situation where a more gradualslope than that which we ascended admits ofspace for the scattered houses of the village, andfor some vineyards and fields of kalambokki. Itis entirely Christian, and there are eight or tenchurches, besides those in the detached quarters,for, like the larger Albanian villages in general,Labovo consists of several detached makhalas.They suffered last year from a deficient harvest,and derive no advantage from being near Tepe«leni, as the Vezir Alj^, when he visits his nativeplace, calls upon Labovo among other neighbouringplaces to furnish him with provisions for hishousehold, particularly eggs, poultry, and wood.On the summit of the ridge above Libovo standsTjaiube, in a situation so exposed to storms, thatit is necessary to pile stones and earth upon theroofs to prevent them from being blown away,although composed of heavy masses of stone.From a peak of this ridge, called Strakavetzi, themonastery of Aghio Nam, near Bitolia, is said tobe visible.Dec. 28. — Very soon after quitting Labovo, (atI.] EPIRI7B. 29half-past eight,) the town of Kardhiki, or Gard*hiki, appears over the northern extremity of therange of Arghyrokastro, on a height surroundedby a valley through which the Belitza river takesits course to join the Dryno. The junction ofthese two streams occurs a little below the KhanValiant, between it and a bridge over the unitedriver.The slopes of the mountain of Labovo, as far as theriver Viosa, are well cultivated, and contain manyvillages. One of the largest of these, named Khor-novo \ resisted for a long time the growing powerof A15^ Pasha, when at length, about nine years ago,he .took it, murdered the male inhabitants, andburned alive the Print', who commanded thevillage, in revenge for the ill-treatment whichAly's mother and sister had suffered from thisman and others, when they were made prisoners,by the allied forces of Khormovo and Gardhiki,soon after the death of Aly's father.In something less than two hours we arrive atthe foot of the mountain, on the right bank of theDryno, which, between the bridge of Arghyr6-kastro, where we crossed it, and this place, hasreceived, besides the Belitza and torrent of Va-hare,a contribution much laisser than either froma source at the foot of the mountain about midwaybetween Arghyrokastro and the Belitza, so thathere the river is almost twice as large as at thebridge of Arghyrokastro. The great source justmentioned is said to be the only portion of the\6piAofioQM * Priest in Albanian.30 Barbs. [chap.river permanent in very dry seasons. The streamnow enters a narrow vale between two mountains ;that to the west is united with ridges which incloseon every side the valley of Gardhiki ; the eastern,on which stands Khormovo, is a westerly projectionof the mountain of Labovo. We cross the river bythe bridge of the Subashi^ so named ; which hasthree arches resting upon piers, with arched openingsin them. The middle arch, which is muchthe largest, is pointed at the top, and its height isequal to about two thirds of the span. The roadwayis so narrow and roughly paved, and the structureso high, that it is scarcely ever passed but onfoot. From the bridge to Tepel^ni, the distanceis about six miles — two thirds along the Dryno,and the remainder on the bank of the Viosa ^ affcerit has received the Dryno. The road has beenpaved, but as the mountain rises immediatelyabove it, the torrent has carried away the pavementin many parts, and left a track just passable.The fortress and serai of the Veadr, standing ona tabular projection, surrounded by cliffs towardsthe river, have an imposing appearance at a distance,and are quite in harmony with the sublimescenery around. The village of Tepel^ni, indeed,which consists of not more than eighty or ninetyMusulman families, with a small detached suburbof Christians, is no great embellishment to thescene ; but upon the whole, the palace is one ofthe most romantic and delightful country-housesBiw^a, otherwise called Boov^a, or Bov^<r<ra.I.J EPIRUB. 31that can be imagined. The height is the terminationof one of the counterforts of a snowy rangeof mountains, bordering the vale of the Viosa tothe west, and is defended on the northern sideby the ravine of a stream called Bantja ^ which,though sometimes dry in summer, now pours alarge supply into the Viosa. The village is surroundedby vineyards which produce a poor redwine ; beyond which, wheat and barley are theproduce of the higher lands around ; and kalam-bokki that of the low level on the banks of theriver.Immediately above Tepeleni, the piers of aruined bridge stretch across the Viosa, the archesof which were carried away three years ago byan inundation, and are now supplied by a temporarywooden communication. From the oppositebank of the river rises a steep and lofty mountain,named Trebushin ; on the side of which areaTekieh, or convent of devises, and a villagenamed Petzisti.Mount Trebushin is separated only from thesimilar mountain of Khormovo by the Viosa, whichat two miles above Tepeleni emerges from a bog-haze,or narrow gorge', between the two mountains,and joining the Dryno, spreads over a spaceof near half a mile ; where the river is divided bysand-banks into several streams now deep andbroad, but some of which have no existence insummer.Mount Trebushin sends forth a branch to theMwdvT^a, ' Miroyafi, from the Turkish boaz, throat.32 SPIRU8. [chap.northward, which extends to the Illyrian plains,between Berat and Avlona, bounding the vale ofthe Viosa, below Tepeleni, on the eastern side, oppositeto the parallel ridge before mentioned, of whichthe highest summit (not seen from Tepeleni), isnamed in Albanian Griva (grey), from its beingconstantly covered with snow, except for a shorttime in the middle of summer. The southerly andwesterly winds, which have now prevailed for afortnight, have melted the snow on the westernside of all the mountains, but have left it inconsiderablequantity on the opposite face ofthem.The narrow ravine between Trebushin and themountain of Khormovo, from which the Viosaemerges, is called ra siva rng Bicacracy or theStraits of the Viosa. It extends four hours to theeastward, throughout which distance the riverflows between two high mountains, every wheresteep, and in some places perpendicular. TheSten terminate at the village of Klisura \ abovewhich the valley widens, and from thence continuesto be nearly of the same breadth for a considerabledistance beyond Premedi. At KlisuraA15^ has built a fortress, in a lofty situation, abovethe right bank of the river, and is thus master ofboth ends of this important defile.There can be little doubt that this pass is thecelebrated Fauces Antigonenses, or Aoi Stena,near Antigoneiaia, in which Philip, son of Deme*^ KXciorovpa, from rXeicii : a applied to a pass, or a placeword of middle Cheek, often situated in a pass.I.] EPIRUS. 33tries, attempted in vain to arrest the progress ofthe Roman consul, Titus Quinctius Flaminius,through Epirus.Dec, 31. — The road from Tepel^ni to Nivitzaleads along the river Bantza (in Albanian Benja),through a hollow in the range of Griva, from whichthat river descends. This pass conducts to ,situated at the head of the valley of theSutzista, which descends to Nivitza, and joins theViosa in the plain of ApoUania. Thus Tepeleni,in all the four quarters, is approached by a narrowvalley ; from the east and north by that of theViosa, from the south by the valley of the Dryno,and from the west by that of the Bantza. On theleft bank of the Bantza, three or four miles aboveTepeleni, is a ruined castle, bearing the samename as the river. It occupies the summit of aheight, and incloses about two acres. Nothing isleft but the foundations, except at the upper end,where are some remains of a round tower, of verythick and regular courses of masonry, cementedwith a great quantity of mortar. The shape andposition of the castle, and its citadel at the roundtower, incline me to think that the fortress is ancient,although no part of the masonry resembles themassy and beautiful constructions of the southernGreeks. On the opposite bank of the river, not amile above the ruins, is the small village Bantza,which is said to have been built about thirty yearsago by one of the fares, or family alliances of ,which, in consequence of the internal disputesof that town, and the superiority acquiredby their opponents, had been obliged to leave it,VOL. I. D34 Epirus. [chap.Several other small villages were founded at thattime in the country around Pregonati from thesame cause. It may be thought, perhaps, thatBantza is. a corruption of Amantiaia, and that itproves that ancient city to have stood either atBantza or at Tepeleni, but Awantia was certainlymuch nearer to Auhny and Bantza may, perhaps,be the ancient name, with scarcely any change '.Below Tepeleni the Viosa continues to flow fortwelve hours between the two ranges of mountainsalready mentioned, as far as Gradista, sometimesclosely confined between rocky banks, at othersleaving small plains, or cultivated open heights,on either side, and thus the country is dividedby nature into districts, each of which containsseveral villages, generally small. The first ofthe plains below Tepeleni is that of Lopesi, pronouncedLiopesi by the Albanians, of which thechief village is named Dukai, in Greek Dukadhes.Here is a ruin on the left bank of the river, similarto that of Bantza. Opposite to Lopesi, a quarterof an hour from the right bank of the river,stands Vasari, or Vasari, according to the usualAlbanian and vulgar Greek pronunciation of thesigma. On the opposite side, one hour from ,is Sarah, distant half an hour from the leftbank of the river, from whence there is a roadacross Mount Griva to Nivitza, by a ravine calledProbate Places, or the vale of the old woman, soThe BaKr/qt were a people imported probably from Greece,of Thrace ; and Barca was V. Stephan. in Ba areca.the name of an Italian town,I.] BPIRCS. 35called because a woman was once frozen to deathin passing. Continuing from Sarah . on the wayto Avlona, occurs, at the end of an hour and ahalf, Humbling, containing three hundred houses,and situated at the same distance from the Viosaas Sarah ; three hours beyond it is Kudhesi, offive hundred houses, the chief town of a districtcontaining several villages, and situated on themountain, which commands the fork of the riversViosa and Sutzista.On the river side, below Lopesi, is the districtof Kal^tzi, separated from that of Lopesi by arocky shore, on which stands another ruined fortress,near the village of Lunji, which is abouthalf way between Tepel^ni and Gr&dista. Anotherrocky shore terminates Kalutzi on the left bank,beyond which the country begins to open towardsthe plain ; then occurs Karvunari, a town of Kud-hei, then Ghradista, on the right bank, and Sele-nitza on the left, where are the mines of fossilpitch described by Strabo ; and then the junction ofthe Viosa with the Sutzista, or river of Nivitza.From all I can learn, the most considerableHellenic cities in this part of the country were atGradista and Nivitza. If the latter was Amantiaia, asI can hardly doubt from the strong testimony of theancient authors, the former was probably Phyllis \Dr. Holland who visited that M. Valerian Maximus hadGiidista in 1813, has deter made a road through ruggedmined this question hy the passes from the Roman colonyLatin inscription which he of Bullis to some other place,copied there, and which, fd- This Colonia BuUidensis isthough very imperfect, attests mentionedbyPliny (1.4,c. 10),d2Epirus.[chap.or BuUiSj for Byllis, Amantiaia and Apologia werethe three principal cities in the vicinity of theGulf of Anion.This evening the Devises mount to the top ofMount Trebushin ; and on their return declarethe new moon visible, though the sky is so cloudedthat the sun could not have been seen, had it beenabove the horizon. Several guns are then fired atintervals of five minutes, and the rioting of theBairam begins.Knowing how little the Musulman Albanianscare for the ceremonies or the doctrines of theirreligion, I was surprised to find them, on my arrival,keeping the Amazon so correctly. Not apipe was to be seen till the muezzin had called thebut we have no knowledge ofthe time of its establishment.The inscription is not earlierthan the reign of Trajan, asappears by the frequent occurrenceof the word Ulpian.Although it can hardlybe doubted that the Romancolony occupied the sameposition as the Greek city, itis remarkable that both Stephensand Ptolemy placeByllis on the sea coast; thelatter between Anion andAmantiaia. Livy also, by stating(1. 36, c. 7,) that Hannibalproposed to Antiochus tocollect his forces in the Billingsager preparatory to hispassing over into Italy, showsthat a part at least of the districtwas adjacent to the sea.Possibly both Ptolemy andStephens referred to a Xi/i^i^,or maritime establishment ofthe Bylliones, which at oneperiod may have been as importantas the city itself. Ifthe Amanda had in like mannera maritime dependency,the arrangement of Ptolemy isperfectly explained : his orderbeing " the mouth of theAous, Alon, Bullis, Amantiaia,the mouth of the Celydnus,Oricum, the Acroceraunia."Celydnus, as I before remarked,is the only name that appearsto be out of its place.I.] EPIRUS. 37evening prayer from the minaret of the Pasha'smosque. But the Vezlr, though he generallydrinks wine openly at table, seems to think itright to set a good Musulman example to the wildToskidhes and Liapidhes of his native mountains;whose ancestors probably adopted the fast themore readily from its resembling one of the observancesof the church from which they apos-tatizedy without being so severe a penance as theChristian Lent. In fact, the Amazon is no mortificationat all in winter, when the short daysleave the Musulmans at liberty to feast as early asfive in the evening.Al^^'s sons, Mukhtar and Vel, were born bya daughter of Raglan Pasha, of Delvino. Histhird son, Salic, who is only three or four yearsold, was by a slave. It does not appear that thesons have been educated in such a manner as canadapt them for preserving the power which theother has founded, or that he himself looks muchfarther in this respect than other Turks. Indeed,a Turk, or Musulman Albanian, not short-sighted,avaricious, or intent upon momentary advantages,would be a rarissima avis. Alj^ is his own Kehayaand Hasnadar, trusts not even his own sons, andtransacts every thing himself, except where writingis required, when he dictates to a Turkish orGreek secretary. His own writing is execrablybad, and his Greek orthography worse ; the littlethat he learnt when a boy having been almost lostby that want of practice caused by the customcommon in every part of the east among the great,of always employing a secretary. Turkish he can38 Epirus. [Chapread, but never attempts to write, though it formeda part of his education : in fact it is not muchwanted, except fqr some formal letters to the Porte,or to some of the Pashas of Rumili ; his communicationswith the government being chiefly carriedon in Greek by means of his Kapi-Tjokhadar, oracknowledged agent, residing at Constantinople.With the Albanians his written correspondence isin Greek, except perhaps in a few rare cases wherehe wishes his missive to be publicly read in Albanian,in which case it is written in that languagewith Greek characters.The person of most importance under the Veziris Suliman, the Selikt4r Ag, now absent. It issaid that his influence in southern Albania is such,that in the event of the Pashd's death, he mightplace himself at the head of a party at least equaltp those of Mukhtar or Vely, for little doubt seemsto be entertained that the. two brothers will be opposedto each other. Already the symptoms ofthis future civil war are apparent. Mukhtar, knowingthat by money he can always command theaffections of the Albanians, is a thesaurizer, whilehis brother, who is a mere sensualist, but withmuch more talent than Mukhtar, is much lessprovident.Another person in whom the Ver places greatconfidence, is Yusuf Aga Arapi, nominally HisHighness's Hasnaddr, in whose house, now occupiedby his son, Bekir Aga, I am lodged. Hehas always been employed by the Vezlr in themanagement of the Dervenia, and hence isthoroughly acquainted with the country, from theI.] Epirus. 39frontiers of Dalmatia to the isthmus of Corinth.He is described as a man of talent and activity,extremely attached to his master, brave, ferocious,active, and cruel. Two other officers, whom theVeadr generally keeps near him, are Tatza Bulu-bashi, a Musulman, and Athan&si Via, a Christian,the ready instruments of many an atrociousact of cruelty. All these persons, including thePasha s sons, are usually dressed in the Albanianfashion, with a coat or jacket covered with goldlace, and a shirt falling down in folds over thedrawers, resembling the drapery of the Romanstatues. When new and clean it is a beautifulcostume ; but a clean shirt is not a weekly luxuryeven with all the higher classes ^ ; and among thesoldiers it is sometimes worn out without everbeing washed, though occasionally taken off, andheld over the fire, that the animals contained init, intoxicated by the smoke, may fall into thefire, when a crackling announces the success ofthe operation. Sometimes during the first twoor three weeks of a new shirt or waistcoat, orwhen particularly desirous of making a favourableappearance, they wear a collar of cotton, impregnatedwith oxyde of mercury, which forms abarrier to the more aspiring natives, and keepsthem out of sight. The same want of cleanlinesspervades every class in proportion, in all theirdomestic arrangements. Alj^ himself has beenso accustomed to the rudest Albanian life in his^ Volley remarked, in a part manners, that even Pashas didof Turkey, more refined in its not count their shirts by dozens.40 EPiRus. [chap.youth, that the dirtiness of his people gives himlittle disgust, and as policy obliges him to receivethe lowest Albanian with familiarity and apparentconfidence, to allow them to approach him, to kissthe hem of his garment, to touch his hand, andto stand near him while they converse with him,his dress is often covered with vermin, and thereis no small danger of acquiring these companionsby sitting on his sofa, where they are often seencrawling amidst embroidered velvet and cloth ofgold.A Divan Effendi and a Turkish Secretary, bothiroXcVacc/ or natives of Constantinople, form a partalso of Aly's court. They preserve the Turkishcostume, and look upon iJie Albanians with thatmixture of fear and contempt, which is the generalfeeling of the Turks towards this nation.Through the medium of the Constantinopolitansresiding with him, and that of his own residentat the Porte, Aly manages the good understanding,which he has the policy to keep up with thesupreme government. He makes frequent presentsto the Valid Sultana, and her powerful KehayaYusuf. He has augmented his dominions as muchby the intermarriages of his family with the chieftainsaround him, as by his military or politicalskill. Arghyrokastro and Libokhovo have beenbrought under his influence chiefly by the marriageof his sister, Khainitza, with Suliman, ofArghyrokastro, sometime Pasha of Trikkala, whoseson, Aden Bey, now resides with his mother, asGovernor of Libokhovo, under the orders of theVezir, having succeeded in this post to his brow.]EPIRUS. 41ther, Elias Bey, who died not long since atloannina.Aiy has no other relatives except his grandchildren.His sister, before she married Sulimanof Arghyr6kastro, was the wife of Suliman 's brother,A15^, by whom she had a daughter marriedto Vel5^, Bey of Klisura. It is said that Aljr, ofArghyrokastro, was murdered by his brother, inconcert with Al of Tepeleni, and his sister : itis certain, at least, that Soliman, very soon afterhis brother's death, married the widow. Eightyears ago Aljr obtained possession of Klisiira, bymurdering his nephew-inlaw, the Bey, togetherwith his younger brother, whom he had enticedto loannina, to assist at the nuptials of his sonVeI5^ with the daughter of Ibrahim. Pasha, bywhich alliance the peace between the two Vezirswas ratified. Alj^ pretended to have discoveredthat not only the Bey, but his brother, who hadaccompanied him, had been engaged in a plotagainst the Vezir. By this act Aly^ cleared awayall the claimants to Klisura: a most importantpoint, which secures Tepeleni and Premedi, andopens the road to Berat.At Arghyrokastro, as in other independent townsof Albania, the power was formerly divided amongseveral leagues, whose chieftains were continuallyat war. At present, Morte Bey, brother of SolimanPasha, chiefly by his alliance with Aljr, isat the head of the strongest party'.Mutja Hushuf (Albanian for Musa Yusuf, orSee a note on Arghyrokastro at the end of this volume.42 Epirus. [chap.Moses Joseph) was the name of Aiys great grandfather,from whom the family are called in Greekoc Movr2!axou€r(rarcc« My host, Beklr Aga, asserts,that Hushuf conquered all Albania with his sabre\ which, though a mere amplification, showsthat his power was considerable. His son, Mukh-tar, accompanied the expedition of Kara Mustafa,the Seraskier of Sultan Amid III., in union withthe fleet of the Capitan Pasha Djanum Rhodaagainst Corfu, in the year 1716, when the islandwas defended by Marshal Schulemberg, whosestatue still remains in the Citadel, erected by theVenetian republic, in gratitude for this defence ofthe island. Mukhtar was killed in the siege,having fallen in the assault of the fortress ; and itis believed in Albania that his sword is still keptat Corfu, among the trophies of that expedition.Velj^, the father of Aiy, was the youngest of threebrothers, or half-brothers, but having succeededin destroying the two elder, became the head ofthe house. He died at an early se, leaving Ala child in the care of his mother Khanko, daughterof a Bey of Konitza, who was of the same familyas Kurt Pasha of Herat, at that time the mostpowerful chieftain in Albania. Aljr has now beena Vezir for about four years, and is not a littleproud of the third tail, which the Porte has generallybeen very unwilling to confer upon Albanians.Having bestowed it upon Alj^, they gave it alsoto the two Ibrahim, in order to keep the balanceof power even.Mi TO awadirov*I.] Epirus. 43A15^ disguftte all the Franks who come to seektheir fortune in his service, by his parsimony.He scarcely ever gives them any fixed pay, whateverhe may have promised, but confines himselfto making them presents in clothes and money,when they perform any particular service. If theyare not married, he is always anxious to providethem with drives, that he may have hostages toprevent their leaving the place. Those who haveto provide for the different departments of hishousehold, are said to be the only persons whoenrich themselves in his service.The Franks at present in the Vezir's service areaMilanese, who had previously been employedby the Pashas of Berat and Skodra, and who hasundertaken to complete a foundry at loannina:there are also a French engineer, a carpenter,who makes gun carriages, a Dalmatian watchmaker,and an Italian smith. These people,though really able men in their professions, willsoon be forced to leave his service from the wantof encouragement.Plutarch informs us, that Pyrrhus was an assiduouscourtier, and studious when young ofacquiring the friendship of powerful persons.This is generally the Albanian character. Theyare anxious to secure the favour of their superiors,and faithful to them while regularly paid. Theirrevolts which so often occur, are generally causedby the ill-faith of the employers, who often beginan enterprize without sufficient pecuniary means,trusting to success for an augmentation of them.44 Epirus. [chap.The Albanians, being generally poorer than theTurks, are more moderate in their expectations,more patient and persevering, more £uniljiarwith hardships from their infancy, but equallygreedy of money, and much more saving. TheAlbanian soldier will either plunder or live on thehardest fare, as circumstances may require, tosave his pay ; his prime object being to returnhome with a well-filled girdle ; for the zone,as among the Romans, is the treasury of theAlbanian. Their military qualities are rathershown in the oSov cXOI/ucvai, than in the avSpoo'ivI^c /laxecrOai, and their wars consist entirely instratagem, rapine, and ambuscade, though fewof them are deficient in personal courage, whenthe occasion calls for it. One of the advantagesof the Albanians is their independence of othercountries for the greater part of the manufacturesof that rude kind with which they are content.Their arms are all made in Albania, with theexception of the gun-barrels, the greater part ofwhich are from the north of Italy, though aninferior kind both of musquet and pistol-barrelsare made at Skodra, Prisr^nd, Kalkandere, pristine,and Green : gun locks are made both inGreece and Albania ; some I have seen fromKarpenisi, in ^tolia, which have a polish (if thatbe any merit) equal to those of England. Thekind of musquet, however, which the Albaniansuse is very inconvenient, and is adapted only totheir own irregular discipline, being long andheavy, without any balance of weight in theI.] Epirus. 46Stocky which is particularly thin and light, andthe piece is thus incapable of an aim withoutresting.The coarse woollen cloth used for the outer garmentsof the Albanians is chiefly made at Skodra.It is a thick white coarse cloth, which wears wellandwhen adorned with a broad lace, forms one ofthe handsomest national costumes in Europe. It ismuch superior in quality to that of the black papa,or outer cloak, made in all the mountains ofNorthern Greece, and which is very generallyworn by the shepherds, peasants, and lower ordersboth of Greece and Albania, as well as by the marinersof the Greek and Adriatic seas.The Pasha asserts, that in the country, of whichTepeleni gives him the command, there are notless than 16000 men armed with musquets, whoare considered among the best soldiers in Albania.However correct this numeration may be, it is certain,at least, that Albania is better peopled than anyequal portion of European Turkey, that notwithstandingthe great number of the soldiery employedabroad, it maintains its population, and that everymale, from his infancy, is familiar with the use ofarms. The Vezir describes Albania as 200 hoursin length ; in one half of which his own influencepredominates while the remainder is about equallydivided between Ibrahim Pasha of Berat, and IbrahimPasha of Skodra. He admits, however, thatthere are still some chieftains who do not acknowledgethe authority of the three. Nor is it likelythat the country will ever quietly submit to a singlehand, although this is evidently the object of all46 Epirus. [chap.the Ve^ir^s actions* , The quarrels of the chieftainsare the delight of the inferior classes, and a constantsource of profit to them. As the former areof every degree of power, the minor agree with themore powerful for the hire of their service, andthat of their followers. When the hostile partiesare persons of great authority, one of their firstconsiderations is the employment of skilful agentsto treat for the services of the inferior chieftains,or to make any other bargains useful to thecause.It often happens in the course of a campaign,between two contending powers, that a village, asingle house, a tibia, a meteiis^ or an occupiedposition, is bought from the possessors by the oppositeparty, and though the villages on the hostilefrontier generally suffer, yet, as Albanian housesare quickly constructed, such injuries are oftenunworthy of consideration compared with the advantagewhich the inhabitants derive from theirpurchase by the contending parties. Sometimesthe head of a family, who is known to be able tocommand a certain number of tufeks, privatelymeets the emissary of the chief who wishes to engagehis services ; he endeavours to raise the life,or daily pay, of each man as high as possible ;next requires so many luf(^s for those whom he isto engage to take care of his house in his absence ;^ These are Turkish words, furnishes the rest necessary fdrThe meteris is a trench which, firing the tufek or musquet.with the earth thrown outwards, The bahia is a redoubt of theis just sufficient to serve as a same kind of construction asbreastwork ; and the top of which the meteris.I.] Epirus. 47then a farther acknowledgment, perhaps, to enablehim to raise a meteris in some important spotfor the defence of the house, or any other pretextof the same kind. When the basin is finallymade, he ties round his waist all the money paidin advance, makes the best provision he can forthe care of his fieimily, and comes into the fieldwith half, or at most two thirds, of the men whomhe is paid for, and remains, perhaps, only until hecan make a new bargain with the opponents. Suchtreachery, however, although not uncommon amongthe poorest tribes of Albania, is not held in estimation,unless upon a very large scale, and for somegreat object. It may easily be conceived, thatwith such customs the Albanians have a particularobjection to a muster. I have seen a Grand Vesdrattempt it, when, instead of effecting his object, hehad the upper part of his tent perforated in a hundredplaces with musquet-shot. The operationsof Albanian warfare in the field being chiefly confinedto dodging behind trees and firing at longdistances from cover, and few but the chiefsbeing in earnest, their campaigns are tardy andexpensive, and their wars seldom of any greatduration, or productive of decisive results. Ultimatesuccess, of course, is sure to attend the treasurywhich is the best provided.The Albanians are fond of the chase, and almostevery man of landed property keeps greyhoundsfor coursing the hare, which is their favouritesport. The Vezir has an establishment here, anda few days ago brought home six hares and a fox.He sent me his horses and dogs one day, with an48 EPiRus. [chap.order to Bekir Aga to accompany me, but theweather prevented us from going. There is nowant of red*legged partridges on the hills, butnetting is the only mode by which they are taken.The greater number of Aljr's subjects beingChristians, he is very watchful over the bishops,often employs them as instruments of extortion,and is careful that every act of theirs shall tend tothe stability and extension of his own power. Heoften requires their attendance at loannina, orwherever he may happen to be, and shows themfavour, so far as to support their authority overthe Christians, and sometimes to assist them witha little military force if it should be necessary forthe collection of their dues, which consist chieflyin a fixed contribution from every Christian house.They are not exempt, however, from those occasionalcalls upon their purses, from which no manwithin his reach is free whom he considers capableof paying. The most important of his ecclesiasticalministers is the metropolitan bishop of loannina, aNaxiote by birth, whose diocese comprehends thegreater part of Epirus. I overtook him at thebridge of the Subashi, on his way to court.His kvapyia, or province, contains four subordinatesees; namely, 1. Vela, BcXoc ; 2. Dhrynopoli,ApvcvoiroXcdic ; 3. Del vino and Khimara, AeX^cvouRoi XEi/Liapac ; 4. Vuthroto and Glyk5^, BovOpoirov icirXvjccbic. Of these, Del vino and Khimara onlyremain, the two others being traceable only bytheir ruins ; of the first the residence is Konitza ;of the second, Arghyrokastro ; of the fourth, Paramythia.The northern limit of the bishopric ofI.] EPIRUS. 49DrynopoliSy or Arghyrokastro, is the bridge ofTepel^ni. To the eastward it comprehends Zago-ria, and borders upon the province of Kopvrta,a town situated a day's journey from Premedl, tothe north-eastward.In the episcopal province of loannina the number ^of Musulmans bears a small proportion to that ofthe Christians, but in that of Korytza there aremany villages entirely Mahometanss ; in some, Mahometanssare married to Greek women, the sonsare educated as Turks, and the daughters asChristians ; and pork and mutton are eaten at thesame table. The province of Beligrad, or Berat,borders on that of Korytza to the westward ; itsmetropolitan is styled bishop of Velagrada, theform which the Greeks have given to the Slavonicword Beligrad. In the provinces of Korytzd andVelagrada, as well as further north, the Musulmanfaith is supposed by the bishop of loannina to berapidly increasing. Instances have occurred ofthe apostasy of whole villages at a time. Thishappened in particular among the Karamuratates,who inhabit Mount Nemertzika, and the neighbouringvalley of the Viosa.Such examples, with the advantages, which anation of mercenary soldiers cannot but find in belongingto the dominant religion, instead of onewhich renders them objects of contempt and ill-treatmentto those in power, are powerful motivesto a rapid increase of apostasy. Meantime, theChristians who are employed in a larger proportionthan the Musulmans, in pursuits of agricultureor trade, have a tendency to retreat fromVOL. I. E60 EPiRUS. [chap.the oppression of their countrymen of the adversefaith, or to occupy lands in Greece or elsewhere,where labour is wanted ; and thus there is everyprospect of Albania, once a Christian country, becoming,at no distant period of time, almost entirelyMahometan. Apostasy has had similareffects among the Sclavonic nations of EuropeanTurkey, extending iron Greece to the Danube,but by no means in the same proportion, unlessit be in Bosnia.The bishop relates to me that the Khormoviteswere notorious robbers before they were reducedby the Vezir. Their favourite place of action wasthe Pass of Tepeleni, where one of their priests usedto enter a hollow tree which stands between Tepe-^leni and the bridge, while others lay in wait bythe side of the road, and stopped the passengersuntil this Dodondean Oracle was consulted. If thepassenger was a Mahometan, the oracular voicegenerally ordered him to be stripped and hungupon the tree ; if he was a Christian, belongingto a hostile village, he was perhaps draggedthrough the river. In other cases the Oracle wasgenerally satisfied with sending the unlucky wightforward on foot, after his horse or ass had beentaken from him.Jan. 2, 1806. — In consequence of a violent rainlast night, the Bantza and Viosa have swelled to agreat height, so that the former occupies the wholeof its bed, which at the mouth is three or fourhundred yards across, and the Vi6sa, which isnearly half a mile broad below the junction, pourseven above it such a flood of water against theI.] EPIRUS. 51bridge of Tepeleni, that it has almost over-toppedthe old piers, and threatens with rain some massesof masonry which the Pasha has erected on thepiers to support the wooden planks, now servinginstead of the four arches which were carriedaway. Passengers still continue to cross fromeither bank, but the Vezir, fearful not so muchfor their safety perhaps as for that of the bridge,sits all the afternoon in a kiosk at one comer of hisharem, looking towards it with anxiety. Dervishobserving him, goes out and dances upon thebridge, harangues the trees brought down by thestream as they pass through it, and at last makesa kurfoan, or sacrifice, of a black lamb and twowhite ones, pouring the blood upon one of thepiers. After this ceremony the populace seemssatisfied that the safety of the bridge is insured,and in fact no accident occurs.Both the ruined work and the temporary repairwere erected by a Greek engineer who is building,with better success, a massy tower at the Serai.The piers have openings, with pointed arches andlarge spurs opposed to the current, but the wholework is obviously deficient in solidity, and theMotu will probably continue to be indignant of abridge, until it has a master more liberal of expence,and who will employ an architect betteracquainted with modern improvements in thisbranch of his art. The Albanians endeavour tosupply the place of solidity by making the archesof their bridges of an excessive height, whichmethod they allege is subject only to the inconvenienceof obliging the traveller to dismount, whilee252 EPiRUs. [chap.it admits of a great economy of materials, thebreadth of a bridge being of little moment in acountry where there are no wheel carriages. TheVezir expresses great disappointment at the failureof his attempts to establish a bridge at Tepeleni, asit causes a detour by that of the Dryno, and byanother in the Stena, in order to reach the oppositebank when the river is not fordable ; andmoreover obliges his Highness on these occasionsto enter the Pass of Klisura, where, if the stout Tos-richesof the neighbouring villages should proverebellious, he might find himself in danger.Adjoining to a mosque which he built near hispalace some years since, is a garden, which wasthen laid out for him by a Frenchman. On thewall which bounds it towards the river three gunsare mounted, and two small kiosks are built Thegarden is now in a neglected state, serving onlyto include the poultry which the Pasha obligesthe villages around to supply. There are nowbetween five and six hundred fowls in the garden,forty or fifty of which die every day in consequenceof exposure to the rain, and want of food ; notbecause there is any deficiency of barley or kalam-bokki, but because the purveyor sells it, layingthe fault upon the weather and want of shelter,and knowing that as fast as the fowls die, the deficiencywill be supplied by the villages.It is said, that Tepeleni once formed an alliancewith two other villages; namely, Dames, twohours to the north-east, on the direct road to Berat,over Mount Trebushin ; and Dragon, which standsI.] EPIRUS. 53a little within the Pass of the Viosa above its rightbank, and that at the head of the league was awoman named Helen. May not Tepel^ni be ra^oc'EXIwic ? The Turks call it Tepedellen ; the Albanians,Tebelen. There is a superstitious belief,that the houses in the village can never exceedone hundred. The Greek suburb, at the westernextremity of the promontory on the edge of thehill over the Bantza, had lately so increased as toapproach the Turkish quarter, and to give hopesthat the spell would be broken ; but last year aplague, which swept off whole families, put a stopto the increase of houses, and has left its marks innumerousrecent graves, some of which have beenopened by the late heavy rains.Jan. 4. — Many Albanian chiefe have arrivedhere within these few days to pay their homage toAljr; among others Medulla Pasha of Elbassan.They all come attended with followers armed tothe teeth, in numbers proportioned to the powerand rank of the chiefs. Their array in approaching,and their introduction to the Vezir, affordsome fine pictures of feudal life, which carry oneback in imagination to Europe in the tenth century; for the Turkish conquest of Albania has notmerely prevented this country from partaking inthe improvement of the rest of Europe, but hascarried it in manners some centuries further backthan it was at the time of the conquest, and, withthe extension of the Mahometan religion, willrender it every day more savage, and less capableof improvement.64 EpiRUS. [chap.Among other persons who have arrived, isMehmet Effendi, Al^^'s secretary for foreign affairs.This Mehmet is a Roman, whose name was MarcoQuinine. He was a member of the inquisition atRome, lived six years at Aleppo as a missionary ofthe Society de Propaganda Fide, and would havesucceeded, so he says, to the bishopric of Bombay ,had he not, in a fit of ennui, left Aleppo a yearbefore the term of his residence expired. Happeningto be at Malta at the time of the arrival of theFrench expedition to Egypt, he was appointed byBuonaparte, in consequence of the knowledge ofArabic which he had acquired at Aleppo, hissecretary-interpreter, but becoming tired of hissituation at the end of three months, he sailed forEurope, was taken by a Dulciniote cruiser nearCape Stylo, and brought prisoner to loannina.Here, in despair of acquiring his liberty, and havingpersuaded himself that the Turkish religionwould suit him, or at least recommend him to thePasha, whose service he was tempted to enter, herenounced the errors of his youth, became a truebeliever, and now argues, with much Italian eloquence,that the Islam is the only reasonable faithexisting. At Aleppo he acquired a little English,together with his Arabic. He is a man of acuteness,sense, and learning, and assuredly will mostbitterly deplore the impatience of temper whichhas caused him to exchange such inconsiderableprivations as he met with at Aleppo, or in Egypt,for the hard service of an Albanian master, amongcomrades with whom he can scarcely exchangeI.] EPIRUS. 55an idea. The Pasha has, according to his usualpolicy, already persuaded him to take a wife, andnow that he has him in his power, scarcely giveshim the means of existence \^ After several years of this iced Europe, and died at Pariswretched life, Quinine was so a Christian,fortunate as to return to civil-chapterII.EPIRUS.Return from Tepel^ni — Lizati — Stepezi — Dhryn6poli — RiverBelitza— Kardhlki— The Gulimidhes— Zulad— Pass of Skar-fitza — Senza — Paleavli — Delvino — Finiki, Phcenice — Captureof PhcBtUce by the Illyrianss — Helicranum — Antigone —Phanote — Eurus — HadrianopoUt — DrymopolU — The Argy^rim — Sail from the Forty Saints to Port Palerimo— L^dtovo—Pikemes — Sopot6 — Kieper6 — Khimara, Chancery — ^Khim&-hote towns ; their troops, manners, &c. — Return by sea tothe Forty Saints — HexamOi — ^Tetranisa — Ctusiope — PositionThe Livdri or fishery — BtUhrotum; port Pelodes — Lake,river, bay, and district of Yutzindro — Lake Riza — Geographyof the coast of Epirus opposite to Corfii.Jan. 6. — This afternoon I return from Tepel^ni, bythe same road as far as the bridge of the Subashi.The village of Dragon being only hid from Tepe-leni by a projection of Mount Trebushin, soonbecomes visible, and opposite to it Kotra, on aheight above the junction of the Viosa and Dryno;then farther southward, on the western face of thesame mountain, LekhU; and then Khormovo.Opposite to Lekhli we pass under the village ofLizati, of two hundred houses, and meet AidanAga of Kalidsa with a long suite of palikaria ^ onfoot, on their way to court. A little short of thebridge of the Subdshi is the hollow plane-treewhere the robbers of Khormovo formerly lay invaXucdpia, from H. irdXXai,juvenis,CHAP. II.] EPIRUS. 57wait for travellers. Here, on both sides of theriver, the space is very narrow at the foot of themountain, and on both sides there is a road ; thatwhich proceeds from the bridge along the foot ofthe mountain of Khormovo and Lekhll enters theStena, and follows the left bank of the Viosa as faras the vale of KiepeH, which is watered by a tributaryof the river. The bridge over the Dryno wasformerly below Khormovo, but having been sweptaway by the river, it was replaced higher up bythat of the Sub^shi, which has now resisted thefloods for several years.Leaving the bridge to our left, we proceed in thedirection of Arghyrokastro. On the face of its mountain,nearly opposite to Marian, is seen Maskoluri, alarge village, and above it the monastery of Trypi,just below the summit, which terminates the mountainat the opening of the valley of Kardhiki. Asmall village called Tzepo stands more to thenorthward in the middle region of this mountain,and below it is Khumelitza opposite to Stepezi,which latter stands on the northern side of theopening leading from the valley of Deropugl intothat of Kardhiki. The Belitza^ which waters thevale of Kardhiki, flows in a ravine through theopening, and joins the Dryno in the plain asalready stated. At Stepezi we halt for the night.At first the people were not willing to receive us ;and when die Bulu-b&shi who accompanies methreatened them, "We are poor," they replied,"and have nothing; we can but lose our lives;"but soon change their tone on learning, that consEpirus. [chap.tray to the remonstrances of the Bulu-bashi, I hadgiven directions to pay for every thing, and declarethat if the King of England wants soldiers, thewhole village, to the number of three hundred, isready to enter into his service. ** It would beeasier," observes one of them, '^ to maintain fiftyAlbanian soldiers than one English' My konakis a hut which, like most of the houses in theAlbanian villages, has no chimney, the fire beingin the middle, and the smoke, after circulating forawhile about the hut, finding its way out throughthe crevices of a roof covered with rude unformedtablets of calcareous stone, called TrXaiccc, angliceflakes. These being large and thick, are for themost part held in place by their own weight alone,but sometimes great stones are laid upon them.The rafters within are generally hung with thestore of maize, here called mesiri, in the state inwhich it is brought from the field. Above Stepezi,near the top of the mountain, is seen the smallvillage of Petri ; besides which, there are two orthree others on the mountain not visible, sowretched as to be described in terms of compassioneven by the Stepeziotes.Below in the plain, about half-way betweenStepezi and the Khan Valiant, I perceive the ruinscalled Dhrynopoli, written in Greek ApiiiVo6roX*c,which appears to have been a fortress, or smallfortified town of the time of the lower empire. Itstands nearly opposite to the junction of the Belitzawith the Dryno, and close by a ruined bridgeover the torrent, which descends from the mountainof Labovo.II.] EPIRUB. 59Jan. 7. — I had intended to proceed from Stemby land to Palerimo, halting this evening atKaliasa, but the weather obliges us to alter ourroute. Soon after setting out, at 8.40, a distantmovement in the plain towards Libokhovo announcesthe approach of Vely Pasha, who iscoming to visit his father at Tepeleni. We crossoverthe heights forming the lower part of themountain of Stepezi : the land is little cultivated,but we pass some large flocks of sheep and goats,the shepherds bear staves headed with hooks ofcopper. Woods of oak diversify the scene, butthere are no trees of any great size. At the endof three hours we arrive on the Belitza, in thevalley of Kardhiki, which is inclosed on every sideby steep and lofty mountains.Kardhiki, or Gardhiki \ is situated on the sideand summit of a steep hill, on the right bank ofthe Belitza, at the junction of a torrent flowingfrom the south-west through a ravine which formsa precipice on that side of the town. The situationof the place is one of the wildest that can beconceived, and its appearance is rendered more soby the season of the year. We are no soonerarrived, than a heavy fall of snow puts an end toour day's journey, and makes me well satisfiedwith a lodging in the house of Demir Aga till themorrow. Demir, commonly called Demir Dost,enjoys a degree of power such as few Albanianchiefs possess, and Kardhiki has the consequentadvantage of internal tranquillity ; for in generalKapBUioi'f TKCLp^tKtov,60 Epirus. [chap.power is so nearly balanced between the leadingparties in Albanian towns, that no one chief hassufficient influence to establish order. The unlimitedpower of Demir over the district of Kard-hlki is at present chiefly owing to his good understandingwith A15^ Pasha. His government, hetells me, contains twenty villages, of which thereare only three or four Greek. One of these isKhumelltza, famous for its tobacco, from which asnuff* is made at Kardhlki, much esteemed by theAlbanians, who, among other points in which theyresemble the Highlanders of Scotland, are greatsnuff-takers. There are eight hundred Musulmanfamilies in Kardhiki, and twenty or thirty Greekhouses on the opposite side of the ravine.The mountains to the westward and northwardof the district, as far as Chimera, Demir describesas inhabited by half-naked wretches living in villages,one of the hardiest and poorest races in existence: he calls them Gulimldhes, they form asubdivision of the great tribe named Liape, inGreek Liapidhes, a colony perhaps of the Lapithaeof Thessaly. One of the villages of the Guliml-thes, called Potion, and exactly resembling petri,is in sight from Kardhiki to the north-west,near the summit of the mountain.The Musulmans of Kardhiki are not less anxiousto serve the king of England, than the Christiansof Stepezi ; they observe that the use of the musketis their only art and their only property. Thecare of their fields and flocks they leave to theChristians.Demir gives me a very particular and undoubted.]EPIRUS. 61ely accurate account of the general topographyof Albania, and of the divisions of its tribes ; ofwhich the following is the substance :Rejecting the political chorography which hasarisen since the Turkish conquest, the only importantdivisions of the Albanians are four : theNgi?ghc, Toshke, Liape and Tame, in Greek Ticcy-KiSfiQ, To<riccScc> AairiScc^ or Aia/iircSeC} and TtafuStc :their respective countries are in Greek writtenTtctyKipta, TonKipta, AiafAwovpia, and T2[a/iovpia. TheNg^ghe possess the districts of Skodra, Kavaya,Kroya, Tj^ana, Duras (in Italian Durazzo), Pekin,a part of the district of Elbasan, the two Libras,and Dura on the Drin, Kurtzova, Kalkandere,and Pristine. There is a large proportion of LatinChristians of this tribe, called Mercies, in thedistrict of Skodra, who pay sixty paras a house tothe Pasha of Skodra. They are considered asgood soldiers as any of the Ng^ghe. The Toshkeextend northward from the frontier of Delvino tothat of Pekin and Elbasiin, bordering to the westupon the Liape, and possessing Gardhlki, Arghy-rokastro, Libokhovo, Premedl, Dangle, Colonia,Skrapari, Berat, Malakastra, Mizakik, Avlona.The Li£ipe inhabit the entire maritime country tothe southward and westward of the boundaries ofthe Toshke, and as far south as Delvino, wherebegin the Tame, who occupy all the maritimecountry, as far as Suli inclusive, and inland to theGreek districts of Pogoniani and loannina. Thusit appears that Tepeleni is in Liaburi&, and Al^^Pasha a Liape ; but as the whole of this tribe is in62 EPiRus. [chap.disrepute among the other Albanians for theirpoverty and predatory habits, he thinks proper toconsider Tepeleni a part of Toskeria, and whodares dispute his geography ?Demir Agk has a khodja in his house, as preceptorto his family, who has learned Arabic at Cairo,Turkish at Constantinople, and Greek at Agrafa.Demir takes no pains to conceal his dislike andsuspicions of Aiy, though he has always been ongood terms with the Pasha, made war in conjunctionwith him against Khormovo, and is still nominallyhis ally. By these means he maintains hisauthority at home, and hopes to save his countryfrom falling entirely into the hands of the Vezir \Aly, he says, has a Jew now in prison at Joanna,from whom he has already extracted one hundredand forty purses, by threatening him with the lossof his head. But this mode of refreshing a treasuryis no novelty in any part of the east ; and Iwell remember the noseless and one-eyed victimsof Djezzar to be seen in the streets of Acre. ThePasha never loses an opportunity of gratifying hisresentment against those who took part againsthim in the war of Khormovo. Only two daysago, on the representation of some person that acertain Labovite had been active against him onthat occasion, he sent for the man and his son andput them both to death. The son received theorder after the imprisonment of his father, andAfter the massacre which prisoner at Gardhiki, and suffolkplace at the Khan of Va feared death at loannina.hare in 1812, Demir was takenII.] EPmu8. 63obeyed it, though he might easily have escaped,and was fully persuaded of the Vezir's intention.At Kardhiki are some ruins of a castle, said tohave been built by Sultan Bayard, when he conqueredthis country, but which is probably moreancient. There can be little or no doubt of itshaving been an Hellenic site, though I cannot findany remains of those times. The heights aroundthe town are, for the most part, clothed with vineyards,producing a pleasant light wine, almostcolourless, and which the Musulmans of the placehave no scruple in drinking. Some wheat andbarley are grown on the lower heights ; the bottomof the vale produces scarcely any thing but salambokki, the soil being poor and stony, and subjectto be overflowed by the river. Such situationsare well adapted to that kind of grain which requiresmuch moisture to feed its large succulentstems, and succeeds best therefore in levels whichare either inundated by nature in the winter, orcapable of artificial irrigation in summer ; theabundant return of the grain also is very acceptableto a poor and numerous population like thatof Albania. It is to the culture of maize andtobacco that some of the Albanians chiefly owethat skill in the conducting of water, for whichthey are noted in other parts of Turkey, and bymeans of which, as I have before remarked, theUuntzidhes in particular obtain employment atConstantinople and other places.Jan. 8. — At 8.30 we move from Kardhiki in thedirection of an opening in the mountains to thesouth-west, called the Pass of Skarfitza ; and at64 EPiRUS. [chap.9.45 arrive on the bank of the Belitza, here flowingto the north, but which, after making the halftour of the hill of Kardhiki, has an eastern coursethrough the opening of the valley between Khu-melissa and Stepezi. Zulati, which stands on theleft; bank of the river, on the lowest heights of themountain, is on the road from Kardhiki to Borgiacastle and village on the sea-coast betweenNivitza of Delvino and Chimera. In approachingthe pass of Skarfitza, we have a summit on theleft, which lies between Arghyrokastro and Del-vino,and near which is the village of Sopoti. Atorrent descends from thence through a woodyvalley called Skating (dark), which is the resortof numerous flocks in summer. Having crossedtwo streams which join the Belitza to our right, webegin soon after ten, the snow falling very thick,to ascend the mountain called Pilo-vuni, whichbounds to the east the vale of Kaliasa. The mountainis clothed with oaks, beeches, and planes,and many paths are seen, made by the shepherdsand the cutters of timber and fire-wood : the oaksare not large.The pass of Skarfitza separates the summitcalled Pilo-vuni from the mountain of Sopoti, thename Skarfitza is specifically applied to a Turkishfountain on the summit of the ridge, where theroad begins to descend towards the plain of Del-vino.At 10.45, not far from that fountain, wejoin the road from Chimera by Zuldti to Delvino,and then descend by a very difficult passage overrocks covered with snow, and along torrents borderedby planes, until we arrive in sight of .]Epirus. 05vita, and soon afterwards of Kaliasa, in a vale tothe right. The river Paula, which enters theplain of Finiki below Nivitza, leaves Kaliasa on itsright bank above the opening.At 1 P.M. we come suddenly upon Senits^, aGreek village on the side of the mountain ofSopoti, divided only by a ravine from the Turkishvillage Verge, and looking down upon the plainof Delvino. The lower parts of the hills underthese two places, though worn into the most ruggedforma by the torrents, are richly covered withvineyards, mixed with poplars, olives, and cypresses.In the descent, Paleavll (old court), aTurkish village, remains to the left, and aboveit the ruins of Kamenitza, which has been in thesame state beyond the memory of the present race.Then turning still more to the eastward we arrive,at 4.15, at Delvino, where I reoccupy my lodgingin the Greek quarter, sending the Albaniansoldiers and suridjis (postillions), with their horsesto find a kon4k, according to the tenor of theVezir's letter.Jan. 9. — when preparing to set out this morningfor the Forty Saints, the Bishop of Delvinocomes to express his regret at my not having madehis house my lodging, but was not sorry probablyto escape the inconvenience attending the Turkand the horses. The bishop is of opinion, that inthe district of Delvino, as in most other parts ofAlbania, the M musulman are nearly equal in numberto the Christians.Sending forward the baggage to the FortySaints, I proceed to Finiki* which lies to the leftVOL, I. F66 EPiRus. [chap.of the direct road, about seven miles from Del vino,and do not arrive at the Skala until 4 in theafternoon. The entire hill of Finiki was surroundedby Hellenic walls. At the south-easternextremity was the citadel, 200 yards in length,some of the walls of which are still extant, fromtwelve to twenty feet in height. The masonry isof the third kind, that is to say, it is laid incourses, but which are not very regular or equal,nor are the stones all quadrangular, although fittedto one another with the same nicety as in thesecond, or polygonal, and in the fourth, or mostregular kind of Hellenic masonry. A stone in oneof the fragments of wall is eight feet by six on theoutside, and appears to be nearly as solid. In nopart are there more than four or five courses remaining.The modem village of Finiki, consisting of afew huts, lies directly under the citadel to thesouth-west. About the middle of the height isthe replacement of a very large theatre, the onlyremains of which are a small piece of rough wall,which encircled the back of the upper seats : atthe bottom in the place of the scene is a smallcircular foundation, apparently that of a tower,of a later date. The theatre looked directly towardsthe village of the Forty Saints and Corfu.Between it and the north-western end of the citadelare the remains of a Roman construction, built incourses of tiles, alternating with a masonry formedof rough stones, mixed with a great quantity ofmortar, and faced with square stones laid regularlyin the mortar, but with the angles instead of then.]EPiRus. 67sides uppermost: this mode of building was notuncommon in the decline of the Roman empire,and the beginning of that of Constantinople.There are some ruins of houses also of a stillmore modem construction, showing that Phoenixcontinued to flourish to a late period, when thechief part of the town appears to have been towardsthe river Yistritza, which defended thisheight to the eastward, as the Paula, or river ofKaliasa did to the west.In agreement with these appearances we findPhoenice to have been one of the cities of thegovernment of old Epirus, under the successorsof Constantine. It was among the places of thisprovince, repaired by Justinian, who, as it hadsuffered inconvenience from the lowness of thesituation, placed the new constructions on a neighbouringheight '. On the hill of the Acropolis Ifind accordingly some remains of columns in sillyof that polygonal, instead of circular shape, whichexactly marks the taste of the age of Justinian.About the time when the Romans first gaineda footing in Greece, PhoBuice was the strongest, mostpowerful, and richest city in Epirus'; notwithstandingwhich, it was taken without a blow by thesyrians, in the year B.C. 230. The ships ofApron having gained a victory over the italianson the coast of Acamania, and brought back arich booty to lUyria, the king, in the height ofhis exultation, indulged to such an excess in theHierocl. Synecd. Ed.Wess. ' Procop. de ^dif. 1. 4, c. 1.p. 652. » Polyb. 1. 2, c. 6, 8.F 268 Epirus. [Chap*pleasures of the table, that his death was theconsequence. His widow, Teuta, who to the inheritanceof his authority added a feminine disregardof consequences \ ordered her officers toplunder ail the ships which they riiould meet, andthus commissioned them to make war on all theworld *. Their first object was a descent on Elisand Messenia; but the fleet having previouslyanchored on the coast, near Phoenice, for the purposeof obtaining a supply of provision ^ the ckMn-flanders there entered into a conference with someGallic mercenaries, who, to the number of 800^were employed by the Epirotes to garrison Phce-nice, and by their assistance made themselvesmasters of the city.The Epirotes seem to have been quite preparedto receive the Roman yoke ; for their imprudencein trusting an important charge to a people not*nous for perfidy, was not more remarkable thantheir defective discipline in some of the transactionswhich followed, though their first operationwas well judged. Having collected their forcesand taken up a position on the bank of the riverwhich flowed by Phoenice, they removed the planksof a bridge which communicated with the city,with the view of securing their camp against thesyrians within the walls, and then sent a reinforcementto Antigoneiaia for the defence of the^ Xp**fiiyil Xoycv^ic yvyai- ' irJirar &ir9^e/£d9a woKjb^are/occ koI wpOQ airro ro ytyoyoQ friar rote ^yovfUyoiC'€Mr)(rifjLa fjtdyov &iro/3Xiirovffa, ' iwnnrta^iov xotpiy, — c. 5.ruth ^ Ikto^ oviev wipivtUTrTo-//<Vi|. c. 4.II.] EPIRUS. 69passes of the Aous against Scerdilaidas, a princeof the royal family of Illyria, of whose approachwith 5000 men they had received information.Too well satisfied with these precautions, theyneglected all further vigilance, and indulged withoutcaution in the plenty which the rich district ofPhoenice afforded. The Illyrianss in the city soontook advantage of their fault : issuing at night fromthe town, they replaced the planks of the bridge,drove the Epirotes from their position, and thenext morning beating them in the field, killed andcaptured many, and forced the remainder to retreatinto Titania. Soon afterwards Scerdilaidab arrivedat Phoenice, apparently without having encounteredthe enemy's forces at the pass of Antigone.The Epirotes meantime obtained succour fromthe italians and Chains, and again marchedtoward Phoenice. The opposing forces met at aplace named Helicranum, but no action ensued,partly in consequence of the difficulty of theground S and partly because Teuta, alarmed by adefection of a part of the Illyrianss to the Dardan,bad sent orders to recal her forces from Epirus.Scerdilaidas, therefore, retraced his steps throughthe pass of Antigoneiaia', after having made a treatyby which Phoenice, together with the free prisoners,were restored to the Epirotes, and the slaves andplunder were embarked in the lydian ships. Sogreat was the booty, and such the encourage-totusc. 6. rwv irapa Trft^ 'Ayrtydpiiav01 trtpi rov XkiphiKat^av (mv&y,VOL. I. F 3 •*-70 EPiRus. [chap.ment which it gave to Teuta, that she thoughtof nothing but plundering the cities of Greece,while the ungrateful Epirotes soon afterwardsjoined the Acamanes in an alliance with liberiaagainst heh benefactors of Achaia and ^tolia.It is probable that the route of Scerdilaidas, bothin coming and returning, was by the way of Gard*hiki and the pass of Skarfitza, and that the Piratesretreated as well as returned by the pass ofModena or Delvino, that having been the routefrom Phcenice towards Aiintania» Helicranum Itake to have been the modern Delvino, for thecastle hill at the entrance of a very important passis such a position as could hardly have been leftunoccupied by the ancients ; and the raggedground about it accords exactly with the words ofthe historian.The ascertaining of the position of Promise is extremelyuseful in illustrating the topography of allthe adjacent part of Chaoniay and greatly assists informingan opinion on the difficult question of thesite of Antigo7i€ia. How it happened that Scerdilai-cas metwith no opposition at the Antinomian passes,the historian has not stated, but he expressly assertsthat the prince took this road both in going and inreturning. As Scotia was the royal residence, wecannot doubt that, after crossing the open maritimecountry of Illyria, he entered the mountainsof Epirus near Bulls now Gradista, and followedthe valley of the Aous to Tepel^ni. The only otherroad he could have taken was by the modern Beratto Klisura, which was not only more circuitous, butmore dangerous, since it would have obliged himII.] EPIRUS. 71to traverse the defile of the Viosa in its whole length,and afterwards that of its tributary the Dr3mOy abovethe junction, or in other words, the passes both ofKlisura and of Tepel^ni. In the other case he notonly avoided the pass of Klisura, but followed ashorter road. It can hardly be questioned, therefore,that the Stena of Antigoneiaia intended by Polybins, was the pass to the southward of Tepel^niwhich leads from that town along the left bank ofthe Dryno towards Arghyrokastro.But this could not have been the same passwhere Philip, son of Demetrius, was defeated bythe Romans under Quinctius, though Livy describesit as being at Antigoneiaia, and applies to itthe same Greek word Stena, which Polybius employson the former occasion ; for Philip was notdefending the approach to lUyria, but that whichled from the western coast of Epirus through theinterior of this province into Upper Macedonia andUpper Thessaly, whither the Romans proceeded inpursuit of the enemy after having forced the Stena,It is evident, therefore, upon examining the placesthemselves, that there were two passes, or rather apass with two branches, one of which communicatedfrom the maritime parts of Epirus in a northerlydirection to the maritime plains of lUyria, theother leading eastward from the same country towardsUpper Macedonia and Thessaly. The first is^ QiiflB ad Antigone fauces on this great event from severalsunt (Stena vacant Graeca). authorities both Greek andLiv. 1. 32, c. 5. — Livy hints Latin,that he derived his information72 EPiRus. [chap.that which I have called the pass of Tepel^ni; dielatter is the Stena itself, as the defile is still called,which conducts along the Viosa from Tepel^ni byDrag6ti and KUsura into the valley of Premedi.Antigoneiaia having given name to both passes, canonly be sought for near their junction, whereTepeleni is the only place which has the appearanceof an ancient site. We can arrive thereforeat no other conclusion than that here stood Antigoneiaia.It may be admitted that in this case An*tigoneia was too distant from the entrance of theStena effectually to command that pass, but it entirelyobstructs the other, and standing on a commandingheight at the junction of a tributary, withthe Lousy just at the point where the straits expandinto a more open and fertile valley, it has all therequisites for the situation of a town of that importancewhich, from the ancient authorities, we maypresume Antigoneiaia to have been ^The next question in the comparative geographyof this part of Epirus is the situation of Phanote.In the winter of the year 170—169 B.C., PiusClaudius, anxious to repair the effects of hisdefeat in lUyria, marched from thence into Epirus,and laid siege to Phanote. But hearingsoon afterwards that Perseus had entered stolid,and attacked Stratus, which was then defendedby Populous and his j£tolian allies, heraised the siege of Phanote, and began his retreatThe name sounds as if it may have replaced one morewere not more ancient than the ancient,third century B.C., when itIf.] SPIRU8. 73towards the plain of Ekeon \ Clevas, the officerof Perseus, who with a strong garrison defendedPhanote, followed the Romans, and, attackingthem on a difficult road, by which they wereobliged to pass along the foot of the mountains,killed 1000 and took 200 prisoners. Clevas, concertingoperations with Pisistratus, one of theEpirotes, who had endeavoured to betray Hostilityinto the hands of Perseus in the preceding year,then crossed into the district of Antigoneiaia, andbegan to plunder the country, with a view to drawthe garrison of Antigoneiaia into a valley, wherePisistratus was placed in readiness to fall uponthem. The stratagem completely succeeded, andthe garrison of Antigoneiaia sustained a loss almostas great as that of Claudius. Clevas then movedtowards the camp of Claudius in the plain ofElation ; but the latter had no inclination to engage,and finding that nothing was to be gained in Epirus,he dismissed his Epirote allies, and returnedwith the Italians into Illyricum.Every circumstance in these transactions tendsto show that Gardhiki was the site of Phanote.The strength and remarkable situation of thattown, in the midst of a valley surrounded by anamphitheatre of mountains, through which thereare only two narrow passes, are a sufficient presumptionthat it was the site of one of the principalfortresses of ChaMia, and the positionmidway between the channel of Corcyra and theAntinomian passes would render it particularlyin campo quern Leona vo€ani. — c. 23i 1. 43.74 Epirus. [chap.important to the Romans advancing from lUyria ;and naturally the first object of Claudius, Antigonebeing already in the hands of the Romans ortheir allies.The name of Phanote again occurs in a transactionwhich took place a few months earlier, and fromwhich we learn that the most important militarypoint on the Aous, in the line of communication betweenMacedonia and Epirus, was a bridge acrossthat river, which, as Antigoneiaia is not mentioned onthis occasion, would seem not to have been at thatplace or commanded by it. The consul, A. Thos*filius Marinus, proceeding to assume the commandof the Roman armies in Thessaly, had arrivedfrom Italy at Phanote, when the Epirotefaction, adverse to the Romans, thought the timeand place favorable to a design which they conceivedof betraying Hostility to Perseus, whomthey urged by letters to hasten his march towardsEpirus. But the Molossi, who were well disposedto the Romans, seized the bridge of the Aous, withthe determination of preventing the Macedoniansfrom crossing the river. Meantime the conspiracywas discovered, and revealed to Hostility by hishost, Nestor, of Opus, upon which he returnedto the sea-coast, embarked from thence for Anti-cora,in the Corinthian Gulf, and by that routeproceeded into Thessaly >.Applying this narrative to the country along thebanks of the Viosa, and to the general geographyPolyb. 1, 27, c. 14. NcV- Nestor was perhaps from Oro-toprf ^Chpunrlfy as Gronovius pus of Thesprotia, mentionedhas suggested, not Kpwirlf. by Stephens in voce.II,] EPIRUS. 75of Northern Greece, there can scarcely be a doubtthat the bridge alluded to by Livy was in theStena^ about midway between Klisura and Tepe-leni, where the communication is now carried onby means of two bridges.The route from Kardhiki towards Arghyr6-kastro, along the foot of the mountain, by Khume-litza, corresponds exactly to that in which Claudiuswas attacked by Clevas, if we suppose the plainJEkeon to have been that between Arghyr6kastroand Libokhovo, and Claudius to have pitched hiscamp about midway between those two towns.The name of the plain Elaeon seems to show thata city Elseus, which Ptolemy classes with Phoeniceand Antigoneiaia among the interior cities of ChaoniaS occupied a position in this valley ; and thename is the more remarkable, as we may supposeit to have been originally derived from the abundanceof olive-trees in the district, in which respectit is well adapted to this valley of the Dryno ; foralthough surrounded by lofty mountains coveredwith snow during a great part of the year, and oneof the coldest parts of Epirus, the valley itself isone of the few situations in Greece or Albania, distantfrom the sea, where olive-trees are now found.The town of Rubus was probably situated on theheights, opposite to Arghyrokastro, where it issaid that some remains of Hellenic walls still exist.The small theatre, and other ancient vestiges inthe plain below Lib6khovo, being of Roman construction,could not have existed at the time of thePtolem. 1. 3, c. 14.EPIRUS.[chap.transactions related by Livy. They mark probablythe position of a city which was founded by Hadrianand repaired by Justinian; and thence namedfirst HadrianopoliSy and afterwards, but probablyfor a short time, Justinianopolis. Mention of Hadrianopolisoccurs only in some authorities of theByzantine empire of the sixth and seventh centuries,at which time it was one of the cities of thegovernment of Old Epirus, as well as the see of abishopric \ The only authority which gives anyindication of its exact situation is the TabularItinerary. In this document there are two roadsfrom Apologia to Nicopolis : one (noticed also inthe Antoine) which led near the sea-coast by theAcroceraunia, Pboenice, and Buthrotum ; the otherby Amantiaia and Hadrianopolis, which last is placedabout midway between the two extremities of theroad '. One route, therefore, passed through theplain of Delvino ; the other, if Amantiaia was atNivitza, ascended the vale of the Sutzista to thatposition, and from the head of the valley crossed byPregonati, into the plain of Arghyrokastro, whichit followed in its entire length. It would, therefore,have passed exactly by the theatre, which stands notProcop. de ^dif. 1. 4, c. 1 .Act. Concil. — Hierocl. Synecd.Vessel. p. 651. — Tab. PettingSeem. V.Aulona Apollonia xxv. ; adAcroceraunia xxiii. ; Phcenicexli.; Butroto Vi.; Glacis LimenXXX. ; Actia Nicopoli xx. ; —Anton. It. Vessel. p. 329, 324.Apollonia xvi Aulona x xxiiiAcroceraunia xli Phoenice ViButharotum viii ad Diana xiiiCiclis Limen xx Actia Nice*poli. Apollunia xxx AmantiaiaIv Hadrianopoli xxiv Ilionxii xlv ActiaNicopoli. — Tab. Pcutinger,ibid.II.] Epirus. 77very far from the middle didtan<^ between Apologiaand NioopoHd. No great accuracy is to beexpected on this point, as several of the distancesin both the Itineraries are obviously erroneous.The only objection to this position of Indianapolisisy that ten or twelve miles lower down theriver are the ruins called Drynopolis, which namemay eerily be taken for a corruption of Hadrian*polls. These remains, however, and the theatre,are productions of two very different periods oftime. The latter is a work of the Pagans duringthe Roman empire. Drynopolis was a fortress orsmall town of the Byzantine empire ; the probability,therefore, is, that when Hadrianopolis fell toruin, Drynopolis was bililt upon a different site,and became the see of the bishopric, first namedfrom Hadrianopolis, thei from Drynopolis, andwhich, after the ruin of the latter, was transferredto Arghyrokastro. Nor is Drynopolis acorruption of Hadrianopolis, but taken from theriver on which it is situated, still called Dhryno^or Drink, or Drunk, which may possibly be theancient name still preserved of this branch of theAnus, and derived either from Spec or from somenative word which has given name also to anotherlarge river of Albania, the Drin, which flows fromthe lake of 'Akhridha into the Adriatic. As toDeropoli, or Deropugl, although this appellationis sometimes applied to the river, it belongs properlyto the whole valley, and may perhaps be acorruption of Hadrianopolis, to which all this extensiveplain probably belonged-when the city wasin its most flourishing condition.78 EPiRUS. [chap*Although Arghyrokastro has no very markedappearance of an ancient site, the name may possiblybe derived from that of the Argyrini, whomLycophron*, and two Greek authors cited by Stephens',show to have been an Epirote people,and whom Lycophron leads us to look for in thenorthern part of Epirus, as he couples them withthe Aero Ceraunii : in fact the word 'Apyvpcvoc isstill sometimes applied to a native of Arghyro-kastro.Jan. 10. — The scirocco has been constant at theForty Saints since my departure, and the boat inwhich I crossed the channel was not able to returnto Corfu till four days ago. Having prevailedupon the crew of another Corfiote boat, which hadjust arrived in the harbour with a lading of for Corfu, to defer their passage thitheruntil they have taken me to Primo and back,we sail for that port at 9.30 a.m., and arrive thereat2. The distance is about eighteen miles ; thewind was a gentle Onchesmite, like that whichcarried over Cicero to Brundusium.Between the Limeni of the Forty Saints and^ TLfj ^ Ik AifivaariQ aZdiQ ifiirlin'wv vvtoq.Etc *Apyvpiyovs koX Ktpavyiuty yawag"A^ei, Pap€i Tpritmipt KVfiaiviay Ana,''Ei'da irXav^n|v Xvjrpor o^pvyrai ftiovtAaKfXutylov irlyoyng AlarroQ pag.Lycophr. v« 1016.s V*Apyvpiyoi, cOkoc *Hireif>a»- Kepavyiwy vairac«^Stephan.TiKoy &Q Tlfiaiog Roi Oiuty Ka in voce.Avxd^pvy, £cc Apyvpivovg koin.]EPIRUS;Spirit, or the Skala of Nivitza, there are severalsmall creeks where boats may find shelter. Spiliais a creek at the mouth of a glen, where stands theruin of a magazine which was destroyed by Al^^Pasha when at war with Nivitza. Beyond it isLukovo, a small village on the side of the mountain,surrounded with terraces of vines and com; twoor three miles beyond which is Pikemes, somewhatlarger ; and two miles further Sopoto. BelowLukovo and Pik^mes are sandy beaches, whereboats anchor, and may be stranded in bad weather.Sopoto stands in a glen, and has a castle namedBordji, on the top of a steep rock commanded byHadji Beddo Aga, a partizan of the Veadr. Here arethe only Turkish families on this coast. Behind So*pot a river descends in a very deep and rocky ravine.A little farther north is Kiepero, on the edgeof a steep precipice, below which are a few fields,terminating in a beach which is separated fromPort Palerimo only by the point which shelters thatharbour to the southward and eastward. Palerimo,the ancient Panormus, which Strabo describes as agreat harbour in the midst of the Ceraunian mountains,and thus clearly distinguishes from the of Noricum, is divided into two bays by arocky peninsula, projecting into the middle of it.*AxpoKtpavylbiy SpitaVf Hdyop"/IOC ^f^^yy** Oy\riafWQ Xtfiiiv,Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 14.£2^2 X'^^^* "^^^ Tpt€uc6inoi9rdiuH dvo Tay Kcpawitav ijriTO ordfjta rod 'A/i/3paiC(icouicdXtrov* er dowry 3* itrrl rf 3ca-0T^/iarc UdvopfjidQ re, Xc/i^vfiiyac ^y fiitroiQ toIq KipavyioiQopttrtf Roi sura ravra OyXJItr^q^XtfAily ^XXoc» Raff 5v ra ^vtrfiiKO,&Kpa Tric KopKvpalaQ &yr/«r£crac.Strabo, p. 324.80 BPfRUB. [chaponthe summit oi which stands the kastro, or fortress.This castle is nothing more than a smallsquare enclosure containing a house, a church , andtwo four-pounders. Having brought a letter to theBulu-b&shi, or commandant, I land as soon as wearrive, and take shelter from the rain in his smallapartment, which is the only one in the placehaving a chimney. On the side of the hills borderingthe southern division of the port are a fewcornfields and vineyards, which, together withsome sheep on the hills, are tended by the tensoldiers who garrison the fort. Five of these areMusulmans, including the Bulu-bashi and his son ;the others are Greeks. At the extremity of thenorthern harbour the hills are well cultivated, butthese form part of the territory of the town of Chimaera,which possesses the exclusive right of fisheryin that division of the bay.A gale accompanied with rain, which comes onat night from the south-east, brings a ship ofDultjuni, in Italian, Dulcigno\ into the harbour,bound to that dace from Alexandria. As dieDulciniotes have the reputation of being inclinedto piracy, the garrison is alarmed, and preparesfor defence. Indeed they had already been put uponthe alert by our arrival, for our boat being fromCorfu, the governor suspected some Russian treachery,and before my cot was conveyed into the castle,it was searched lest it should contain concealedarms.Last summer a French pirate boat, which was^ Written in modem Greek, HrmfKrHovvn — the ancientOmnium.II.] Epirus. 81afterwards destroyed at Fan by one of the Britishships of war on this station, put into Palerimo,after having plundered some Maltese vessels underEnglish colours ; the Khimariotes formed a designof attacking it, on the plea of its being a pirate,but probably with a view of plunder ; not agreeinghowever among themselves, the project failed.Jan. 11. — ^^The wind shifts to ^^The westward, andthe weather clears up at noon. . At 1 , accompaniedby a servant, and preceded by one of the Corfioteboatmen and a guard from the castle, I proceedon foot to Khimara, no beasts of burthen being procurable,and the road scarcely admitting of theirbeing employed. The captain of the Dulciniote, abearded Turk, about seventy years of age, hadoffered to land m^ in the Bay of Chimera, and thusto save the detour along the side of the mountain ;but when we came alongside his ship, his authorityproved insufficient to obtain a party to row theboat. It appears that they are afraid of the Khiva*rites. After crossing the ridge at the extremityof the northern bay, and climbing along the sideof the hills which overhang the sea beyond it, wearrive at the end of an hour's walk from the castle,upon a little valley and beach where are someflocks. To the right, the sides of the mountainsare grown with velanidhies, or oaks, which producethe vallonea^ ; they still preserve their lastyear's leaves, but can hardly be called evergreens.We meet some shepherds to whom the sailor, witha few words of greeting, presents his snuff-box, theV heXayiSid, Quercus Mgilops,VOL. I. G82 EPiRUS. [chap.common compliment in Albania, and in these independentdistricts a necessary propitiation. Inreturn the shepherds call off their dogs, which hadmade a general charge upon ns.We soon arrive in sight of Khimara, situated onthe top of a pointed hill, and enter upon the cultivatedland which surrounds it, consisting of extensivevineyards, some fields of wheat just springingup, and others of barley, which the peasantsare ploughing, and will sow as soon as they cancatch a short interval of fair weather. On a highsummit under the mountains on the right is. amonastery of the Panaghia, on the left the portof Khimara, near the shore of which are somewater-mills, turned by a rivulet from the mountain.The harbour is exposed to the west, butaffords good shelter to small vessels from any otherwind, and has a fine beach. There is another moreopen ffpiaggia, two miles farther to the north, immediatelybelow the town, where boats are hauledup on the beach. Here is a small plain which,with the side of the hill between this plain and thevillage, is the best cultivated part of the territoryof Khimara. Immediately below the village aresome gardens, containing vines, olives, cypresses,and fruit-trees.At half-past three we arrive at the house ofCapt. Zacharias, the son of George*, vulgarlycalled Zakho-Ghiorghi, for whom I have a letterof introduction from Z. the collector, my host of theForty Saints. The house is as humble a dwellingII.] Epirus. 83as any captain's in Albania. In the inner room afire in the middle of the floor, and a mattrassspread by the side of it, are the luxuries speedilyarranged for me. Capt. George, who has attainedthe ordinary bounds of life, and has never beenabsent from his native village except three yearspassed in the Neapolitan service, expresses his delightat seeing an Englishman here for the firsttime. Two Germans some years ago, callingthemselves Englishmen, left a certificate withCapt. Constantine Andrntzi, which proves theimposture. Capt. Z.'s family consists of a son,the widow of another son killed in the service ofthe King of Naples, and two or three of his children.All are employed in preparing supper, butprincipally the widow. The dishes are baked, anda dingy towel spread close to the cinders, servesl)0th for table and tablecloth. The Captain, andthe sailor from the boat, who is honoured as aguest, are the only persons who join the table.After supper all the heads of houses friendly toZakho-Ghi6rghi come in and seat themselves cross-leggedaround the fire. They relate their adventuresin the Neapolitan or other services, for mostof the Khimariotes seek a livelihood as soldiersabroad. One states that he was in the war of Italywith Buonaparte, who made many inquiries of himconcerning this part of Albania, and told him atTrieste, that he meant to send 40,000 men toCorfu, and as many more to Avldna. They allspeak with pride of their liberty, meaning theirexemption from Turkish oppression, at the sametime that they lament their own internal anarchyG 284 Epirus. [chap.and dissensions, and agree that they should behappy to receive the blessing of good governmentfrom the hands of any sovereign in Europe exceptthe Turk, whom they are always determined toresist. They neither pay the khardtj nor anyother tax, except a contribution of thirty paras ahead per annum to Ibrahim Pash of Berat, for theliberty of trading to his ports. The right of pasturageon the lands of the town of Khim&ra, thatof gathering velanidhi on the mountains, and thatof fishing in the northern bay of Palerimo are enjoyedin common by all the inhabitants. Maizeis grown in the plain adjacent to the northernbeach, where the two torrents, which embrace thetown, overflow in the winter, and prepare the landfor receiving that grain. Wheat is produced withinthe territory, more than sufficient for the annualconsumption of the place in favorable seasons;but for two or three years past they have hardlyreaped enough for six months. Velanidhi, a smallquantity of wheat in good years, and sometimes alittle wine, which is of a dry kind and withoutflavour, are the only exports. The mountainbehind Chimera is said to abound in firs suited formasts, which might be brought down at a smallexpense, and would be a profitable undertaking, ifpoverty and dissension admitted of it.The village, or city as the natives are pleasedto qualify it, of Khimara^ more commonly pronouncedaccording to the Italian icajco^c^via Tjimara^contains 300 families : divided into five principalII.] EPIRUS. 85alliances called parentis in Italian, and in Greek^r/MaiCy a classical word which I hardly expectedto find in Albania. With one or other of these allthe inferior families are in alliance. The fratrisare, 1* The Lyganates\ consisting of sixty orseventy houses, at the head of which is Alexod*hero ', son of Alexis ; 2. The Tzakan&tes ', ofwhich my host Zakho-Ghiorghi is the vpwo^ : ithas upwards of eighty houses ; 3. The Koykadhes^,of which Zacharias Andrutzu'^ is the chief : of thesethere are about forty-five houses ; 4. The M abatesof whom John Trag^us^ is the chief; and, 5. TheKoKovpra^Q, of whom Andrew Pol us* is the head.The first and second are the only families, at present,who are not on speaking terms, but last Augustthere was a scuffle with sabres between Constantine,the brother of the chief of the third family,and Alexodhemo, the head of the first, in whichsome wounds were received before the quarrel wasadjusted, and the contending parties restored to anexchange of words. Another brother of the is now lieutenant-colonel of one of the regimentsof Cacciatori Albans in the Neapolitanservice. His major is a native of the town ofVuno. Constantine Andrutzi informs me that hewas twenty-eight years in the Neapolitan service,that he deserted to the French when they tookNaples, but that not obtaining any employment orencouragement from them, he returned to hisAvyavdns, * Za^apiag Avhpovri^ov^ or '*AXf{/ov. rpovr^ov, ' Ma^arcc-T(cu:aydr€c, ' 'I«aVvi|c Tpayvvovc*KkfyvKfiitg. ' Av^piat HdXovQ.86 Epirus. [chap.native country. When General Villette was raisinga corps of Albanians for the British service,G. Andriitzi was sent for to Corfu to i^ree upon theterms on the part of the Khimariotes. He speaksand reads Italian and French, is tolerably informedon the history and antiquities of this country, wishesmuch to enter the English service, and asserts thatwe may easily raise a body of 800 Khimariotesfrom the free villages of Khim&ra, and, wifhi thepermission of the Turks, twice that number in theneighbouring districts.There are about 100 pensioners of the King ofNaples in the town, officers included, who. are paidby Capt. Zakho, for which purpose he visits Corfuevery year to receive the pay from the Neapolitanconsul, whose agent he is. He receives a pensionof twelve ducats a month for. his own military services,four more for the consolation or agency, andeight ducats for the widow of a son who fell in theservice. So handsome .a provision after a shortpersonal service can only be considered as intendedto secure an influential agent in . the place, forZakho-Ghiorghi is looked up to as the chief manin Khimara by all except those who side with theLyganates, and who, of course, consider Alexod-hero the chief. The feud between the two partiesis of long standing ; the most remarkable contestoccurred ten or twelve years ago, when many livesare said to have been lost. The heads of the fra-triesare those who possess the largest proportion ofvineyards, cornfields, and flocks; and they formthe council of the family league. Between friendlyfratris disputes are easily made up, though evenII.] Epirus. 87among them the foundation and last resource ofthe law is the lex italians* As in Arabia a murdermay be acquitted for money. At Khimara 2000Turkish piastres are the usual price of blood ; at thenext village of Vuno it is 1000. Until this be paidthe retaliation goes on. The power of the headsof families, Capt. Zakho observes, is merely theinfluence of property and character, and is neitherasserted nor acknowledged. '^ That man' pointingto an attendant, ^^. though he receives his payfrom me, will do nothing I order unless he pleases'He shows, however, at the same time, that he candesire the man to bring his papa and lay it on hisshoulders. There are several soldiers here on leaveof absence, during which they receive their pay.One has a twelvemonth's leave. The pay of aprivate is 28 grant per diem; that of a Serjeant-major34 ; of a captain 80 ducats a month ; of alieutenant-cokmel 110; but they find their ownarms and clothes. A Neapolitan soldier has nothalf as much. There are three or four Khimariotecaptains now recruiting here for their corps atNaples.The Khimariotes often intermarry with the peopleof Vuno, the territory oi which is separated onlyfrom that of Khimara by the crest of the ridge tothe north-westward, which looks down upon Vuno.But notwithstanding these alliances, the two townsare generally on terms of suspicion, and often inopen hostility. This, indeed, is the ordinary conditionof two neighbouring towns in Albania, and,by a natural consequence, those which are separatedfrom one another by a third territory are88 EPiRus, [chap.generally in alliance, which in fact is not uncommonon a larger scale in other parts of the world.The name of Khimara is generally applied tothe whole of the ancient Acrocerauman ridge, fromCape Befall to Cape Glossa, including the valleyof Oricum. The towns are in the following orderfrom south to north : Nivitza, Lukovo, Pikemes,Sopoto, Kiepero, Khimara, Vuno, Dhrymadhes,Palasa, and Dukadhes. All these places standon the western slope of the Acrocerauniat exceptDukddhes, which looks to the Gulf of Auhn.There are also a few smaller villages in Kliimara,one of which, named Piliuri, is in sight from thetown of Khimara to the eastward, towards thesummit of the mountain, in a pass leading to theTurkish village of Kutzi. At Corfu I met a certainCount Gika \ of Dhrymadhes, who describedthat place as very picturesque, with a river runningthrough it ; and added, that near Dukadhesare forests of fine oaks and pines, furnishing timberwhich might easily be brought down the hillsinto the lagoon of Erikho. All the towns havenearly the same semi-barbarous manners and customs.The Greek language is spoken by almostall the men, and the Italian by those who havelived abroad ; but the women in general knowlittle of any language but the Albanian.Khimara being situated on a steep rocky height,protected on either side by the ravine of a torrent,and having all its exterior houses prepared fordefence, has by its strength hitherto served as aII.] Epirus. 89barrier to all the northern part of the districtagainst the arms of Aljr Pasha. Three or fouryears ago, the Khimariotes fought with his troopson the hill above Palerimo. More recently, onvisiting the latter place, he proposed to purchasea piece of land from the Khimariotes, for thepurpose of building a castle, which they wiselyrefused. He has often recommended this harbourto the use of British ships; his principal objectin which, as he confessed to me, is that by this 'appearance of support from us, he may find itmore easy to bring the Khimariotes under hisyoke. It was in a manner somewhat similar thathe obtained Nivitza and Aio Vasili ; and thus itis that he always endeavours, in his transactionswith the powers of Europe, to convert them intoinstruments of his own aggrandizement. FromKhimara to Tepeleni is reckoned a four days'journey in this season, though the direct distanceis not more than 20 G. miles : the first day is toKutzi, the third to Nivitza on the Sutzista, which,like the other streams of this country, is difficultto pass in seasons of rain. Nivitza is inhabitedby Musulman lippe, and is described as situatedon a peaked rock, surrounded by deep ravines andtorrents, where considerable remains of ancientwalls are preserved, and in the castle particularlyan entire door. It is agreed by all who haveseen these walls, that they exactly resemble somepieces of Hellenic work, which now serve as foundationsto several of the modem houses of Chimaera.The masonry approaches to a regular kindnot any of the blocks of stone having more90 BPraus. [chap.than five sides. These relics, together witib thename, leave no question that Khimara stands uponthe exact site of the ancient Chimaera, which Ibelieve is noticed only by Pliny. I was informedof an inscription in a private house, but as itbelonged to one of the adverse faction, I couldnot obtain permission to see it.Jan. 12. — ^As neither the season, nor the engagementsof the boat in which I came to Palerimo,nor the doubtful politics and civilization ofthe CeraunianSy will admit of my exploring Chimeraany farther, still less of being able by thisroute to examine the topography of Amantiaia,Oricum, BuUis, or Apologia, I am under thenecessity of returning to Palerimo and Corfu.The people of Dukadhes, who possess the valleyabove Oricuniy are the principal difficulty, havinga reputation something like that of the Kakovuli-ones of Mani.Though the wind is favorable this morning forreturning by sea to the Forty Saints, and theweather delightful, Captain Zacharias pushingthe laws of hospitality to a semi-barbarous extent,will not allow me to walk back to Palerimo,until a lamb, which he sends for fromthe hills, has been baked and served up on thefloor.After this Homeric breakfast we descend toPalerimo, accompanied for two miles by CaptainConstantine Andrutzi : two guards, formerly Neapolitansoldiers, armed with musquets, walk withus as far as the boundary of the territory, betweenthe northern Bay of Palerimo and the isthmus ofII.] Epirus. 91the castle. Here, having received a present, theyfire off their musquets and return. We embarkat 2 P.M. with a light northerly breeze, whichsoon falls to a calm ; and, rowing all the way,arrive at half-past nine at the Forty Saints by afine moonlight.In all this part of Albania it is a prevailingidea, not uncommon also in many parts of Greece,that the country formerly belonged to the Spaniards,and that all the ruins are the work of thatpeople; those at the Forty Saints, the castle ofDelvino, the ruins in the plain of Deropugl, theremains of an old Turkish castle at Tepeleni, andeven the Hellenic walls of Phoenice are supposedto be of Spanish construction. It is difficult tounderstand how this opinion originated, for theCatalans, the only Spaniards who made any permanentsettlements in Greece, were not in thisquarter, nor can any one of the ruins in Epiruswith any probability be ascribed to them.I had made an agreement with the Corfiotes toproceed to Vutzindro, and Parga, and from thenceto Corfu, but this being the Greek new year'sday, and feast of St. Basil, the sailors get drunkand insolent, and the bargain breaks off.Jan. 14. — Having found another vessel, we sailalong the coast to the Bay of Buthrotum^ passingbetween the two rocks off Kassopo, which are sucha dangerous impediment to the safe navigation ofthis channel. They lie midway between the castleof Kassopo and a wide bay on the shore of Epiruswhich is separated only from the lake of Vutzin-dro by a long ridge of land, not broader in someEpirus.[chap.parts than a mile. The bay is called Examili, inallusion to the isthmus, that name being oftenattached by the modern Greeks to an isthmus,whatever may be its breadth. It is thus appliedto the Isthmus of Corinth, and to that of theThrcunan Chersonese near Cardia. The Bay ofExamili is open and exposed to the west, but thesouthern part is well sheltered by four islets,which have given to the anchorage within themthe name of Tetranisa. Beyond this there is arugged coast, parallel to the eastern extremisof Corfu, and forming with it the narrowest partof the channel. The most projecting point onthe continent is probably the Cape Posidium ofPtolemy and Strabo ^ Between Onchesmus andPosidium, Ptolemy places a Cassiope, which heclearly distinguishes from the Cassiope of Corcyra,by describing the former as a harbour, thelatter as a town and promontory'. Cassiope ofEpirus, therefore, if Ptolemy is correct, wouldXtfifiVf Kaa<n6irrf XififiVf IIo<r/-iioy axpoyf BovOpurroy xSkiroCfHi^Xw^ijc \i^fiy» — Ptolem. 1. 3.c. 14.fieri TLayopfi6t te \ifiiiy fuyaQiv fiiaoic ro(c Kepavv/oic 6pt<n'Kol fiery ravra "Oy^ritrfto^ X*-dxpa rfiQ KopKvpalag 6.yriKEirai'Kal iraXiv dXXoQ KaatnoTfi^ 6,<f>*ov It SpeyriiTiov \i\ioi cxra-k69wi araiioi' ol S* "itroi Ka inlTanagra &iro aXXov hKpwnipiovvoTuaripov r$c Ka<r<rt($inic SraXov<rc ^aXeucpoK. Mi 2c"OyxnafJLoy Ho^l^toy teal Bov-dp^fToy viri Tf tn-dfULTi IIiiXw-Novi: XifiiyoQ, — Strabo, p. 324.Kaaffiowfi ir<(Xcc '^a^ ajcpa.Ptolem, ibid. For the Cas-slopeof Corc3rni and its templeof Jupiter Cassius, see Pliii«1. 4, c. 12. Sueton. in Nero.c. 22. Procop. de B. Goth.1. 4, c. 22. and some of thecoins of Corcyra.II. J EPIRUS. 93seem to have stood in the harbour of Tetranisa.It is on the strength of this evidence of Ptolemy,that Strabo has been supposed to allude to aCassiope on the coast of Epirus, in statingthat the distance from port Cassiope to was 1700 stades. I have little doubt,however, that he intended the harbour of Cas-slopein Corcyra, from whence it is more probablethat vessels should begin their passage toItaly, than from any port on the Epirote coastto the southward of Onchesmus. If Strabo didnot intend a place in Corcyra, why should hehave described Phalacrum, (which we know fromPtolemy and Stephens to have been a promontoryof that island), as lying to the southward of Cas-slope;or why should he have returned to On-chesnutbefore he described the ports of Posidiumand Buthrotum ? This seems clearly to show thatall which occurs between his first mention of On-chesnut,and his return to it, relates to Corcyraonly ; that his Cassiope was the modem Kassopo,and his Phalacrum the north-western point ofCorfu. It is true that this cape is nearly due westof Kassopo, instead of being to the south ; buterrors of bearing are among the most common ofancient inaccuracies. Strabo's distance of 1700stades cannot assist in deciding the question, becausethe difference of distance from Brindisi toKassopo in Corfu, or from Brindisi to any pointon the Epirote coast, is too small on so long a lineto lead to any certainty, especially in reference toso incorrect an authority or text as those of Strabo.94 Epirus. [chap.His imperfect knowledge of the general form ofthese coasts is shown, not only by his mistakenbearing of Phalacrum from Cassiope, but by hisstatement also that the distance from Phalacrumto Tarentum is equal to that from Cassiope toBrundusium, there being a great excess in theformer line whether the latter be measured fromthe coast of Corcyra, or from that of Epics. Asto the mention supposed to have been made byother authors beside Ptolemy, of a Cassiope inEpirus, it is clear that they all, without exception,intended the Cassope, of which the territory borderedon the Ambracic Gulf ^If Phalacrum was the north-western cape ofCorfu, the southern extremity, or Cavo Banco,was probably the Amphipagus of Ptolemy ' ; foralthough the words Leueimne and Bianco have asimilar import, the modem name Al^fkimo is amuch stronger proof of the identity of the ancientLeueimne with the low cape advancing into thechannel of Corfu, eight miles to the northward ofCape Bianco. The name Amphipagus correspondsto such an abrupt and rocky height as Cavo Bianco,and with the more propriety, as it is a contrastto the low sandy promontory of Al^fkimo.It is observable also, that the placing of Amphi-pagesat Cavo Bianco agrees with the order ofnames in Ptolemy, which is as follows : CassiopeScylax in Kavawwdloi* — Salon.Strabo, p. 234 ; Stephan. in ' Ptolem. L 3, c. 14.Kaaaifwii, — Demosth. orate. deII.] EPIRUS. 95(Kassopo) ; Psychic (Vico) ; Corcyra (Corfii) ;Leucimne (Alefkimo); Amphipagus (Cavo Bianco); Phalacrum (Cape Drastic or the New.Cape). The only remarkable promontory inCorcyra which seems here omitted, is that at thesouthern entrance of the Channel of Kassopo.As we approach Vutzindro, the water becomesmuddy, and in the bay is almost fresh. This bayis very shallow on the northern side, and the barat the mouth' of .the river will even now, when thewater is at the highest, but just admit of the entranceof xaorio, or small coasting vessels. We row three orfour miles up the river, through a plain once perhapsthe property of Attics, the friend of Cicero S andnow peopled with horses from the neighbouringvillages. We then arrive at the Vivari *, or morevulgarly Livari; that is to say, the principalfishery, which is on the left side of the river, at itsexit from the lake, nearly opposite to the peninsulawhich was anciently occupied by Buthrotum.The only buildings at the Liv&ri are a ruinedhouse of Venetian construction, and near it an oldtriangular castle, occupied by a dirty bilibash ofthe Vezir,' and fifteen or twenty soldiers. Theplace is called BourJ^Avrpov^ vulgarly pronouncedVu^indro : the territory comprehends all the lake,and a part of the surrounding hills. In the houselive the superintendent of the fishery and fourteenGreeks, who are employed by him. The fish arecaught by means of a strong permanent dam,made of lai^e beams, crowned with a palpitatingCicero ad Attic. 1. 4, ep. 8. ' From wtarwm*96 Epirus. [chap.of reeds. At intervals are small chambers in thedam, where the fish are taken in passing out ofthe lake. A man who is on the watch, gives asignal for shutting the door as soon as the chamberis full. There is a second dam above the first, forthe purpose of breaking the force of the water, butthe late violent rains have carried away great partof it, and injured the fishery for the remainder ofthe season, which usually lasts from September toMarch. The yearly average quantity of fish caughtis 350,000 litres, or Greek pounds, which are thesame as the Venetian. This year, though theseason is only half over, they have caught 400,000.The fishery is farmed from the Vezir for fifty-fivepurses by N. Y. of Kalarj^es, the bishop of loan-nina,and G. Z. of the Forty Saints. In the samefarm is included the fishery of a smaller lakenamed Riza, to the south-eastward of the greatlake; that of a lagoon called Armyro on thenorthern side of the mouth of the river, the pasturageof the marshy land near the river and lake,and the privilege of cutting wood (but not constructiontimber) in the forests and marshes of theterritory of Vutadndro, as it was defined by treatybetween Venice and the Turks. Beyond tJiat linethe wood-cutters pay for the privilege to Konispoli,which possesses all the south-eastern part of thefine plain, extending from the southern extremityof the lake to the foot of the hills which border theChannel of Corfu in face of the city.The right of fishing with nets in the lakeslagoons, and river, is underlet by the farmers toCorfiotes, who employ many boats in this manner.II.] Epirus. 97The fish are salted on the spot, and the greaterpart sent to Corfu, which depends upon Vutzindroand the Gulf of Artaa for its supply of fish duringthe long fasts of the Greek church ; the rest aresold in the villages around for a great distance.From hence also Corfu is chiefly furnished withfirewood, and with staves to make casks for its oiland wine. These circumstances explain the importancewhich Venice always attached to the possessionof Bucintro. The wood is chiefly procuredon a mountain rising steeply from the eastern sideof the lake and plain, and called Milia-veni, froma little village near the summit, which is in sightfrom Corfu. The French are said to have formerlyprocured from thence some good timber for shipbuilding.Under its south-eastern extremity, betweenit and another mountain, is the lake Riza,which is three or four miles long, and sends fortha stream which enters the lake of Vutzindr6, nearlyopposite to the ruins of Buthrotum. Along theeastern side of the lake Riza passes the directroad firm Delving to Murcia, a village at thesouthern extremity of the plain, from whence itcontinues to Konispoli and Filiates. The road fromthe livari to Delvino follows the western side ofthe same lake, and joins the former road at theupper or northern extremity of the lake, near asource of salt water. On some low eminencesrising from the southern bank of the lake Riza arethe villages Sara and Zaropulo, which are comprehendedin the district of Vutzindro. Thefishery of this lake, as I before remarked, forms apart of the farm of the great livari, but is subjectVOL. I. H98 EPiRUs. [chap.to the payment of one hundred and eighty okes offishto Selim Bey Koka, who owns the neighbouringland.Konispoli is a scattered town of four or five hundredAlbanian families, conspicuous from Corfuby its situation on the summit of the maritimeridge, which stretches from the plain at the mouthof the Kalama, as far as the bay of Vutzindro.Inland the plain extends southward from Vutzin-dro behind this ridge, for a distance of about fivemiles, and a river flows through it into the lake.The southern part of the plain belonged to a Helleniccity, of which remains are found on theedge of the plain, to the northward of Konispoli ;the other end was obviously a part of the territoryof Buthrotum.About twenty days ago there was a battle atKonispoli, between the two parties which dividethe town ; at the head of one is Mahmud Dali^ni,whose niece was married to Mukhtar Pasha sometimeago, but divorced by him and then marriedto Selim Bey, of Delvino, who now resides atKonispoli. The other chief is Ismail Aga, a friendof the Vezir, whose assistance he demanded ; butbefore it could arrive Ismail had made up matterswith his adversary. The Vezir's party at Konis-poli and Filiates are called Jacobins ^ by theiropponents, in imitation of the party appellationsof the Corfiotes. Aljr was displeased with Ismailfor not allowing time for his interference ; butstill hopes, by his means, to obtain possession^ *IaK'o/3(Voc.n.] EPiRus. 99of Konispoliy which would be a great step towardshis object of - subjugating the whole ofTzamuria.Wild swine are very numerous among thethickets along the edge of the lake, particularly inthe peninsula of Buthrotum ; and the place is infestedwith jackals, which at night make as hideousa noise as those in the plains of Palestine.Woodcocks are very numerous, and the lake isnow covered with ducks.A Greek of loannina, who is employed at theLivari, had established, at the expence of six hundredpiastres, a small shop and wine-store, whichwas totally carried away by the late inundations.Of the two years he has dwelt here, he has beenill the greater part of the last. In summer the airis extremely unhealthy ; and there is no drinkingwater, but that of the river, which in winter is extremelyturbid.As one of the states of Epirus, Buthrotum hasnot received any more notice from history thanthe cities of this province in general. It was occupiedby CsBsar soon after he had taken Oricum \and before the time of Strabo had become a Romancolony*. Virgil had a most imperfect idea of theplace, when he applied to it the epithet of lofty ;and its resemblance to Troy is very like that ofMonmouth to Macedon. It would be difficulteven to find the dry torrent to which the followersCaesar de B.C. 1. 3, c. 16. ' Strabo, p. 324.H 2100 EPIRUS. [chap.of Helens had given the name of Xanthus \ Thewords which the Latin poet applies to the Pheea-can citadel are better chosen, and exactly describethe two rocky summits or Kopvi^ai, which havegiven its modern name to Corcyra '.Strabo was so far acquainted with the site ofButhrotum, as to know that it stood on a chersonese; but in placing it at the mouth of the harbourPelodes, he was either greatly misinformed,or the word Xi^voc has been improperly substitutedin his text for Xc/uvf?c S and the name Pelodes belongedto the lake as well as the harbour; forPtolemy, Plutarch*, and the word itself, sufficientlyidentify Pelodes with the muddy bay ofVutzindro. Ptolemy, indeed, distinguishes betweenthe Bov0p(ii>roi; KoXwoQ and the TltiXbiSiic Xifi^v ;placing the former next to Cape Posidium : posPlotinus aerial Pliseacuin absconding archesLitoraque Epiri legis, portuque sublimesChronic et celsam Buthroti ascending urbem.Ante urbem in lucy, Ddsi Simmonds ad undaLibabat cineii Andromache masque vocatHectoreum ad tumulus •Proceed et parian Trojan, simulataque magnusBergamo et trente Xanthi cognomen rivumAgnosco, Scaeseque amplector limina ports.Virgil. Mn. 1. S, v. 291» 302, 348.^ errovc Kop^vc. povfi<ri(ovTif eirolKovg e^^&fv *P«i»-Mere ^£ ''Oyxn^fM)y9Uo(r£l- /xaiowc.— Strabo, p. 324.cloy Kol BovSptoToy^ iwl rf trro' * Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 14. —ficH-i Tov KoXovfiivov IIi^Xw^ovc Plutarch. de defect. Ora.Xifiiyott i^pvfiiyoy iy T6irf x€p-11.] EPIRUS. 101sibly port Pelodes was the modem Armyro, whichmay have been converted in process of time by thedeposit of the river, from a well sheltered harbourinto a lagoon on the northern side of the river'smouth. The ruins of Buthrotum occupy a peninsulawhich is bounded on the western side by asmall bay in the lake, and is surrounded from thenorth to the south-east by the windings of theriver just above its issue. The walls of the Romancolony still exist in the whole circumference, whichis about a mile, and are mixed with remains bothof later and of Hellenic work, showing thatthe city always occupied the same site. Withinthe inclosure are the ruins of a large church, oftwo or three small ones, and of some cisterns,baths, and houses. There are also some fragmentsof granite columns and of other marbles.The towers which flank the wallswere built with a salient angle, I Iand some of them were of this \^^form. The citadel was towardsthe bay of the lake, where the side of the peninsulais the highest and steepest. Of the Hellenicremains there is a very perfect piece of wall on thesouth-eastern side, which, as it consists of regularcourses, is probably not much older than the timeof Pyrrhus. There is also a fine remnant on thewestern side, of which the courses are nearly equaland parallel, and appear entirely so at a distance ;but on a nearer inspection, few of the stones arefound to be quadrangular, nor the courses regular.Immediately opposite to the house of the fishery102 BpiRUS. [chap.are some other ruins which appear to be Venetian ;among them is a tower resembling those on thecoast of Malta. There is a similar one in the passbehind the Limeni of the Forty Saints.Jan. 15. — ^A rocky summit on the western sideof the ruins commands a fine view of the Epirotecoast, from the cape near Palasa to the islands ofSj^vota, as well as of all the eastern side of Corfu.The plain of Delvino is. seen beyond the lake,together with the surrounding mountains. Onthe narrow ridge which separates the lake fromthe bay of Examili, stands the monastery of St.George, surrounded with gardens, olive-grounds,and vineyards; it is now occupied by Alj^ as amilitary post. A little beyond the southern pointof the bay of Vutzindro is a small port calledGlyfa, a little within Cape Still : then occurs theharbour of Ftelia, or Amelia, which is well sheltered,and though small is a good anchorage forships of commerce ; then Kataito, a little openport, then Bagnio, a good harbour for merchantships. Beyond Banana, the villages, Konlspoli,Liopesi, and Saiddha^ crown the hills whichborder the coast. Under Saiadha is a sandyshallow bay, exposed to the north-west, in whichis a scala called Persia, which is the ordinarylanding-place from Corfu on the way to Filiatesand loannina, and from whence the island is usuallysupplied with cattle, sheep, hogs, and otherprovision.II.] Epirus. 103At the mouth of the river Kalama, the ancientThames, there is an island or peninsula affordinggood shelter, immediately beyond which is the bayof Gomenitza, a fine harbour for ships of any sizeand number ; the entrance is narrowed by the shoalsformed by the Kalamd, which extend from Persiaall the way round to the bay of Gomenitza. Closeto the mouth of the river, on the north, is the insulatedmountain called Mavronoro, which seemsonce to have been an island, as all around it arelow sandy points. It seems to be the projectionwhich Ptolemy entitles the promontory or promontoriesof Thyamis^ ; the low promontoriesaround it would justify the plural number. Fiveor six miles to the southward of Gomenitza are theislands Sybota, which still bear the ancient names.They shelter a small bay, where on the shore ofthe main land stands a village of Musulman Albaniansnamed Vrakhana or Multo. Strabo has notnoticed any place between Buthrotum and Sybota :an unfortunate omission, as there must have beenanciently some important towns in the rich districtsnear the mouth of the Thames, concerning whichno author has left us any precise information.Tarane would seem from Ptolemy to have stood inone of the bays between the mouth of the Kalamaand S^^vota.The country which lies to the southward of theUriXM^ri^ XififlVf QvdfitWQ arpa, Qvdfiio^ worafiov UfioXai,TopMvif, 2vj3ora Xififiv, — Ptolemy, 1. 3, c. 14.To Sw/5ora.104 EPiRus. [chap.districts of Vutzindro and Delvino, as far as theKalama, is called Parakalamo. ^tXarcc, pronouncedFiliates by the Albanians, is the principal town ofParakdlamo. With the exception of a few Christianartisans and shopkeepers, it is entirely inhabitedby Musulman Albanians, contains several handsomemosques, and about 2000 houses, which, asin the generality of Albanian towns, are dispersedover a great space ; the ground is hilly, and theplace is situated at a distance of some miles fromthe plain of the Kalama. Ibrahim Demis andIbrahim Stambulis are the two principal chieftains,and can bring two or three thousand armed Musulmansinto the field.Plessaritza is a large Greek village on a rockyhill to the northward of Filiates, and situated abovethe western side of a valley which forms the naturalcommunication between the vale of the Kalamaand that of Delvino. Beyond Plessaritza, towardsDelvino, are Kotzika and Vera, in the narrowestpart of the valley abovementioned : this pass, andthat of Neokhori, in the mountains which separatethe valley of the lower Kalam4 from the districtsof Paramythia and Margariti, are the only two entrancesinto that valley on the land side, exceptthe difficult route which leads into it along theriver from the north-eastward. Hence Parakdlamo,Daghi, to the south of the Kalama, Margarita, andParamythia, have hitherto remained independentof Aly Pasha.Jan. 16. — Return this morning to Corfii, in aboat of that island with a gentle scirocco. At twoII.] EPIRUS. 105thrills of the distance down the river stands a housebuilt by a Corfiote, who owns also part of the plain ;but his speculation having failed, the house is nowin ruins. Aljr Pasha having already made so muchprogress in gaining possession of the Ex Venetianplaces, is desirous of purchasing this property fromthe Corfiote.CHAPTER III.SECOND JOURNEY.stolid.Landing at Varassova — Galata — River Evenus — Bokhori —Calydon, Chalcis, Taphiassus, Macynia — Mesolonghi — Plea"ran, Proschium^ Pylene — Khierasovo— Mount Zygos, Ara-cynthia— Ston-gambo — Vrakhori — Chorography of Karlili —Kuvelo — Vlokho — Thermus — Mount Pancetolkum — RiverEmi tza — Zapandi — River Aspro, Ackelous — Stratus — Le-pen— Capture of Thermus by Philip son of Demetrius — Me-papa,Conope, Lysimachia, Olenus^ lake Hyria^ Acra Tricho^fuum^ Phytceum^ Agrimum^ Thestia.June 12, 1805. — At 11 p.m. I embarked withtwo servants and a Tatar courier in a boat ofKefalonia from the Skala of Patra for the oppositecoast; but a light breeze, blowing directlyagainst us from the lagoon of Mesol6nghi, andour boat being furnished only with two oars, itwas not until the morning of June 13, at 8.30,that I landed at the ruin of a tower of Venetian,or lower Greek construction, at the foot of MountVarassova, as that immense pile of rock is herecalled which closes the plain of the Evenus to theCHAP. III.] .Stolid. 107eastward, but which is more commonly knownat Patra by the name of Mount Galata, from avillage of that name. The other steep mountainor promontory towards 'Epakto, which at Patra isgenerally called Paleo-vuni, is here better knownby the name of Kaki-scala. The landing-place ofVarassoTa is in an angle, where the level coast atthe mouth of the Venus terminates, under theclio of the mountain, which rise almost perpendicularlyto the summit. Several copious streamsof the purest water issue from the foot of themountain, and form a pond and marsh near thebeach, from which a stream flows into the sea.Most of these fountains are within fifty yards of thebeach; and there is one which rises in the sea itselften or twelve feet £rom the shore, forcing its wayto the surface, and making the water all around itfresh. From these sources the place receives thename of Trio-nero.Some return mules, which have brought hitherplank from the interior mountains to be transportedto Zakytho, afibrd the means of forwardingmy baggage to Galata. At noon I leave the sea-beachon foot, but soon meet some horses, sentfrom the village by order of Osman Bey, a Turkof 'Epakto, who owns Galata. The plain is verymarshy near the sea, but farther inland is fertile ;and near Galata and Bokhori produces maize,com, oil, wine, silk, and rice. Of the latter graina great quantity might be grown, as there arelarge uncultivated tracts in the plain well adaptedto it. Two or three miles to the northward of108 JBTOLIA. [chap.Oalati and Bokhori, the valley of the JEvenuSjnow called Fidhari, branches from the maritimeplain. It is inclosed by hills clothed with oaks,and has a rich and beautiful appearance.Galata is a Turkish village of thirty houses,distant 2^ miles north, 60 west, from Trio-nero ; itis situated in the midst of olive plantations andcornfields, and though surrounded also by ricemarshes, is said to be not unhealthy. The peasantsare now employed in reaping barley. TheTurk who brought the horses conducts me to ibiscottage, provides a dinner, and accompanies meinthe afternoon to Mesolonghi. We are preventedfrom setting out till 4.53, by a heavy rain,accompanied with thunder, an occurrence almostdaily in the mountainous parts of Greece in theearly summer. The clouds begin to collect onthe mountains about 9 o'clock, and the storm isgenerally over by 3 or 4 p.m., but sometimes it islater. Though it happened every day during thefortnight I remained at Patra, the rain neverreached that place. While travelling in the Morea,I remarked that these meridian storms weremore constant in the mountains of Rumili than inthe Peninsula. At 5.15 we cross the Fidhariabout the same place where the centaur Nessus,of old, transported passengers across the river inhis arms, and where he suffered from the arrowsof Hercules for his rudeness to Deianira, for hereaboutsis naturally the most convenient passage.Nessus would seem to have been no more thanamortal horseman, who gained a few penceIII.] iETOLIA. 109by his employment*. The river well illustratesthe story, as it requires a guide for the ford evenin this season, the water reaching to the stirrups.The water is clear and rapid, running over awide gravelly bed, which in winter is often entirelycovered. The river separates the districtof 'Epakto from that of Zygos.Having reached the right bank, we pass throughBokh6ri\ a Greek village situated amidst plane-trees,cornfields, fruit-gardens, and plantations ofthe same productions which grow near Galata.Derivations from the Events here turn several mills.At the hamlet of Kurt-aga, near the point wherethe last slope of the mountain on the north-westernside of the vale of the Evenus advances into theplain of Bokhori, are foundations of the walls of alarge Hellenic polis, not far from the right bank ofthe river. The position corresponds so exactly tothat of Calydon, as indicated by Pliny ^ that onecan hardly doubt of the identity. Without thistestimony, there might have been some doubts onthe question. Strabo, by his citation of two conflictingauthorities, without deciding between them,clearly shows that he never was here ; but thoughhis text, as it now stands, is unintelligible, it requiresonly the transposition of two of the para*0c Tov fiadvfipovv irorafwy £vi|vov fiporovc'M.iadou *ir6p€vt xipaiy, — Sophocles. Train. v. 559.ApoUod. 1. 2. c. 7. Pausan. Phocis c. 38.Calydon est septem millions quin gentis passions a marijuxta Evenum arnnem. — Plin. Hen. 1. 4, c. 2.no.Stolid.[chap.graphs \ and the addition of the single word ovk', tobe made perfectly applicable. The passage occursin a description of the maritime places in theirproper order from Leucas to Antirrhium. With theproposed alteration his remarks will be as follows :'^ Next to the lake Cynic, which has a communicationwith the sea, is Pleuron, then the townLicyma, above which, thirty stades inland is Corydon,and near it the temple of Apollo Laphraeus ;then the Evenus, to which, from Actium, there isa distance of 670 stades, and beyond it the mountainChalcis, which Artemidorus calls Chalcis;then the mountain Taphiassus ; then the city M a-cynic; then Molycreia, and near it Antirrhium,the boundary of ^tolia and Locris, to which, fromthe Evenus, there is a distance of 120 stades.Artemidorus, however, differs respecting the mountainChalcis, or Chalcis, placing it between theAchelous and Pleuron. ApoUodorus, on the otherhand, places both Chalcis and Taphiassus, as Ibefore stated, above Molycreia, and Calydon betweenPleuron and Chalcis, unless, indeed, we^ The text now stands asfollows. The figures 1 2, describethe proposed order.2. Et' 6 £vi|V0Cf eic oy awoTov *Arr/ov oration kiaK6ffioik/i^fiilKoyTa' furii ^i Toy "EvriyoyTO opoQ Ti XoXkIc fjy XaXxiayeiptiKey *ApTefjLiBwpoc> 1. £l^j^ UXevpiitVt tlB* 4 Mxvpya Kafirit vwipKEiTai Ka\vii>y ky rpfueroyai^ OTaSloiQ Tpiaxoyra'irepl Be Tijy KaXvBwya ktrrl toTOV Aafj^palov* Aw6\Xiayoc up6y»Strabo, p. 459.*ApT€filBwpoc fiky (pi^x) ovrwircpc r^c sire XaXx/&>Ci &c.p. 450. — M. Corny has alreadyproposed this addition:see Geographie de Strabo,tome iv. p. 64.iik] ^t.olia. Illsuppose that Mount Chalcis near Pleuron was differentfrom Chalcis near Molycreia.'^As it cannot be doubted that the Chalcis and here named were the two great mountainssituated between the river Fidhari and the Castleof Rnmili, or ancient Antirrhvam^ it follows thatChalcis was Varassova, or the western mountain,and Taphiassus the eastern, now called Kaki-scala.And as there is no appearance of an ancient sitebetween the river and Mount Varassova, we mayinfer' that Chalcis or Hypochalcis^ the XaXicicayyiakoq of Homer', and the Chaldea of Polybius',stood in the valley between the two mountains,where is now a harbour called Gavrolimni. Itwould seem also, that the site of Macynia was betweenTaphiassus and Molycreia,* which last, as Ihave already remarked*, was on the first rise.of thehills behind the castle of Rumill. I was informedat Patra, from whence the whole of this coast iswell seen, that there are still' some remains of aHellenic fortress, now called Ovrjj5-kastro, betweenthe mountains, and some vestiges also on theEastern side of Kaki-scala both of them confirmingthe preceding conjecture, the former being theremains of Chalcis, the latter of Macynia. Ptolemyplaces Molycreia in-Locris*, but Strabo makes the boundary, and ascribes Molycreia toitalia.The modem name Mirox<^pc is obviously a cor-strabo,p. 451, Stephan. * Travels in the Morea, vol.in XriXjciCj 'YiroxaXic/c. 2. p. 150.» n. B. V. 689. • Ptolem. 1. 8, c. 15.• Polyb. 1. 5, c. 94.iETOLIA.[chap.eruption of *Ywo\(u>piov in allusion to its position, thatis to say, an outlying quarter of Calydon below thecity. In some vineyards near Kurtagi a sepulchralstele has lately been found and brought to Bokhori.It has that common form which is an imitation ofthe end of a sarcophagus, and is inscribed with thenames ^ Philomela, Antiochus' where the precedenceof the lady's name without anything to indicatethe relationship between the two is uncommon.The evening is unfortunately too near its closeto allow me to examine the ruins of Calydon.Proceeding therefore from Bokhori we pass throughfields of oats, barley, grinia^ guinea com, and^ See Inscription No. I. atthe end of this volume.Ff^pf^viaC) or Fpiyt'cdc, iswheat of a middle hardness,and generally with a blackbeardand fine full grain; inthe Morea it is chiefly producedon the banks of the Al'pheitu. The other species cultivatedin Greece are, 2. BXa^t^-trrapi^ brought from Triestemany years ago, in a time ofscarcity, and planted in theMorea. It is a soft com, andbeing a native of a colder climate,is grown chiefly on thehigh lands. 3. Sc^cWr^o, asmall yellow grain and parish.It grows principally in the lowerparts of Achaioj eastward ofPatra. 4. Ar^aXo-orapc, veryhard; grows in Boeotia. Thefollowing is a rough calculationby our consul at Patra of theproduce of wheat in an averageyear, in the principal com districtsof the southern part ofGreece.KoiXa HokiTiKa^orKild of Constantinople, reckonedto contain an average of22okesof 2|lb.Thebes '. . 150,000Livadhia 200,000Salon 50,000Corinth and Achaia 100,000Arcadia 50,000Pyrgo and Gaston. . 150,000Great part of the latteris from thechampaign countryon the banks of theAlpheus as far upasLond^.Total 700,000Kilt of Constantinople.HI.] stolid. 113maize, and at 6.20 leave on the left a village "whichhas recently been built in the level near the sea, onthe edge of the eastern extremity of the Lagoon ofMesolonghi, and hence called Neokhori. Themountains on the right are well cultivated at thefoot, and above are covered with trees. Havingdescended upon the lowest level at something morethan a mile from the edge of the lagoon, we proceedover a desert space inundated by the laterains ; at 7.10 enter a suburb of Mesolonghi consistingof thatched huts, and at 7.25 arrive at thehouse of a merchant on the seaside.Mesolonghi was evidently so named from itssituation in the midst of the Xoyyoc, or wildernessof woods and marshes, which, under the Romans,gradually enveloped all the ruined cities of maritime^tolia, until the position, like that of Venice,was chosen for its security during the middle ages,to which period of Greek literature the name belongs.The town contains about 1000 families,residing in houses which indicate a great varietyof conditions, and occupy a large space, as wellalong the shore of the lagoon as in the adjacentmarshy level. The lagoon is separated from thesea by a narrow pacific, as it is called, or thread oflow land, and is divided into two nearly equal partsby a projection from the marshy level, which ad-^dances to within a short distance of the mamma.In the eastern division of the lagoon, and inthe middle of a bay at its northern extremity, isthe town of Anatoliko, entirely covering a smallVOL. 1. I1 14 iETOLlA, [chap.island. The entrance from the roasted of Mesolonghiinto the lagoon is at a distance of four milesfrom the town, where is a small island called Vasi-ladhi, and upon it a fort and custom-house. Laxboats cannot approach within a mile of the houses,kior can they advance so far unless when empty : allthe remaining navigation of the lagoon, therefore,is carried on by shallow monoxyla, or canoes, whichare made of hollow trunks of oaks from the neighbouringmountains. In the town, salt water risesevery where on digging to the depth of three orfour feet; but so near as the gardens which surroundthe town, wells of a greater depth furnish anabundance of fresh water which maintains the gardensin perpetual verdure. The water for drinkingis brought by an aqueduct from Mount Zygos betweenthe foot of which and the ^rd ens there is aplain covered with currant plantations, vineyards,and fields of com, but which do not supply theplace with more than a four months' consumptionof bread.I was surprised to hear that the air of Mesolonghiis not considered unhealthy, and to observethat the appearance of the people, who are a handsomerace, corresponds to this opinion. It is admitted,however, that the back part of the townis not so healthy as the seaside, where the besthouses are situated. The fishery of the lagoon,and the commerce of this the only emporium in^tolia, are the productive labors of the Meso-longhites. The fish are taken in a variety ofmodes, but in the greatest numbers by means of apalpitating near the stomata or mouths of the lagoon,III.] stolid. 115of which there are several communicating with thesea. Here, after breeding in the shallows, theyare intercepted on their return to the sea, in passagesor in chambers into which the passages conduct.Each kind of fish has a different seasonduring the summer and autumn for going out.Besides the quantity consumed in the town, or inthe villages around, either fresh, half salted, orthoroughly salted, 200,000 litres are exportedevery year. The other exports of Mesolonghi are6000 barrels of oil every two years, 1600 barrelsof wine, 300,000 litres of currants, 1000 okes ofsilk, and all the surplus corn of the southern partsof Karlili. The merchant, in whose house I amlodged, carried last swear a cargo of maize to Tunis.The currants, shipped here, are partly producedin the plain of Vrakhori, and as they form part ofthe cargoes of the British ships trading to Patra, aconsul or agent has been appointed at Mesolonghi,who is the son of a Kefalonite merchant residinghere, and who acts also for the Septinsular Republic.June 14. — A ride of a little more than one hourfrom Mesolonghi conducts me to some ruins in alofty situation on Mount Zygos, just as the usualpost-meridian storm of rain and thunder is comingon. Fortunately it lasts only half an hour. Theremains which are now known by the name of roKaarpov Tric Kupioc Eip^vijc, or the Castle of LadyIrene, are those of the entire circuit of the ruinedwalls of a small polis, about a mile in circumference,enclosing the western face of a very steep and ruggedheight, the summit of which formed an acropolis.VOL. I. I 2 +-116 iETQLIA* [chap.The masonry h generally of the third order. Thelower courses of the principal gate exist, on one sideof which is a stone measuring seven feet by four.It seems to have been a common practice amongthe Greeks to place the largest masses near theprincipal entrance, to excite respect in a strangerfor the fortifications. In the centre of the wall,which defended the lower side of the town, is asquare tower, and at one extremity of the same wallanother tower, having very long flanks. The mostremarkable remains within the enclosure are atheatre about 100 feet in diameter, and above it,on the side of the hill, a cistern, 100 feet long, 70broad, and 14 deep, excavated on three sides inthe rock, and on the fourth constructed of masonry.The excavation is on a slope, and betweenthe excavated side at the upper end, and a wallwhich closes the lower, there are 'four other parallel,though not equidistant walls reaching from theone side of the excavation to the other, and consistingof courses of regular masonry, of a singlestone in thickness, and which have openings at thebottom in the form of a triangle, very acute at theupper angle. The intention of these walls andopenings in such an excavation it is not very easyto explain. Close to a small side-gate on the nordare the foundations of a building, and to the eastwardthe remains of two parallel walls, enclosinga terrace twenty-four yards long and eleven wide ;near the great gate are those of a small quadrangularbuilding, like the cell of a temple, thestones square and accurately cut, but without anyappearance of a peristyle or any fragments ofIII.] ^£TOLIAJ 117columns. In the Acropolis are some remains ofDoric shafts of white marble, about three feet indiameter ; they belonged, perhaps, to the identicaltemple of Minerva at Pleuron, noticed by DicaBar-ehiis\ for I have little doubt that these are theruins of Pleuron. Strabo remarks, that the moreancient Pleuron was destroyed by Demetrius II.son of Antigonus Sonatas ' ; that it stood in theplain towards Calydon, and that the Pleuroniiafterwards built a new town on Mount Aracynthus.From his description also of the Evenus, thoughhe was mistaken in supposing the course of thatriver above Calydon to have been easterly, it isevident that the territory of Pleuron bordered uponthe Caledonia ^. Dicsearchus, in naming Pleuronbetween the Achelous and Calydon, agrees with. . . • iroTafAoy I* ij X^P^ ^X^^^A^f^^oyi')(eTai S* AcroiX/a,'£k ^ ironic vwdKurai nXevp^v xal upon"Aytoy *A^vac larlv dfyofAavfiiy oy,"Eiretra KaXv^ity^ . • .— Dicaearch. v. 55.About the year 235, b. c. cal Trcdca^a, wopdovyrot relyIt appears from Strabo, that xwpay Arifirirpiov rov cviicXa*this Demetrius was commonly Oiyroc AinifXiKovknown by the surname of JEto- *0 Se Evi/i'oc pu ovPicus, to distinguish him from sid rfjc KovprfTiKfj^ Ear* apxag^the Poliorcetes : both the De ^rcc i<rrly // abrri rjf UXtvptayl^fmetric having been sons of An aXXa ^ic^ r^c ^poc £«<> fiaXXovtigoni. vapid rrlv XaXjc/^a Roi KaXv-"Exit . . . . i AirwXla . Java' tara aVaica/Ai//ac girl to.• . . . Toy ^ApaKvydoyf inpl 8v ttjq TiXtvpijyog ireiia rfjc ira-revyttaripay XlXtvpiaya trvv^- XaidQ, Roi vapaXXdlac ilc Bvaiy,iciaay^ d^iyrtc Tr^v TraXaiay cxiorpc^ec irpoc rdc Ixf^XaclyyvQ Kiiftiyriy KaXviwyoQ ical rife ft€irrifiPpiav, — Strabo,oi ohtiToptgy tvKapyroy oZaay p. 451.118 Astoria. [ChapApollodorus, who places Calydon between Pleuronand Chalcis If the situations therefore which Ihave assigned to Calydon and Chalets be correct,there can be no question that Pleuron was nearMesolonghi. In farther admitting the transpositionwhich I have proposed in the text of Strabo,we may add to the preceding testimonies that ofArtemidorus. Nor is the concurrence of Thucydideswanting, who, in describing the march ofEurylochus the Spartan from Locris into ^tolia,in the sixth autumn of the Peloponnesian war, relates,that he moved from Molycrium to Calydon,Pleuron, and Proschium, in which places he remaineduntil he proceeded against Amphilochia *.There is every reason to believe that Mount Zygos,upon a part of which the castle of Irene stands, isthe ancient Aracynthus, and the ruins accord withthose of the later Pleurisy inasmuch as they haveno appearance of remote antiquity, and are exactlythose of such a small town as we may suppose NewPatron to have been from the circumstances of thepeople at the time of its foundation. I remarked,moreover, some pieces of Hellenic wall at the foot ofthe mountain on the edge of the plain of Mesolonghi,as well as on a small height in that plain nowcalled Ghyfto-kastro, situated precisely where thewords of Strabo would lead one to look for OldPleuron. The name Ghyfto-kastro allows theconjecture, that greater remains once existed there,and that the materials have been removed for theuse of modem constructions at Mesolonghi.Ap. Strabo. p. 460, v. » Thucyd. 1. 8, c. 102.sup. p. 110.III.]JETOLIA.Proschium, from a comparison of Strabo withThucydides, in the places just referred to, seems tohave occupied the western part of the ridge ofZygos. and to have possessed the plain, at its foot,now belonging to Anatoliko* The high situationin which Proscbium was founded when the lowposition of the Homeric Pylene was abandoned \seems to accord with that of the monastery of St.Geoi^e in Mount Zygos, between Anatoliko andAnghelokastro, where considerable remains of aHellenic city are said to exist. Pylene may havereceived its name from the remarkable cleft calledthe Klisura, which extends through the wholebreadth of Mount Zygos;, and which was exactlysuch a place as the ancient Greeks called a iruXif,or gate. In this case it is probable that Pylenewas situated at the maritime end of the Klisura,over against Anatoliko.Apokuro, a sub-district of the Turkish karaof Karpenisi, to the north-eastward of Zygos,seems evidently to have derived its name fromMount Curium and the Curates ; for it comprehendsnearly the same country in which Homerplaces that people, as well as Strabo, who saysthat Pleuron was situated below the mountainCurium ', whence it seems that Curium and T^VHvX^yriv fiereyiyKayreg eic rovekvmrtpov r^irovc flKSjoIfiv airr^ccai rovro/M, \lp6ir^iov KaKivav'rcc. — Strabo, p. 451.II. I. y. 525, et seq.Yiovptov Be rrjs iraXacacUXtvpHyog irXffvloyt c£^* ov tovqnXevpitfWovc Kovpfrrag SyofiaV'difyal riyec vircXa/lov. — Strabo,p. 451. Of y iiwo rau 6povsrov Kvplovg rov vtrepKei^yovrile nXcvpwKoc. — p- 465. Butsome preferred a heroic derivationboth for Curates and Acar-names.120 iBTOLIA. [chap.cynthia were the same, or different parts of thesame, mountain.Having descended the hill of Kyiia Irini onfoot, through the rocks and shrubs with which itis entirely covered, we regain, in half an hour,the direct road from Mesolonghi to KLhierasovo, ata distance of three quarters of an hour from theformer ; and soon after having entered the mountain,and lost sight of the maritime country, leaveon the right, at 5.20, a tumulus, covered with stones,situated in a little valley, along which a torrentflows ; on its opposite bank is a Hellenic foundation.These are possibly the sepulchre and shrineof one of the ancient heroes of ^tolia. Afterascending for an hour over a rugged road, wearrive on the side of a stream shaded by largeplane-trees : follow a path still worse than beforealong the side of the same torrent through a forestof planes, oaks, and linaria, as far as a hollowbetween two summits of Mount Zygos ; and at theend of another hour reach a height which commandsa view of the lakes of Vrakhori, and of thegreat mountain to the north-east of that town,called Kyria Eugenia * (Lady Eugenia), or vulgarlyMount Viena. Descending from hence,through a forest for three quarters of an hour, wearrive, at 8.30, at the village of Khierdsovo*,beautifully dispersed among vineyards and gardenson the slope of the mountain, in the midst ofa forest of chestnuts. The gathering of the nutsand the carrying of them to Anatomise and Meso-Kvp/a Etrycvcca. ' Xupaaofio^mIII.] .£TOLIA. 121longhi, from whence most of them are transportedto Zakytho or the other islands, together with thetending of their sheep and goats on the mountain,form the principal employments of the people ofKhierasovo.June 16. — A descent of fifty minutes from Khie-rasovo through the forest of chestnuts, conductsus, at 7.5, nearly to the base of the mountain,where a torrent shaded by planes turns some mills,and flows down a valley opening into the plain ofVrakhori. At 7.40, just at the entrance of theplain, we pass a zevgalati \ or hamlet, dependenton Khierdsovo, and called Son Gumbo', or ^' atthe plain ;" but which is sufficiently high to commanda view over a great part of the extensiveplains and lakes around Vrakh6ri, with the oppositemountains. This prospect is alone sufficient toidentify Mount Zygos with Aracynthus ; since, accordingto Dionysius the geographer. Mount Hyacinthusbounded to the southward the great plain ofthe italians '. There are three lakes in this plain,one to the right of the river Aspro, or AchelouSjthe two others to the left of it ; but the latter areseparated only by a marshy and often inundatedtract, full of large trees and underwood, throughwhich is a causeway of stone, forming the onlyroad from Vrakhori to Anatoliko, Mesolonghi,Bokhori, and the adjacent coast, whether by Khie-^evyaXari, (cvyaXar/a, * troy Ka^voy.litvyaXarid,T$c 3* inrip cc prop eltnv iriro (ncoinily*ApaicvyOov*Avhpwy AlroiXftfv irtZloy fiiya.Dionys. Perieg. v. 431.122 JETOhlA. [chap.rasovo or by Klisura. The latter route, afterhaving crossed the causeway, turns to the rightof the former, and passes by Papadhates, whichstands on an extremity of Mount Zygos, not farfrom the borders of the middle lake; it thenenters the pass of Klisura, which natural opening,by avoiding the ascent and descent of themountain, is often preferred as the road fromVrakhori to Mesolonghi, although circuitous.Above Papadhates are considerable remains of aHellenic city, probably Lysimachus. Leaving Pa-achatesa few miles on the left, we enter onthe causeway at 8.10, and ride through a mostagreeable shade of oaks, wild olives, and planes,festooned with wild vines, and intermixed in themore marshy parts with large reeds. The causeway,which rests on a great number of arches, issaid to be two hundred years old, and to havebeen built by a certain bey of Vrakhori, whoprobably took advantage of the foundations of amore ancient work. A gentle stream flows throughthe arches from right to left. We arrive at theend of the causeway at 8.30, cross the remainderof the plain, and, ascending the last slope of theheights which border it on the north, arrive at9.45 at Vrakhori.This town occupies a large space of ground, andcontains about 500 Turkish, 100 Greek, and 40Jewish families. It was entirely Turkish notmany years ago, but the present Aga has encouragedthe Greeks to reside. The Turkishhouses have large gardens attached to them, withhigh stone walls to hide the windows of theharem, and they are built in a more antiqueIII.] iETOLIA. 123Turkish taste than is commonly seen in Greece.The Greek houses are small, and situated in thelower part of the town. In the afternoon I visitYusuf Aga, the Musellim of Karlili, of whichdistrict Vrakhori is the chief town. Yusuf, whohas resided here during the last seven years, withthe exception of one, owes his promotion to hiscousin of the same name, who is the powerfulValide Kiayassy, and, like his relative, a native ofKhania in Crete \ In consequence of the M selim'sinterest at court, Al^^ Pasha finds it necessaryto treat him with respect ; received him lately withgreat distinction at NicopoKs, and affects to placehis Derveni troops under Yusuf's orders, whichis believed by many to be nothing less than atrap laid by the crafty Albanian to bring Yusufinto disgrace ; for not long ago, a haste ', whichthe latter had forwarded from Kravari with 40soldiers, in its way to Constantinople was attackedby the robbers at Makrinoro, which isnot very likely to have happened without thePasha's connivance.The royal farms of the revenue in this part ofGreece are divided as follows : Karlili, Mesolonghi,'Epacto, Kravari, Badrajik, (Ne6patra)„and Karpenisi. Al^^ Pasha has Mesolonghi, toKfMiriJcoc diro rd Xayid, fences in the eyes of the Turk-thisword is applied to wish government; to do so byany portion, however small, of any other means, is the objectthe imperial revenue. To rob and practice of every officialthe hasn^ by open violence is man in Turkey,one of the most heinous of iBTOLIA. [chap.which is attached Macula, a village of 60 houses,and Neokhori of 150 ; geographically these formpart of Karlili, as well as Vonitza at its oppositeextremity, which is separated from it politically,as being one of the Ex Venetian places.As the inferior branches of revenue in Turkey areoften farmed separately from the mihi, Yusuf hasthat of the kharatj in Badrajik, Karpenisi, Kravari^and 'Epakto.Karlili \ besides the towns of Vrakhori, Mesolonghi,Anatoliko, and Vonitza, contains 140 villagesof various sizes ; many of these, situated inthe plain of Vrakhori, are mere tjiftliks belongingto the Turks of this town. The kaz4, which containsall Acarnania, and a great part of ^toUajis divided into four parts : Vlokhos, and Zyg6s, tothe left of the Aspro ; Valto and Xeromero, tothe right. The two first are separated from oneanother by the northern bank of the middle lake,which is all included in Zygos, as the eastern lakeis entirely in Apokuro, which district is borderedto the eastward by Kravari, as Zygos is by Venetian,or the district of 'Epakto. Apokuro is includedin the Turkish kara of Karpenisi ; butKravari is considered a separate district, of whichthe chief town is Lumbotin^. Vlokho borders,northward, on 'Agrafa, and Valto on the Artaakazasi ; the latter includes the Makrinoro, and followsthe course of the Aspro as far as a line drawnThis' name is supposed on their first arrival they foundto have hccn attached to the it in the possession of a Frankcountry by the Turks, because prince, named Charles Tocco.III.] ^TOMA. 126from the south-eastern extremity of the Gulf of Artaa,until it meets the Aspro, about Anghelo-kastro.All the country westward of that line between theAspro and the Gulf of Artaa, constitutes Xeromero,which thus corresponds nearly with the ancientAcamania. BoXroc, though the ordinary meaningof the word is marsh, is said to be so called, as beingfor the most part a woody desert. Xeromeroseems to have derived its name from its deficiencyin water, when compared with Zygos, Valto, andApokuro, and Zygos from the ridge of Aracynthus^though it contains also the level and lake at thefoot of this mountain on either side. Apokuro,as I before hinted, appears to be an ancient namecorrupted.The whole of Karlili, with the exception of theprincipal town, has suffered excessively from thewars carried on between the clefts and the Der*vent Aga, so that at present it does not contain,exclusively of the towns which I have named, apopulation of 20,000 souls.Anghelo-kastro, which is a conspicuous objectfrom Vrakhori, is a ruined castle on the summitof a low peak at the north-western extremity ofMount Zyg6s, not far from the Aspro. At thefoot of the height, towards the river, is a smallvillage of the same name. There are said to besome Hellenic foundations on the hill, as well asin the plain below it, marking probably the site ofCooper afterwards called ArsiTwe.June 16. — A beautiful little bronze figure ofHercules, wanting an arm, which I observed yesterdayin my lodging, and which my host stated126 iETOLIA. [chap.to have been brought from Vlokho, a monasteryon a lofty hill to the eastward of Vrakhori, wherehe described some extensive ruins, at once pointsout the probability of that place being the siteother's; which, at the time when Greek artwas in perfection, was noted for its numerousstatues \ Setting out this morning, therefore,at 5.5, and riding through currant grounds andvineyards, among which, on the left, are a kioskand gardens of Yusuf Aga, I cross, at 5.50, theriver Ermitza, which issues from a ravine amongthe hills between Vrakhori and Vlokho ; in winterit covers a wide gravelly bed, and even now isa respectable stream. The name is encouragingto a search for Thermus^ as it seems to be acorruption of that word. Instead of ascendingto Vlokho by the nearest way, we leave it onthe left, and follow the plain towards the shoreof the eastern lake, or lake of Apokuro, for thepurpose of visiting another Paleo-kastro which hasbeen described to me : pass through some fieldsof maize and com, and numerous plane trees,and at 7.5 arrive at the remains of a Hellenicfortress, situated on a height one third of a miledistant from the edge of the lake, between whichand the ruins stands a tjiftlik, or zevgalatia, calledKuvelo^The entire circuit of the ancient fortificationsstill subsists, surrounding a height which forms thelast slope of Mount Viena. The circumference isabout a mile. On the summit are the ruins of anPolyb. 1. 5, c. 9. ' Kow/SeXocIII.] XTOUA. 127oval Acropolis, ninety-five yards in length, flankedwith towers on the exterior side, and towards thetown defended by a double wall without towers.At the southern extremity of the oval, a semi-cir*ocular tower, twenty-three feet in diameter, looksdown upon and enfilades the whole line of thesouthern walls, of which a great part of the towersand curtains are still standing. This semi-circulartower is nearly complete, and has three windowsin the middle of the curve. At the northern endof the Acropolis are two towers formed of smallstones and mortar, raised upon the ruins of the.ancient walls, (a repair probably of the time of thelower Greeks or Franks,) and adjacent to them, onthe northern town-wall, three or four of the ancienttowers, with the intermediate curtains : of the restof that front, which follows in a curve line thecrest of the height towards a narrow vale grownwith com, there is very little left, and still less ofthe western side towards Kuvelo and the lake.This fortress, standing on the foot of the mountaina little above the lake, was well placed to commandthe passage along the shore to the eastwardor southward, or in other words, the ancient routefrom Thermus and every part of the great italianplain, in the direction of the vale of the Evenusand Naupactus. Beyond the fortress, at the southeasternend of the lake, the mountains descendquite to the water, and leave only a difficult roadalong the margin.This is far the largest of all the lakes of Acar-nana and MtoVm, and is so deep towards theextremity that it has the reputation of being iETOLlA. [chap.fathomable : it abounds in fish, but they arecaught only in the shallows towards the causeway,by means of monoxyla, one of which isnow lying near the shore at Kuvelo. On the oppositeshore of the lake, the slope of Mount ^roc^-thus is more gradual than it is on the shore of thewestern lake, or lake of Zygos, where, especiallybeyond Papadhates, the woody mountains extendto the water side. At the foot of the mountain,south-eastward of Son Gumbo, and opposite toKuvelo, there is a cultivated tract containing thevillage of Gavala, or Kavala \ and several tjiftliks.It is probably the territory of Trichonium, from,which the lake took its ancient name.From Kuvelo, after returning for half an hourby the same road, we turn out of it to the right,and begin to ascend the mountain of Vlokho, whichis very steep, and covered with a thick wood ofoak*, ilex*, and holly-oak*. The ilex affordsthe best timber; its stem resembles that of theholly-oak ; the leaves are larger, (and not soprickly) smooth, small, and dark-coloured, oblong,pointed, and serrated, with features very longand close. Besides these trees, there are manyordinary shrubs, among which are wild olives,brambles, and wild vines, making the ride cooland agreeable, though the path is so bad thatPhilip and his army could hardly have taken moretime to reach the summit than I do with a coupleof Albanian soldiers. At length we arrive at a^ ricttj3aXa, Kaj3aXa. * did or dpeoc.^Mpov* * vtpvdpi or movpydpt.in.] iETOLIAi 129small grassy level surrounded by woody heights,and crossed by a brook shaded with planes, whichdescends from the summit of the hill. From henceupwards to the village of Vlokho the path is stillsteeper than before, and is traced in a zigzagamong corn-fields, olive plantations, and pear-trees,bearing a small well-flavoured fruit nowripe : the wild pear also abounds. At the distanceof an hour and a half from the kastro of Kuvelowe pass through Vlokho, where are the sourceswhich supply the rivulet, and about ten inhabitedhouses, with a large one in ruins, dispersed amongsome large walnut-trees. Two or three hundredyards higher up the hill, is another collection ofcottages, with a little garden ground. These villagesand cultivated ground occupy a hollow underthe summit of the mountain on the southernside, and stand about the centre of the site of theancient city.At the upper village we find a monk belongingto the monastery which stands on the summit ofthe hill, and invite ourselves to dine there. Hespeedily procures a lamb, places it on the shouldersof one of the villagers, and thus accompanied we proceedto the monastery. From the upper huts ofVlokho the ascent is very steep. Half-way to thesummit we arrive at a part of the ancient wall, whichfollowed the crest of a ridge descending from thecitadel to the south-west. The wall was constructedof great masses of various shapes, accurately fittedto one another; higher up, near the foot of theAcropolis, the stones are still larger. One ofthem, a trapezium, measures ten feet by theVOL. I. K1 30 JETOUA. [chap.largest diagonal, and is six feet four inches broad ;another on the surface is equal to a square ofseven feet and a half. Few are less than three orfour feet. The Acropolis and its rocks are stilltowering above our heads, but we reach at length,by a zigzag road, a narrow passage between twoparallel walls, which was evidently the approachto the gate of the Acropolis, and arrive at themonastery at the end of half an hour's ride ironthe upper Vlokho.This building, dedicated to the Virgin and calledthe Panaghia of Vlokhos^ stands on an oval tabularlevel, bordered on all sides by steep rocks, but ratherless difficult of approach on the western side, wherewe ascended. To the north-eastward the mountainslopes rapidly to a deep ravine between slopescultivated with com, on the opposite side of whichrises the great mountain of Viena, or Kyria Eugenia; an appellation which, according to the ka<^loyeri of the convent, was derived from a /SaacXo-vovAa, or princess Eugenia, who concealed herself,when pursued by her enemies, in a cavern whichthe monks point out to me just under the highestsummit of the mountain, and there died. Whothese ladies, Eugenia and Irene, were, whosenames remain attached to two of the mountainsof ^tolia, it would be vain to conjecture with ourscanty knowledge of the history of iBtolia underfl Uavayla rov BXuxov. gar form being the third caseNames terminating in oc may with the preposition, as troybe pronounced either with or BXurxpyf and the final v beingwithout the final letter, the unusually dropt.Ml.] iBTOLIA. 131the Byzantine empire, for to that time the namesare evidently to be referred. The other summitsof Moist Viena, which from its magnitude andcentral situation I conceive to be the PansBtoliumof Pliny \ are distinguished by the names of thenearest villages, the whole being called Viena',which is probably nothing more than a Bulgariancorruption of Eiyivua. The range terminates tothe north in a peaked summit above the villageof Ardkhova, in the district of Karpenisi. Halfwaydown from the retreat of the unfortunateprincess, and immediately opposite to Vlokho,stood a village of fifteen houses, named Lykokhori ',which about eight years ago fell down the side ofthe mountain, and disappeared with all the adjoiningsoil ; the inhabitants fortunately had retired,having taken warning from the previous tremblingand cracking of the earth. Aware of what waslikely to happen, the monks watched the place,but it slipped off in the night, and they heard onlythe awful crash.While our dinner is preparing, one of the monksguides and assists me in climbing up the rocks ofan upper summit, by a path known only to themselves.This height, which is named Ogle, is 200yards long and 30 broad, similar in shape to theentire summit of which it constitutes about afourth part ; and thus forming a sort of keep tothis natural castle; its precipices on the furtherside from the monastery are a continuation withan increased height of those on the easternPlin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 2. » B9CV0. * AvKox^p^oy,K 2132 iETOLIA. [chap.side of the entire hill. The summit of Ogle is leveland carpeted, like the larger summit, with a delicateherbage. This fine geographical station comprehendsin its view to the southward Mount Helmsbeyond Kal&vryta, and to the northward the vast serratedrock of Djum^rka beyond Artaa, points distantfrom each other more than 100 miles in a straightline. The mountains of 'Agrafa are seen to theright of the latter, and other points more distant tothe east, which are probably a part of Othrys.(Eta and Parnassus are hid by Mount Viena. Thesummits near the head of the Gulf of Artaa are visibleto the left of Djum^rka, then the mountain of Suli,the Acamanian heights near V6nitza, Varna andTragamesti, and then the range of Zygos, abovewhich appear the great mountain of Kefalonla, andthe rocks of Loxia and Kurtzolari. Above the loftyhills at the end of the lake of Ap6kuro appearthe mountains Vardssova and Kaki-scala, and thatof Rigani, above 'Epakto, beyond which are thegreat Peloponnesian hills 'Olono, Voidhia, and Helms.The plain of Vrakhori is extended in frontof the prospect, with its three lakes, and the broadwhite bed of the Achelous, from which the modemname, Aspro, was evidently derived. The nearercountry, at the back of the hills of Vlokho andVrakhori, is very rugged and mountainous as faras can be seen, nor do I perceive any cultivation,or a single village. Deep ravines surround thehill of Vlokho on every side excepting to the south.On the west a stream shaded with planes followsthe foot of the hill, traverses half-way down a littlecultivation round a metokhi of the monastery, andIII.] .£TOUA. 133joins one of the lakes, near the causeway. Fartherwestward is a narrow valley watered by theErmitza, the sources of which are at a considerabledistance to the north. The springs at Vlokho formabranch of the rivulet flowing along the ravinewhich separates the hill of Vlokho from the mountainof Kyria Eugenia. Their junction and subsequentdischarge into the lake of Apokuro are notfar westward of Kuvelo.It is curious that Vlokh6, though of so little importanceat present, not only stands on the site ofthe ancient capital, but still gives name to a greatpart of ^tolia, of which it is in fact the naturalcitadel. The modem name is Sclavonic, and seemsto indicate, that when the barbarians of that raceconquered this part of Greece, in the decline of theByzantine empire, the advantages of the site causedit to be their principal fortress, and the chief placeof a large district. When the French were at ,and an invasion was expected, the Turks ofVrakhori prepared to retire for security to Vlokh6'.The form and position of Thermus were such asthe Greeks seem generally to have considered themost advantageous; namely, a triangle on theslope of a pyramidal hill, bordered on eitherside by a torrent flowing in a deep ravine, andhaving a summit convenient for an acropolis.The citadel was generally the apex of the triangle,and often itself, therefore, of a triangularform, but when the summit of the hill was level,the citadel was sometimes oval, such as I haveDining the Greek revolution it again became of importance.134 .Stout. [chap.already described at Kuvelo^ and at the ruins ofPhigaleui and Theists in the Morea. But this wasprobably a very ancient manner of fortifying,which was seldom followed in the meridian ages ofGreece, when square towers and straight curtainswere the general method. In the instance ofVlokho the ground was formed by nature for anoval acropolis.The entire circumference of the city was abouttwo miles and a half ; the walls are in best preservationon the western side. Here the foundations,with some of the lower courses of masonry,are to be seen, following the entire crest of theridge ; in some places there are considerable piecesof the wall, all of polygonal masonry, though generallyof smaller stones than those which I describedbelow the acropolis.There were no towers, but only short flanks atintervals of 60 or 100 yards : on the eastern sideI could not trace any remains of the wall betweenthe citadel and a small level about half-way downthe hill, which was not far from the southeasternangle of the city. But the fall on this side beingmuch steeper, there was not so much necessity fordefence as on the other side, where the easier declivitynot only required a stronger fortification, but hasbeen the means of preserving it better than on theeastern side, where the materials as they have fallenmay have rolled down the hill. To the south, thewalls crossed some transverse ridges, on the bordersof the hollow in which the two villages are situated,but considerably below the lower village. Littlemore than foundations are traceable on this side.III.] iETOLIA. 135The only remains of a public edifice within thewalls of this capital of one of the most influentialpeople in Greece, and which, when it was takenby Philip, was noted for its riches, is a squarepyramidal shapeless mass of stones, on a line withthe cottages of upper Vlokho, near the westernwall. I inquired in vain for medals, or other remainsof antiquity.At a little before 5 we begin to descend from themonastery, which is soon afterwards occupied bysome guests less welcome ; namely, a body of ar-napoli,ranging the country, and living at the publicexpense. Turning at the upper huts of Vlokho,to the right of the road, by which we mountedthe hill, we cross the western wall, and descendthe ridge along the outside of it as far as the southwesternangle, where the southern wall of the townbegan to cross the valley. In the latter, a littlebeyond the angle, is a semi-circular retiring of thewall, about ten yards in diameter, with a plainunlamented opening in it which was evidentlyone of the principal gates of the city. The gateis not in the middle of the semi-circle, but a littleto the left, and the whole construction furnishes anexample of one of the many ingenious modes devisedby the Greeks for strengthening their gatesand the approaches to them. The semi-circle hadthe same intention as the square court which issometimes found before the gates of Helleniccities ; in the present instance it not only admittedof a concentration of missiles, particularly on theright or unshielded side of the enemy, but exposed1 36 iBTOLI A« [chap.him, when he had reached the gate, to the reverseof the western wall.Leaving this spot at 5.45, we descend by zigzagpaths, among the hills, to the ravine on the westernside of the city, and having crossed the streamwhich flows along it, enter soon afterwards the plainof Vrakh6ri ; we then ride over a fine soil quite uncultivated,in a direction parallel to the foot of themountain, enter the currant grounds and vineyardsof Vrakhori, and at 7 cross the Ermltza at themills where we passed it in the morning, followingthe same road from thence as before, and at half-past7 re-entering Vrakhori.June 17. — ^^This morning, at a few minutes before6, I proceed northward along the plain, in a directionparallel to the foot of the hills, and at 6.25arrive at Zapandi, a village of 120 houses, twothirds of which are Turkish. After waiting aquarter of an hour for a guide, to ford the river,we begin to cross it at 7.20. In winter the passageis seldom attempted, the waters often filling theentire bed, which is not less than three quarters ofa mile in width ; but at present the river is dividedinto five or six rapid streams, two of which onlyare large, and require a guide : not so much onaccount of their depth as because the bottom is aloose gravel and sand, with many holes and quick-iii.]ACARNANIA.sands ; and the peramata or safe places for passing,shifting frequently, are well known only to thosewho reside on ike spot. In the present season theafternoon's storms in the mountains sometimes producesudden floods which are dangerous, but in theforenoon the river is generally passable. The wateris now not higher than a Turkish stirrup, and wefind no inconvenience except from the round stonesat the bottom, which make the horse stumble occasionally.But the guide who walks alongside onfoot, and leads the horse, quickly raises him whenhe makes a false step, encouraging him by hisvoice, and recommending to the rider to look atthe bank, that the current may not make himgiddy*. A little below the ford the bed is widerthan where we cross it, and takes a turn to thewestward. The dry part is covered with trunks oftrees, the wintry spoils of the woods of Pindus.After a halt of half an hour on the right bank,we reach at 8.24 the ruins of a large Hellenictown, undoubtedly Stratus ; for Stratus, accordingto the ancient authorities, stood on the right bankof the Achelous, in the same plain which containedthe lake Trichonis, and at a distance of 200 stadesfrom the sea, by the course of the river' : all whichyd fifi Tov aKorloJi to rpt'\ovfuvoy.2rparoc hvoTrkovy e\ov(yaTf 'A^eXuf^ TrXeidyt^y If ^caico-9(^y trraiiwy • . . *• .• • . ap\alay (^AirtaXiay)fuyfT^y dvo rov ^A\€Xuh}v fJ^ixP^KaXvSHvoQ wapaXlay Im iroXvKal r^c /4C(roya/as dy^tcovtray^tifKd(nrov re Kal irc^ca^c' ^earl Kal 'SfrpdroQ Kal to Tpc^^cv-vioy^ dploTfiy «X*^^ 71^*Strabo, p. 450.Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 80, 102 ; 1. 3,c. 106 ; Xenoph. Helen. 1. 4,c. 6; Diodor. 1 12, c. 47, 1. 19,c. 67 ; Polyb. 1. 4, c. 63, 1. 5,c. 6, 14, 96; Liv. 1. 36, c. 11,1. 48, c. 22.138 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.accords perfectly with this place. The eastern wallof the city followed the hank of the river, just atthe point where it touches the last falls of the hillsof Valto, which are here low, but rise gradually tothe north-north-west, and extend to the head ofthe Gulf of Artaa, where they terminate abruptlyin the pass of Makrinoro : a parallel ridge risesgradually from the plain not far to the southwestwardof StrattiSy and ends at the Gulf ofArtaa in the hill called Sparto-vuni. Betweenthese two ridges lies a long valley commencingat the ruins of Stratus and at a village oppositeto it called Lepenu, and terminating to thenorth-west in an easy pass, through which is adescent into the plain of Xer6kambo9 near thesouth-eastern corner of the Gulf of Artaa. It is evidentfrom this construction of the country, that Stratuswas a military position of importance. Beingsituated at the point where the valley of Lepenumeets that of the Achelousy and where they bothopen into the great j^toKan plain, it commandedtwo of the principal approaches to that plain fromthe northward, at the same time that it was not farremoved from a third, which I shall jfr '^ntly haveoccasion to mention.The first object in the ruins of Stratus thatstrikes the traveller after crossing the river, is asmall door in the south-eastern angle of the townwall. Thirty yards below it, on the water side,are some foundations, whether those of the perilousof a temple, or belonging to a wharf, it isimpossible to say. The door has a semicirculartop, not constructed on the principles of the arch,but by hollowing the horizontal courses of atone]Ii] ACARNANIA. 139into a semicircular form, in the same manner asis seen in many places, both in Greece and Egypt.The door is 10 feet high, and 6 feet 6 inches wide;the stones very large, and, as commonly occursin Greek fortresses, larger than in the other partsof the wall. This door leads into an uneven spaceabout a mile in circumference, surrounded on allsides by remains, more or less traceable, of thetown walls, which are of the third kind of masonry,in some parts nearly approaching to themost regular species. Half way from the door,towards the highest part of the inclosure which isdiagonally opposite to the gate, are the remainsof a theatre, situated in a hollow, having its rightside near the western wall of the above-mentionedenclosure, and fronting the south. Its interiordiameter below is 105 feet, and there seem tohave been about thirty rows of seats, all of whichmight probably be brought to light by excavation.But this inclosure towards the river, which containedthe theatre, was not much more than athird of the whole city. The remainder stood onlower and more even ground, and the circuit ofits walls, tl»lkiMi are every where traceable, occupiedthe summits of several heights which borderthe valley of Lepenu, or follow the contour of theridges uniting those heights. The wall whichparted the two portions of the city terminatesat the north-western summit before mentioned.Here seems to have been a small citadel, butit was scarcely higher than the adjoining partof the same ridge on the outside of the walls,and at the distance of two or three hundred140 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.yards was commanded, together with almostthe entire site, by the external heights. A gateremains in the partition wall, near the summit,a little beyond which, to the westward, are someruined huts, and some fruit-trees, once belongingto the village of Surovigli *. In the northern waUof the greater or western inclosure, a little belowthe summit, are some towers and interveningcurtains, which are almost perfect. The circumferenceof the western inclosure appears to bebetween two and three thousand yards, and theentire circuit of the city about two miles and ahalf. The arm of the Achelaus (for the river ishere divided into several streams), which flows atthe foot of the eastern wall, although narrow, israpid, deep, and difficult to pass, even at thisseason, so that the river was a considerable protectionto the place. As a fortress, howeverStratus could not have been considered verystrong when poliorcetics were in the state of improvementwhich they reached after the time ofAlexander.The external ridge commanding the citadel illustratesone of the circumstances of the attempt madeby Perseus to occupy Stratus, in the winter of theyear B.C. 170 — 169. The king, who having undertakenthe expedition at the request of the Epirotes,had marched through their country, was met on thefrontiers of ^tolia by Archidamus, the strategicof ^tolia, who accompanied him to Stratus, thenbelonging to the ^tolian confederacy. But as usualin the states of Greece, there were two factions inin.] ACARNANIA. 141^tolia, and while Archidamus was proceeding tomeet Perseus, the opposite party had sent forPopillius, who was at Amhracia, and who enteredthe city with a thousand men, on the very night thatPerseus encamped upon the Achelous, near Stratus.Dinarchus also, commander of the cavalry of^tolia, who had come ostensibly to meet Perseus,joined the adverse side, and entered the city.The king, nevertheless, having with him an armyof 10,000 men, and the chief magistrate of ^tolia,still hoped that the TEtolians in the town wouldcome out and join him, and with this view presentedhimself on the heights above the city ; butfinding that instead of any advances to a communicationhe was threatened with missiles, heretired five miles to the river Petitarus, and fromthence to Aperantia^The summit of the ruins commands a fine viewof the Asprop6tamo upwards, and of the hillycountry near its banks, terminated by the mountainsof ' Agrafa in the distance ; the quantity ofsnow on which seems to show that the highestsummits are nearly equal in height to 'Olono andHelms. At less than two hours above Suro-^villi, the river is joined, on the same side, by atributary which originates to the eastward of MountMariners, and at an equal distance beyond the riverare the ruins of another Hellenic city, at a villagenear the right bank, named Prevents. The riverI take to be the Petitarus, if this name be correctin the text of Livy, and the ruins those of thetown of Aperantia, of which Prevents may be> Liv. 1. 48, c. 21,142 A.CARNANIA* [CHAP.a corruption, Livy indeed seems to allude toAperantia only as a district ; but Stephens, inreference to the corresponding passage of Polybius,which is lost, shows the city also to havebeen named 'Aircpavrcia. The general situation ofthe place accords with a transaction relating toAperantia, which occurred twenty years before theexpedition of Perseus, and which is recorded byPolybius and by Livy in nearly the same terms.When Menander had recovered his kingdom ofAthamania from Philip, the italians who had assistedhim thought the opportunity favourable forrecovering Aperantia and Amphilochia for themselves.Nicandrus, the strategic, therefore, proceedingfirst into Amphilochia, probably becauseit was the more important of the two, although moredistant from ^tolia, found the greater part of thepeople ready to receive him, and met with easysuccess ; he then moved into Aperantia with thesame result, and from thence proceeded into Do-copia,where the people, having never belonged toitalia, hesitated at first to receive him, but onlearning the state of affairs, and that Philip hadno farther hopes from their neighbours, the Aha*manes, they joined the iBtolians ^While I was seated in the theatre, a drove of300 Wallachiann oxen, every one of which waswhite, passed through the ruins to Tragam^ti tobe shipped for the Islands. Besides these, whichare on their passage from Wallachia, large herdsand flocks are brought to feed in the winter andspring in the plains of Acamania and j^toUa from> Polyb. L g2. c. 8. Liv. 1. 38, c. 3.III.] ACARNANIA. 143'Agrafa, and the other mountainous districts aroundThessaly. The oxen of the latter countries aregenerally dark coloured.Leaving the ruins of Stratus at .10.15, we ascendthe valley which branches from the plain tothe north-westward, and arrive at 1 1 at Lepenu,or Lepeni6^ a village of forty families, on theside of the valley opposite to Surovigli. In thevale just below it, are some copious sources ofwater. Lepenii is one of the principal villages ofValto, but has much diminished in population,from the same causes which have annihilatedSurovigli. Being quickly driven out of the houseof the Proestos by the fleas, I remove to the gateof the court-yard, which having, as usual in thispart of the country, a large tiled roof, affordssufficient shelter in this season.The Proestos confirms several Hellenic positionswhich I have heard of, but not yet seen. Inj^tolia those of Anghel6kastro, Papadh4tes, andSt. George, seem to be the most remarkable ; thelast is reckoned * three hours from Anghelokastro.Some monks of St. George, who came here lately,affirmed that the kastro at Surovigli is not to becompared to theirs, by which perhaps they meantonly that the walls of the latter are in better preservation.A peasant, whom I encountered in theruins at Surovigli, remarked that the city was thecapital of the surrounding country. He judgedmerely from their extent ; for probably not an in-^ Afirevov, Ajtictvidv. The the Albanian manner, with afonder is the more vulgar form, guttural L, Liepenu.and is generally pronounced in144 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.individual in Acamania or ^tolia has ever heard ofthe name or history of Stratus.It is chiefly from the narrative given by Polybius*of the capture of Thermus by Philip, son ofDemetrius, that we obtain a knowledge of theancient geography of the central part of ^tolia,or great inland plain now occupied by Vrakhori,from which the chief strength and opulence ofthis province of Greece has in all ages beenderived. In the second year of the Social WarB. C. 218, Philip, taking advantage of the absenceof Lysimachus with half the ^dBtolian forcesin Thessaly, raised the siege of Palsea in Cephalicand sailed to Leucas, from whence, afterhaving caused his ships to be dragged across theDioryctus, or sandy isthmus of Leucas, he enteredthe Ambracic Gulf, and reached Limnsea on themorning after his arrival at Leucas. Having beenjoined by all the forces of Acamania, he movedfrom Limnsea towards the evening' without baggage.At the end of sixty stades, he halted toallow his troops to repose and take their supper ;and then, continuing his route all night, arrivedat the break of day on the river Achelous, betweenStratus and Conope. His treacherous counsellor,Lentils, wished to give time to the italians todefend themselves ; but the better advice of Aratushaving prevailed, Philip gave orders for an immediateadvance to Thermus, the j£tolian capital.Crossing the river, therefore, and marching withallspeed towards that city, he passed, on his left.Stratus, Agrinium, and Thestia, and, on his right,Polyb. 1. 5, c. 5, et seq. ' dvaCtviag U r^c Aift^a/acIII.]iETOLIA.Conope, Lysimachus, Trichonium, and Phyteum \and thus arrived at Metapa, situated sixty stadesfrom Thermus, in the defile of the lake Trichonis *jthe passage along which was rendered very narrowand dangerous by the rugged woody mountainson its margin '. The iBtolians havingabandoned Metapa, he occupied it with five hundredmen, to serve as a protection to him, as wellin advancing as in reuniting through the straits ^.He then conducted his army in column, protectinghis right by some light troops thrown out on thatflank, while his left was defended by the lake for adistance of thirty stades '• At the end of this distancefrom Metapa, he arrived at a town * namedPamphium, and leaving a guard there, thenascended to Thermus by a road which was thirtystades in length, very steep, bordered by dangerThis name varies in the MSS.bat ^vratoy is the orthographyof Stephens, who refers to alost passage of the 1 th bookof Polybius which containedthe narrative of a second occupationof Thermus by Philip,as we learn from a few lines ofthat part of the 1 th book stillexisting. Mention was thereagain made of the lake Tri-clovisand of Phytaeum, as wellas of another ^tolian town,named Hellopium (vide Stephan.in ^EKkirioy),i) ireirai fiiv heir' a&r^c TtjsTpij^kiylioQ XifirtiQ ra tAv irapdVOL. I.k^^lKoyra franca, rov Trpotrayo'pevofiiyov Qipftov, — Polyb. 1. 5,c. ?•iin-l ydp m^ 6 Tape ri^yXlfiyjiy tSifoq dpetvoc koI rpa-Xvc» tnfyfiyfiiyog This vKaig, BidKal wayriX&Q trrevi^y icac Bvailo^Soy e\€i Tijy iropodov.PovXofuyog iifuBpel^ XP^"*oatrBai wp6t re ri^y €l,aoioy KalTijy ii/oBoy r^y €K Twy trriywy,• rely fiiy ydp Ik roy ehwyv"fury iiri^dvciav Tips iropc/ac jo'-ipaXlirBri XZ/nvp a^eioy girl rpu^Koyra ordBia,«Kt^fJLtl,146 ifiTOLIA. [chap.vous precipices on either side, and in some placesvery narrow.Having arrived at Thermus considerably beforethe close of day, he gave permission to his armyto plunder all the surrounding villages, to overrunthe plain of the Therein,. and to sack the cityitself, which was well furnished with com andother provisions, and abounded with riches ofevery kind, having long been the place of meetingof the national assemblies, the centre of the civiland religious as well as commercial affairs ofitalia; and, froth the strength of its situation,considered as the place of refuge and Acropolis ofall ^tolia ^ The temple of Apollo ' in particular,with its surrounding buildings, was full of valuablefurniture and offerings. On the morning aftertheir arrival, the Macedonians separated the partof the plunder which they intended to carry away,and burnt the remainder in heaps before theirtents; in which manner they destroyed, amongother things, an immense quantity of armour.They burnt, or razed to the ground, the temple,with its stone, and threw down all the statues,breaking those which were not figures of the godsor inscribed with their names. The number ofimages thus demolished or subverted, was not lessthan two thousand.Such an act of destruction and impiety was very^ffrc rijc <rvfji7rd<nft Airuh- temple wits dedicated, is men*Xiac oiov dKpoir6\€Uf£ ^X^^^ toned only in the fragment ofTd^y.—c. 8. the 11th hook of Polybius.The deity to whom theIII.] iETOLIA. 147repugnant to the manners of Greece, and is severelycensured by Polybius, notwithstanding theprovocation which Philip had recently received inthe similar conduct of the Italians at Drum andDodona ; against the former of which places theirvengeance had been particularly directed, as beinga Macedonian city. But the young monarch wasnot sufficiently gifted with magnanimity to abstainfrom retaliation on so fair an opportunity ; indeed,it seems to have been the great object of his expedition,and accordingly he inscribed upon theruined wall of the temple, a sectarian iambic,composed by a young poet who accompanied him,for the purpose of reminding the italians that theshaft of vengeance came from Dium^ Philipthen began his retreat by the same road by whichhe came. Three thousand italians, under Alexanderof Trichonium, who were lying in wait forthe purpose, attacked the rear, consisting of mercenariesand Acamanians^ as they began to movefrom the city, and had put them to flight, when abody of Illyrianss, whom Philip, with a view tosuch a contingency, had placed behind a certainheight', met them in the pursuit, and killed ormade prisoners between two and three hundred ofthem. The rear then set fire to Pamphium, passedthe defiles', and joined the Macedonians, whohad already arrived at Metapa.The next day the invaders, having destroyed'Opf C TO Atom, oJ /3eXoc ^ccuroro ;— c. 9.into riva Xo^v virefrraXKU /laVcc— c. 13.Tovf *IXXv^vc iy r^ tfara- * lu\d6yT€i rd crrerd,l2148 iETOLIA. [chap.Metapa, inarched to Acne, and on the followingday to Conope, where they remained one day ;they then followed the left bank of the river, asfar as Stratus, crossed it near that city, and haltedjust without the reach of missiles from the walls,thereby offering battle to a body of three thousandjSBtolians, who with some cavalry and Cretan hadrecently entered the place. But it was not untilthe Macedonians resumed their march that theenemy came forth. The rear then turned, droveback the iBtolians to the gates of the city, andkilled one hundred of them ; after which, Philip,prosecuting his march without further impediment,rejoined his vessels at linea, and returned toLeucas.The preceding narrative, when compared withStrabo, will enable us with some confidence to affixthe ancient names to the principal existing remainsof the cities of the interior of .£tolia, notwithstandingthat there is one part of it which I have foundimpossible to reconcile with an actual view of thecountry. From the south-eastern extremity of theGulf of Artaa, where it is evident that Limnsea wassituated, there is a route for the most part level ofabout twenty-five miles, as far as the Achelous belowStratus, so that it was not very difficult for Philip,by performing about a third of the distance on theevening of his departure from Limnsea, to effect theother two thirds in the course of the night. The remainingdistance of about fifteen miles to Thermusseems equally conformable to the proceedings ofthe army on the second day, when we may easilyconceive that the march to Metapa, which was notIII.] iBTOUA. 14980 rapid as to prevent Philip from burning anddestroying the country \ added to the preparationsfor the passage along the lake to Pamphium, andthe usual loss of time in the course of such amarch, may have consumed, together with thelong and painful ascent to Thermus, all the forenoonand two hours of the afternoon, about whichtime the Macedonians seem to have arrived at thecity. The difficulty in the narrative is, that Philip,in advancing from Metapa to Pamphium, shouldhave marched with his left upon a lake; since,according to the present state of the country, thereis no apparent reason why he should have approachedeither of the lakes, the route from theAspro by Vrakhori to Vlokh6, not passing withinthree miles of them. Or if we suppose that thewoods noticed by Polybius then occupied so muchof the plain below Vrakhori, as to force him tofollow the margin of the lake, and that Metapastood about the junction of the river Ermitza withthe lake, the distance of that point from Vlokhobeing nearly equal to the sixty stades, which thehistorian assigns as that between Metapa and Thermus: still it is obvious that an army moving fromthence to the foot of the mountain of Vlokh6 wouldhave had its right and not its left towards themarshes. In order to have approached Vlokhowith his left on one of the lakes, Philip must eitherhave made the circuit of them both, along the footof Mount Zygos, and then, after rounding the extremityof the lake of Apokuro, and passing by the160 ATOLiA. [chap.foot of Mount Vi^na along the steep and woodymountains which overhang the lake, have emergedinto the plain again near Kiivelo, or he must havecrossed between the lakes by the line of themodem causeway, and entered the plain betweenVrakh6ri and K^velo. On the former suppositionMetapa would have been near the eastern extremityof the lake of Apokuro.It was impossible, however, for the Macedonians,immediately af);er a forced march from Linea tothe Achelous, to have performed even the shorterof these routes, which would have tripled thedirect distance from the Achelous to Thermus ; orcertainly, if such a march were practicable, theycould not have arrived at Thermus at the hourwhich the subsequent transactions of that dayrender necessary. Possibly it may be thought thatthe ruins at Kuvelo, although very short of 60stades from Thermus, are those of Metapa, andthat Philip, after having conducted his armydirectly from the Achelous across the plain ofVrakhori, occupied the fortress at Kiivelo, notwith the view of retreating through the passescommanded by it, which lead along the lake inan easterly direction, but merely to protect hisoperation fit)m any interruption on that side. Thepurpose seems useful, and the post well suited toit,and we might suppose that in consequence ofhis possession of it, the iBtolians were inducedto attack his rear in a different place, just as itbegan to retire from Thermus. The deviation toKuvelo would only have added another hour to hismarch, and in moving from Kuvelo to Vlokho theIII.] Astoria. 151Macedonians might for a short distance have hadtheir left on the lake. But it is impossible to besatisfied with this explanation. The historian givespositive testimony that the anva^ or passes on theborders of the lake, were between Pamphium andMetapa, from the latter of which on his return heproceeded by Acre to Conope : it seems inevitablyto follow, therefore, that Metapa was at the westernentrance of the passes, about eight miles to thesouth-westward of Thermus. The only conclusionseems to be, that the words right and left have,by some negligence either of the historian orhis coppers, been substituted for each other inthe text. Experience proves that such an error,notwithstanding its importance, is one of the mostcommon that occurs. With this change everythingis clear, Metapa having stood near the lakeimmediately below Vrakhori, around which sitethere were probably woods making the passagedifficult As to Trichonis having been the easternlake, whereas I suppose Philip to have marchedchiefly along the western, that is easily reconciledby the £edict that they are only divisions of the samelake, which communicate at the causeway, whencein common parlance the larger division may oftenhave given name to the whole.I have not entertained the supposition thatThermal could have occupied any other site thanthat of Vlokho, the description of Polybius, butstill more the magnitude of the ruins leavingscarcely a reasonable doubt on this head in thesame manner as the extent of those at Surovigliare a strong confirmation of their being the remains152 iSTOLiA. [chap.of Stratus. If we were to suppose Thermus to havestood on the southern side, or at the eastern endof the lake of Apokuro, in which case Philip mightcertainly have approached it, with his left defendedby the lakes, it would in that case have been situatedon Mount Aracynthus, or on the mountainwhich separates that lake from the valley of theEvenus, and would have been at no great distancefrom Calydon and the sea-coast, instead ofhaving been far in the interior towards the greatmountains of ^tolia and the centre of the province,as every evidence respecting Thermus seems clearlyto indicate.Of the places which the Macedonian armyleft on either hand in their march towards Thermus,after having crossed the Achelous, namely,Conope, Lysimachia, Trichonium, and Phytseumon the right, and Agrinium and Thestia on theleft, there can be little doubt that Conope stood atAnghelokastro ; for, besides the testimony derivedfrom Polybius in his narrative of the capture ofThermus, from which we learn that it was on theeastern side of the river at a considerable distancebelow Stratus, the same author in relating somemovements of Philip in Acarnania, in the yearpreceding that of the capture of Thermus, indicatesit as standing at about twenty stades fromthe Achelous \ which perfectly agrees with thedistance of Anghel6kastro from the Aspro. Strabo,moreover, as well as Polybius, intimates thatit was near one of the ordinary passages of thePolybius, 1. 4, c. 64.III.] iBTOLIA. 153Achelous, which is now the case as to Angeloand arises in fact from permanent geographicalcauses.Conope having received considerable augmentationfrom Arsinoe, sister and wife of PtolemyPhiladelphus, assumed her name instead of thatof Conope. Polybius, however, in relating transactionswhich occurred thirty years after the timeof Ptolemy Philadelphus, still names it Conope.The neighbouring city which stood at Papa-dates,near the lake of Zygos, seems clearly tohave been Lysinuichia^ for Strabo describes theruins of that city to have been between Pleuronand Arsinoe, on a lake then called Lysimachia,but more anciently Syria', which agrees perfectlywith the position of Papadhates, supposing Pleuronto have been at Kyria Irini, and Aside atAnghelokastro. This position of Lysimachia accordsalso with the march of Antiochus from theMaliac Gulf in the year B.C. 191, when, havingappointed Stratus as the place for meeting theitalians, he marched thither by Naupactus, Corydon,and Lysimachia'. We may infer from thename of this city, that it was founded by Lysimachus,when, as King of Macedonia, his dominionextended over the greater part of Greece. If thesite was occupied more anciently, the name of thetown may possibly have been Eyrie, in like manneras in later times both town and lake were named Lysimachus.As Antoninus liberals, in relating the^ eir^vii^c iwiKeifiivTi x«c r^ ' Strabo p. 460.Tov 'Ax^Xmov iutfidtni. — Straw Liv. 1. 36, c. 11.bo, p. 460.154 iETOLIA. [chap.fable of the conversion of Cydnus into a swan, givesto the lake in which Cydnus destroyed himself thename of Conope ^, it is evident that the ancientsconsidered the lake of Zygos as the scene of thisfable, and it becomes probable, therefore, thatOvid, who in describing the same metamorphosis,couples the Cycneia Tempe with Eyrie ', alludedby the former name to the Klisura of Zygos,which is precisely such a place as the Greeksdenominated a Tempe.The river Cyathus, which, according to Polybius,as quoted by Athenaeum, flowed near Ar*since, corresponds to the stream which, issuingfrom the lake of Zygos, joins the AcheUms^ notfar from Anghelokastro. The principal sourceswhich form both the lakes are at the foot of thesteep mountain overhanging the eastern, or lakeof Apokuro ; a current flows from east to westthrough the two lakes : and the river of Angeloor Cyathus^ is nothing more than a continuationof the same stream. Acre stood perhapsat the place where the river emerges from the lake,this being about midway between the positionswhich I have assigned to Metapa and Conope.Notwithstanding the opinion of the antiquariesof Strabo's time, who pointed out some ruins atthe foot of Mount Aracynthus, near Pleuron, asthose of the Homeric Olenus, there is difficulty inbelieving that Olenus and Pleuron were so near toeach other. It seems more probable that Olenus^ Antonio. LiberaL &b. 12.Inde laus Hyries vide et Cycneia Tempe.^ Then. 1. 10. c. 6. Ovid Met. 1. 7» v. 371.III.] JETOLIA. 155occupied some advantageous site in the dominionsof the Calydonian dynasty, such as that of Gdvala,where Trichonium afterwards stood.The notice taken of Trichonium by severalancient authors ^ as well as the circumstanceof its having given name to the largest of the^tolian lakes, shows it to have been the principaltown of the plains, which, according to Strabo,extended from Trichonium to Stratus. The occurrenceof its name after that of Lysimachia, amongthe cities on the right of Philip in his progresstowards Thermus, places it beyond a doubt towardsthe south-eastern extremity of the plains, whereGavala, in a fertile district on the southern side ofthe Lake of Ap6kuro, seems perfectly to correspondto the data. PhytsBum, having been the last townon the right of Philip's line of march, answers tothe rained polls at Kiivelo, that being moreoverthe only place, besides Gavala, where any opencountry is left between the woody mountains andthe shore of the lake.Agrinium and Thestia received their names fromArius and Theseus, two ^tolian chiefs of theroyal race of Calydon and Pleuron, who, in processof time, obtained possessions farther in theinterior * ; for the italians, who went with Thomas tothe Trojan war, were all from the districts of Zy-gos and Apokuro. It is evident that Agriniumwas not far from the Achelous, as well from themarch of Philip as from an occurrence of the yearPolyb. 1. 4, c. 8 ; 1. 5, c. Tpix^vioy* Strabo, p. 450.7. 13 ; 1. 17, c. 10. Pausan. ' Strabo, p. 46I9 et seq.Corinth, c. 37. Stephan. inJBTOUA.[chap. III.B.C. 314, related by Diodorus, when Agriniumwas in alliance with Acamania against the italians,and when Cassander marched from Macedoniainto iBtolia to assist the Acamanes. By hisadvice the Acamanes concentrated their forces, bywithdrawing from their smaller fortresses intoStratus, Agrinium, and Ithoria\ As soon asCassander departed, after leaving a garrison inAgrinium, the italians besieged it; and whenthe inhabitants marched out upon capitulation,treacherously fell upon them in the route, andmassacred the greater part of them. It may beinferred from the two testimonies, that Agriniumwas not far from Zapdndi. Thestia was probablyon the heights above Vrakh6ri, towards the sourcesof the Ermitza. The river Camillus, upon whichthe historian states that Cassander encamped, andheld a council with the Acamanes on his arrivalin ^tolia, seems, from all the circumstances mentionedby the historian, to have been that greatbranch of the AchelatiSy which joins it betweenTetama and Surovigli, not far below the former.01 vXeioToi fie tic ^rparovwdXiy tnfyfKfitrav ^vptoranyvoZ<ray km fieyltmiy* Oiyidiai ieical nec aXXoc crvvqXdov iwll^vpiay, Aepuic (aL Aopcclc)fun* Iripwy €?c 'Ayplyioy,—^Diodor. 1. 19, c. 67. Ithoriahaving been, as we know fromPolybius (1. 4, c. 64), beyondConopo, towards CEniadae, thecorrection *lOktpiay for ^avpiayis easy. Acpieecy or Aopceic,though it has rather more theappearance of correctness, is notfire from suspicion, the namenot being mentioned by anyother author. If correct, wemay suppose that Derium orDorian was a town on theAeolian side of the Achelous,as its people retired into Agri-num.CHAPTER IV.ACARNANTA, Epirus.Departure from Depend — Kekhreniatza — Kekhrenia — ^Amvra-kia — Spaito — Stanu — Kervasara — Spartovuni — Ltrnfusa-^Lutiaki — Balimbey — ^V 6nitza — Punta, Actium — Pre vyza —Port Vathjf — Ex Venetian places — Nicopolis — Mikhalitzi,hill of Apollo— SbjI from Pre vyza to Salagh6ra — carta, Umbras— River Arachthiu — Siege of Ambracta by Fulvius — Am"lacus — Craneiaia — Oreitce,June 18. — ^^The direct route from Lepenti to passes along the foot of the hill of Dependantleaving on the left the lake of Lygovltzi, whichdischarges its superfluous waters into the right sideof the AchekmSy enters a pass between the ridges ofMakhala and Lepenu, and then follows the easternbank of the lake of Valto to Amvrakia, which villageby this road is seven hours distant. Wishingto explore a little more of the districts Valto thanthe direct road affords, I send the ba^s^e thatway; and taking with me two of the Albanianescort, which Yusuf Aga provided for me, followup the valley of Lepenu. It soon becomes narrowand quite uncultivated. As we advance, the hills01} either side become higher, and the bushes belowthicker, until at 5.45 we enter a wood of smalloaks, mixed with ilex and prints, ascending gentlyby a pleasant shady path, until having arrived at158 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.the summit of the pass we begin at 7 to descend,and at 7.15 arrive at the ruins of some Hellenicwalls. One of them crosses the road ; others arewith difficulty traced among the trees. They arethe outworks of a fortress which occupied a heightto the left of the road, and was naturally strengthenedon two sides by a deep ravine and torrent ;thus placed, it commanded the access by this valleyfrom AmpkUochia to the great plain of the Ache-urns.Within the inclosure, a little to the left ofthe road, a circular excavation in the ground,thirty-four feet in diameter, is lined with regularmasonry of nearly equal courses, one of the stonesof which measures four feet six inches in length,and two feet eight inches in height On one sideof the circle there remain eight courses overgrownwith trees and bushes, on the other the slope ofthe bank covers the masonry. Near the walls ofthe fortress, on the outside, there is an ordinaryancient sepulchre, which has never been opened.The ruins are called the Pale6ka8tro of Kekhreni-atza. The latter name is applied to the pass, andto a brook to which I descend in five minutes,after a halt of fifty minutes.The wall which crosses the road follows it afterwardsfor three minutes towards the brook. It hasin some places six courses of masonry of the * thirdkind, nearly approaching to the fourth, and veryaccurately joined, except where trees growing onthe top have displaced the stones, with theirroots. The brook of Kekhreni&tza winds througha little uneven vale, ending in a snail plain onthe shore of die Ambcacian Gulf, which is calledIV.] ACARNAN1A. 159Xerokatnbo, from its want of water ; for the brookis lost before it arrives there. It produces, however,com and Kalamb6kki, and belongs to thevillage of Kekhrenid, situated on the side of thesteep rocky mountain which borders the ravine ofKekhreni&tza to our left, and which separates it fromthe valley and lake of Valto or Amvrakia. We nowquit the road to Xer6kambo, and turning to theleft cross the ridge of Kekhrenia, passing about themiddle of the ascent through that village, whichcontains thirty Greek families, some dwelling ingood pyrghi. We left the brook at 8.18, halt tenminutes at Kekhrenia, and then, proceeding toclimb its steep rocky ridge, arrive, at 9.40, at achurch of St. Elias, on the summit which commandsan extensive view of Xeromero and Valto.These districts are little cultivated or inhabited,but particularly the latter, which consists of woodymountains to the northward, and to the southwardof steep ridges inclosing a valley, the greatest partof which is lake or marsh, according to the season.It is this valley which gives name to the sub-district.Having descended the western side of the ridge,on fi>ot, Through a wood of oaks not growing verythickly nor of large size, we arrive, at 10.50, fiveminutes beyond the foot of die mountain on theedge of the lake ; then turning the northern endof it ascend to Amvrakia, which is one-third of theway up a ridge parallel to the one we have passed ,and equally steep and rocky. We arrive at 11.30.Sparto is another village on the same mountain,one hour northward of Amvrakia towards the sea*160 ACARNAVIA. [CHAP.Stanu is a third, of the same size as Amvrakia, andsituated at the same height above the lake, threequarters of an hour to the southward. The partof the Valto, or lake, below Amvrakia, is a narrowshallow creek, about three miles long, branchingout of the deeper part of it which is under Papa-hatesand the monastery of Agrili6.Amvrakia, or more vulgarly Amvrakid, containsabout forty houses, and as many more in ruins.The Amvrakiotes, to avoid further decay, areabout to move their situation higher up the mountain,where they will be less exposed to Turkishpassengers, to thieves, and to the hostilities ofsome of their neighbours, which have caused apart of the vale, on the side of the lake, to be atlength quite uncultivated. Their new village isto be called Plat, the position being level, thoughlofty, and already, my host the Proestos, hasspent, he tells me, twenty purses in building ahouse there.In the evening I descend the mountain of ,in 40 minutes, to its Skala, from whenceare exported planks, velanidhi, grain, and cattle.It is called Kervasara ^, and is situated in a valleyat the head of a long bay which forms the southeasternextremity of the gulf of Artaa. To theeastward of the valley rises the mountain namedSpartovuni, a lower continuation of which extendsto the entrance of the bay, and falls on the easternside to Xer6kambo. The latter valley terminates^ KipftatrafHic is derived such Turkish place of receptionKarayanserai, though no tion is now to be found there.IV,] ACARNANIA. 161at Arinyr6, where is a scala and shallow harbourseparated from the sea on the west by a low coast,which appears from Kervasara projecting to theleft of the cape of Spartovuni. To the westwardof the bay of Kervasara rises the continuation ofthe ridge of Amvrakia, on which stands the villageof Sparto, once perhaps situated on the oppositemountain which now bears that name, for, aswe have seen in the instance of Amvrakia, villageshave a locomotive faculty in this country.At the inner point of the bay, south-east of themagazines of Kervasara, are the walls of a largeHellenic town, occupying a height which risesfrom the right bank of a torrent, and reaches tothe sea side. The place was fortified like Stratus,that is to say, there is no appearance of an Acropolisof the usual kind, but the inclosed space wasdivided by a transverse wall into two parts, whichare here more equal than at Stratus : many towersremain on the land-fronts. The masonry is ofvarious ages; some parts are entirely polygonal,others consist of regular and equal courses. Butthe greater part of the work is of the third order,or of a kind between the two former. There areremains also of repairs with mortar, of a muchlater period. Doubtless the post has always beenone of importance, as commanding the mosteasy and natural access into Acamania fromEpirus, both by sea and land. The inclosedspace is overgrown with the kharub, oak, wildolive, and a great variety of shrubs, which oftengive shelter to deer, and other wild animalsabounding in the adjacent woods. Beyond Xero-VOL. I. M162 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.sambo is the plain of Vlikha, where at the footof the mountains are the remains of a Helleniccity, described as being of larger compass thanthose at Kersavara, but not so well preserved. Itis probably the ancient Argos of Amphilochia.Beyond the plain of Vlikha begins the Makrinoro,a mountain covered with a forest of oaks, andfalling steeply to the shore of the gulf. The roadalong its declivity, which is reckoned three hoursin length, forms a pass resembling that of theGates of Syria, at the head of the gulf of Skan-derun. Returning to Amvrakia, some iroXaia^vrifMTa occur on the road-side. They are ancientsepulchres of the most ordinary kind, or formed offour slabs set edgewise in the ground, and coveredwith other slabs.The existence of the name 'AfijSpaicia attachedto a modem village in this part of the country hasagreat tendency to confine the ancient geography,as leading to the belief that the ruins at Kervasaraare those of the ancient Ambracia. But Ambraciawas certainly on the northern side of the gulf, atsome distance from the sea. The fact is, thatAmvrakia is a village of recent construction, towhich the founders gave that name in consequenceof a prevalent opinion, that the ruins at Kervasaraare those of Ambracia. That the error is of longstanding,we learn from Meletius, who himself fellinto it, and who, having been Bishop of Artaa, wasprobably the false luminary which led the foundersof Amvrakia to give their village that name.I have little doubt that the ruins at Kervasara arethose of Linea, from whence Philip began hismarch to Thermus.IV.] ACARNANIA. 163June 19. — ^At 5 we begin to climb the steeprugged mountain at the back of Amvrakia. At5.40, arrive at the summit which forms the separationbetween Xeromero and Valto, and begin todescend. It is observable that this mountain, aswell as the two parallel ranges, and the same maybesaid of many others in this part of Greece, arebare on the eastern side, and well clothed withtrees on the western. As we descend, Katuna, avillage of Xeromero, pleasantly situated on a hill,with a cultivated valley below it, is on the left,and rather behind us : beyond it towards the sea,distant 10 or 12 miles, rises a high ridge, onwhich stands Zavitza, not in sight. To the rightof Katuna appeal's the bold round mountain calledBumisto, and more in front of us a lofty ridgewith a peaked summit, named Vamaka, from avillage on it towards the sea. On this side of itthere is a fine vale, which extends to Katuna, andis well cultivated with com. Towards the Gulfof Artaa appears a valley and a green marsh, overgrownwith shrubs and timber trees. The mountainbeyond it is covered with a thick forest.Having descended on foot through the wood, andarrived in the vale at 6.20, we leave, after a haltof ten minutes, the marsh to the left, and passthrough a wood on the side of it. Cattle arefeeding round it, and towards the southern endthere are a few fields of wheat now falling underthe sickle. At 7.20, near the head of the Bay ofLutraki, leaving to the right the road to the monasteryof Kendromata, and to Vlikha, Makrinoro,and Artaa, we ascend a height, and at 7.25 lookM 2164 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.down to the right, on the head of the Bay ofLutraki. The beach is covered with firewood,piled in stacks for embarkation ; and farther onare some magazines, near which a malacca brig isat anchor, loading the wood. At 7.53 the roadcrosses a bridge over a torrent, which is shadedwith planes, and bordered by slopes clothed withoaks and planes, festooned with wild vines, andwhere the kharub and the paliuri, covered with aprofusion of blossoms, are mixed with the aromaticshrubs with which Greece so eminently abounds,and peopled with nightingales singing in the deepshade. After a halt of 12 minutes we pursue ourroute along the side of the forest of oak, whichcovers the mountain, with the gulf at a short distanceon the right, and then pass through a narrowtract between the sea and the forest, whereare a few fields of maize, watered by rivulets fromthe mountain.At 8.35 occurs a tjiftlik belonging to Aljr Pasha,named Balm Bey, situated half a mile from thesea. Here the French consul, Lasalle, about theyear 1788, embarked the greatest part of thetimber which he cut down in the neighbouringmountain, for the use of the naval yard at Toulon.There still remain however some very large trees,the finest I have yet seen in Greece. Soon afterwardswe enter the thickest part of the forest,leaving the village of Nisi half an hour to theright. The road to Lefkadha^ turns off to theAcvira^a, that is Leucas in the usual Romaic form of theaccusative case.IV.J ACARNANIA. 165left about three quarters of an hour beyond BalmBey. We lose our way in the wood, and are 40minutes in recovering it. At 10.15 having gainedthe summit of a ridge, which terminates in a capecalled Gheladha \ on the eastern side of the Bayof Vonitza, this town opens to view, and to theleft of it the lake called Vulkaria, with a woodyand marshy tract on this side of it, around whichb a little cultivation. Here the oaks are generallysmall, but there is an abundance of fine treestowards Lefkadha, in which direction the mountainof Plaghia* intercepts the view to the Strait ofLucas but admits a sight of the highest part ofthe island over it. The ridge to our left is continuedas far as the western coast near Zaverdha,and rises in that interval to a lofty summit namedPergandi. Exactly in the spot where this viewopens are some Hellenic foundations by the roadside,and some others in a neighbouring corn-field.From hence to Vonitza the land is well cultivatedwith com. Leaving on our right a monastery,beautifully situated below a grove of oaks on theside of the mountain, we descend into the plain,and crossing it diagonally, arrive at Vonitza^ at12.10. In the entrance of the town are the remainsof a square redoubt and detached ravelin,which are recent works of the French.The district of Vonitza extends 4 or 5 milesround the town, including the slopes of the mountr^c rtXdSa^, — Episcopalian, written Bovv-the Cape of the Cow. rir^a. The bishopric which isETAaycac- now extinct was in the kvap-Buvirl^a. In the Notitiae x^^ ^^ Naupactus.166 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.pains on the eastern and western sides of thevalley, and the valley itself in the direction of theLake Vulkaiia, nearly as far as Konidhari; atjiftlik belonging to Aljr Pasha, whose propertynow extends as far as the channel of Lefkadha,though in consequence of its exposure to the robbers,who take refuge in the islands, he deriveslittle profit from it. Konidhari stands on a lowridge which connects the heights on the west ofVonitza with Mount Pergandi, and thus separatesthe plain of Vonitza from the Lake Vulkaria, aswell as from another plain which reaches to theBay of Zaverdha. Beyond the ridge, at theeastern extremity of the Vulkaria, are some thickwoods, the abode of deer and wild hogs, and oftenthe retreat of the robbers in those expeditionsfrom the islands which have almost depopulatedAcamania,The house in which I am lodged at Vonitza, thatof the Greek primate Khalikiopulo, commonlycalled Logotheti, from his ecclesiastical office,stands on the shore, on the side of a strait about200 yards in width, which communicates from theBay of Vonitza to the Limeni, a shallow harbourwhich widens to half a mile, and is about twomiles long.Vonitza contains 450 houses, divided into threeseparate quarters : namely, Recinto, which lies onthe south-west, and is so called as being inclosedwithin two walls which descend to the shore ofthe shallow harbour from the summit of a conicalhill, crowned with a ruinous and ill-constructedVenetian castle; secondly, Borgo, which is aIV.] ACARNANIA. 167suburb on the western side of the hill ; andthirdly, Buccal, which is divided from Borgo bygardens, and stretches eastward along the shoreof the Bay. The greater part of the houses ofVonitza are-wretched cottages, constructed of mudand thatched. In Recinto are the ruins of a largechurch, having a Latin inscription over the door,placed there by the Venetians. A marshy tractextending towards the head of the linen is occupiedby gardens, and several private houses inan unhealthy situation. Immediately opposite toM. Logotheti's house, on the opposite or northernpoint of the harbour's mouth, is a small suburbconsisting of a few houses upon the extreme point,together with a monastery prettily situated amongolive trees. Both the monastery and suburb areknown by the name of Mortar.Beyond Mortar lies the great peninsula, formedby the Bay of Vonitza, the linen of Vonitza,and the Gulf of Prevyza, and which terminates tothe north-east in a high rocky point, separatedfrom a similar cape by the strait which forms theentrance from the small ante-gulf of Prevyza intothe main Gulf of Artaa. The Bay of Vonitza is avery large semi-circular basin, opening into thegulf between the eastern side of the peninsulaabove-mentioned, and Cape Gheladha to the eastward.It is indented with several beautiful harbours,and has considerable depth quite to theshore of Vonitza. The commerce of this placeconsists chiefly in the' exchange of grain, cattle,and firewood, for the articles of furniture and domesticuse for which Greece is indebted to Europe,168 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.or Constantinople. As to government, it is inthe same condition with Prevyza and Parga. Thetreaty of 1800, which formed the Septinsular republic,assigned these Venetian dependencies tothe Porte, on the condition that they were to begoverned by their own municipal laws, and to beexempt from the kharatj, but to pay the land taxand customs to an officer appointed by the Porte toreceive them. The Aga charged with this officehas a guard of five or six men. He complainsmuch of his solitary situation, without a singleTurk to speak to, even the soldiers of the garrisonbeing Christians. " But I serve," he says, *^ forthe glory of my sovereign, and with the hopes ofpromotion." In the meantime he is in greatdread of offending Aljr Pasha, whose design ofobtaining complete possession of the £x- Venetianplaces is sufficiently evident. The poor Aga hasrecently been much alarmed at the conduct of hisprincipal at Prevyza, who has openly shown hissuspicions of the Pasha by not waiting upon himwhen he was lately at M^iiika, on the borders ofthe district of Prevyza. Nor is he free from apprehensionsfrom the chief Greeks at this place,whom he suspects of having been gained over byAljr to solicit his protection. Whatever may bethePasha's designs, the Turk is totally unable toprevent them, and will find it very difficult, therefore,to avoid falling into disgrace with his ownsuperiors. "If the Greeks of Vonitza," he ob-^serves, " abandon me, and I am left alone to opposeAljr's wishes, I am certainly a lost man."There seems to be too much reason for these fears.IV.] ACARNANIA. 169for already those among the Greeks, who were inclinedto support him and his cause against Aljr,have thought it prudent to quit the place ; and theopposite party, convinced of the inutility of resistance,have joined the Vezlr in some mercantilespeculations, by which all the advantage they arelikely to gain, is that of being the last devoured.His Highness derives great assistance in his designsfrom the robbers, who furnish him with a constantpretext for having a body of troops in the Ex-venetianterritories. Soon after the Turkish resident'svisit, he sends me a present of a lamb andsome lemons, and —June 20, this morning accompanies me to thecastle which commands a fine view\)f the westernpart of the Ambrdcic Gulf, bounded by the hills ofSuli and loannina. The castle has a double inclosure,a ruined church on the summit, a goodcistern, and a house built by Aljr Pasha for theAlbanian garrison, which he placed here after hehad taken Vonitza from the French, and when heprobably expected to have been left in quiet possessionof it by the Porte. It is armed only with threesmall cannon on the southern side. The ruinouscondition of the churches here, and in the Recinto,is said to have been caused by the Venetians havingdestroyed them to sell the materials when theyevacuated the place.The advantages of Vonitza are its fine bay forships, its harbour at Myrtdri for small vessels, ittforests abounding in excellent timber and pasturefor cattle ; a fertile valley, an easy communicationwith Lefk&dha, and a fortress in a position which170 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.commands the access into Acamania and ^toliafrom Epirus by the way of Prevyza, and whichwould be of the greatest importance if the strongPass of MakrinorOy the only entrance by land,were closed , and the water communication in thehands of the defenders of Acamania. On the otherhand, Vonitza, in common with the other placesin the gulf, partakes of the inconvenience of theshallowness of the Strait of Prevyza, and which isthe more sensibly felt as the exterior coast, for agreat distance both to the north and south of theentrance, affords no secure anchorage. Dhemata,at the northern extremity of the Strait of Leucas,is the best ; but the entrance is commanded by theCastle of Santa Laura. Another disadvantage ofVonitza is its deficiency of fresh water, which issupplied by a canal derived from a stream at somedistance in the valley; nor is the place exemptfrom malaria in the summer and autumn, causedby the stagnant waters at the head of the harbour,as well as by the land breezes which blow from themarshes near the Lake of Vulkaria.The land of Vonitza belongs chiefly to nobles ofZante, Catalonia, and Corfu, who became possessedof it under the Venetian government, and whosecultivators send the proprietors a fourth of the produce,being themselves subject to all the expences,including the land tax paid to the Porte. TheGreeks of Vonitza have lately cleared tracts of landon the hills, which they are sowing on their ownaccount. In the woods around, they are allowedto cut firewood and plank, but not for exportation,the woods being the property of the Sultan, and noIV.] ACARNANIA. 171persons being allowed to fell large timber withoutpermission from the Porte.In the plain, a mile and a half S. E. of thetown, and three quarters of a mile from the sea,rises a small conical height, called Manila, andbehind it a similar one, but larger; both overgrownwith bushes. On the summit of the smaller,a space of about three acres, now grown with com,is surrounded by the remains of a Hellenic wall.On the northern side, the masonry is of the thirdorder ; and on the east there is a beautiful specimenof the fourth, or most regular kind. There is said tobe another small castle of the same kind at Ruga,an inlet of the coast a little on this side of Nisi.The latter was probably a maritime dependency ofa larger place, of which there are remains at AioVasili, on the side of the mountain above it, threehours from Vonitza. I have searched in vain forany vestiges of antiquity in the Castle of Vonitza,or on any part of the hill, though the situationcould hardly have been neglected by the ancients.In fact, ancient sepulchres are often found in thesuburb of Buccal, and fragments in other places,sufficient to show that it was an ancient site.June 21. — ^^This morning, at 5.10, having sentmy baggage off at midnight in a boat, I proceedby land from Vonitza to Prevyza, follow the southeyshore of the shallow harbour until 5.30, thenleaving the direct road, which continues along theharbour at the foot of the mountain, turn to theleft, and in eighteen minutes gain a summit whichcommands a fine view of the great Acamanianpeninsula, lying to the westward of the bays of172 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.Vonitza and Zaverdha. To the eastward of theisthmus, which, with the exception of the smallridge of Konidhari, is a level from the one bay tothe other, rises the parallel mountain, of whichthe summit is named Pergandl. The middle ofthe peninsula is composed of low land, surroundingthe lagoon of Vulkaria, and extending to Pr^vyza,and to the coast between it and Aha Mavra. Allthe southern part of the peninsula consists of alofty mountain, on the slope of which, opposite toLefkadha, stands the village Plaghia^ and at itssouthern extremity another named Boeotia. Oppositeto the latter, at the foot of the ridge of Per-gandi, is Zaverdha. Both these places are at nogreat distance from the bay, which is usuallynamed after the latter. The intermediate plain,and indeed the whole isthmus, is fertile, but littlecultivated. The peninsula is for the most part aforest, which, especially on the southern and easternside of the lagoon, and on the mountain of Plagued,abounds in large oaks well adapted to naval construction\ The lagoon, including the marsheson its edge, is four or five miles long, and as muchbroad. It communicates by a narrow stream withthe head of Port Dhemata, on the southern side ofwhich is the entrance of the canal of Lefkadha andthe Castle of Aha Mavra.At the south-eastern end of Vulkaria, on aheight rising amidst thick woods, is the PalesIn the woods near the have seen in Greece ; thoughlagoon, I observed, in 1809, perhaps as they grow in a marsh,many very fine oaks, taller the timber may not be so goodand straighter than any I as that of th hills. I remainedIV.] ACARNANIA. 173kastro of Kekhropiilay so called from a smallvillage no longer inhabited. To the left of Kegthe view comprehends Meganisi, 'Atoko,and a part of Kalamo, the remainder of which ishid by the Acarnaman coast. To the northwardare seen Pau and the coast from Parga to Sala-hora,with all the northern side of the Gulf ofArtaa. Though it is difficult with confidence toadapt the names to the ancient positions in thispart of Acamania^ there can be little doubt thatthe Vulkaria is the ancient Myrtuntium, beingprecisely as Strabo describes Myrtuntium *, "a\ilivoBa\arra, (or salt-water lagoon,) situated betweenLeucas and the Ambracic Gulf."At 7.15, descending from the mountain, andleaving the extremity of the linen of Vonitza onthe right, as well as a road to 'Alios Petross, aharbour on the shore of the Gulf of Prevyza,where are some vestiges of a Hellenic polis, probablySanatorium, we proceed through woods andbushes, and arrive, at 7.50, on the margin of abeautiful little fresh-water lake, named Linovro-khi^ on one side of which is a hanging forestof oaks. A peasant here describes to me a subterraneousstream which emerges from a cavity inthe forest, near the Lake of Vulkaria. The roadcontinues through an uncultivated country over-severalstumps of the trees tis. In some places the woodwhich had been cut down hy consists entirely of ilex (i£pei-Lasalle, and some trunks, a2c)i hut the trees are not large,which, after having been cut ^ Strabo, p. 459.down, had not been removed. ' Aivo/Spc^i, literally a pondThere is a thick underwood of for soaking flax,hay, ilex, myrtle, paliuri, ACARKANIA. [Clap.grown with thorns and shrubs, and at 8.40emerges on the beach of the Gulf of Pr^vyza,where lies some ship timber, principally knees,ready cut and prepared for an armed vessel whichAljr Pasha is about to build . at Salaghora. Thebuilder calculates that it will pass the bar of with the guns in, and have half a foot waterto spare.After following the beach for half a mile, wecross a low point for the most part covered withmyrtle, at the northern extremity of the Straitof Prevyza, and at 9,10 arrive at the Tjiftlikof Punta. Here are a few fields of maize surroundinga quadrangular building, with towers atthe angles, which contains the dwellings of thepeasants who cultivate the fields and tend theflocks on this farm of Aljr. Here also is a aula,or modem tower, and several remains of ancientbuildings of Roman construction. At a projectionto the southward of the tjiftlik, where the Strait isnarrowest, and immediately opposite to the castleof Prevyza, the Vezir has constructed a serai andsmall fortress. There is every probability thatthe Roman ruins are remains of some of thebuildings of Actium, established by Augustus, forthe breadth of the Strait answers perfectly to the*^ less than 5 stades" of Polybius, or the "somethingmore than four" of Strabo, or the ** four" ofScylax, or the '* 500 Roman paces" of Pliny ^Punta, it is to be observed, is the Italian .L 4, c. 63. Stray Krurtriairoi. Plin. H. N. 1. 4,bo, p. 325. Scylax in c. 1.IV. Epirus. 176nation oCAxpiif or'^Aicpov, which is the Greek nameof this promontory, though in consequence of having so long been a Venetian dependency,the word Punta is very commonly used by theGreeks themselves. But Akri, as well as Punta,is nothing more than the modem representativeof 'AicTii, a word descriptive, like Akri, of such apeninsula as that opposite to Prevyza, and fromwhich the Apollo here worshipped was summedActus, and his temple Actium. Besides theauthors who have just been cited, we may refer toThucydides and to Dio in proof of Akri being thesite of Actium. Strabo alone has left an expressionwhich is not easily reconciled with actualappearances, in saying that the temple stood ona height.June 22. — Prevyza, or Prevent *, for it is nowwritten in both ways in Greek, though the latterform is probably Italian, contained 2,000 families,when the French arrived in 1798, but has nownot more than 1200. When the Venetians tookit in 1684, there are said to have been only 70 ;the rapid increase after that time is easily accountedfor, by the commercial advantages of the position,and by the importance of this place, as well as ofParga and Vutzintro, to the safety of Corfu and itscanal, which induced the Venetian government notonly to protect the people against their Musulmanneighbours, but to be vigilant in preventing theirown progenitor and other officers from indulge1. J, c. 29. Dion. • Upipv^a, Upifieffa.Csaa. L 50, c« 12.176 EPiRus. [chap.hug in their accustomed rapacity. The housesare dispersed over a large space, each havinga garden or small plot of ground attached to it,containing fig, walnut, and apricot trees, witha few culinary herbs. But the greater part ofthe dwellings are wretched huts, made of wattledbranches plastered with mud. All the besthouses, some of which, built in the Venetianstyle, show the former opulence of the place, arenow in ruins. Prevyza is still, however, one ofthe best towns in Greece, and has an agreeableappearance, from the abundance of gardens, andfrom the olive plantations which cover the peninsulabeyond them. The low point on which thetown stands enjoys the sea-breeze in summer inperfection, but the gulf wind at night, and early inthe morning, is reckoned unwholesome ; that thesituation, however, is not so, generally speaking,the robust constitution of the men, and the goodcomplexion of the women sufficiently indicate, notwithstanding,that the latter, besides performingall the household drudgery, labour in the fieldsduring the harvest of com and olives, while themen are employed in the fisheries of the gulf, orinthe trade and coasting navigation of Epirus,Acamania, and the islands, or in smoking theirpipes in idleness at home. One of the severestlabours of the women is that of carrying large jarsof water on their heads from the fountains, whichbeing at the extremity of a very straggling town,are a mile distant from some parts of it.The water, which is excellent, rushes plentifullyfrom the foot of a rocky cliff* on the edge of theIV.] EPIRUS. 177sea beach. Wherever a channel is made in thisplace, a stream immediately issues, and it canhardly be doubted, that if the Prevyzans ^ were todig wells, they would find water every where.The principal source is fitted up in the Turkishstyle.Another employment of the women, but whichis at once profitable and easy, is that of raisingsilkworms; they are now winding off the silk.The place produces annually 1500 pounds of rawsilk, now told at 10 piastres the pound. Thegrain of the territory, consisting of maize, wheat,barley, and oats, is about equal to the consumptionof the place, sometimes insufficient, but sometimesso productive as to admit of the exchange of aportion of it for the wine of Les kadha, or Thiaki.Of oil, which is of the best quality, superior even,according to the Prevyzans, to that of Corfu,or any other island, there is an annual averageexportation of 10,000 tzukalia, or jars, of sevenlitres each, besides the consumption of the place :the present price is two dollars the jar.The Turkish Bey, or resident of the Sultan, receivesthe tithe on land, which is let every yearto the Greeks in lots, and the maritime customs,which are four per cent, on exports, and two percent,on imports, as under the Venetians. TheBey commands a garrison of thirty-six soldiers,but takes all his directions for the management ofthe police from the Greek magistrates, who stillpreserve the Maggiore Consilio and other Rene*«oi Uptfividyoif or npe(iv(aiouVOL. I. N178 EPiRUs. [chaptian courts. The Consilio consists of nobles,some of whom, as in the Seven Islands, may befound digging in their olive grounds. A body offorty of these elect the magistrates. Culprits areimprisoned on the requisition of the Proestos, andare tried by the proper tribunal, which, as underthe Venetians, admits of an appeal to the primarycourt, at either of the two other ex-Venetian towns,Parga and Vonitza. The Prevyzans express themselvesvery grateful to Russia, whose consul takescare that no encroachments are made on theseprivileges, either by Aljr Pasha or by the Bey.Hence, Prevyza at present is one of the happiesttowns in Rumili, though with such a neighbouras Aiy there is no saying how long thiscondition may last. The territory extends onlyan hour's distance inland. Mjrtika \ and the furtherpart of the ruins of NicopoKs^ are in AlPashd's dominions : the nearer ruins, and thelagoon called Mazoma, belong to Prevyza. Thesituation in the entrance of this noble Gulf, surroundedby some of the most productive lands inGreece, at a point of ready communication withthe islands and with Italy, would ensure to it someof those advantages which the same causes gaveto its predecessor Nicopolis, if Greece were i^ainto become a civilized country ; though perhaps notto the same degree, in consequence of the shallowchannel, less suited to modem than it was to ancientnavigation. Nevertheless, it is probable that in^ JAvTuca — ^80 called as standing on a cape ; /ivrij, nose, fromthe Hellenic fivut.IV.] Epirus. 179every age Patrie and Nicopolis will prove the wisdomof Augustus in selecting these two placesfor the Roman colonies of the western coast ofGreece.The soil of the peninsula is excellent. Barleyis sown in November, wheat in December, andoats in January. Maize, as requiring plentiful irrigation,which is not to be obtained here, sometimesfails when the spring rains are not sufficientlyabundant. It is generally grown amongthe plantations of young olives, is sown in Apriland reaped in August. The best oil is madefrom olives gathered by hand, though these donot yield half so much in quantity as the fruitwhich falls from the tree. It is not customaryto sow under the full-grown olive-trees, which iscommon in many parts of Greece, oil being themost valuable production of Prevyza, and theopinion prevailing that the com exhausts thesoil and injures the crop of olives. Vines are supposednot to have the same effect, and are sometimesplanted among the trees. Where no tillageoccurs the grass is fed short, and the groundabout the roots is opened. In many parts of thepeninsula the land is covered with fern, whichgrows here rather too luxuriantly. It is cut downand put into holes at the roots of the trees, wheresome think it beneficial as manure, and the groundis then ploughed. One of the reasons for thistreatment is to obviate accidents from fire in thesummer, when the least spark among the driedvegetables, then abounding in uncultivated lands,creates a conflagration. Prevyza is said to have onceN 2180 EPiRus. [chap,lost one-third of its trees in this manner; and asimilar accident, though not so destructive, occurredwhen the Vezir's Albanians were here. Thesetroops, when en bivouac are in the habit of lightingfires, for the purpose, among others, va ^(vowrace f^OiipaiQj that operation which is the Albaniansubstitute for washing the shirt.The hill of Michael tzi, at the foot of which arethe ruins of Nicopolis, although now uncultivatedon this side, bears the marks in its artificialterraces of a different state when it belongedto the monastery of Zdlongo ; the Vezir, havingappropriated it to himself, has built a houseand some labourers' cottages on the summit ofthe hill. His farmers furnish seed, cattle, labour,and farming utensils, and deliver to him thetenth of the gross produce as miri, and a thirdof the remainder. In new tjiftliks, or those whichare of uncertain tenure, such as many of hiswere during the Suliote war, he was generallycontented with a fourth of the produce. When tothis obligation is added the kharatj, and the demandsof Albanian troops, there seldom remainsmore for the peasant than is necessary to supportlife upon maize, salt fish, cheese, and garlic.The channel between Prevyza and Akri is notonly shallow and narrow, but the entrance is rendereddangerous by a long sandy shoal, whichprojects southward from the cape of Prevyza, andleaves only a narrow passage of twelve feet indepth between it and another shoal on the Acar^nathan shore. Towards the northern, or interiorextremity of the strait, and immediately oppo-IV.] Epirus 181site to the town, the strait widens, and forms theharbour of Pr^vyza. Half a mile beyond thesprings, at the northern extremity of the town,is Vathjr, a small bay, where the water is asdeep as in the harbour of Prevyza, and wherean armed brig of the Vezir, formerly an Englishsloop, is now lying. A creek branches from Va-ther,which has a double termination ; the westernbranch touches a part of the site of Nicapolis^ andthe eastern approaches the coast of the Gulf ofArtaa. On the shore of Vathjr are ruins of themagazines of Lasalle, which formed a quadrangleand had two stories ; the upper intended for grain,the lower for timber. In the inclosed court La-sallebuilt vessels on his own account, besides whichhe had a contract to deliver at the arsenal of Toulon,for five franks the cubic foot, oak timber, to bemarked in the woods by persons appointed by theFrench government. He bargained with the Greeksor Albanians to bring the trees down to the waterside: the ambassador at the Porte procured permissionfrom the Sultan, and Alj^ was paid forty orfifty purses yearly to cover his own claims asDerwent Aga, or for the Spahilik, where it existed.One year he extorted seventy purses fromthe French, on the pretence that he had receivedan order from the Porte to prevent the embarkation.Lasalle had the contract for five years, whenit was renewed for five more ; but at the end oftwo the French Revolution put an end to the contract,and an assassin to his life. The Suliotesbrought a considerable quantity for him down theriver of Luro. In the forest of Manna, in Acar-182 BPiaus. [chap.ananias the oaks are chiefly of the velani kind,which is seldom so large as the common oak, noris the timber so good* Those of Mariners, Suli,and V6nitza, are the best in this part of Greece.Djum^rka produces some fine firs.It is reckoned that near four hundred Prevyzanfamilies gain a subsistence by the fisheries of theirown town, or by those of Artaa and Acamania,which are now farmed from the Porte by AlPasha. In the territory of Pr^vyza, shell-fish,eels, and grey mullet, are caught — the two latterin the M&zoma, or lagoon of Nicapolis. Of shellfishthere is an inexhaustible supply in the shallowsaround the strait and near the town ; a great quantityof these is sent to the islands in the time of Lent.Occasionally also an immense number of eels fromthe lagoons of Artaa, suddenly make their appearancein the harbour of Pr^vyza. This happensalways in tempestuous weather, and probablyoccurs only when in migrating to the sea fromtheir breeding-places in the rivers and lagoons ofthe Gulf, they meet with a storm in passing out ofthe strait, which drives them back upon Prevyxa.The fisheries of Artaa and Aiximania are conductedby the more opulent Prevyzans, who form societies,each of which hires a share of the fishery, andemploys Prevyzan labourers, for whom they findnets and other necessaries. While the sale of fishis going forward, the money is laid by in a commonpurse, which, when the muk&tesi has beenpaid, is equally divided between the merchantsand the fishermen. This, and other modes ofgiving an interest in profits to all the individualsly.] EPiRus. 183employed in any speculation are common in themercantile and even in the agricultural undertakingsof the Greeks. The greater part of the maritimecommerce and carrying trade is managed uponthe same principle ; and it often happens thatevery sailor is in part owner of the ship as wellas of the cargo.Such customs are at once an effect and a supportof the republican spirit which it is curious tofind pervading a people subject to such a despotas the Sultan. In its origin it is to be attributedto the geographical construction of the country, naturallydividing the people into communities, whichhave little dependence upon one another ; its preservationsince the conquest may be attributed, ingreat measure, to the bigotry, and exclusiveness ofthe Turkish system, which, neither admits theChristians to the rights of the governing people,nor interferes with the internal arrangements ofthe communities, unless by the effects of its universaloppression. It cannot be denied, that theGreek method of conducting affairs stimulatesmental and bodily exertion, but it promotesalso that undisciplined, intractable, envious, andcontentious spirit, which is sure to break outwhenever this people has sufficient liberty to displayit.Greek customs prevail at Prevyza in all theirforce, as in other places where by any accidentthe people enjoy a considerable degree of independence; among others, they observe strictly theforbidden degrees in regard to marriage ; — cannottake a wife more than three times ; — the priests184 Epirus. [chap.more than once. Cousins cannot marry nearerthan the seventh degree, nor can the god-son beunited to the daughter of his godfather. This isa part of the custom of Kov/uirapta, which gives analliance equal to relationship by blood to two menof different families who have been sponsors to thesame child at the baptismal font. The Greek wordformed from the Italian compare and originallyfrom the Latin campater^ shows the origin of thecustom. It may be doubted whether it gives theGreeks any advantages against their great enemythe Turk, and rather seems to be a proof only ofbarbarism and insecurity, and both cause andeffect of their spirit of hostility and rivalship.Mr. North ^ gave five hundred piastres towardsthe establishment of a school, by means of whichand other donations a small house was built at thegate of the principal church. It has since beenconverted into a court of justice ; but there is aschool in which writing is taught, with a sufficiencyof ancient Greek to read the Testament.Many of the women of Suli have taken refugeat Prevyza, since the capture of their mountain byA15^, and are employed as servants. A SovXtwnwa,or Suliote girl, ten years of age, in the Vice-consul'sfamily, has hired herself for twenty years, atthe end of which she is to have one hundred andfifty piastres for a marriage portion.Of the three other ex Venetian places given uptothe Porte, under conditions, by the treaty of1800, we have seen the state to which V6nitza isAfterwards Earl of Guildford.IV.] Epirus. 185now reduced. Pais is protected from A\^ atpresent by a resident agent of the Porte, underwhom the people enjoy their old municipal governmentunchanged. Vutzintro is entirely in thehands of Aljr. At the instigation of the Russians,the Porte has sent the Pasha repeated orders forits evacuation ; but he avoids them, affecting tobelieve that the Russians mean to make use of theplace for the purpose of their designs against himselfand the empire. He moreover alleges that hehas purchased the farm of the fisheries from theSultan for three years, and that he has not yetbeen paid his expenses in expelling the French.June 24. — Strabo, who wrote soon after thefoundation of Nicopolis, has thus described it ' :** Beyond portGlycys are two other harbours ; thefirst and smaller is Comarus, which at Nicopolisthe city founded by Augustus Caesar is separatedby an isthmus of sixty stades from the AmbracicGulf: the farther, and larger, and better port, isnear the mouth of the gulf, about twelve stadesdistant from Nicopolis. * * * Augustus foundedthis place because he saw that the neighbouringcities were much depopulated * ; and he gave itStrabo, p. 824, 325. chicane, and Calydon. TheThe cities which chiefly last is named by Pausanias,contributed to people Nicopo- the others in the following epicwere Ambracia, Thyrsus, gram of Antipater :Sanatorium, Argos Amphion^yri fit Kaiirap IS* 'Afc/}par(i|c ipifiufXovBv^tlov re TtKny^kvTl r* 'Avcurrop/ov,"Apycoc 'A/i^cX<$xov re rac omroaa paiuaro icvrXy186 BPiRUS. [chap.the name of Nicopolis in honour of the naval victorywhich he gained before the mouth of thegulf over Antony and Cleopatra, who was herselfpresent. A sacred inclosure for the use of thequinquennial contest has been constructed in thesuburb ' in a grove * containing a gymnasium andstadium ; there is another sanctuary on the sacredhill of Apollo, which rises above the grove. TheLacedaemonian have the superintendence ^ of thegames which are named Actia, as being sacred toApollo Actus, and which have been declaredOlympian. All the surrounding towns are nowsubordinate to Nicopolis."The ruins of Nicopolis are now called Paleopre-vyxa. The road thither leads for two miles throughthe olive plantations and vineyards, which occupyall the south-western part of the peninsula of ,and for another mile over a shrubby uncultivatedplain. The first ruins that occur are somesmall arched buildings of brick, probably sepulchral; a little beyond which are the remains of astrong wall following the crest of a height whichfalls to the lagoon called Mazoma. The situationand direction of this wall, and the position of thesepulchres on the outside of it, seem to show thatit was a part of the southern inclosure of the city.The Mazoma, which occupies about half theAntipater Epigr. 38. AnthoL Jacobs.rifuvoQ, * dXffii,ly.]Epirus.breadth of the isthmus, is separated only from the(jiilf of Artaa by a narrow pa/ufia, or thread of land,which is a mile long and one hundred yards wide,and has two openings, where the fish are caughtin great numbers as they enter the lagoon in thewinter, and quit it in the summer. At thesouthron extremity of the narrow bank standsa tower, from whence, following the southernshore of the M4zoma, we arrive at a church ofthe 'AvaXif^ic, or Ascension; two or three hundredyards beyond which are the ruins called thePaleokastro.A. PaleokaBtio.B. Theatre and Stadium.C. Small theatre.1.1. Springs of water.2. Metropolis.3. Great gate.4. Palace.5. 5. Strong walls.6. Bath.188 EPiRus. [chap.This is an extensive inclosure of irregular form',flanked with towers, and composed in great partof the materials of former ruins : courses of largesquared blocks of stone, which seem to have belongedto Hellenic walls, alternate with thickstrata of Roman tiles cemented with an abundanceof mortar. The western side of the inclosure isthe most perfect, and here was the principal gate,situated near the south-western angle between twosemi-circular towers. The other towers are quadrangular.All of them internally have flights ofsteps supported upon arches, for the purpose ofascending to battlements on the summit of thewalls.Although these works are lofty and solid, theydo not resemble those of the Augustan age ; indeedthe variety of marble fragments, and even remainsof inscriptions, of the time of the Roman empire*,inserted in the masonry, prove the whole to havebeen a repair, though upon the exact site perhapsof the original citadel and restored so as to forman inclosure sufficiently lai^e for the diminishedpopulation of the place. It may not improbablybe the work of Justinian, who, we know from Procopius,repaired Nicopolis'. A cross over a smallgate called v iropra 'Apa/3i| seems cotemporary with^ I cannot answer for the correctness of the shape as delineatedin the sketch.The following is one of the fragments :• • rf yXvjcvrarii fciyrp^ AiXi^ 'AXc • « . •Roi TJ yXvKvr&Tfii Bvyarpl KXProcop. de. .£dif. 1. 4, c. 1.• . • tIV.] Epirus. 189the rest of the work. In the middle of the Palesis a pool of fresh water now called Vai^ni',which appears to have been covered with a largearched building. A rivulet issues from it, and isconsumed in some adjacent gardens. Not far fromthe spring to the north-west, a ruined building,called the Metropolis, is supposed to have been theepiscopal church of the extinct see of Nicopolis.If so, it may be the oldest church in Greece, forthe intention of St. Paul to winter here, expressedin his letter to Titus, would seem to indicate thathe had a congregation at Nicopolis. Leaving thePaleokastro by the great gate, and proceeding inthe direction of Mjrtika, where stands upon a capeof the western coast a small village, of that nameand a serai of the Vezir, the first remarkable objectthat occurs is a theatre, so overgrown with vegetationin the lower part that it is not easily examined.It appears to be about 200 feet in diameter : 15 or20 rows of seats and the proscenium still remain.Being built on level ground, the back or highestpart is entirely supported upon an arched corridor,18 feet high, and 8 feet 6 inches wide, lighted byopenings in the wall which slope outwards, andsupporting the entire superstructure, which containsthe seats, formed of tiles and mortar. Thebuilding is now called the Skotinl^ from its darkpassages. The next ruins towards Mj^tika isnamed Bughi', and seems to have been a palace,as it has numerous apartments with many nichesin the walls for statues, and some remains of a190 Epirus. [chap.stone pavement. It stands j must within an aqueductsupported upon arches, which enters the valley ofNicopolis on the western side of the hill of Mikha-lltzi, and may be traced beyond the Skating : inmostparts the piers alone remain. Between theaqueduct and M j^tika are remains of a buildingsimilar to that within the aqueduct, but of a moreregular plan, and of smaller dimensions.On the side of the last falls of the hill of Mikha*litzi stands the greater theatre, sufficiently elevatedabove the other remains of Nicopolis to be a veryconspicuous object. In approaching it from Bughi,the remains of a solid wall occur, resembling thatabove the Analysis, and which seems, when complete,to have stretched across the isthmus from thenorth-western angle of the fortress. Beyond it isa second source of water, which, with that in thePale6kastro, would seem to have been sufficient, bythe aid of wells, for the supply of the city ; but here,as at Corinth, another Roman colony, where localsprings are still more abundant, the colonists werenot satisfied with the water, either because it laytoo low, or did not suit their taste, and constructedan aqueduct thirty miles in length. Near the fountainare the ruins of a building calledKalpetzaki, of the annexed form, andprobably a bath. It stands on thelowest and narrowest part of theisthmus. A little above it are someother remains on the foot of MountMikhalitzi, from whence the stones of a pavement,and a statue of white marble, are said to have beentransported lately to Prevyza. Both these and theIV.] Epirus. 191baths belonged perhaps to the gymnasium ; for thegymnasium, according to Strabo, was near thestadium ^ and the remains of the stadium occurimmediately above the last-mentioned ruin, in anorth-eastern direction, having its eastern extremitysituated just below the south-western angle ofthe great theatre.The stadium, by the peasants called to Ka(>a^,(the ship) is circa at both ends, unlike all theother stadia of Greece, but similar to several inAsia Minor, which have been constructed or repairedby the Romans. The length of the course,however, seems to have been the same as in theother stadia of Greece, namely, 600 Greek feet ;for I measured 670 feet in the clear between thetwo curved extremities of the seats, which are nowmere ruins ovei^own with bushes. In winter theinclosed space is a pool of water. The ruins ofthe seats occupy a breadth of about 76 feet, but thetotal length of the construction was probably notmore than 750 feet; underneath the seats are arange of arched chambers, intended apparentlyfor no other purpose than to diminish the massof masonry.The great theatre was partly excavated in theside of the hill ; but all the superstructure, withthe appurtenances of the scene, and a vomitory oneider side of the stage, was constructed of largeflat Roman bricks, united with a great quantity ofmortar, and was faced with stone. Although thecorridor above the cavea has fallen in, and the stone^ Sambo, p. 326.192 EPIRUB. [chap.seats have been removed , it is still one of the bestpreserved Roman theatres in existence, and welldeserves to be accurately measured and delineatedby an architect. The total diameter is about 300feet, but the earth, which has been washed fromthe superincumbent hill during the fourteencenturies which have elapsed since the deceaseof Pagan civilization, renders an exact measurementunattainable without excavation ; in thepresent season a dense vegetation is a fartherimpediment, and, in particular, a forest of giganticthistles, now in the full strength of their growth,mixed with other plants, which are equally troublesomefrom being already pulverized by the heat,especially the Sfaka, or Verbascum, which at theleast touch throws out a cloud of acrid dust. Thescene had three doors and a large square apartmentat either end, but the stone door-cases nothaving been spared any more than the seats of thecavea, the building is deprived of all its externaldecoration, and the inferiority of the Homan brickand mortar to the beauty and solidity of Greekmasonry is shown in all its nakedness. The sceneis 120 feet long, and 30 in depth. It was decoratedwith a range of statues of deities facing thecavea, as appears by some blocks below, on whichare remains of the names of Venus and Minerva :A*PQ, — GHNAI. From the back of the theatre,the hill of Mikhalltzi rises steeply to the summit,which is about 500 feet above the theatre.As Strabo describes the sacred grove, stadiumand gymnasium, to have been in the irpoa<rr€cov, orsuburb, it is probable that the wall to the south.]EPfRUS. 193ward of Kalpetz&ki was a part of the inclosure ofthe city on the northern side. Of the two rc/ulvn,or sanctuaries, the aXtrog, or sacred grove, in whichthe Actia were celebrated, is sufficiently identifiedby the theatre and stadium, the former for the useof the music, the latter for that of the gymnasticcontests. The second temenus, which was abovethe former, on the mountain of Apollo, is shownby Dio to have been exactly on the summit of thehill, where Mikhalitzi now stands. The historianrelates that Octavian, on arriving, previously tothe battle of Actium, at the place ^ where Nicolafterwards stood, encamped upon a height',from whence he could see both the Ambracic Gulfand the outer sea towards Pari, as well as theports before Nicopolis ; he not only fortified thecamp, but built walls from it to the outer port,Comarus ; and after the battle, having surroundedthe place where his tent was pitched ^ with squaredstones, he adorned it with the beaks of the capturedships, and built within the inclosure a sanctuaryof Apollo, open to the sky ^. Such a view as Diohere describes, Augustus could not have obtainedfrom the isthmus of Nicopolis, or from anyspot in the immediate vicinity, except Mikhalitzi,^ X^pioy. consecrated the place to Nep-tw\ fAeT€hfpov» — Dion. Cass, tune and Mars : '' Ampliato1. 50, c. 12. vetere ApoUinis temple locumiy f koKfivjiat. — Id.51,c.]. castrum quibus fuerit ususc^C Ti iy airrf rov 'Aw-dX- pomatum navalibus spoilsXwvoc Iraldpioy c^pvaa/ieroc* Neptune et Martin consecrate'According to Suetonius, he — Sueton. in Aug.VOL. I. O •194 EPiRUs. [chap.from whence all the objects stated may be seen.The tent of Augustus therefore was placed on thesummit of the mountain, his camp occupying theslope and the foot of the hill, from whence thecommunication with the port Comarus was probablysecured from interruption by fiaicpa reign, orparallel walls, which comprehended the harbourbetween their extremities.Although the words of Strabo, combined with theextant stadium, show that it was atNicopolis, and notat Actium, that the games called Actia were heldduring the long period of their celebration, there isreason to believe fW)m Dio, that until the city wadcompleted, and the buildings for the use of the gamesconstructed, the meeting took place at Actium, wherea <rrc^avirf?c aywv, or Contest for a crown, had longbeen instituted by the surrounding cities '. Thisancient celebration was converted by Augustus,immediately after the victory, and at the sametime that he enlarged the Temple of Apollo Ac-thus,into an exhibition of music and gymnasticrivalship, accompanied with horse-races, and wasdeclared a sacred contest * ; by which it was madeequal in dignity to the four great games of Greece,and was accompanied by a sacrifice aid festival,at which the heroical were entertained at thepublic expence '. Dio expressly adds, that it wasnot until some time afterward that Nicopolis wascolonized and completed, and that the hypeethriumStrabo, p. 825. • Dion. Cass. 1. 51, c. 1.JV.]Epirus.was constructed on the site of the tent of Augustus.Here, besides other dedioatiiMos, were placed thebrazen statues of an ass and his driver, in commemorationof a favourable omen, which hadprobably been prepared for the occasion on themorning of the battle ^ On the foundation ofConstantinople these statues were removed to thehippodrome of that city, where in 1204 they fellinto the hands of the barbarous Latins, who meltedthem with many other monuments of Grecian artstill more valuable '.It is remarkable that the wide bay lying betweenM5tika and Kastroskia is now called Gomaro;Comarus, however, which Dio agrees with Straboin showing to be the harbour of Nicopolis in theexterior sea ', was certainly not such a gulf as thatto which the modem name is attached, but a portsuch as the ancients used, whence it was probablythat of Mji^ika. The port which Strabo describes^ Plutarch, in Anton. Apeasant driving an ass, metOctavian as he came out ofhis tent at daybreak, and beingasked his name, replied, ** £u-tyehes ;" and your ass's name 7"Nixon."Nice. ap. Danbury Imp.Orient, vol. i. p. 93.Toy Xifiiva rov Ii tovK6fia^y> Dio. Cass. 1. 50,c. 12.Mord 3c rXvKvi' \ifUya6 fiiv lyyvripv koI iXdrriay K6«fiapoi itrBfioy Toi&y iifiKovratrrahliay irpo^ toy 'A/ifipcucucoyK6\iroy Kal to tov XefiamovKa/otipoc KTlfffxa ri^y "SucdiroXty6 Bi iiirwipv Kal fui(vy xal&fuiyt$y ir\ri<rloy tov erdfioroerov K6\irov Zuyy^y r^c Nixoir<$«Xc^ 69oy Bitiexa OTaSiov^*'£^€£9c 3c TO aT6fjLa tov 'A^x*PpaKuuni k6\tov* tovtov Bi tovK6\irov to fuy trrdfia f^itcpf rawTtTpaaraiLov ful(oy» — Strabo,p. 324, 325.o2196 EPiRus. [chap.as the greater, would seem by the order of histext, to have been between Comarus and the straitof Prevyza, and consequently on the outside of thegulf; but the nature of the western coast of thePeninsula shows that he cannot have expressedhimself accurately. It is pendent from Dio, who distinguishesComarus as the outer port of Nicopolis,that the second harbour intended by Strabo waswithin the gulf. Here, in fact, his distance of12 stades corresponds perfectly to Vathj^, wheresome Roman ruins a little within and on theeastern shore of the creek, seem to indicate theexact situation of the Xc^^i^. These ruins consist oftwo square masses from 20 to 30 feet the side, witha third ruin, 48 feet in length, having a curvedextremity. The walls are formed of strata ofRoman tiles between masses of rough stones andmortar, and in some places subsist to the heightof 12 or 15 feet.The breadth of 60 stades, which Strabo ascribesto the isthmus of Nicopolis, is obviously incorrect ;the broadest part of the site from the tower of theMazoma to Mj^tika not being more than three milesAn opinion prevails at Prevyza, founded I believe ona supposed measurement by the French, when theyentrenched the isthmus, that the shortest line fromthe Mazoma to the Gulf of Gomaro is no morethan 800 opyviaic, or 4000 Greek feet. I cannotconceive, however, that it is less than 2000 yardsin the narrowest part. After having measuredthe stadium, which is not exactly on the isthmus,it appeared to me, from a rising ground, that thereIV.] Epirus. 197is a distance equal to two stadia between the end ofthat monument and the Mazoma, four betweenthe other end of the stadium and the aqueduct,and three more to the sea.The great quantity of fish taken by the Preysin the Mazoma, and neighbouring sea, illustratesthe remark of an anonymous geographer ofthe fourth century \ who says that fish was soplentiful at Nicopolis as to be almost disgusting.Most of the other towns near the gulf having beenabandoned, the Nicopolites probably had ail thefisheries in their hands.Nicopolis was considered the capital of SouthernEpirus and Acamania during the three first centuriesof the Roman Empire ; but before the close ofthis period, it had so far declined as to cease tostrike its own money, of which there exist greatnumbers in copper, either autonomous * or of theemperors prior to Valerian. The coins of thisprince and his wife Salina are the latest. Theruin of paganism, by depriving the Action gamesof their importance, was the first great blow inflictedupon the prosperity of Nicopolis. Julianrestored both its edifices and its games; but theeffect was momentary, and the decline of the imperialauthority at sea having been followed bypiracy, the inevitable consequence in the Grecianseas of the want of a controlling naval power, Nicollost the maritime commerce which had been its^ Ap. Geog. Minor, vol. iii. consequence of Domitian'sThe Nicopolites were proud persecution of the philostheir freedom. Epictetus, piers — (Paul. Gell. 1. 15, c. 11.who retired to Nicopolis in — Suits in 'Exicriiroc) — ^men-198 Partis. [chap.main support. At the beginning of the fifth century,the Goths of Alaric retreating before Stilicho in thePeloponnesian, spread desolation over Epirus, andsoon afterwards the Huns of Totila ravaged thiscoast, on which occasion Nicopolis particularlysuffered K It was chiefly perhaps on these occasionsthat its buildings sustained the injuries whichcalled for the repairs bestowed upon the city byJustinian. It continued to be the capital ofsouthern Epirus either as the chief town of aducal province *, according to the arrangement ofthe earlier ages of the Byzantine Empire, or asthat of a Theme in the tenth century '. Cedrenusrelates, that in the eleventh century all the Theme6f Nicopolis, except Naupactus^ joined a revolt ofthe Bulgarians against the Emperor Michael thePaphlagonian, which had been caused by theextortion of his lieutenant, John Cutzomytes (wry-noses.The name of Nicopolis occurs also inthe history of Venice, in reference to the transactionsfollowing the capture of Constantinopleby the Franks in 1204 : and from Niceties welearn that the territory of Nicopolis ^ was a partof the dominions which then became the desperateof the West, under Michael Angelus Com-tons a saying of theirs: N^ ' iicapxia vero 4yefi<$Hi<—r^v Ka/o-apoc rvx^v iXeiSipol Uieroel. p. 651. Wessexiir/ur, — Epiet; ab Arian. h ' CoiiBtaiitin.Poxphytog.de4, c. 1. Them.Also Anchises (the * Cedren. p. 747* edk Paris.Forty Saints.) Procop. de bello * Tarfj HuconoKti irpoiropil^6»Goth. 1. 4, c. 22. fUifa, — Nice. Ann. Baldwin.p. 460. Paris.iv.] BPiaus. 199venus. But the town hud long been reducedto misery, if we may trust to ecclesiastical history,which, during the Byzantine empire, furnishes thebest indication of the relative importance of places.Although Nicopolis was still a bishop's see at theend of the ninth century, and had then been recentlytransferred from the patriarchs of Rometo that of Constantinople, the ravages of the Bulgarians,fifty years afterwards, put an end to thebishopric, the last prelate having then been removedto Anpyra in Asia ^ lo^nnina, which wasalready a bishopric under the metropolitan ofNaupactus then succeeded to Nicopolis as theseat of ecclesiastical authority in the south ofEpirus, and was raised to the dignity of a metropolisin the thirteenth century ; about a centurybefore which Artaa became a bishopric ofNaupactus. When the imperial name was no longera protection to the distant subjects pf the empire,it was natural that Ambracia and other ancientsites near the Gulf, which Nicopolis had depopulatedunder the first emperors of Rome, shouldagain become preferable from the same motives ofsecurity which had caused them to be occupied bythe early Greeks. The new town of Prevyza,built nearer to the Neapolitan harbours thanthe ancient city, in a more defensible position, inamore fertile part of the plain, and where waterwas equally plentiful, then absorbed probably allthe remaining inhabitants of the old city.June 25. — A north-westerly breeze carries meNicephor. Constant. 1. 14, c. 39.£PIRUg«[chap.this afternoon, in an hour and a half, to Sala-hora\ the port of Artaa. Just beyond the straitwhich separates the Gulf of Pr^vyza from that ofArtaa, are two small islands : that to the left namedGaidharonisi, that to the right Kefalo^. These,and the other islands in the Gulf, like all the desertgrounds in Greece, are clothed with a luxuriantvegetation in the spring, when they furnishpasture for cattle. Between Gaidharonisi and theneighbouring cape of the peninsula of Skafidhaki,we found one of Aljr Pasha's gun-boats lying,a small vessel with two little guns in the bow. Hehas two or three of these in the Gulf, and at Sala-horaa new brig corvette. When he lately visitedSalaghora he ordered the shrubs to be clearedaway, and a town to be laid out ; but only five orsix magazines have been built, with a chamber forthe collector of the customs at the foot of a rockyheight which here projects from the northern shoreof the Gulf. The hill seems formerly to have beenan island, being almost surrounded by the sea to thesouth, where the depth of water is more than sufficientfor any ship capable of crossing the bar ofJia\ayutpa»In a subsequent journey Ilanded on Kefalo, which is oppositeto Vonitza, and foundthere the remains of a hugebuilding of the Lower Empire,probably a monastery, fromwhich Mr. K., of V6nitza, hadremoved an Ionic capital andpilaster of the taste of thosetimes to his house at Vonitza.The same gentleman informedme that he had used the island,which is his property, for raisingpoultry ; but was obligedto give up the practice fromthe difficulty of communicatingwith the island in the winter,on account of continued galesof wind.IV.] EPIRtJB. 201Preys, and by shallow lagoons to the north, theconnexion with the main land being by means ofthree narrow low banks branching from it to the east,the west, and the north : the two former of these aremere threads of land such as generally separatelagoons from the sea ; the last is wider, but so low asoften to be inundated ; a causeway, which even in thisseason is washed by the water of the lagoon, formsthe only road into the plain of Artaa. The summitof the hill of Salaghora commands an excellentview of the Gulf. In the rammata, which separatethe lagoons from the sea, are seen the openingswhere the fish are caught, as at the Mazomaof Pr^vyza, and where are houses for the use ofthe fishery. The thread to the east joins at theend of three miles a woody peninsula projectinginto the Gulf, on which is a metokhi of the Paua-hia, and off it three or four small islands connectedtogether by mud-banks, and called theKorakonlsia : midway to the Acamanian shore, isVuvala, the largest island in the Gulf. Beyondthe peninsula of Panaghla the mamma is continuedtwo or three miles farther eastward, to :so called from the belief that here wasanciently the mouth of the river of Artaa, nowthree miles to the eastward, which is not devoid ofprobability, as in almost every instance of an increaseof land at the mouth of rivers, their lowercourse has assumed a new direction. Near theeastern side of the muddy and shallow bay ofPalea-Bukka, is an island in the lagoon, coveredwith the ruins of a castle called Fidhokastro^ (Ser202 EP1KU0. [chap.pent-castle), built of small stones and mortar,mixed with Hellenic work towards the foundations.The lagoon on the western side of Saladswhich extends to the river of Luro, isnamed Tzukalia, that to the eastward Logaru.June 26. — Quitting Salaghora for Artaa thismorning at 5.45, we pass round the western end ofthe hill, and follow the causeway for half a mileacross the lagoon; then enter upon the plainwhich, though now dry, is so marshy during thegreater part of the year, as to be left uncultivated.But we soon arrive upon a somewhat higher level,where are a few fields of com among desert tractscovered with camomile ; pass through Anazi andPosthumus, both villages belonging to MukhtarPasha, the latter at 7.35, and from thence passthrough a continuance of tillage as far as Artaa.At 8.15 we cross the river of Artaa, which is hereabout200 yards wide — deep, winding, and rapid —by a handsome bridge, said to have been built byone of the Palseologi. From thence, having traversedgardens and scattered houses, we pass closeto the left of the ruined church of Parioiitza, properlyParigoritissa\ at 8.20, leave the castle ofArtaa on the right at 8.28, and at 8.30 arrive at theMetropolis'. The baggage was three hours andthree quarters on the road.The bishop Ignatius receives me with great (Consola' house, both which are generic),applied to the Panaghia. rally within a common incloseMrirpoiroXiQ is the name sore. *Eiriflriroxi^ is the wordusually given in Greece to the applied to the church andepiscopal church and bishop's house of a suffragan bishop.IV.] EPIK08. 203likeness ; he is a prelate of a most prepossessingperson and address, well informed and sei&sibie inhis conversation, but spoiled by his situation, which,instead of allowing him to cultivate his mind, or toenjoy that civilized society of which he is naturallyformed 'to be an ornament, places him in a perpetualstate of fear for his own safety, and reduceshim, against his inclination and conscience, to executethe cruel orders of a selfish unprincipled tyrant.While another Greek is the Pasha's agent forthe management of the police and finances of thetown and district of Artaa, the bishop superintendsthe more important political concerns of all thesurrounding country ; and when the Pasha has occasionto send a mission to the Septinsular republicor elsewhere, Ignatius is the person generally employed.At Salaghora his signature was fixedto the tariff of imports in the custom-house. Athome he assumes a considerable degree of orientalgrandeur, more perhaps than any Musulman canventure upon in the Ve2ir*8 dominions. Were itnot for the absence of all arms, of which the Turksdelight in making a display, and the plain monastichabit which is in contrast to the showy dressesof the Ottomans, the Metropolitan palace might bemistaken for the house of a rich Aga.The Vezir encourages these appearances of authorityin the Greek prelates, as it assists them in theexactions and political objects of which they arethe instruments, without saving them from the occasionaldemands which none of his subjects, butespecially the more opulent, ever escape. Thus circumstanced,it is not very surprising that bishop204 BPiRUB. [chap.Ignatius should be better acquainted with modempolitics than nth the ancient history and geographyof Greece, upon which subjects he is satisfied withthe opinions, often erroneous, received among hiscountrymen, who seldom give themselves thetrouble of referring to the original sources of information.Meletius, one of the predecessors ofIgnatius in the see of Artaa, whose judgmentwas not equal to his diligence and learning, hasbeen a great cause of the prevalence and permanenceof these errors, as the Greeks seldom orever venture to dispute his authority.In the evening the aycoc 'Aprevoc, or ArminianHoly (such is the most polite mode of naming abishop), accompanies me in a ride round the town.We proceed first to the church of Parigoritissa, alofty building constructed chiefly of brick, nearlycubical on the outside, but within surroundedwith vestibules and galleries, so as to leave in themiddle a katholiko, which is more than twice ashigh as it is square at bottom, and is surmountedby a dome around which are six smaller domes overthe aisles. The following is an inscription in twolines round the semi-circular arch of the greatdoor of the church in the inside: —K^iWAJ^^isyKAC AECTToTiC xxxxKCjTTo AoY WCSeCTTOTHC KSJirsK^WHIVoB>iXC/OC3J>TI€ TToA MtrACKo MHNoCS^XAThe bishop states, that the church was built bythe Comnenus Duces here recorded, that his nameThe parts underlined only plaister, which has fallen awayare on the original stone : the in the middle, where the dotsremainder are on a coat of are.IV,] EPIRUS. 205was Michael, and that in two MSS., one of whichis preserved in Lefkadha, the other in the conventof Mortar at Vonitza, he is entituled Despot ofArtaa, Count of Leucas, and Duke of Cephaloniaand Zacynthus. He was probably the same MichaelAngelus Comnenus who, under the title of Despotof iBtolia, or of Epirus, governed all WesternGreece at the time of the Frank conquest of Constantinoplein 1204, and who appears to have beenthe most powerful of the despots of the West. Thiswould make the date of the building not longposterior to the time when Artaa became a bishopricof the province of Naupactus. In the sixteenthcentury it was made a metropolis, and the see ofNaupactus having been transferred hither, the prelatereceived the title of Bishop of Naupactus andArtaa, which he still retains.From Parigorltissa we ascended the heightwhich commands Artaa to the eastward, and returnedto the Metropolis by the modem castle,visiting several remains of Hellenic antiquity inthe way. Though not considerable, they are sufficientto show that Artaa was the site of a very largeGreek city. Towards the north and west it washalf encompassed by the river which issues froman opening at no great distance to the north-eastwardbetween Mount Gelberini', a high rockysummit, which rises in face of the town to thenorthward, and the hill of Pet, a village standingon the last falls of a range of mountains, whichfollows the left bank of the river of Artaa almost toKeXirepiiyri.[chap.its sources. Beyond Pet, southward, the hillsborder the plain of Artaa as for as Makrinoro, whichis a continuation of them termination abruptly inthe gulf.I. The Metropolis. 2. Church of Farigortdsaa. 3. Ruinedwindmill. 4. Monastery of 'F^naromeiu. 5. Modem castle.6. Church of Odhighitria. '7. Ancient Acropolis. 8. Hillcommanding that of the ardent Acropolis,*The dotted line shows the aadeut walls where the foundationsonly renuun. The entire line, where the remains aremore considerable.The height on the eastern side of the town is theextremity of a long rocky hill, which is embracedby the river on its northern and western sides, andfalls to the plain on the two others. Some foundationsof an Acropolis are traceable on the summit,IV.l Epirus. 207Iron whence the town wall descended in a northerlydirection, 80 a8 to exclude a monastery dedicatedto ' the Virgin brought to light and from thenceto a projection of the height which here overhangsthe river. It then followed a direction parallel tothe river towards the modem 'Castle, where in oneplace the Hellenic wall forms part of some cottages,otherwise of the slightest and rudest construction,and which remind me of the Egyptian huts standingon the towns of Luxor or Edfu. Beyond thesethe ancient wall is again seen in the lower part ofthe structure of the castle towards the river, andhere it is most remarkable, consisting of coursesnearly regular, and not less remarkable for theclose and finished junction of the stones, thanfor their magnitude. These are in general quadrangular,but some are sloping at one end; thetwo or three lowest courses which are narrowerthan the others, and project beyond the rest of thewall, as often occurs in Hellenic masonry of thebest times, are founded on the excavated rock.One of the stones, which rest on the uppermostnarrow course, is 16 feet long and 4 high ; anotheris 12 feet by 6. A little beyond the castle occursthe excavated foundation of another enormous wallparallel to the former, and indicating apparently,that the modem fortress occupies the site of asecond ancient citadel. The town wall may againbe seen supporting the terrace df the bishop'sgarden overhanging the river, beyond which somesmaller vestiges may be traced as far as the church208 Epirus. [chap.of Parigorltissay beyond which, at the foot ofthe hill behind the church of OdhighitriaS thefoundations are again visible ascending the hilldirectly to the acropolis. Squared blocks formerlybelonging to the walls or public buildings of thecity, are to be seen in every part of the modemtown, where they are often used as benches, steps,or mounting blocks at the doors of the houses.The traces of power and opulence evident in theseremains, seem scarcely to leave a question thatArtaa stands on the site of Ambracia, though neitherbishop Ignatius assents to this opinion, nor hisphysician. Dr. M., of Katuna, a learned and well-informedman. But the presumption derived fromthe existing vestiges, from the fertile and extensiveplain, and from the strong and central situation ofArtaa, which have made it the chief town of thesurrounding parts of Western Greece, causing it togive name to the Gulf, like Ambracia of old, isfully confirmed by other coincidences derived fromthe ancient authors. From a comparison of theirtestimony, we learn that Ambracia was situatedeighty stades from the sea, in the middle of thenorthern side of the Gulf, on the eastern bank ofthe Aratus, otherwise called Arachthus or Ireton,which rose in Athamania, and in the same mountainswhich give rise to the Peneius \ There is no^ Uayayla 62]}y//rpca| or the Polyb. 1. 22, c. 9 ; Liy. 1. stconductress. c. 4.Strabo, p. 325, 327. Scythe words oXiyiav tn-a^lotv^lax, in 'AfifipaKia ; Dicsearch. and inripKetrai rov fivxov ^t-V. 24 ; Lycophr. v. 409 ; Cal KpoVf by which Strabo describeslimach. ap. Tzetz. Iq eod. ; the distance of Ambracia fromNIV.] EPIRUS. 209other river, nor any other position near the Am-boracicGkdf, that will correspond to these requisites.Livy, in the narrative which he has borrowedfrom Polybius, of the siege of Ambracia by theRomans under the consul Julius, in the summerof the year B.C. 189, informs us that the city ofAmbracia was more than three miles in circumference; that it stood on the western side of arugged hill called Perchance, one of the summitsof which was occupied by the citadel ; and that itwas well protected by the river and heights, andby the wall which surrounded it These particularsare exactly justified by the existing remains.As the siege by Fulvius is the most remarkableevent concerning Ambracia which occurs in history,and as it refers both to the topography of theplace itself and to the geography of the surroundingcountry, I shall subjoin the principal circum-thesea, does not quite accord cols vacant : urbs, qua moruswith the eighty stades of Di vergit in campos et lumen,searches and Scylax; but the occidental, aix use imposingagreement of these two au est tumult oriental special :thorny and the circumstance of amnis Aretho, ex Athamaniathe number in Dicsearchus be fluent cadit in sinus maris,ing in verse, leave no doubt ab nomine propinquity urbis,that eighty was the distance. Ambnudum appellate ; is one of those instances of tanquam quod hinc amnis muawant of precision, so little nit hinc tumuli, munro quoqueadapted to geography, which firm septa erat, patente inare too common in Strabo. circuit paulo amplius triaAmbracia tumult asper millia passim. — Liv. 1. 38,subject est, Perrhanthem in- c. 4.VOL. I. P2 10 Partis. [chap.stances of it. From the reign of Pyrrhus, Am*brachia had been the capital of Epirus and theroyal residence ^ ; but at the time of the siege itwas in the hands of the italians, and had been amain cause of the extent of the ^tolian power at thatperiod of Grecian history, by giving them either adirect authority or a strong influence over theneighbouring states of Amphilochia, Aperantia,Athamania, and Colonia, which last confined onother acquisitions of the italians in Phthisis andthe country of the .£nianes. As soon as theyfound themselves unable to save Ambracia, theysubmitted to the Roman power, and never recoveredtheir former importance. Fulvius, who hadlanded at Apollonia, and had marched throughEpirus, first established two fortified camps at amoderate distance from each other in the plain,and built a castle on a height near the citadel.His Epirote allies were encamped in the plain onthe opposite side of the river. Before the consulcould unite his three works together by means ofan entrenchment, Eupolemus, with one thousanditalians, made his way into the city. As soon asthe circumvallation was complete, and the machinesprepared for assailing the walls, the Romansbegan to batter them in five places : three of these,at two equal intervals, were in the plain over-againstthe Pyrrhus ; a fourth was near thetemple of aesculapius, and the fifth was at thecitadel. The walls were so strong as to resisteven beyond the expectation of the besieged ;> Strabo, p. 325. Polyb. 1. 22, c. 9. Liv. L 38, c. 9.\IV.] BPfRUS. 21 1giving them time to make sorties by night andday, and enabling them to counteract the effectsof the battering machines of the enemy, either bymeans of engines or of fire.While these operations were in progress, asecond body of italians, amounting to five hundred,partly by force and partly under cover of atempestuous night, entered the place, and immediatelyjoined Eupolemus in assaulting the Romanlines, in which attempt it had been concerted thatthey were to be assisted by a simultaneous attackfrom without by Nicander, the praetor of ^tolia.Nicander, however, found a cause or an apology forinaction in the arrival of Perseus in Amphilochia,who had been sent by his father Philip to recoverthat country and Colonia from the iBtolians. Thedouble consequence was, that the sortie from Am*brachia failed, and that Perseus retired from hisattack of Argos on the approach of Nicander, andreturned into Macedonia, contenting himself withthe spoliation of Amphilochia and Colonia. Nosooner had this obstacle been removed, than anew diversion occurred to prevent the pastorfrom attempting to raise the siege of Ambracia.Pleuratus, king of lUyria, having arrived withsixty ships in the Corinthian Gulf, made fromthence desultory incursions on the italian coast,which required the attention of Nicander and hisarmy. Meantime the siege proceeded vigorouslyon both sides. The wall was breached and retrenched; a mine was formed and countermined,and the parties fought in the subterraneous passages,until the besiegers were driven out by thep2212 Epirus. [chap.missiles of their adversaries, or by the smoke ofburnt feathers. Affairs were in this state whendeputies arrived to solicit peace on the part of theitalian council , who were urged to this measureby the defeat of Antiochus in Asia, by their consciousinability of resisting three such enemies asPhilip, Pleuratus, and the Romans, and probablyby the conviction that the Ambraciotae and theirfriend Menander, king of Athamania, were onlywaiting for an opportunity to withdraw from theirforced alliance with iBtolia. The principal conditionswere, that the iBtolians shout pay five hundredEuboic talents to Rome, and should cease toclaim any authority over the cities which had beentaken by or allied with the Romans since the arrivalof T. Quinctius in Greece. The people* of Ambrosiapresented Fulvius with a golden crown of onehundred and fifty pounds weight ; but this presentdid not save the city from being despoiled of all thestatues of brass and marble, with which, as havingbeen the royal residence of Epirus, it was adornedbeyond all the cities of Western Greece. In thetriumph of Fulvius two years afterwards, on hisreturn from his pro consulship, two hundred andeighty-five statues of brass, and two hundred andthirty of marble, were exhibited in the procession,the greater part of which had been brought fromAmbracia, iBtolia, and Cephallenia.The triple assault of the walls seems evidentlyto have been from the side of the modem gardens,that being the only part of the circuit where thewalls were contiguous to the plain. The Pyrrhus,consequently, which I take to have beenIV.] EPIRUS. 313a fortified palace built by Pyrrhus, was in the adjacentpart of the modem town, and probably nearthe river, comprehending the beautiful terrace nowoccupied by the metropolis. The situation of themonastery of Fanaromeni seems to have been anadvantageous point for one of the battering machinesof the Consul, and may therefore be thesite of the temple of aesculapius. The castle whichFulvius built on a height over against the citadel \we can hardly' doubt to have been on the hill ofSt. Elias, which is separated only by a hollowfrom that of the Acropolis ; for the occupation ofthat height was obviously necessary to the safetyof his line of circumvallation. The position of hiswork for battering the Acropolis was of courseimmediately opposite to the phil] of St. Elias, onthe crest of that of the citadel, and close to thewall.Dicsearchus informs us that Ambracia was notedfor a temple dedicated to Minerva, which mayhave been converted into one of the ancientchurches now existing, such having often beenthe use made of the pagan temples.The other situations in the Ambracian territorywhich history has noticed are : 1 . Ambracus, whichwas captured by Philip, son of Demetrius, in theyear B. C. 2 19, after a siege of forty days^undertakenat the instigation of the Epirotes, who hoped thatit would lead to the recovery of Ambracia from theitalians *. 2. The port of Ambracia, near whichCastellum loco editor contra arcem.Polyb. 1. 4, c. 61.214 EPiRus. [chap.there was a fortress ^ 3. Craneiaia, which a comparisonof Pliny and Stephens shows to havebeen a subordinate place of the Ambracia, on amountain of the same name '.Ambracus is described by Polybius as a place,in the territory of Ambracia, well fortified withramparts and outworks, and as surrounded bymarshes, through which there was only one narrowcauseway leading to it '. This description accordsso well with Fidhdkastro, that little doubt can remainof the identity. If Ambracus was the sameas the rcixoc, or fortress near the port of Ambracia,mentioned by Scylax,of whiche probability is verygreat, we may conclude that the harbour, which,according to the same author and Dicsearchus ^,was a kXhotoq Xififivy or port closed with moles,leaving a narrow entrance which might be shutwith a chain, was an artificial basin, excavatednear the fortress, and opening towards the mouthof the river, which appears anciently to have dischargeditself very near to Fidhokastro. CraneiaiaI conceive to have been the high mountain now"Eerc ^c icai wi OaXam|( mans, in Ambracia Crania, inTuxotKal\in^yKdXKiuro^(lege Acamanii Aracynthua. — Plin.icXcAcrrdc). — Scylax, in 'A/bij3pa- H. N. 1. 4, c. 2.Ria. * Kol wpor€t)(lffnatri koI rd"KpaVeca, tapley *Filia'' )^cc. rcirac f iy X/fiKoic j^layirpwr^.-^^tephan* in Kpdytia* t^v £\ii^v wp6a<Aiv, -* Polyb.Montes clare in Dodona To ubi sup.T^C *EXXo&c i^iy 'Afippaxia wpurrti ir6\iQ'Avr^ i* airouc/a Xiyerai r&y Kopiydlt^y'EiyaC card roy coXiroy ^e tov KoKoifUvoyIV.] Epirus. 215called Kelberini) which rises from the right bankof the river of Artaa, immediately opposite to thetown, and which is exactly of the rugged naturedescribed by the ancient name. Whether thiswas the same as the Sacred Mountain mentionedby Dicsearchus', or whether the ridge on whichAmbracia stood, and which Livy calls Perchance,bore that name, cannot be asserted ; but thesebeing the only heights near Ambracia, the wordsof Dicsearchus seem applicable only to the oneor other of them.The poetical topographer just named differsfrom Scylax *, in interposing the Orestes betweenthe Ambracian coast and that of the Amphilochi,and thus identifies the country of the Orbits withMakrinoro; for as Polybius and livy agree in*A/i)3paictrov ftcurrat fiitni^ ara^iovQ 7 e^^ei'Air This OaXiLfffffiQ oyioiiKoyr'* kvifaviQA* Upon 'AOiyvac €ffr' ci' oirrjf, ica* Xifii^yKX£t9r6c' jcaXeirat i^f>voir^ fi xStpa ^ BXtf,Dicfiearch. v. 24.*Aw ^AfifipoKiai lie QiTTaXiav rptuy oSog'Eff* fifJLcpQv' €xei $i TrarafjAv Xiy6fuyov"Apajfioy cic OaXaairaP HtSrra oral"Spot irpSmniy iepov d* iiriuKXiifuyop*Sra^iwK ^ o wapdirXovs early kicaToy tlicotn*ISIra sura rovrdy eiaty 'Opcirai \ey6fuyoifElr* *AfJU^\o\oi* "ApyoQ S* iyravdd mori ro*A/i^iXox*f<5v" flora rovrovg 3* 'AxapydytQ,Dicsearch. v. 40.DapairXovc de rill 'A/«/3po- tfoU irporri; irrfXic a^6di "Apyotcic irraiia pK, Mira ii 'Aft r6 *Afifikox<uc^* — Scylax^ iofipoKlay 'Axapyayia IByoc €<ni' ^Afifiptucia, 'Axuprayla,216 EPiRus. [chap.placing Argos Amphilochicum at 22 miles fromAmbracia, it is evident that the country at thehead of the gulf, immediately beyond Makrinoro,was the Amphilochia. The Orbital therefore seemto have been the inhabitants of that remarkablemountain, and probably of its northerly continuationalso, as far as it bordered on the Ambracian territory.As the foundation of Nicopolis was the term ofthe existence of Ambracia, it was to be expectedthat the site of Artaa should be deficient, as wefind it in those remains of the time of the Romanempire, which so constantly meet and sometimesdisappoint the traveller when in search of earliermonuments in Asia, Africa, and many of the citiesof Greece. Whatever may be found at Artaa willprobably be of the best times of Greece, as Ambracia,after having been plundered by Fulvius,shared the fate of the other cities of Epirus, 22years afterwards, when the Senate of Rome, togratify their army, which had been disappointedof the plunder of Macedonia, gave directionsfor that atrocious act of deliberate cruelty andperfidy, too well attested by the cotemporaryhistorian, which consigned 70 cities of Epirusto plunder and destruction, and 150,000 Piratesto be sold as slaves'. Hence the wretchedPolyb. ap. Strabo. p. 322. soldier 200. Plutarch, thoughLiv. 1. 45, c. 34. Plutarch, he agrees m the number ofin .^Imil. Livy and Strabo, cities taken, and Epirotes enjoyingfrom Polybius, state slaved, asserts that the prize-theshare of plunder to each money amounted only to 11Roman horseman to have been drachmae each.400 denarii, and to each .]EPIRUS. 217state into which Ambracia fell, in common withthe other cities occupying the naturally favoureddistricts around this beautiful inland sea, andwhich reduced them all to so small a population,that they sufficed only, even with the aid of aRoman colony, to furnish inhabitants for thesingle town of Nicopolis. To the abandonment ofthe site of Ambracia we may attribute, as in theinstance of Sparta and a few other leading cities,the loss of the ancient name ; for it has rarely happenedwhere the positions have been continuallyinhabited, that the name has not been preserved.When strength of situation became again an importantrequisite, Ambracia was re-occupied, aswell as two other Hellenic sites at Vonitza andBogus, while such as Sparta, Megalopolis, andother places little defended by nature, have remaineddesolate. The new name seems to havebeen taken from that of the river ''ApaiOoc, or'Apax^ocy which was the more easily contractedinto two syllables as the accent was on the first.The monasteries and churches, Vlakherina, Fana-romaniaParigoritissa, Saint Theodora, and ,show the importance of the renewed cityunder the Byzantine emperors.CHAPTER V.Epirus.Rate from Artaa to loannina — MaiBti— Khan6pulo-^tri?in»—Kometz^ulhes — Koli4dhe8 — Muliana — Pendepigadhia — Var-him— Mount Oiytzika— Pest— Ai Dhimitri — loannina — departurefor Suli — Rapsista — Variadhes — Tervitziana — RiverLakiotiko^Romanates — Suli — Kughni — Kukia — Ai Dhona-to — Samoniva — Kiafa — Bira or Tiypa — ^^The HiD of LightningMountain of Tzikurates — Klisdra — River ^cAeroti— Fan&riGlyky — wars of the Snliotes — Departure from Kia& —Avaxiko — Seritzian^ — Zermi — Zerlia — harass — ^KutzanopuloKamarina — Zdlongo — Ruins of Cassope — Luro — Rants —Lelovo— River of St. George — Aqueduct of NicopoUs — St.George — Koliadhes — Pendepigadhia — Return to loannina.June 27. — ^^This afternoon, at 6, having re-crossedthe bridge of Artaa, we follow the right bank of theriver to Maratii, a suburb standing just opposite tothe metropolis of Artaa, and consisting of a Turkishmosque with some houses and gardens. The Turkwho built the mosque adorned it with severalcolumns from the church of Parigoritissa, wherethe loss has been very clumsily repaired. Thegardens of Maratii abound in filbert trees, the fruitof which forms one of the exports of Artaa. Amongthe gardens is a ruin with walls and towers, apparentlyof the early times of Artaa, forming asquare of 36 yards ; it is now called to KaariXi.Beyond Maratii we cross the plain, leaving a marshCHAP, v.] EPIRUS. 219on the left hand, and having arrived at the footof Mount Kelberini, bend to the left along its foot,following a paved road which overhangs the edgeof the marsh.In the midst of this pass at 7.7 are some copioussprings issuing from under the mountain, andforming a large stream ; it is supposed to be thesubterraneous discharge of the Lake of lodnnina,and flows to the lagoon of Logaru. The marsh nowbecomes more deep and impracticable, and themountain steep and rocky, the exhalations areoffensive, and numerous serpents are seen on thewater's edge. At 7.40 the pass ends, and themarsh retires to the left, leaving a cultivated plainwhich extends to Striving in front, but narrows tothe right, where it terminates in an ascendingvalley, the direct route and natural opening ofcommunication from the Gulf of Artaa to the plainof lodnnina. At a khan called Khan6pulo weleave that road to the right, and proceed for thenight to Striving, where by order of the bishop acottage had been prepared for me. This villagecontains 30 or 40 families, who are chiefly employedin the culture of tobacco on the banks of astream, of which the sources are in the village.After flowing through a marshy plain, it forms oneof the tributaries of the river of Luro.June 28. — Setting out this morning at 4.30, werejoin the road to loannina at the entrance of thevalley above-mentioned at 5, then ascend the drybed of a torrent, and at 5.30 leave the villi ofKometzades^ a quarter of a mile to the right.220 BP1RU8. [chap.situated on uneven ground on the side of thetorrent, which here issues from between two highsummits of Mount Kelberini. To our left, at thesame time, are the remains of a small triangularHellenic fortress, standing on the summit of a hill,which commanded the entrance of this importantpass. The walls are in some parts still standingto a considerable height.From hence we continue to ascend, passing alittle to the right of Koliadhes ^ ; and at 6.38, arrivingat the summit of the pass, descend into a smallvalley included between steep rocky mountains.At 7.10 the village of Muliana is half a mile onthe right, on the mountain's side, situated at theentrance of a lateral pass which leads to the valeof the ArackthuSy over Mount Kelberini, or ratherwhich separates that summit from Xerovuni, aridge following the same northerly direction asthe former. The Vezlr has lately built a serai atMuliana, and has constructed a good paved roadby which we cross a counterfeit of the mountainto Pence Pigadhia', where are a few cottages,and a little beyond them the five wells which givename to the place. It is situated just at the openingof the pass where it begins to descend into anelevated plain, similar to that below Muliana, butmuch more extensive, and equally bordered oneither side by a steep rocky mountain. We arriveat the khan of the Five Wells at 8.38, and makea long halt, for at this season of the year it isnecessary to divide the day's journey, and to restKoXco&(. ^ ra Libri Iliyyo&a.v.] Epirus. 221during the meridian hours, which, especially inthe Villages, are by far more quiet than the night,when asses, hogs, dogs, fowls, rats, bugs, fleas,gnats, are all in a state of activity. Of the threelatter plagues, which by adding want of sleep tothe effects of fatigue and climate often contributepowerfully to destroy a traveller's health, the fleais the only one from which he may not be protectedby a well constructed mosquito netting.This torment and the excessive heat are the chiefimpediments to the traveller's repose in the day,for as to the incessant chirping of the wood-cricket,he soon becomes accustomed to it, thoughhe will hardly bring himself to consider its notemusical, as the ancients seem to have thought.At 3.15 P.M. we descend from the khan intothe valley, with the village of Varlam on the left,and beyond it the mountain 015^tzika\ as thehighest point of the range to the left of our road,and the most remarkable peak in all the surroundingcountry is now called. I know not where weareto look for its ancient name. Below Variaare some fields of tobacco, but the chief produceof this valley, as well as of that below Julian, iskalambokki.At 4.45, after having crossed the plain, there isa further descent, with the village of Pest on theright, to a fine source of water on the road side.Here, to the left, on the opposite side of the valley,*OXvr(iica. I follow the or ing, as usual where the r( isbiography of Meletiua in this concerned, is Ol^tjka.name; but the vulgar sounds'222 Epirus. [chap.rises a sloping cultivated hill, on the snnimit ofwhich are the ruins of a triangular Hellenic fortress,naturally fortified at the back by a precipice,which overhangs the ravine lying betel itand Mount Oljrtzika. Twenty minutes fartherthere is another paleo-kastro, at about an equaldistance to the left of our road, of the same kindas the former, and similarly situated, but the hillis steeper, higher, and more uneven, and the inclosedspace is larger. We now begin to descendtowards the great plain of loannina, and at 5. 52arrive at the khan and small village of St. Deme-tries,situated in a little bay of the plain, half anhour beyond which, Barth is on the side of thehills on the left; hereabouts are several roundponds in the plain, some of which are coveredwith water lilies. We hasten forward, and ateight arrive at loannina. The distance from Artaais about forty-two miles by the road. In time, it isthus generally reckoned : from Artaa to Khanopulo,1.30; to Kometzadhes, 1.30; to a ruined khanunder Muliana, 1.30 ; to Pendepigadhia, 1.30 ;to Ai Dhimltri, 3; to Io4nnina, 3. Total, 12hours, or 14 with baggage.June 29. — Since my visit to the Vezir at Tepe-l^ni, he has built a founder at Bunila, in theplain of loannina, where he had before establisheda colony of Bulgarians, whom he brought here in1802, on his return from the Danube, and lodgedin cottages built in a quadrangle, like their ownnative planks. When I asked His Highness howhe procured copper to make his gun-metal, *^ Icollect it," he says, '' from my subjects; one fur*v.] BPiRUS, 223wishes an old pot, and another a kettle' A magnificentroom, which he has just finished in hisnew serai in the Castro, is probably not surpassedby those of the Sultan himself. It is covered witha Gobelin carpet, which has the cypher of theKing of France on it, and was purchased by thePasha's agent at Corfu. His Highness has latelytaken Dr. Frank, formerly one of the physicians ofthe French army of Egypt, into his service, at10,000 piastres a year. In the evening he hassome mortar practice at Bunila, with an old fiveor six inch mortar, which has been considerablydamaged by its employment in the siege of Suli.They fire loaded shells, one of which explodesclose to a party of Greeks standing upon a height,but fortunately without hurting any of them. ThePasha laughs very heartily at the joke. We thenvisit the founder, the roof of which seems likelyto fall.July 1. — This afternoon I set out on a tour toSuli, accompanied by the Italian renegade MehemetEffendi, together with one of the Vezir's trustyAlbanian bolu-bashis, and his chief architect namedPeter of Korytza, who constructed the bridge andserai at Tepeleni, and has built many others of thePasha's palaces and castles. His Highness furnishesme with an excellent mule, for the mountain paths,from his own stable. We proceed no farther thisevening than Rapsista, a village distant 1.30 hourfrom the city, in the middle of the plain on theright hand side of the road to Ai Dhimitri. Onthe hills above Rapsista are two or three conventsprettily situated among woods of linaria.224 EPiRus. [chap.July 2. — At 4.10 this morning we quit Baptista,leaving the baggage to follow ; at 5. 40 leave thekhan of Ai Dhimitri half a mile on the left, thenascending the lowest part of the mountain whichborders the western side of the plain of loannina, wearrive at six in a small level on the summit wherethe village Ferekisi' is at a short distance on theleft, from thence descend into the valley of theVaria, and at 6.23 arrive at that stream nearthe beginning of its course. On our left, as weproceed, is the ridge which separates this valleyfrom that of Peste and Varlam, and on two pointsof which are the two Hellenic castles mentioned onthe 28th of June. We now cross another ridge,in the middle ascent of which are some ancientsepulchres and remains of Hellenic walls in andbeside the road, and then descend to Variadhes,where we arrive at 8. This is a small village,with a kula or pyrgo belonging to the Vezir, situatedat the eastern foot of the southern summit ofMount Olj^tzika, where the heights overlook thenarrow vale of the Varia.From Variadhes, at 3.30 p.m., we proceed tocross the lowest part of the southern summit ofMount Olji^zika, and arrive at 5. 3 at a church ofSt. Elias, standing on the crest of the ridge whichseparates the valley of the Varia from that of abranch of the river of Suli, and commands a viewof both. We descend the slope obliquely to theleft, and at 6.46 arrive at Dervidjana, properlyTervitziand', situated amidst fountains, large walev.] Epirus. 226nut trees, vineyards and gardens, — on the middledescent of the ridge, and enjoying a prospect ofthe valley below it, which is beautifully diversifiedwith broken ground, streams, woods, and cultivatedfields. At seven we arrive at the farther endof the village, at the kula of the Bolu-bashi, anAlbanian of unusually polished manners.July 3. — At four this morning we descend intothe valley, and after passing a tributary of theriver of Suli, cross at 5. 30 the principal branch,which, taking its rise near the village of Lakia, iscalled the Laki6tiko. The hills at the foot ofMount Rasher', which is a peaked summit, separatedonly by a hollow from Ol^^tzika, are coveredwith oaks, some of which are large. All the villagesin this beautiful valley formed a part of theSuHote league in the time of its greatest power,when Variadhes, the vale of Varia, and all as faras the summit, overlooking the plain of loannina,were included in it. The village of Paleokastro,which is a mile and a half on the left; after crossingthe river, belonged to the Botzari family. Threeminutes farther we begin to ascend the great mountainof Suli at the kula and tjiftlik of Romances,where are some ruins of another tower, which wassurprised and blown up by the Suliotes during thewar. Aly's Albanians having, as they thought,secured the place, went to forage, leaving a fewof their youngest soldiers in it, and on their returnremained at night on the outside. During thenight the Suliotes, approaching silently, set fire toNacrvcpc.VOL. I. Q226 EPiRUS. [chap.a mine which they had left at the foot of thetower, and, as soon as it exploded, attacked andslew, or dispersed, the Albanians. After the war,the Vezir destroyed the church of Romances, andconverted the village into a tjiftlik. From hencethe ascent of the mountain is in a steep zigzag ;the road has been well made, but in some placesthe borders are giving way. At 6.40 we pass acopious SpvacC) or source of water, in a hollowgrown with linaria ; and continuing from thenceto ascend, arrive at 7.28 on the crest of the ridge,about a mile to the southward of the highest summitof the mountain* Lefkadha is in sight to thesouthward ; Pau and Andlpaxo to the west, withthe hills behind Pai^a and the coast near PortFanari : but Suli and its vicinity are hidden by alower summit of the mountain, immediately overhangingthem.After a halt of six minutes we begin to descend ;pass many remains of the konaks, or temporaryhuts of loose stone constructed by the contendingparties during the siege; and having descendedthe steep mountain on foot, arrive at 8.45 at thevillage of Suli. On the side of the mountaingrows a great quantity of a small fragrant speciesof abrotonum, not very common in Greece, andhere named airiaria.Suli, called Kakosuli from its fame and strength,like the KaicoiAcov of Homer, or Megalo-Suli, todistinguish it from another Suli on the Kalamabelow Zitza, contains 150 scattered houses, all ofwhich are in ruins, except five or six, tenanted byMusulman Albanians, to whom the Vezir meansv.] EPiRUS. 227to add a colony of Christians from the neighbourhoodof Tepeleni. The ruins of the principal churchhe is now converting into a mosque. The houses,which seem all to have been built on a similarplan, were small square buildings, with a pitchedroof and two stories, of which the lower was a storeor stable, and the upper contained two apartments.They were dispersed among terraces, artificiallyformed on the side' of the hill, and now uncultivated,but which formerly bore potherbs, and com,among fruit-trees. In the height of their prosperity,the Quotes possessed all the adjacent part of theplain of Glykjr, containing rice grounds and maizefields,in the culture of which they employed the Greekpeasants of that district, thinking such employmentsbeneath them, and delighting only in robbery, war,and idleness. The instances of their activity, oftheir swiftness in walking over the mountains andthrough roads and passages, to us impassable, oftheir expertness in the use of the musket, of theirkeenness of sight, in which they excelled all otherAlbanians, who themselves are exceeded only bythe Arabs of the desert ; their vigilance and sagacity,their ability in planning, and activity in executing,the most refined stratagems of their desultorywarfare, would, in some instances, exceedbelief, if they were not so universally attested bytheir enemies. Their power of vision in the nightis particularly mentioned in terms of astonishmentby the troops of Aly Pash, who opposed them.From Suli we proceeded south-westward to thehill of Kughni^, an Albanian word, which theKovyvif. The pronunciation is that of Kugni in Italian.q2228 EPiRus. [chap.Greeks interpret Xo^c^ a summit: the fort ofKukia occupies the southern point of the hill andis distant from Suli 35 minutest Kukia was thelast point which resisted the arms of Aljr. He isnow erecting a new fortress on the spot, afterhaving levelled all the walls, huts, and meters ofthe Suliotes, as well as their church : 4 or 500yards to the northward of Kukia, and not muchlower than that point, is a peak called Ai Dhon&to(St. Donatus), from a church which formerlystood there, and which the Pasha converted into akula, and made the head quarters of the siege.Having descended by the same road to the footof the hill of Kughni, we fall into that from Sulito Kiafa, near the ruined village of Samoniva,and in half an hour arrive at the ruins of Kiafa,or Gkiafa', situated amidst a few terraces andfruit-trees, and from thence, ascending the hill ofTrypa, in Albanian Bira, arrive at a new fortress,not yet completed, situated on the summit of thisnarrow ridge, and midway between its two extremities.The south-eastern end of the height is the Bira,properly so called, which gives name to the wholeridge ; the north-western is specifically namedBroke Vetetlmis, in Greek ^ *Paxii riic 'Atrrpainic,or the Hill of Lightning, because in stormy weatherthe lightning often strikes the summit, sooften indeed that the Suliotes were obliged to giveup building upon it. A kula which the Pasherected there last year has already had one of itsangles beaten down by a thunderbolt. This point,See a topographical sketch of Suli, at the end of this volume.Kid^a, or Frca^a,v.] Epirus. 229in fact, being lofty and precipitous, and surroundedby an amphitheatre of much highermountains, cannot fail often to attract the electricfluid. Northward it looks down upon Kughni, atthe distance of 1000 or 1200 yards, and is separatedfrom that hill by a narrow vale, in which theLakiotiko, or main branch of the river of Suli isjoined by the Tzingariotiko, so called as rising nearthe village of Tzingari, on the mountain whichrises to the northward of the hill of Kughni. Thefortress in the middle of Mount Trypa, which theVezir began to build as soon as he obtained possessionof Suli, is now nearly finished : my companionKyr Petross, of Korytza, is the architect. The crestof the ridge is so narrow, that there is just room forapath, and Kyr Petross was obliged to level thehill before he began the castle. Towards themountain of Tzikurdtes, which is separated fromthe hill of Trypa by the river, and commands it onthe southern side, as the mountain of Suli doeson the eastern, he has built bomb-proof magazines,casemates, and cisterns. He has alsocompleted a house for the officer in command,and is now building a large serai for the Venir inthe middle of the fort. The only guns at presenthere are two short pieces of brass carryinga 121b. ball. These and two five or six inchmortars were all the artillery used in the siege.The hill of Trypa towards the river is a rapiddescent, covered with loose stones, and interruptedin many places with precipices and pointedrocks ; although the slope forms an angle of about230 EpiRus. [chap.30° with the horizon, the women of Trypa were inthe habit of mounting it, with large jars of waterfrom the river, upon their heads. The southeasternend of the ridge of Trypa terminates inthree pointed summits, the two northern of whichare surmounted by kulas, lately erected by thePasha to contain a guard of Albanians ; one ofthese buildings has already been damaged by thelightning, but not so much as the tower at theopposite extremity of the mountain. The hollowbetween the two northern summits of the southeasternend is properly the Trypa or cavity fromwhich the whole mountain takes its name, butthe posts of the Suliotes extended over all thisextremity of the hill, and their meteris may stillbe traced as far as the place where the southerngate of the fortress now stands ; 100 yards to thesouth of which, is a small Suliote church stillsubsisting. As it was necessary for the Pasha,when he had expelled the Suliotes, to build afortress for his Albanian garrison, he could nothave chosen a better site. Suli, however, althoughit would be troublesome to him in thehands of an enemy, is of no importance as a passor point of communication between the severalparts of Alj^^s dominions, nor can it be of muchuse to him as a place of refuge in case of disaster,for the mountains on both sides command it withina moderate range of cannon-shot ; and althoughthey are very difficult of access on all sides, anactive enemy, if superior in the field, would soonfind the means of transporting artillery over them.v.] Epirus. 231Upon all the summits around Suli are still seenthe remains of the Meters and Konaks whichwere erected by the Pasha's troops during thesiege. The former are upon all the most advancedand commanding points of the mountainsand are nothing more than little breastworks ofstone, from behind which the besieger fired hislong heavy musquet, resting it on the top of thewall. The konaks, or lodgings, were in the mostunexposed situations, and were just large enoughto afford shelter during their hours of repose, tothe men who were stationed at that point of theinvestment. As the siege proceeded, the meteriswere drawn nearer, serving the purpose of approachesin a regular siege, and blockading theposts of the Suliotes until they were reduced tostarvation. In like manner the konaks of the Suitesare to be seen on all the rocky points andprecipices of the hills of Trypa and Kughni.The river, after the junction of the two branches,flows through the Klisura, or narrow opening betweenthe mountains of Tzikurates and Zavrukho,into the plain of Glyk^^, where it is generallyknown by the name of the Suliotiko, or river ofSuli. Along the rocky sides and precipices of theKlisura, above the left bank of the river, the Veadrhas lately made a good paved horse road fromSuli to Glykj^, so that now there is a road, thoughin some parts rather dangerous, through the entirepass, communicating from the plain of Luro, or ofloannina, into that of Glyk^^.The view from the Hill of Lightning comprehendsall the adjacent part of the plain of Glyky232 EPiRus. [chap.with its numerous villages, and I perceive at oncethat the river is the ancient Acheron; for afterwinding through the plain it traverses a lake, ormarsh, or rather combination of both, which isevidently the ancient Palus Acherusia, and thenfalls into the harbour called Porto Fanari, orPlanta, which (it is equally manifest) is theGlycys Limen ^ : so great is the quantity of waterpoured into it from the lake and river, that thewater of the harbour is observed to be generallyfresh, as the ancient name implies. The harbourand a great part of the Acherusia are hidden fromTrypa by a part of the mountain of Tzikurates.At the foot of the hills of Margariti which risefrom the western side of the plain of the Acheron,is a marsh called Vivo, through which passes ariver of the same name, flowing from the vicinityof Paramythia. Its subsequent course is traceablethrough the plain to a high stone bridge nearKastri, a name generally indicative of an ancientsite, and in this instance derived from the conspicuousruins of a large Hellenic city on a heightabove the village. The Vuv6, as I am informed,afterwards winds to the left in a direction nearlyparallel to the Acheron and joins that river nearthe sea. It is probably the ancient Cactus.In the lower part of the plain the SuUotiko orAcheron is more commonly called Fanaritiko, orthe river of Fanari ; this name (in Albanian, Frai)For the Acheron, Cactus, lax in QetnrpwToi, Liv. 1. 8»Acherusia, and Olycys Limen, c. 24. Strabo, p. 824. Pau-seeThucyd. 1. 1, c. 46. Scy- san. Attic, c. 17.v.] BPiRUS. 233being generally applied to the plain around andbelow the Acherusia^ as Glykjr is to the portionabove it towards Suli. Formerly there was a villageand church of Glykjr near the right bank ofthe river, a little below the spot where it emergesfrom the gorges of Suli into the plain. But sischurch was destroyed by the Vezir two monthsago, and there now remain only two or three ofthe buttresses which sustained the walls, and whichmay be remarked from the Trypa. During thewar this was an important military post of theSuliotes, and sometimes was equally useful to theirbesiegers. The name Glyk5^, by a process ofchange not uncommon in all countries, seems tohave spread from the harbour to the plain, andafterwards to have been applied specifically to aplace, where, though nothing but a ruined churchis now to be seen, there was probably a town ofthe Lower Empire ; for Glykj^ still gives title inconjunction with Buthrotum to one of the bishopsof the province of lodnnina, whose residence isParamythia, and the church at Glykjr is acknowledgedto have been the cathedral of that diocese.At Glykjr the plain is about five miles wide, andextends to the right in a northerly direction fourhours to Paramythia. This large town, which is inaccessibleto me at present on account of the hostilityof its chief family to Aly Pasha, is situated atthe extremity of the valley of the Vuv6, and has acastle behind it on a steep and lofty hill, near thefoot of the range which terminates to the southwardin the mountain of Zavrukho and the Klisuraof Suli. The entire range, like most of the mountEpirus. [chap.pains around Suli, is bare and rocky in the middle,but is covered at the summit with pine-trees.The official name of Paramythia, by which it isalways designated in the firman of the Porte, isAidonat Kalesi, or the Castle of Aidondt, whichdoubtless is a corruption of ''Aytoc Avaro, or St.Donatus who was the patron of this part of thecountry : the church of Glykjr was dedicated tohim, as well as another on the ridge of Kughni,and a third in the village of Suli. It is curiousthat his name should so nearly resemble, especiallyin modem Greek pronunciation, that of 'AtSenvcvc,the ancient monarch of this country ; for thoughthe Greek mythology confounded Aidoneus withthe lord of the infernal regions, he appears to havebeen in reality the mortal possessor of the valuabledistrict watered by the Acheron, at the timewhen Theseus, prince of Athens, was on his travels.The Suliotes, having no written memorials norany clear traditions older than a century, it canonly be offered as a conjecture, founded on strongprobability, that Suli was occupied in the thirteenthor beginning of the fourteenth century, bya colony of those Albanians, who, at the latterperiod, overran the Desperate of the West, avoidingloannina the capital, which was in the handsof Greek, Servia, or Frank princes ; but settlingat Artaa and on the banks of the Achelaus^ and extendingthemselves, as their present settlementsand the use of their language indicate, throughoutmaritime JEpimSy from Illyria nearly to the Ambrady Gulf. The Turks, when they penetratedv.] Epirus. 235into Epirus, were satisfied with the conquest ofArtaa and lodnnina, and had little temptation toenter the poorer and more mountainous parts ofthe country, which neither the Greeks, Vlakhiotes,nor Albanians, who possessed them, were disposedto yield without a struggle. The Albanians soondiscovered that the Ottoman empire was an excellentmart for their services as mercenary in-sentry ; but that, in order to obtain all the advantagesin view, it was necessary to profess the dominantreligion. The consequence has been, thatmore than half the nation has become Musulman,that Mahometan Albanians are to be found in theservice of every chieftain or governor of that faith,fix)m the Straits of Gibraltar, to Arabia, Persia,and the Danube ; and that at home they haveeither brought the Christians under their yoke, orhave forced them to take refuge under a milderdespotism in Southern Greece or Asia Minor.To the former country the stream of Albanianmigration had been setting, even before theTurkbh conquest ; those countries having alreadybeen depopulated by wars, or by the bad governmentof the Franks and the Byzantine Greeks.Such is now the military preponderancy of theMusulman faith in Albania, that with the exceptionof a tribe belonging to the Roman church, inthe district of Skodra, the Khimariotes are theonly Christian Albanians who preserve their independence.The Suliotes were the last who fellunder the Mahometan yoke.During the past century, as well in the earlypart of it, when loannina was governed by a236 Epirus. [chap.Musellim dependent on the Pashd of Artaa, as afterthe year 1740, when it became the head of a Pa-shallthe Suliotes were constantly engaged inwar, with the neighbouring beys of Margariti,Paramythfa, or lo&nnina; for it was not untilA15^ succeeded to the government of loannina, inthe year 1788, that a factious oligarchy, similar tothat of the Albanian towns, and which had leftvery little authority to the Sultan's officer, wasrendered powerless, and has at length been strippedby Aljr of the greater part of their property. TheSuliotes soon found that they had an opponent inA15^ far more formidable than they had yet known ;and that to resist such a bold and crafty enemywould require all their energy. Nor was thePasha less prompt in arriving at the convictionthat he could have little hope of extending hispower in the degree which his ambition contemplated,until he had reduced the Suliotes, whowere a constant rallying point to the Christians,were capable of strengthening by their allianceevery Mahometan chieftain disposed to resist him,and even threatened his capital whenever he mightbe engaged in any distant undertaking. By hisusual artifices, he succeeded first in turning againstthem one or two of their Musulman neighbours,and then the Christian armatoll of Acamania and^tolia ; which so provoked the Suliotes, that theirpredatory excursions, hitherto confined to hostileand neighbouring places, were extended to Marisor to the passes leading from Artaa to loan-nina,and even into the plain of loannina, wherethey plundered travellers without distinction, andV,] EPiRus. 237never spared the life of a Mahometan unless withthe prospect of a heavy ransom.The war between Alj^ and the Suliotes wasactively carried on during the years 1790 and1791. In 1792 the Pasha made that formidableattack upon the mountain itself which has beenrelated by Eton on the authority of a Greek interpreterin the service of the French consulate atSaloniki, who happened to be at loannina at thetime. His army approached Suli from the plainof Glykjr, forced the Klisura with difficulty, metwith a still more resolute opposition in the pass ofParaskeviy which leads between the hills of Kughniand Bira to Megalo-Suli ; but succeeded by theeffect of superior numbers in obtaining a momentarypossession of the town, when both women andmen rushing forth against them, and an attackbeing made at the same instant on their rear, by aparty which for this purpose waited only to receivea signal from Bira, the Mahometanss were totallydefeated with an immense slaughter, and with verylittle loss to the Suliotes. Mukht^ escaped withdifficulty, and Alj^ fled with precipitation to loan-nina,fearing to be intercepted.This victory saved the Suliotes from any seriousdanger for the next six years, during which theywere aided by a tacit, but not less real alliancewith the Venetian towns of Pr^vyza and Parga ;and through them with the adjacent islands, theSeptinsular government having always been sensibleof the necessity of maintaining good terms withthe tribes of the opposite continent, and of preventsEPiRUfl. [chap.ing any single chieftain from acquiring too lai^ea portion of the Epirote coast, upon which theislands depend for the supply of several objects ofprime necessity. Ultimately, however, this connectionof Suli with the Venetian places was destinedto contribute to its ruin ; for when the designsof the French Republic against Turkey becameapparent, Suli was involved in the denunciationsof the Porte against all those who weresuspected of being friendly to the French in thisquarter ; and when Alj^ had taken Pr^vyza, it gavehim great influence over all the neighbouringMusulmans, and left them no plea for decliningto join him against the Suliotes, as abettors ofenemies who threatened the Turkish empire withdestruction.Before the Suliote war, which began in 1798,the increase of Aiys power and his unceasing activityhad curtailed the Suliotes of some of theirdependencies, and had diminished the number oftheir combatants. The history of this last andlongest of the Suliote wars, which continued to1803 without any intermission except in the year1802, when A\^ Pashd, as Rumili Vales, was employedagainst the adherents of Passant Ogle nearAdrianople, has been written by a native of Parga,a part of whose narrative has been printed. Asheseems to be a man of some education, whotreated the subject with great minuteness and apparentaccuracy, and was anxiously watching theprogress of events in a neighbouring and alliedtown, it would be in vain to attempt to collect av.] EPiRus. 239more correct account from the illiterate actors inthe contest, now dispersed over every part of theVezir's dominions, or in the Seven Islands ^The greatest misfortune, or rather the certainruin of Suli, was the defection of its own citizens.The arch-traitor was George B6tzari, who receiveda bribe from the Vezir to desert with his farbefore the war began, and who, in the course of it,tempted others to follow his example. Bira waslost in this manner, by the desertion of the Enervates,about two months after the loss of the townof Suli, and Avariko in consequence of a similartreachery on the part of Pj^lios Gush. After the fallof Bira, the Vezir's troops began to invest the hill ofKughni, where 300 families were collected. The fourpieces of ordnance before-mentioned were placed atAi Dhondto, and on the side of the Hill of Lightning,in situations n^hich are on a lower level thanthe summit of Kughni. The Pash was totally inwant of artillery-men ; and although his shells destroyedthe houses of Kughni, not more than threeof the garrison were killed by them. The Suliotesmade bomb-proof by digging holes in the ground,and covering them with a slanting roof of timber,spread with boughs and earth. The women tookrefuge in a cavern, or in little konaks of loosestones, constructed for the occasion on the westernside of the hill, where they were covered from theenemy's fire. On the summit there was nothingbut a slight wall, comprehending a small churchFor an abstract of this work, see a note at the end of thisTonne.240 Epirus. [chap.to the eastward, of which the foundations nowremain. The rest of the fortress consisted only ofthe walls of the exterior houses, united and loopholed.The Venir's Mahometan Albanians showedas much perseverance in the attack as their Christianopponents in the defence : the former climbedup the sides of the hill, particularly on the west,and made some small meteris of stone at the distanceof a few yards only from the enemy's kon&ks.The Suliote women exposed themselves to the fireof the enemy, supplied the men with water, ammunitionand provisions, and when not otherwiseemployed, disclaimed holies of verbal abuse againstthe assailants. When resistance began to be hopeless,a part of the garrison made their escape byforcing their way over the enemy's meteris, likethe Plataea in the Peloponnesian war. The defencewas chiefly prolonged by the exhortationsand example of a priest named Samuel, a nativeof one of the JEgcsan islands, who had the care ofthe ammunition and provisions, and who, after thecapitulation, was blown up in the magazine, whichstood at the northern end of the hill, within thepresent fortress. One of the Pashd's officers, whohad been sent to receive the fortress and its stores,suffered with him and two or three other persons,which seems to prove that the explosion was eitheraccidental, or premeditated by the priest, and notas some persons imagine, the result of a schemeof Aljr Pashd, to get rid in this manner of hismost formidable opponent ; but who, in fact, wasalready in his power. The Vezir's Albanians assertthat it was an accident ; but the Suliotes main.]Epirus. 241tain that it was the deed of Samuel, which is veryprobable, as he could not expect any mercy iftaken, and as it accords with his determined character,and with that of the Greeks in general, whooften exhibit similar examples of desperation. Theremaining families had permission to retire unmolestedin whatever direction they thought fit ; butthe Venir, in violation of his promises, interceptedmany of them in their retreat, and brought themto loannina. Of those who escaped, the greaterpart are now in the Greek corps, formed by theRussians in the islands, and many of the womenand children are in the domestic service of theChristians of Epirus. There are now about seventymen prisoners at loannina, and as many womenand children. These the Vezir gradually dispersesamong his tjiftliks as labourers, and generallysends them to the most disagreeable and unhealthysituations.July 4. — This afternoon, having descended onfoot from the castle to the ruins of the village ofK]4fa, we proceed at 3.45 eastward, along thehollow between the mountain of Suli and the hillof Trypa. At the end of this pass, just under theTrypa, stands the ruined village of Avariko\ fromwhence there is a descent into a deep ravine,formed by the meeting of the two great mountainsof Suli and Tzikurdtes ; one of the darkest anddeepest of the glens of Greece : on either side riseperpendicular rocks, in the midst of which arelittle intervals of scanty soil, bearing holly-o£^s,slices, and other shrubs, and which admit occa-» *A/3ap/icoc.VOL. I. R342 Epirus. [chap.signally a view of the higher summits of the twomountains covered nth oaks, and at the summitof all with pines. Here the road is passable onlyon foot, by a perilous ledge along the side of themountain of Suli ; terminating at a narrow opening,where the Acheron enters the defile from thevale of Tervitziand. The river in the pass is deepand rapid, and is seen at the bottom falling in manyplaces in cascades over the rocks, though at too greata distance to be heard, and in most places inaccessibleto any but the foot of a goat or a Suliote.On the side of "the road, at intervals, planks arecollected, which have been sawn out of the oakson the spot, and left in readiness to be removed.,At 6.45 we arrive at the end of the defile, anddescend into a valley, where the river, comingfrom the north in a direction almost at right anglesto its course through the Suliote glens, previouslymakes many turns and meanders, as if unwillingto enter such a gloomy passage. At 6, leavingSeritsdand close to the right, where only five orsix houses now remain, and to the left Gordna,standing on the side of the range of Tziku*rates, we cross the river at 6.15, and immediatelyascend into a vale, or opening between the ridgeof Tzikurdtes and Mount Ndsseri, which latterhere changes its direction, and turns eastward towardsLuro and the Gulf of Artaa* From henceriding over a beautiful undulated valley, naturallyfertile, but little cultivated, we arrive at 7 at Zero*ml, where the Vezir has lately built a tjiftlik offive or six cottages, inclosed by a square wall.My konak is an open gallery on the outside of onev.] Epirus. 249of the hate. In the evening the whole atmosphereglitters with fire flies.July 6. — At 4.20, a. m. we begin to follow thesame valley, descending towards the south-east :the sides of the hills and the valley become morewoody as we advance. At 5 the monastery ofArasso ^ is a little on the right at the foot of themountain, and Zerlia a small village is on theheats to the left. Near the monastery thereare said to be many ancient sepulchres, few ofwhich have ever been opened; they show thatthe monastery occupies a Hellenic site. As thename appears to be ancient, Crassus may verypossibly have been one of those numerous citiesof Epirus unnoticed by history, but of which theformer existence is well attested by their remains.At 5.30 a tumulus occurs on the road side, andat 5.45 the village Kutzanopulo on the hill tothe left. We soon afterwards arrive on the bankof a dry torrent, shaded with fine planes, wherethe valley opens towards the Gulf of Artaa, and arich level is covered with plantations of maize.Leaving the castle and village of Luro a quarterof an hour on the left, we proceed to skirt the footof the mountain of Zalongo which is united by alower ridge with the hills on the right side of thevale which we have passed. After having madethe semi-tour of the mountain, through a wood ofsmall oaks, Lib6khovo remains three quarters of amile to the left, at 8 ; soon after which we beginto ascend the southern face of the mountain, and.r2244 EPiRus. [chap.at 8.20 arrive at Kamarfna ^ a village of 30 or 40Greek families, situated among fruit gardens atthe copious sources of a little stream which flowsto the plain of Ldmari, and there unites with ariver which falls into the sea a little to the southwardof a small harbour called Agriapidhia.My lodging is a chamber and open gallery inthe serai, as it is called, of a Christian captain ofArmatoli, named landki, who is entrusted by theVesdr with the government of the surroundingdistrict. The village commands a beautiful viewof the gulf and plain of Artaa, with the mountainsaround them, including the Makrinoro, the hillsof Valto and Xer6mero, and to the southward, thetown, channel, and whole island of Lefkadha,ending in Cape Ducats, to the right of which isseen the Point of Ricardo, in Kefalonia. Withinthis magnificent amphitheatre appear the town ofPrevyza, the peninsulas of ^c^um and NicopoKs,and immediately below us an undulated countryand plain, consisting of pasture, corn-fields, andolives, forming the district of Lamari. A line oftall detached masses is seen stretching across theplain, formed of a mixture of stone and Romantile. These are the piers of the ruined aqueductof Nicopolis.The summit of the mountain of Zalongo ', whichis a mile to the north-eastward of Kamarina, isfamed for having twice been the scene of a gallantresistance of the Suliotes. On the first occasion.Ka fiapiva, and Xc^yyoci a forest, in middleZdXoyyott front ^«, intense, and modem Greek."^•••%««2'**%'XC246 EPiRus. [chap.100 families, who had retired hither by capitulationfrom Suli and Kiafa, and who had lived onthe hill unmolested until the reduction of Kughni,were suddenly attacked by order of the Vezir, onthe pretence that the natural strength of the positionhad tempted them to commit acts of hostilityagainst him. When affairs became desperate,Katzo Botzari and a party with him escaped. Ofthe rest, 150 persons were made slaves, 25 headswere brought to the Albanian Bolu-bashi at Kamarina,who commanded the attack, and 6 menand 22 women threw themselves from the rocks, atthe place where the precipice is highest, in preferenceto falling alive into the hands of their enemies.Several of the women who had infants, were seento throw them over before they took the fatalleap. Last year again, in the month of July, aparty of 400 Suliotes, under Botzari, sent over bythe Russians to assist the Beys of Tzamurid intheir war with Alj^, stood a siege here, in conjunctionwith as many Tzamidhes, for six weeks,against a large force sent against them by theVezir; they capitulated, on condition being permittedto return with their arms into Tzami.The meters of the Suliotes are still seen on theweak points of the cliffs, which surround the hillon all sides, and particularly near a winding roadwhich ascends through the cliffs, from the desertedmonastery of Zalongo to its metokhi of ''A'ycoc Ta^c-^PX*'^' ^^ michael which is situated in themiddle of the summit, and is still occupied by twoor three monks. The monastery stands just underthe cliffs at the western extremity of the hill ; fromv.] Epirus. 247which point the tabular, though sloping summit,which is of an oval form, rises gradually to theopposite extremity, where it terminates in a naturalcitadel, 200 yards long from north to south,and 35 broad. All the summit around the is covered with low oaks. No remains ofHellenic architecture are to be seen on this height,though it commands, at a distance not greaterthan the length of the hill itself, the eastern extremityof the Acropolis of an ancient city of greatextent.This Acropolis occupies a level about 1000 yardslong, and one-fourth at the utmost of that breadth,and which is surrounded by low cliffs on everyside, except to the north, where it is still betterfortified by high rocky summits, connected withthe height of Zalongo by a lower crest or ridge ; onthe farther extremity of which stands the monastery.The ruined walls of the Acropolis may be traced intheir entire circuit, but aries best preserved at thewestern end, and towards the upper cliffs. Therewere very few towers, and the masonry is so completelyo! the second order, that I do not observeone regular course, or rectangular stone* In thehighest part of the inclosure at the foot of thecliffs, towards the western end, is a theatre ingood preservation, of which the interior diameteris 50 feet; the rows of seats, which are 37 innumber, are divided into two compartments by aprecincts, or hiitiofxa, the lower containing 24rows, the upper 13. The cavea is greater than asemi-circle, and is divided into cunei, separated bysteps. The outer circular wall of the cavea, andEPIRUS.[chap.those which support the two extremities, are builtof polygonal masonry, without any squared stones,and are well preserved. The scene or structurein front of the cavea was divided into two compartments,of which the inner was equal in lengthto the inner diameter of the theatre, and the outerhalf that length ; both were about 24 feet in breadth.Two immense fragments ofrock, which have fallenfrom the cliffs above, arelying on the cavea ; thisaccident is said to havehappened net many yearsago'.On the descent from hence to the western extremityof the Acropolis, near where it terminatesin an angle, is a subterraneous building, which thepeasants call the Vasilospito, or King's House.Its plan resembles, on a small scale, that of thetombs of the kings at Egyptian Thebes, and it wasintended probably for a similar purpose ; but insteadof being hewn out of the rock, it is constructedof masonry. A passage, nineteen feet inlength and five feet in breadth, with a curved roofone foot and a half high, leads to a chamber ninefeet nine inches square, and having a similar rooffive feet seven inches in height. The arches arenot constructed on the principles of the Romanarch, but are hollowed out of horizontal courses of^ Mr. Hughes, on the aa the south-eastern extremity ofthirty of Mr. Jones, says that the ruins, which was not seenthere is another theatre towards either by Mr. Hughes or myself.v.] EPiRUS. 249stone : the interior of the arch is plastered, and isadorned with a small cornice in the same materialat the bottom of the curve. The architrave ofthe outer entrance is formed of a single stone sevenfeet long. The passage and chamber, but parti ,clary the latter, are obstructed with stones andrubbish ; so that in no place the surface of theground is more than six feet below the bottom ofthe arch. There is an excavation of earth beforethe door ; and the upper surface of the roof, whichwas probably in former times entirely coveredwith earth, is now partly visible on the outside.These seem to be the effects of a search whichhas been made for treasure. Upon the roof lieseveral stones in the form of segments of a circle,belonging apparently to some circular building ofabout ten feet in diameter. Not far from this subterraneousbuilding there is a vaulted postern-gatein the wall, the arch of which is formed byconcave stones, as in the Vasilospito ; but in thisinstance the concave parts of the two upper stonesdo not meet, and the top is completed by a flatstone ^ The wall is here entirely of the secondorder.The principal gate of this fortress, which is stillin good preservation, is in the western front, betweenthe theatre and Vasilospito. It is flankedon either side by a square tower, in one of whichstands a sorts, formed of a single stone with anoperculum, which has been removed just enough1 have since remarked the same kind of construction insome arched gates in Acamania.260 Epirus. [chap.to admit of an examination of the contents ofthe tomb and of an abstraction of them. Belowthe theatre are many rectangular foundations, allof polygonal masonry, and apparently belongingto very large buildings. In some places the ancientstreets may be traced, crossing one anotherat right angles. The circuit of the fortress is upwardsof a mile, and that of the city could nothave been less than three miles ; for though Icannot exactly trace the inclosure of the exteriortown towards the south, a piece of wall, whichcrosses the slope of the mountain ten minutes belowKamaiina, serves to mark the extent in thatdirection. Along the foot of the wall, between thegreat gate and Kamarina, and particularly in aspot immediately behind ' the village, are manytombs of an ordinary kind, seven to nine feet long,and three or four wide. They were either hewnin the rock, and covered with three massy piecesof stone, or where the soil was earthy, had sidesconstructed of four fragments of stone set edgeways,with a covering of similar slabs. Havingcaused four of these tombs to be opened, I foundin the first a great number of broken vases andbones, three or four small laboratories, as theyare commonly called, and several long rectangularpieces of iron, one-tenth of an inch thick,and covered with gold leaf. The second tomb,though it had no appearance of having ever beenopened, produced nothing, not even bones : a partof its cover and all the body of the tomb was cutout of the rock. The third, which was also hewnout of the solid rock, produced fragments, but notv.]BPXRU8.many, of skulls and bones, with coarse vases of theusual forms, together with fragments of utensilsmade of lead, and a circular mirror of copper ormixed metal, six inches in diameter, placed withina covering of thinner metal ; the lustre is stillperfect on the side which has been protected bythe covering. The opposite side has a rim threeeighths of an inch high, and the handle has anornamented border. The same tomb containedalso a leaden box two inches and one-eighth high,and one inch and three-eighths in diameter, shapedlike the frustum of a cone, and having a buttonserving for a handle in the centre of the lid. Asthe labourers believed that the box containedjewels, and were afraid perhaps of an avania, Iopened it in their presence : nothing remained init but some earth, amidst which were two or threeshells of a minute kind of snail. The mirror, andthe box which once contained probably some ointmentor perfume, show the tomb to have been thatof a female. In the fourth sepulchre were foundtwo or three vases, and some more of the ornamentsof iron and gold above-mentioned. Thespeculum was placed vertically at the feet of thedeceased : the vases were found in every part ofthe tombs, and are allof the most ordinarykind of Greek pottery.The annexed was theonly form among themthat is not very commonlyfound in Greece.This great city I take to have been Cassope, orSeparate,Joint.EPIRUS.[chap.the city of the Cassopaei, who occupied the maritimecountry between Thesprotia and the AmbracicGulf, and bordered on the territory of Nicopolis * ;for although in, the time of Scylax the Cassopseidwelt iccjfinSov, or in small towns, it is very probablethat the most advantageously situated ofthose towns became subsequently the head of thenation, when the Cassopaei arose to such power asto obtain Pandora and some other places in theancient Thesprotia *. The Acropolis, therefore, ofwhich the masonry indicates so remote an antiquity,may have been the Kclifiii, older than thetime of Scylax, and the lower city may have beenadded at that later period to which the coins ofthe Cassopeei have the appearance of belonging.That this people had a capital city, is shown byDiodorus, who, in relating an expedition of Lycis-cus, commander of the forces of Cassander, againstAlcetas, king of Epirus, in the year B.C. 312,states that Lyciscus, marching from Acarnania intoEpirus, pitched his camp near the city Cassia '.Alcetas, after having sent his two sons, Alexanderand Teucer, to collect forces, advanced to meetLyciscus ; but his Epirotes having passed overto the enemy before the reinforcements arrived,Mira 2c Qeirirpwrlay Katr^tnnria Itrrly c6voc* olKovtri 2eovroi Kara Kwfiac' trapoucovai Hoiroi c«»c c<C Tov 'AvoKTopucoyK6\woy. — Scylax in Rao^^fi*-xacbi.OlKovtn 3c roic city iv ^c^i^titnrXiovtn r&y 'EXX^vai^v 'Aicap-K&vccky hpiartpq. ht i^Ncrc^iroXic ^^o^ TSiy *}lirtipiiTwy01 Ra^o'Ainracoc lu\pX rit l^vypvrov Work 'A^pair/aK. — Strabo,p. 325.Demosth. in Orate de .ircpi Kaoviairlay iroXtK.—Diodor. I. 19» c. 88.v.] Epirus. 253he fled to Eurymense, where he was joined byhis sons. He then fought two battles with theenemy, and in the former had the advantage;but the Macedonians haying prevailed in thelatter, he took refuge with his two sons in anotherplace of strength, leaving Eurymenae to betakenand destroyed by Lyciscus ; soon after whichCassander, arriving in Epirus, made peace withAlcetas, and entered into an alliance with him. Itseems not improbable from these circumstances,that Eurymenffi stood in the vale of the UpperAcheron towards Lakia, Varieties, or Tervitziana ;for the valley of the Acheron, below Suli, togetherwith the country extending from thence to Z4-long, appears to have been occupied by the citiesof Else, Buchsetium, Cichyrus, Pandora, Baptise,and Elate. Agriapidhia was probably the Aifiiyv,or harbour of the Cassopsei.Captain lanaki has an annual income of about1000 piastres, now equivalent to 65/. sterling. Heis authorized to deduct 300 piastres for himself,and 50 for each of his men, from the Vezir's revenue,which he collects; the remainder of his incomeis derived from fees on his arbitration of thedisputes which arise in the district under hischarge. My travelling companion, Kyr Petross,of Korytzd, considers Captain landki an object ofenvy ; and with reason, — for although Peter is theVezir's chief architect and engineer, he has servedin his present capacity for five years without receivinga para, although constantly employed insuperintending the building of some castle or seraifor the Vezir or his sons. His property and family254 Epirus. [chap.are at Korytz4, where by special favour he is nowand then allowed to stay a few days. He relatesthat when he was excavating the ground for thenew serai in the castle of loannina, a stone wasfound inscribed in honour of Thomas 'Hyov/ievocybenefactor of Io4nnina. Having reported his discoveryto the Vezir, his highness said, " Go readall the old histories, and come tomorrow morningand let me know whose monument it is." Thissame benefactor of loannina is said to have been amuch worse tyrant than A\^ himself; and oneamong several examples which show that many ofthe Christian chieftains of Albanian and Serviarace, with their military followers, exercised a dominionover the subject population of Greece notless oppressive than the Turkish. Kyr Petrossstates that his native town and the neighbouringone of Mo8kh6poli formerly contained five or sixthousand houses, but that the emigrations whichhave followed the tyranny of the Pashds have reducedthem to less than eight hundred. The distressof the Christian population throughout thediocese of loannina, he ascribes in great measureto the extravagance of the bishop, who has loadedthe see with debts to such a degree, that at hisdeath the mansup will hardly find a purchaser ;while, meantime, his flock is fleeced to pay theimmoderate interest, without which money cannotbe raised in this country.July 8. — This morning, having set my watch toTurkish time ^ to accommodate my companions,Though it is generally form to local customs, there isbetter for a traveller to coiip> some inconvenience in Turkishv.]Epirus.we begin the descent from Kamarina at 10, and ipten minutes arrive at some remains of the exteriorwalls of the ancient city, near a mill turned by thestream, which has its rise in the village. At aquarter of an hour short of Luro, we cross themouth of the valley of Kutzanopulo, and at twelvearrive at the house of the Proestos of Luro, whichvillage is situated in a low unhealthy situation, neara square castle of the Vezir, now in a ruinous state.All the hills around are clothed with oaks. Coarsebut good blankets are made here, and in some ofthe neighbouring villages : a piece of seven feetby four feet and a half costs ten piastres. In theafternoon, at 8.53, we proceed over a desolateplain overgrown with brambles and bushes, and at9.12 arrive at the foot of a rocky mountain, fromwhich issue some copious streams of water, forminga large pond : it is very deep and pellucid, aboundsin fish, and is closely shaded around the marginwith trees and shrubs. To the right are marshesextending for a great distance towards the sea ;time, as the watch cannot bekept correct without daily attention.It would seem, however,to be a natural mode ofmeasuring time, being followedhy so many nations. TheTuikiflh method di&rs onlyfrom the Italian in dividingthe day into two twelves, insteadof reckoning to twenty-four; so that sunset is alwaystwelve o'clock. One of thecommonest questions which anative of the Levant whowears a watch puts to a Frankis, " At what hour is middayV This he asks, that hemay set his watch. The peasantwithout a watch generallyasks, '' How many hours is itto sunset?" — this being obviouslythe principal questionfor the labourer. To the Turkalso it is important ; as theafternoon's prayer is threehours before sunset.256 Epirus. [chap.and near the sources a kula for the protection ofthe pass, with the remains of a Hellenic tower,which doubtless served the same purpose.A paved road here passes over the foot of themountain, descends beyond the lake again intothe plain, and then turns to the left through anopening between two mountains, in which standsthe village of Kanja \ The aqueduct of Nicopoliswas conducted through this opening, as appears bysome remains of it visible on the slope of the hillto the left, as we pass through Kanza at 9,33 : wethen enter a small plain surrounded by mountains,and continue to ascend through it untilturning a point of hill we open the view of anextensive valley, included between two parallelridges of hills, of which those on the east are richlyclothed with trees. To our left a woody height issurrounded with remains of the inclosure of theHellenic city which possessed this beautiful vale,consisting only of the foundations of town walls,chiefly of the third order. The site is now calledKastri.At a distance of one hour and a half fromKanza is Leiovo, situated on the rocky foot ofthe western hills. Around the village are plantationsof olives, and below it fruit trees andgardens, extending into the valley, which stretchesfour or five miles farther, terminating inland inheights which separate it from the valleys wateredby the upper tributaries of the Acheron and of theeastern branch of the river of Luro.Leiovo contains 150 or 200 houses, much dish.]EPiRUs. 257perse. Papa Nikola is both priest and priests,and has a large house with yard and outhouses,erected with considerable expense, but utterly inwant of the most vulgar comforts. He has thereputation of being a tyrant, and a complaint haslately been preferred against him by the village,but the Pasha seldom listens to such representations,unless to impose a fine upon the personcomplained of. The principal church, which wasbuilt about six years ago, is adorned within withcostly gilding and painting. This is a vanitywhich Aly readily allows the Greeks to indulgein, and though he exacts something in permittingthem to rebuild or repair their churches, he isvery moderate on these occasions, and desirous ofencouraging the practice. Lelovo contains theruined serai of a Turkish Bey who once possesseda considerable property here in land, but wasstripped of it by the Vezir, and now lives inmisery at loannina. All the better houses havespacious yards, in which the people delight to sitat this season, on a rude sofa raised upon sticks,and covered with fern leaves. These, when theleaves are fresh, are cool and agreeable, but theysoon become dry and swarming with fleas, likeevery place in this country in summer where maninhabits.July 9. — ^At 9.40, Turkish time, we begin tocross the valley in a south-eastern direction, andhaving traversed it, as well as the range of hillswhich border it on the east, wt arrive at 10.45 atthe issue of a large stream which flows to theriver of St. George. We then ascend an uncul-VOL. I. s258 EPiRUS. [chap.treated valley overgrown with bushes, and havingpassed through a wood of large oaks, fall a littlebeyond the summit of a low ridge, into the roadfrom Kanza to Pendepigadhia, which here pursuesthe side of a woody and rocky height, about 100yards above the river of St. George. The ruinedchannel of the aqueduct of Nicopolis follows theside of our road. Steep rocky heights coveredwith wood rise from the opposite bank of thestream. This is the main branch of the river,which joins the Gulf two or three miles to thenorthward of Nicopolis, and is usually called theriver of Luro, perhaps from being collected intoone body in the marshes of Luro. The river ofSt. George, although considerably smaller thanthe Arcadian Laden, in volume of water, isbroader and very rapid, falling with a great noisein a continued cataract over the rocks. Thispeculiarity leads me to believe that it was ancientlynamed Charades ; for although no authormentions any river besides the Arachthus in thispart of Epirus, Charades was a natural name forsuch a rapid stream ; and as Polybius twice alludesto a town of Charade \ which in one passagehe clearly shows to have been on the roadfrom Ambraeus to the Strait of Actium, there isevery reason to believe that it was situated on thisstream towards the gulf, and that it took its namefrom the river. Some ruins on its bank, at Roguesto the eastward of Kanza, mark probably the site9f Charade, as some remains of Hellenic walls> Polyb. 1. 4, c. 68. 1. 22, c. 9.y.] EPiRus. 259are reported to be there mixed with the ruins of atown of the Byzantine empire.At 11.40 we descend upon the right bank of theriver, which is here overshadowed by very lai^eplane trees, and after following it for a fewminutes, arrive at a spot where the larger portionof the river issues from a rocky opening, underthe foot of the opposite hill, and joins thedirect branch, which falls into it, over a ledge ofrocks in a wide cascade. The subterranean riveris said to be the discharge of a katav6thra. Alittle higher up is a conjunction of several smallstreams which sink under the rocks. We continueto follow the right bank of the ravine, amidst planetrees, and soon arrive at a natural bridge formedby the rocks in the river's bed, under which thewater is concealed for the distance of 100 yards.Towards the upper end, a part of the subterraneouscurrent may be perceived through a lateral openingin the rocks, and several small tributariestumble over them, flowing in numerous rills amongthe planes, until just above the natural bridgethey unite and disappear in a great whirlpool.Two hundred yards above this spot occurs thejunction of two other principal branches ; that tothe right, which is the larger though not so broadas the other, rises near Potamia, and flows throughthe plain of Khierasovo and Koliadhes, the othercomes from Ferekisi, where we crossed it near itssources in the road from loannina to Varia. Alittle above the junction is the ruined aqueduct ofNicopolis, built across the ravine of the Ferekisistream, which rushes through the arches of thes2260 EPiRUS. [chap.aqueduct over a stony bed. The beautiful effectof this ruin, fringed with shrubs, and which in themiddle of the ravine is 70 feet high, with a doubletier of arches, 18 feet wide, standing between tworocky, extremely abrupt, and woody mountains,and stretching over a rapid torrent shaded withenormous plane trees, it is easier to imaging thandescribe. The ruin is commonly known by noother name than that of erratic fca/nopaicy or thearches.Besides the principal ruin there are remains oneither bank of another row of arches, which crossedthe ravine obliquely a little higher up the stream,and met the former in an acute angle, from whencebegan the conduit which was constructed alongthe side of the hills nearly as far as Luro. Acrossthe valley of Luro it was probably again necessaryto raise the aqueduct upon arches, though I didnot perceive any vestiges of them. In the plainof Lamari, which the aqueduct crossed, long rowsof the piers, as I have already mentioned, stillremain, and the aqueduct may be traced, fromthence to the western end of the hill of Mikhalltzi,and from thence to NicopoUs. The length was aboutthirty miles. Not a vestige remains in the bed ofthe river of the piers of the aqueduct bc, norv.] EPIRUS. 261can I discover from what sources it was supplied.The aqueduct a c was filled by a stream whichissues from the side of the mountain, at a churchof St. George. In order to reach that place weareobliged to return down the right bank to crossthe united river at the natural bridge, then thebranch from Potamia, and lastly the stream fromthe church, which falls over the side of the mountainwith the utmost rapidity, and supplies derivationsfor turning some mills. The source is inthe mountain behind the mills, and issues in thechurch itself. When the aqueduct was in use,the water was of course conducted into it by anartificial channel ; it now falls the whole height ofthe source above the bed of the river in less thanhalf a mile. From the church we ascend in fiveminutes to the village of St. George \ where wehad intended to rest during the meridian hours,but find that it has been abandoned by the inhabitantson the news of our approach. Recrossingtherefore the Potamia branch, and passingfor half an hour over some heights, we enterthe valley of Potamia, at the end of which, on theright, but not in view, is the village of Sfeliniki ;and directly in front of us the summit of theXerovuni, or Kelberini range, which is just aboveKometzadhes. Having passed some copious sourceswhich join the river, we follow the foot of the hillfrom whence they issue, and reach the bank of theriver, which is here a deep and muddy streamflowing along a marshy valley covered with ricefields. In an hour from St. George, we arrive at"Ayiof Fcwpyioc.262 Epirus. [chap. v.Koliadhes, a village of fifteen houses, now abandonedby its inhabitants on account of the bad airand gnats.All the villages in the valley have summer residenceson the surrounding hills, a common practiceboth in Greece and Asia Minor. The summervillage of Koliadhes I have already noticed asbeing in sight, to the left of the high road fromArtaa to loannina, between Kometzadhes and .Khierasovo is situated in the valleyof the river of Potamia, at the foot of the mountainimmediately over against Koliadhes ; betweenthese and Potamia, near which the river rises,there are six or eight other small villages inhabitedin the season by cultivators of the rice-grounds,but which are all now empty. At a pyrgo atKoliadhes, where we halt, a Papas visits me, theonly person left in the place, and who is losinghis sight by a disease of the eyes exactly resemblingthe ophthalmia of Egypt. At 9 we set outagain, continue to follow the left bank of theriver, and the foot of the hills, from whence issueseveral sources, and at 10 quit the valley, whichstretches considerably higher up, and turn to theright up an opening of the mountain, following atorrent which in some places is thickly shadedwith stunted plane trees, until at 11.20 we arriveat the head of it at Pence Pigadhia. Pursuingfrom hence the ordinary road from Artaa to loinnina,we arrive at the Khan of St. Dhimitri at 2.36,lighted for the last two hours by the moon.CHAPTER VI.EPIRUS, MACEDONIA.Ancient remains near Dhramisius — ^Kalarjftes^-Syrako — VilizaMatziiki — Mount KakardhistaT— Prospect from the summit —Departure from loannina for Prevent — Dhrysko — DbipotamoGotzista — Khrysovitza — tria Kh&nia — M^tzovo — Beratori —Pass of Djankiirtara — Mount Citium — March of Perseus fromElimeia to Stratus — Milia — Kranii — Kiepero— River Venetian— Greveno — River Yistiitza, or Inj^kara, Haliacnum —Siktista — Klisiira of Siatista — Sarighioli — Tt^rissa — Camps ofScipio and Domitius,July 14. — Having received intimation of someremarkable ruins at the foot of Mount Oljrtzika, Iproceed thither this afternoon. The road, leavingRapslsta ^ a quarter of a mile on the left, enters anopening in the ridge which borders the plain ofloannina on the west, passes to the left of Kos-mira', a village situate in the midst of vineyards ;and after having crossed the ridge, descends intoa narrow valley at the foot of Olytzika, on the sideof which mountain are situated die four villages ofMilyngus *, Alepukhori *, Tjerkovista % Dramet-jus, or Dhramishus ^ : in that order from southeastto north-west, and consisting of dispersedhouses prettily situated among gardens on themountain side. The summit of Mount Olj^tzika,like most of the high mountains of this country, isVayj^ara. * T/^epKoPima.KofffAipd. * novi Tpa/i£rfovc, Apa/u-OTOv^ MiXvyyovc. oufVQ,*AK£icovx^pi,264 EPiRUs. [chap.a bare white limestone rock, deeply furrowed bytorrents. Below this naked region there is a beltof firs, and then a cultivable slope.The ruins, called as usual the Paleokastro, arein the valley immediately below Alepukhori, butnearer to Dhramisius. Here are the walls of aHellenic fortress, crowning the summit of a smallrocky height, which rises from the lowest part ofthe vale. The form is an irregular quadrangle,and the inclosed space is not more than equal toa square of 550 feet. Within the enclosure is asmall subterraneous building, supported by rudepilasters, and formerly covered with a roof formedof fiat beams of stone, which have now fallen in.The walls of the fortress, flanked with towers, areextant in some places to the height of 15 or 20 feet,and are from 10 to 15 feet in thickness, accordingas the ground required a greater or less defence.The towers are not uniform in size or shape, norare the intervals between them equal : the faces ofthose at the angles are from 25 to 35 feet long ;lit the intermediate towers they are not so long.The flanks in general are about 15 feet. The irregularityof the fortress, although caused in somemeasure by the nature of the ground, seems tohave been partly adopted for the sake of obtaininga convenient site for an immense theatre, facingthe south, and separated only, at the back, fromone of the angles of the fortress by a passage27^ feet in width. Like the theatre of Sparta, andmany others in Greece, the middle part was excavatedin the hill, and the two ends supported bytwo great masses of masonry, faced with rectangularstones, nicely fitted without cement. ThereVI.] EPiRUs. 265were 65 or 66 rows of seats ^ of which the twolowest were cut in the rock. As usual in Greektheatres, the seats were divided into horizontalportions by predictions or corridors, and verticallyby cuneij separated from each other by radiatingMud, or flights of steps, each step being half theheight of a seat. There were two predictions,dividing the seats into three divisions, besides athird corridor of the same kind at the top of thetheatre : in the upper division were 22 seats, andthere were perhaps an equal number in each ofthe two lower ; but there is some difficulty in ascertainingthis fact, for though the seats all exist,their component blocks are very much displacedby the effects of vegetation or other causes, andare lying in confusion. In the upper division ofthe seats there were twice as many scales as in thetwo lower divisions, as may generally be observed inGreek theatres. Two broad flights of steps conductedfrom the exterior level, on either side of theproscenium, to the middle diploma. The interiordiameter or length of the orchestra* is about 80 feet,and each wing being about 190 feet, the totaldiameter is 460 feet nearly : dimensions whichplace this theatre among the largest in Greece,such as those of Athens, Megalopolis, Sparta, andArgos. It differs, however, from all I have seen,either in Greece or Asia sufficiently preserved toafford a comparison, in having a cava which,very little, if at all, exceeds the semicircle. Inproportion to its diameter, therefore, it was inca-this,and two or three not obtained until I made anotherparticulars of the theatre excavation in the year 1809.and temple here given, wereEPIRUS.[chap.able of containing so many spectators as some ofthose above mentioned'. There are some foundationsof the constructions belonging to the scene,which it would be interesting to excavate.Hellenic Ruins near DhramisiHs.Gaietf«/vJ I ■.,50 100 2001000 /Ml.^ Taking 1ft. tin. for eachwtiing^ this being nearly thebreadth marked in the greatertheatre of Pompeii, the Epirotetheatre might contain 18,000persons seated, and 20,000upon occasion ; which renderscredible the three myriads,sometimes assembled in theDionysiac theatre of Athens,according to a passage in theBanquet of Plato.VI.] Epirus. 267On the north-eastern side of the theatre, andbelow the adjacent wall of the fortress, an enclosure,about two-thirds as large as the fortress itself,was surrounded on the other sides by a wall notmore than half as thick as that of the fortress. Itappears to have had an entrance by the side of atower at its north-eastern extremity, and to havebeen separated by a narrow passage from theeastern side of the theatre. The slightness of thewall, and the remains of two temples in the enclosedspace, evidently show that it was a sacredtemenus, of which the theatre may have formed apart. Of one temple, which stood on higherground than the other, and not far from the theatre,one or two columns only remain in situ; but of thelower temple, which is near the north-eastern endof the perilous, or wall of the temenus, the lowerparts of most of the columns are extant amidst theruins. It was a tetrastyle, with at least 10 columnsin the sides, about 70 feet long, and 25broad, built of a coarse limestone, which is muchinjured by time. At one end of the temple, amongthe ruins, lies a piece of the frieze, ornamentedwith small capita bevis, connected by garlandsformed of an intermixture of the vine with oak-leaves,acorns, and ears of com : the relief is verylow, and roughly executed.Below the temenus was a third enclosure, smallerthan the former, in the shape of an irregular quadrangle,and enclosed to the southward by a wallstill slighter than that of the perilous. Nevertheless,a part of it still stands to a considerableheight ; and at its termination to the south-eastwas a large tower, with the remains of a gate268 Epirus. [chaponone side of it, and on the other a long narrowspace in the lowest part of the valley, enclosedwith the remains of a slight wall. But neitherhere, nor in any other direction, can I find anytraces of town walls, such as were universally employedin the cities of Greece. Nor was thisnarrow valley, deficient in water, and closely surroundedby hills, such a situation as the ancientsusually chose for their towns. As well from thesecircumstances therefore, as from the nature of thebuildings, I conceive them to have composed a*Icpov, and place of public assembly, protected bya fortress ', the dimensions of the latter not beingeven those of a ic^fiii, or small town. Theposition is so nearly central in the country of theMolossij that it was probably a place of commonsacrifice and political union for the use of all thetowns of that division of Epirus. The valley isnow chiefly cultivated with maize. The watersflow to the Kalama. Variadhes is about threehours to the southward, over the roots of MountOljrtzika.Aug. 4. — ^^The afternoon thunder-showers, whichfell at loannina two days out of three during themonths of June and July, and still oftener on theneighbouring mountains, have ceased for the lastten days. The heat reflected from the hill of St.George, on which the upper part of the townstands, as well as frt)m Mount Mitzik^li, whichhas the effect of an immense wall on the oppositeside of the lake, is unmitigated, except by themaestrale, which the former hill in great measure^ ^(fovpioyf or rei^^o^.VI.] Epirus. 269intercepts. The thermometer, about 3 p.m. , rangesfrom 90° to 98° in the coolest places. The wantof rain to carry off the accumulation of filth, whichnothing else ever removes from a Turkish town,begins to infect the air ; and the muddy edges ofthe lake send forth exhalations which render thatquarter unhealthy.This evening at sunset I set out for Kalarj^tes,one of the Vlakhiote towns of Mount Pindus, tothe south-east of loannina ; and in less than threequarters of an hour arrive at a khan, near thesmall village of Katzikd, which is situated nearthe south-western angle of the Lake of loannina,not far from the foot of the hill of Kastiitza. Fromhence, after reposing for a few hours in a dirtycabin, adjacent to the shop of the Khan, we proceedat half-past three, tempo Frances as the Italiansand Levantines call the mode of reckoningused by French and English: follow the hill ofKastiitza, which rises from the southern extremityof the lake ; and leaving it on the left, then passthrough a narrow opening between it and someheights which are connected with the range of Xero-viii, into the valley of Barkumadhi \ which surroundsKastritza, and to the eastward of that heighttouches the lake. Crossing the southern end ofthis valley, and leaving Ardhomista' and twoother small villages to the left, we ascend theridge of Dhrysko, or Drysko*, which separatesliii plain from the vale of the river Artaa. All theland in the plain of Barkumadhi still belongs to270 Epirus. [chap,Turkish beys of Io4nnina, no part of it having yetbecome a tjiftlik of the Pasha. On the ascent ofDrysko, we pass, at 5.15, a large monastery surroundedwith oaks, named Eleokali, which themonks have abandoned on account of the frequentpassage of late of Albanian soldiers by this road.At 6.50 we arrive, at a chapel on the summit ofthe ridge ; descend by a steep and very bad road,and at 8 ford the river Artaa at the junction of atorrent on the left bank, where amidst barrenmountains are a khan, some mills, and a fewfields of maize.A high narrow bridge crosses the river and anotherthe torrent, but little use is made of them in thisseason. The river flows from hence through a verynarrow vale to our right, and soon enters a deepravine. To the left the snow-capped mountains,which stretch from Konitza to Metzovo, are seenabove Mount Mitzikeli. We now climb for anhour one of the steepest ridges of Pindus as far asanother khan under one of the highest peaks, whichi never entirely free from snow, and on the otherside falls to Syrako. Having remained at thiskhan from 9.5 till 4.40, we begin to make thetour of the summit, passing round its southern extremity,and leaving on the right a succession ofcultivated slopes, with rocky intervals betweenthem, which reach to the Artaa. In these slopesare several mills, turned by torrents from themountain. The heights, which rise abruptly fromthe opposite bank of the Artaa, and connect Dhryskowith Mount Xerovuni, are well cultivated by thenatives of twelve villages called the Katzano, orVI.] EPIRUS. 271Tomaro gloria. At half an hour beyond the khan,the side of the mountain is covered with immensefragments of rock, and innumerable smaller piecesthe effects of the fall of a part of the mountainwhich occurred about twelve years ago. My companion,a Kalarytiote, states, that the previous fallof a portion, and the appearance of the rest, gavesufficient warning ; so that no damage ensued, exceptthe destruction of the road. The ruin is half amile in length, and the path through it windingand difficult. The immense rock of Djumerka 'now presents itself in face of us to the southwardthe opening between which and the parallel rangeof Xerovuni displays a fine view of the Gulf ofArtaa, with its shores and the mountains of Xero-nero beyond it. On the nearest part of Tzumerkais seen the village of Amanda ', and a cultivatedtract, sloping northward to a large branch of theArtaa, which before its junction with the mainstream passes through a narrow gorge between twovery high precipices. This branch of the river isformed of three streams, one of which flows fromMatzuki, the middle from Viliza, the third andlargest from Kalar^^tes and Syrako. We now crossoverthe ridge, of which we had been followingthe side, and at 7.15 arrive at a small churchof St. Geoi^e, situated on a narrow summit, threeor four miles to the southward of the peak whichis above Syrako. The church commands a viewof Syr&ko and Kalarj^tes, both covering slopes ofT(ovfAipKa, ' Updfiayra^272 Epirus. [chap.excessive steepness ; the fonder just under thepeaky the latter upon an insulated mountain, occupyinga space between the ridge of Syrako and thestill higher summits to the north and east, whichform the central chain of Pindus. The third ofthe three streams above-mentioned passes betweenthe two towns, which, although only two or threemiles apart in a direct line, require as many hoursto walk from the one to the other. Kdarjrtes,standing on the eastern side of its mountain belowthe summit, is hid by that summit from Syrako.Nothing can be more surprising than the suddenview of these two large towns on arriving at St.George, after travelling the whole day amidst precipices,arid rocks, and desolation. It is particularlyin the present season that the contrast is mostremarkable ; for while the little patches of cultivationwithin view, show nothing but a dry stubble,the gardens among which the houses of the twotowns are dispersed, are maintained in the brightestverdure by numerous rivulets originating in thetowns, or a little above them, and which undoubtedlyguided the first settlers in their choice of thetwo positions. All the surrounding scenery consistsof bare rocks or parched slopes, except to the southward,where a peak rising to the left of the fork ofthe Kalarjrtes and Artaa rivers, is covered from alittle below the summit to the base with a thickforest of firs, mixed in the lower region of themountain with other trees, and thus forming amost beautiful object in front of Alarms. Severalof the lower slopes in the ravines of the riversVI.] EPiRus. 273of Kalarj^tes and Syrako, are clothed with woods :but they form no decoration to the picture in thehigher positions, being hidden by the depth andnarrowness of the ravines ; so that in descendingfrom St. George to the river of Syrako, I was surprisedto find myself suddenly in a thick forest oflinden, maple, cherry, horse-chestnut, oak, elm,ash, beech, sycamore, and hornbeam, mixed withcornel, holly, elder, hazel, and a variety of plantsof lower growth. The hill is so steep that the descentoccupies half an hour by a continued zigzag.At the bottom the stream bounds over the rockswith a loud noise, and in some places forms deeppools which abound in trout ^ ; as all the neighbouringrivers are of a similar description, theSalary tiotes are thus plentifully supplied with thesefish in summer. They are most commonly taken bymeans of quick lime thrown into the head of thepool, which soon brings the intoxicated fish to thesurface. In seasons of rain, nothing can resist thefury of the river : not long since, my Kalarytiotecompanion thus lost, in an instant, some mills andbuildings which had given him a yearly rent of1000 piastres. At the bridge, the road to Syrakobranches to the left up the right bank of the river,until it arrives at a point immediately below thattown, from whence there is an ascent similar tothat which we follow from the bridge to Kalarj^tes.The latter resembles exactly the descent from St.George, excepting that it is not so woody. LikeVOL. I. T -K274 EPiRus. [chap.the descent, it occupies half an hour. At 8.30we arrive in the upper part of the town.Kalarj^tes or Akalarrj^tes, and Syrako or ,are two of the largest of the Vlakhiotevillages, which in number about 500, and nonevery small, are dispersed throughout the mountainsof Epirus Thessaly and Macedonia. Vlak-holivadho, near Olosona, is reckoned the largest,and then Metzovo. We learn from the Byzantinehistory, that the Lakhs, in Greek BXa^oi orBXa)(^i(uraic, occupied so large a portion of Thessalyabout the twelfth century, that the whole countrywas commonly known by the name of MeyoXiiBXa^ia, or Great Wallachia. But it is the traditionof Kalar^tes, that the Vlakhiotes have notbeen settled in this part of Pindus more than 250years, which is very credible, as it is not likelythat they quitted the more fertile parts of Thessalyuntil they felt the oppression of the Turkish conquerors,and their inability to resist it. Theremoval has not been unfortunate for their descendantshave thereby enjoyed a degree of repose,and have obtained advantages which their formersituation could hardly have admitted. Theybegan by carrying to Italy the woollen cloaks,called Cape, which are made in these mountains,and much used in Italy and Spain, as wellas by the Greeks themselves. This opened theroute to a more extended commerce : they nowshare with the Greeks in the valuable trade ofVI.] Epirus. 275colonial produce between Spain or Malta andTurkey, and many are owners of both ship andcargo. The wealthier inhabitants are merchants,who have resided abroad many years in Italy,Spain, or the dominions of Austria or Russia, andwho, after a long absence, return with the fruits oftheir industry to their native towns, which theythus enrich, and, in some degree, civilize. Butthey seldom return for permanent residence tilllate in life, being satisfied in the interval withtwo or three short visits. The middle classes pursuea similar course ; but as their traffic seldomcarries them so far from home as the higher orderof merchants, they return more frequently, andmany of them spend a part of every summer intheir native place. These are chiefly shopkeepersin the towns of Turkey, or artisans, of whom themost numerous are tailors, and workers in gold,silver, and copper. They excel in mounting pistolsand musquets in the Albanian taste, in makingpisans or silver coffee cups, and in embroideringAlbanian dresses. The poorer householders arechiefly carriers or shepherds. At Syrako are afew goldsmiths, who work chiefly at Prevyza andLefkadha ; but there the great body of the peopleare owners of sheep, shepherds, or carriers. Thegardens, and the small quantity of arable landwhich surrounds these towns, are chiefly cultivatedby the women, who reap the harvest as well asperform all the household work, and spin. Hera-chidesPontius remarks, that in Athamania themen tend the flocks, and the women till thet2276 Epirus. [chap.ground' ; and we are here, if not in Athamania,at least very near it, and in a country altogethersimilar.As some of the retired merchants have housesat loannina, and the shepherds drive their flocksin that season to the plains and maritime districts,Kalarj^tes in that season is chiefly inhabited bywomen, children, and priests ; and as the snowlies sometimes five months in the town, or at nogreat distance from it, there is little communicationwith the surrounding country, and it is customaryfor every family to lay in a winter provisionof rice, flour, oil, saltfish, and firewood.Kalarj^^tes and Syrako contain between five andsix thousand souls, besides those who are abroad,amounting to about a tenth of the population.Each town has its iatros, or medical attendant,receiving a fixed salary from the public, and itsdhaskalo, or master of literal Greek ; but the latterteaches scarcely any thing more than the rudimentsof the language, the illiterate parents takinglittle interest in a proficiency, which seems to themunnecessary, unless their children are destined tothe priesthood ; in fact, it adds little to their prospectof success in life.The lower classes of Kalarj^tes (and the same issaid to occur in all the villages of these mountains)preserve, in a remarkable manner, the ancientspirit of independence for which the Greeks were^ *£v rp *A6afidywy x^P9 fJ^ovtri ^c oi AySpiQ, HeracKyeijpyov&t fxkv at yvvaiKi^y vi Pont, in * ABafiav^v,VI,] Epirus. 277so remarkable. They will not easily submit to behousehold servants : and heads of families, who havenot been abroad, are generally served by their wivesand daughters ; those who have been accustomedto different fashions abroad generally take servantsfrom loannina or Trikkala. A Corfiote, who cameto establish himself here as physician, could notfor a long time procure any one to wait upon him,because he made use of a bell, which they saidwas fit only for sheep and goats. On the otherhand their wives are perfect slaves.As a community, their peaceable pursuits havebeen adverse to their retention of that independencewhich their ancestors conquered and longenjoyed in Northern Greece, and to which theiralmost inaccessible retreat in this part of MountPindus would have been extremely favourable,had they been as martial a people as many of theGreek and Albanian mountaineers. But theyhave made little or no resistance to Aljr Pasha,who has been inclined to treat them with lenity,as well from that circumstance, as because therevenue of Kalarjrtes, and of some of the otherprincipal towns, is an appanage of the Valide Sultan,who with her kiaya still enjoys great powerat the supreme court. Aljr regularly accounts,therefore, for the dues to the imperial treasury,and has hitherto endeavoured to avoid all flagrantcause of complaint from the rajahs of these places.The conquest of Suli, however, has of late renderedhim bolder, and the people now complainof the angora, or gratuitous labour of men andhorses, for which they have often been called upon278 BPiRUS. [chap.since the Pasha began to build the castle of Kiafa.The 14,000 piastres, which was formerly theamount of the contributions of Kalarjrtes, havegradually been raised to 45,000, and the town hasbeen lately obliged to increase its public debt by100 purses, which they have borrowed from Turksof loannina at an interest of 15 per cent. Myhost informs me that he pays 170 piastres a year,equal to 12/. or 13/. sterling, in direct contributions.The corn-fields of Kalar^tes, which are chieflyon the northern and eastern sides of the town, andon the face of the opposite mountain in that direction,produce a sufficiency of wheat in favourableyears for about four months' consumption. In thepresent year the harvest has been very bad, andhas scarcely returned double the seed. It is abearded wheat, with short straw, and makes excellentbread. They are supplied with maize, wine,and oil, from Artaa, wheaten flour from Trikkala,and a few articles, chiefly European, from loan-nina.Some of the narrowest terraces and moststony soils are grown with vines ; gapes, apples,and pot-herbs are the principal produce of thegardens. For these and a few ordinary commoditiesand manufactures from loannina, they havea market on Thursdays and Saturdays, which isattended from some of the nearest villages. Thesurrounding mountains furnish an excellent pasturefor sheep in summer, and large flocks arehere tended by Vlakhiote shepherds during thatseason.Such is the steepness of the hill of Salaries,Vi.] Epirus. 279that the topmost houses are at least 500 feet higherthan the lowest, and the vertical streets of thetown are mere zigzag paths formed into steps.On the southern side, by which we approached thetown, the position terminates in a tremendous precipice,the summit of which is so near to thechurch of St. George, on the opposite ridge, thatwords may be heard from the one place to theother ; and the first intelligence is constantly communicatedin this manner, on the arrival of passengersor caravans from loannina, which in winterare sometimes arrested there by a sudden fall of snowfor several days. It is curious to remark with howmuch ease this ri|XoXaXt« ;or distant conversation iscarried on. It is an art which, as well as that ofr^Xo^jcoiria, or of distinguishing distant objects, ispossessed by the Albanians and mountaineers ofGreece in a degree which seems wonderful tothose who have never been required to exercisetheir ears, eyes, and voices to. the same extent.The same qualities were among the accomplishmentsof the heroic ages of Greece, the mannersand peculiarities of which have never been extinctin the mountainous and more independent districtsof this country.The houses of Kalarj^tes are all on a small plan,but generally neat, well arranged, and well furnished,according to Greek ideas of convenience.The hanging gardens which separate them arewatered by streams from numerous fountains,supplying every part of the town with a cold andpure water, of which the Kalarytiotes are justly280 EPiRUs. [chap.proud. The roofs of the houses are covered likethose of Greek mountain-villages in general, withirXajcaic, or lai^e slabs of a limestone, which readilysplits into this form. These are squared more orless accurately according to the opulence of theowner, and in addition to other fastenings, generallyrequire large masses of stone to be laid uponthem, in order to obtain increased resistance tothe furious winds which prevail in this elevatedsituation, and which in the winter often unroof thehouses in spite of all precautions. Every dwellingof the better kind has a j^tifioviKovy or winter apartment,in the lower story ; above which is the principalchamber of reception, generally fitted withwindows of coarse Venetian glass, but otherwiseconstructed and fitted up in that Turkish stylewhich is so little adapted to the climate of thesemountains.The language of the Vlakhiote towns of Pindusdiffers very slightly from that of Wallachia, andcontains consequently many Latin words, derivedfrom the Roman colonists of Dacia. At Kalarj^tesall the men speak Greek, and many of the women ;but the Wlakh is the common language both inthe towns and among the shepherds. The Latinwords are not so numerous as in Italian or Spanish,but the flexions and the auxiliary verbs, in someof their forms, are less changed than in any of thedaughters of the Latin. The Greeks give thefollowing expression as an example of the vocatof the Wlakh, a characteristic in which the Greekitself is not deficient :VI.] Epirus. 281oao, aue^ oi, aua\With the aid of these words, a party of Albanianor Greek palikaria may order their dinners onarriving at a Vlakhiote village.On the north-eastern side of Kalarj^tes, a longdeclivity, which contains the greater part of thecultivable land belonging to the town, falls toa torrent, the middle one of the three tributariesalready described, as forming one of the branchesof the Artaa. On the lowest part of the slope, onthe bank pf the river, stood the Hellenic townwhich possessed this secluded district. The ruinsare in no part extant to any great height, thoughalmost the entire circuit is traceable, consisting ofa loose ill-constructed kind of masonry, of thethird kind, but containing a few large masses ofstone. The site is covered with vineyards in terraces,at the back of which some high rocks werethe upper limit of the town; from the oppositebank of the torrent rises abruptly a rocky height,on the other side of which is Matzuki. A littlebelow the ruins are some mills ; the view from theancient site is extremely confined on every side,except down the river, where the opening showswoody slopes folding over one another, with themountains near Artaa in the distance. The placeis called Viliza, or Vigliza, a modification of theRomaic villa, and like the Latin vigils, from whichThe separate sound of each Italian, attending to the avowedis to be given, as in cent.282 Epirus. [chap.it is immediately derived, may be traced to thesame root as the Hellenic synonym Phyle.The former state of the district of Kalar^tes ispreserved in the following proverb : Kaarpov BiiXitia,yjapiov Mar2[uiciy 'AjcoXappvraic fta^oXa, jccrf ]Sv/»aJCftiirfvrtarnrio, meaning that formerly Viliza was thefortress, Matziiki the town, Akalarrjrtes an outlyingquarter of the town, and Sjnrako a littledetached hamlet. But such is the change, thatthere are now 500 houses in each of the two lastplaces, and in Matzuki only 25. Some years ago(it was before Al Pasha gained loannina) therewere 40 Turkish families at Kalarj^tes, but suchwas the influence of the Christians at that timewith the Valide, that the Turks were removed toVendista, on the opposite side of the Sproutmay be remarked in every part of Greece,that whenever circumstances, which are often occurring,though they are seldom very permanent,favour the industry and security of the Greeks inany particular place, and enable them to acquiresome degree of comfort and opulence, they arenever slow in tempting their tyrants to plunderthem, by their imprudence and vanity, or by theirenvious and contentious disposition. The Vlakfai^ones, who with less native acuteness than theGreeks, are endowed with more steadiness, prudence,and perseverance, are nevertheless like allrepublicans, (for such they may be styled, as wellas the Greeks of the Elefbherokhoria, notwithstandingthe despotism of the supreme government)seldom free from intestine intrigues and divisions.VI.] Epirus. 283The Pash takes care to be well informed of thelocal politics, and allows no good opportunity toescape of turning these, or any other accidentalcircumstances to his own purposes. Not longsince, on discovering that G. T., one of the leadingcitizens, had lent a large sum to the town andwas in great want of a repayment, which the towncould not conveniently make ; the Pasha offeredT. his interference, on condition of his having alarge share. Not many years ago, the Kalar^-tiotes were moved with the desire of having bellsto some of their churches, one of the attributes ofthe temples of the Oriental Christians, of which,because forbidden by the Turks, they are particularlyproud. A15^, though generally very indulgenton the subject of building and repairingchurches, did not omit so good an opportunity ofmaking the Kalarytiotes pay for their vanity, andexacted 15,000 piastres from them for the permissionto have bell.Aug. 12. — At 4.30 this afternoon, I set out,in company with Messrs. John and David Mortier,with the intention of climbing to the summit ofthe peak of Mount Pindus called Kakardhitza, orKakardhista^ which bears S.£. from Kalarytes,and has the appearance of being the highest pointThese two terminations aie really has. The latter ter*generally convertible : the first mention was common in thewas unknown in Hellenic, and northern parts of Greece, inhas been adopted by the mo gentile adjectives, as, Orestes,dem Cheeks, from the Sclavonic Lyneestse.ishf which pronunciation it gestEPiRus. [chap.in the whole range. Descending into the ravineof the torrent of Viliza, we cross it at some millsa little below the Palea Hora, or ruins beforedescribed. One of these mills is for com, andanother for fulling the skuti, or cloth for makingthe cloaks called KaVacc, the chief manufactureof the Vlakhiotes. The torrent, bridge, and buildings,overhung by precipices, form a beautifulpiece of mountain scenery. We cross the ridgewhich lies between the river of Viliza and by a tedious zigzag ascent and descent, andarrive, in 1.45 from Kalarjrtes, at Matzuki, whichis situated in a hollow immediately at the foot ofKakardhista, where a torrent collected from thegreat summits around, rattles along the ravine,and proceeds to join the streams from Viliza,Kalar^'tes, and Syrako. At the back of the village,towards the north-east, rises the steep ridgewhich connects Kakardhista with the summitstowards Metzovo, called Peristeri and Tzikurela:like all the others, it is a white bare mass of limestone.The houses of Matzuki belong chiefly topersons, who keep shops for the sale of capons anda few of the other productions of Greece, in theislands of the Adriatic and Ionian seas, or in themaritime towns of Italy. The two most opulent oftheir traders are settled at Corfu. Very few ofthe men are now in the village. Those who resideare employed in the manufacture of capons,or as carriers with their mules, or in cultivating afew )^ci>pa^ia, or fields of com and maize, on themountain side, or in the care of sheep and goats.The person of whom I have hired a mule for theVI.] EPiRUS. 286expedition, who brought it to Kalarj^tes, and accompaniedme on foot, kept a shop for capons,and other commodities, during seven years at cadi,and for another three years at Leghorn. Hewas at Rome when the French entered it the firsttime. Most of these people, as may be supposed,speak Italian. They ascribe the ruin of their townto the quartering of Albanian soldiers ; the placebeing more accessible to this pestilence, than Ka-laertesand Syrako. The annual contributions ofthe village amount to 9000 piastres, of which 6000are paid to Ais Pasha 500 to the Turkish Subashifor staying away, and the rest for the interest ofmoney borrowed by the village, and other localcharges. The burthen to each house increases withthe diminution of the population : so that one ofthe proprietors of our mules has paid this year, asthe head of a family, 110 Spanish dollars, or morethan twice as much as some of the larger householdersat Kalarjrtes, and has been obliged toborrow the money at loannina, at twenty percent,interest. Beldame, who was made tutor tothe Emperor Alexander, and his brother Constantine,by the Empress Catharine, was a native ofMatzuki. He was a poor merchant at Leghornwhen Alexis Orloff took him into his service, andcarried him to St. Petersburg. Our hosts of thepoor cottage in which we lodge, priding themselveson being /ucao^payjcoc, or half Franks intheir manners, endeavour to prove it by givingus a covered table at supper, with plates, knivesand forks. At 2 in the morning we set out to scalethe mountain.286 EPiRUS. [chap.August 13. — The ascent being very rugged,our progress is slow ; the route crosses many smalltorrents, which flow to the right into a ravine,lying between this mountain and the pine-coveredpeak conspicuous from Kalar^tes, which connectsat its southern extremity Kakardhlsta with Tzu-merka. At 4.30 the road being no longer practicablefor mules, we mount on foot, during anotherhour, by a very steep ascent, where loose stonesand earth, or grass dripping with dew, carry thefeet half way back at every step. Towards thesummit are some deep patches of snow, and a hoarfroston the grass. At a few minutes after sunrisewe reach the highest point.To the east the view is rendered indistinct bythe sun being in that direction, and by an atmospherenot perfectly clear. There is a haze likewiseover the sea on the opposite side ; but (Ms isthe ordinary state of the atmosphere of Greece inthe middle of summer, and a clear day in winteris much more favourable for obtaining a sight ofdistant objects. Nevertheless we distinguish Corfu,Catalonia, and Mount Voidhia in the Morea. Tothe north. Mount Tomor, and the summits betweenit and Bitolia, are seen, particularly a peakbetween Kastoria and Figuring, to the right ofwhich are those more eastward, towards Vodheniand Verria. The horizontal arch between Nee.and S. is bounded by Olympus Ossa Plan,Othrys^ and the mountains of ^toUaj of whichlatter the peaks called Veluti and Viena are themost conspicuous. The remotest point which Ican recognize is Voidhia, or PanocAatctcm, in theVI.] EPiRus. 287Morea ; the direct distance of which is about 100geographical miles. The ridges along the westerncoast from Xeromero to Khim&ra, are naturallymuch more distinct. To the north-westthe geography of the valleys of the Upper Cousinwhich Arghyrokastro, Tepeleni, Premedi andKonitza are situated, is well defined, though noneof those places are distinguishable. Immediatelybelow, us, to the east, are the mountains of Aspro-potato, a confused mass, resembling the waves ofa stormy sea ; and to the right, those of 'Agrafa,of the same description : the highest summit ofthe former is nearly in a line with Pelium. Olympushas the appearance of being the highest pointin sight. Of those in the Indian ridge, noneseems to rival Kakardhista, unless it be a summitnear Samaria. Its height above the sea is probablyabout 7000 feet.A great part of the course of the Aspro or Achelousis traceable from Kakardhista, though the rivercannot be distinguished in consequence of the depthof the valleys in which it is encased, or the hazinessof the atmosphere hanging over them. Itsreputed sources are at Khaliki, a Vlakhiote villageof 200 houses situated midway between and M^tzovo, on the south-eastern side ofMount Tzikur^la, but not in sight from hence.As the name Khaliki, which is not uncommon inGreece, is generally a corruption of the HellenicXaXfcic, indicating the former existence of a Chalcisin the same place, it serves, in the present instance,to illustrate an hitherto unexplained passage of288 EPiRus. [chap,Dionysius the geographer, in which he evidentlyintended to remark that the Achelous rose atChalcis ^ After receiving several streams fromthe mountains around Khaliki, the river followsthe narrow ravines included between the summitsin the district of Aspropotamo, and those of Kakar-hist, Tzumerka, and Radhovisi. On the slope ofone of the mountains in the last-mentioned sub-districtof Artaa, are seen the lands of Vrestenitzaabove the right bank of the river, near the bridgeof Koraki, which is in the road from Artaa to Trik-kala, through 'Agrafa. From thence the Aspro flowsfor about 20 miles through a country, in which thegreat summits are more distant on either side, afterwhich it again skirts the foot of a lofty rock orthe Tzumerka chain, which is named Kal4na, andis a conspicuous object from Pr^vyza. Here theriver is again crossed by a bridge, called that ofTetama, from a monastery on the left, and a fewmiles lower is joined by its principal tributary.The united stream then passes between perpendicularrocks into a country of woody heights, ofsecondary elevation, until it emerges near the ruinsof Stratus into the great aeolian plain. In almostevery direction the mountains hide the valleys ;Kakardhista being in the centre of the most mountainouspart of Greece. The only plain in sight isthat of loannina, with a small portion of that of Trik-kala: loannina is the only town. The immense preciseBtraac r hero XaXW^oc eptrutvDionyi. Perieg. v. 496,VI. J Epirus. 289pieces of Tzum^rka appear considerably below us :they hide Artaa and all the Gulf, except a smallpart of its eastern extremity near Makrinoro, whichmakes its appearance between Tzum^rka and as the mountain of Radhovlsi is named.Kakardhista is quite bare of trees or shrubs, butfurnishes a fine short herbage to the very summit.A sharp rocky ridge, which connects it with thepeak of Person, separates the course of thewaters flowing respectively to the Artaa and to theAspro, and divides the district of Malakassi in thekara of lodnnina from that of Aspropotamo inTiikkala. The latter sub-district extends fiftymiles down, the river from its sources, comprehendingthe sides of the adjacent mountain oneither side, and separating first loannina and thenArtaa from 'Agrafa. The right of pasturage is soaccurately defined between loannina and Aspro-p6tamo, that the flocks of one district are notallowed to enter the other. Kakardhista itselffalls steeply into a deep ravine which lies betweenit and another lower but abrupt and rocky crest,which slopes to the Approvedescend to a mantua, or sheep-fold, supportedon each side by one of the palikaria, whohave accompanied us from Kalar^tes ; and who,though with tapers and pistols at their girdles,and a musket slung over their shoulders, nevermake a false step, though bearing the weight ofanother person. Some goat's milk, with breadwhich we brought with us, furnishes our breakfastThe annual profit of a yew in these mountains isreckoned as follows : two piastres for the cheeseVOL. I. u290 EPiRus. [chap.and milk, four piastres for the lamb, and half apiastre for the wool ; out of which there is a cleargain of five piastres. From the mantua we reachMatzuki in two hours, leave it at 6 p.m., and intwo hours and a half return to Kalar^tes. Sosteep is the northern side of the hill of Matziiki,that it takes longer to descend than it had requiredyesterday to mount it.The shepherds of these mountains, as well asthose who tend their flocks around loannina, playon a pipe (in Greek ^Xoyipa, in Albanian full),which resembles that described by Theocritus, inasmuchas it has nine holes on the side, and ispartly closed at either end with wax \ But someof the modem pipes of Epirus have a singularwhich has not been noticed by any author, beingmade of the thigh of the vulture ', or of the eagle ',which are bones of extreme hardness, and of asize well adapted to a shepherd's pipe. Thesematerials may be more common now than anciently,because gunpowder has given the modesthe power of bringing down such birds more easilythan could formerly have been done by means ofarrows. In the mountain pastures in every partof Greece, the shepherds may be heard, as the samepoet has described, pouring forth a wild melodiousstrain from their pipes, amidst the murmuring of thewaters, and the whispering of the wind through theAevKoy iropoi^ rx^c<rov too mrti, iovr Aptifdiy.Theocr. Id. 8, ▼. 18, 21.6py€a, • der^c*VI.] Epirus. 291trees. Theocritus has particularly referred to thepine as producing this sound \ And the pine isdoubtless the most psithyristic of trees. It is surprisingthat he has not noticed also the aromaticodour which emanates from it in summer.Aug. 31. — Leaving loannina this forenoon forGrrevena^ I follow the causeway between the lakeand the foot of the hill of Kastritza, and havingcrossed the plain of Barkumadhi, arrive in twohours at the khan of Ardhomista, near the foot ofMount Dhrysko. The plain is covered with maizeand melons, of both which the harvest is near athand. After resting an hour and a half, we quitthe khan, ascend in three quarters of an hour theridge of Dhrysko, and in another quarter arrive atthe khan of that name on the eastern face ofthe mountain, which is a continuation of MountMitzikeli, and derived, undoubtedly, its name'from the oaks still growing here, and which ancientlymay have been larger and more numerousthan they are now. The khan seems to have beenplaced here for the sake of a copious source ofwater, which the tatar, who accompanies me, andwho has had long experience, declares to be thebest between loannina and Constantinople. Oneof his corps brought letters a few days ago iron*A world Toil rayai^i fuXlaieraif hSv ii ical rvTheocr. Id. 1. v. 1.Apvtfroc» a place of oaks, or by abbreviation perhaps fromipvoKto^ shaded with oaks.u2292 EPiRus. [chap.Constantinople in four days and a half : thus performingtwo hundred computed hours, or six hundredmiles of road distance, in one hundred andeight hours, including stoppages. To be appointedto such a journey as mine, is to be wellpaid for a comparative state of repose, and is considered,therefore, as a favour conferred upon thetatar by the Pasha.After a twenty minutes' halt we continue ourdescent, and in another twenty minutes arrive atthe junction of the two great branches of the Artaa :one flowing from Zag6ri, the other from Metzovo.The place and neighbouring valley are hencenamed Dhipotamo. A bridge of three arches,called the Lady's Bridge \ crosses the Zagoribranch, which is the larger of the two, and is composedof a great number of streams collected inthe hollow between Mount Mitzik^li and the parallelhigher range, or central ridge of Pindus. Onthe side of the mountain of Syrako, above Dhipo-tame, stands the village of Gotzista, divided intotwo makhalas, and surrounded with cultivatedslopes. A point above it, which is separated by aravine from the great mountain, is the site of aHellenic fortress or fortified come, the walls of whichinclose the summit and face of the hill.In winter the road, after crossing the bridge,follows the right bank of the river of Metzovo.Instead of crossing the bridge, we ford theunited stream, and then ride along the bedof the Metzovo branch, which, though contoyt^ifpt r^c Kvpa^.VI,] Epirus. 293sitting entirely of loose stones, is a saving intime,the line being shorter than along the ajcpacc,or rugged banks. Occasionally, however, wecross some of the acres. Like all the roots ofthe mountains bordering these valleys, they arecovered with small oak, ilex, pimari, and a varietyof shrubs, among which the lentisk is themost common. At 6 we arrive at a half-built kulaof the Pasha, on the right bank of the river, whereare a few fields of kalambokki. In winter, the roadreaches this point from the bridge of the Lady, bycrossing and recrossing two other intermediatebridges. On the heights to the left stands Khry-sovitza, beautifully situated among the woods, andnoted for its monastery of the Panaghia, whosefestival on the 23d of August is resorted to by allthe neighbourhood, particularly from loannina.At 6.35 we halt for the night at the Three Khans \situated on a height overlooking the right bank ofthe river, in a part of the valley where its directionand that of the river change from aboutEsse. to E. by N. The three khans may possiblybe the successors of three Roman taverns ;for Tres Taverns is a name repeatedly occurringin the Roman itineraries; and although thisroad is not found in any of them, the generalstructure of the country is a sufficient proof thatthe pass of Metzovo was in all ages one of thechief thoroughfares of Northern Greece. Thesummit named Tzikurela, or Tzukurela, was immediatelyabove us on the right, about half wayrk Tria Xcfyia.294 Epirus. [chap.up the valley. To the tiorth-eadtward is the otherpeak, called Peristeri ; beyond which is the summitabove Khaliki, of the same height nearly asthat of Syrako, and situated midway betweenPerson and the southern end of the Zyg6s ofM^tzovo. The hills around the Three Khansare covered with vineyards and wood* At lessthan a mile beyond them, at the head of a slopeof vineyards reaching to the river, is the villageof Mutinous, and on a height on one side of thevineyards some remains of ancient walls calledLakhanokastro. The masons of Metzovo resort toitfor the sake of the tiles which they find there,tt was perhaps a Roman military station, for thedefence of the pass, which is here more open thanin any other part.Sept. 1 . — Our route continues along the riverbed,crosses it several times, and at intervalspasses over its woody and rocky banks by an execrableroad. The village of Grevendfsta is situatedamong some cultivated slopes on the side of themountain to the right. In seventy minutes wecross to the right bank by a bridge, a little abovewhich is the junction of two branches of the river,one coming from Metzovo, the other from a valleyto the right, in the direction of the mountain ofKhaliki, which thus gives rise both to the Arach-thus and Ackelous. We ascend along the side ofthe mountain which overhangs the right bank ofthe Metzovo branch of the river, and at 8 a.m., intwo hours from the khans, arrive at the northernand larger of the two makhalas, into which Met-novois divided by the ravine. The northern isVI.] Epirus. 296called ProBilio', as being exposed to the sun,while the southern being shaded by the mountainon which it stands, is named Anilio *. The roadto Trikkala passes through the latter, and thenascends the Zygos', or ridge, as a long woodymountain is named which has a north and southdirection, and which separates the sources of theArachihus from those of the PeneittSj connectingKakardhista and the ridge of Syrako with theZagori summits and those near Konitza and Samaria.The streams descending from the westernslope of the Zyg6s, are the principal feeders of thetorrent which separates the two makhaladhes, ofM^tzovo, and which we followed from the bridge.There are about seven hundred houses in the twodivisions of the town, which, together with ,a village on Ae eastern side of the Zygos,and two others is an appanage of the Valide Sultan.Formerly, in consideration of the expensesto which the Metzovites were subject from thepassage of soldiers and travellers, they were liableonly to the Charade, and to the payment of fivethousand piastres a year to the Valide's agent, forwhich advantage they were bound to ensure thesafety of the Pass, and to maintain a body ofarmatoli under a captain. The Vezir, by payinga laisser sum to the Valide than she before received,has obtained the Mukata, and exacts fromthe Metzovites fifty-five purses, besides obligingthem to maintain an Albanian guard, nominated296 EPiRus. [chap.by himself. The adjoining slopes produce wheat,barley, and rye ; but the wheat is not more thanenough for the consumption of a month or two,and the barley still more insufficient, on accountof the demand of passengers for their cattle. Theyhave some large flocks of sheep and goats ; but thegreater part of the men, as in the other mountainvillages on the borders of Epirus and Thessaly,seek their fortunes as labourers, artizans, and shopkeepers,in other parts of Turkey, or as merchantsin Germany, Hungary, Russia, or the Mediterranean.Those who are not too distant, visit theirfamilies for a short time in the summer. Theclimate, in winter, is described as more severeeven than that of Kalarytes.At 2.25 we quit Prosilio, and mounting the hillfor half an hour, arrive in a plain called Politic,inclosed between the heights of M^tzovo andMavro-vuni, which is a long mountain coveredwith pines, lying in a north and south direction,and forming a northerly continuation of the Zygos.On its slope near the plain is a place called by theVlakhi Beratori, a name supposed to be a corruptionof Imperatoriaia. Wrought stones, coins, andsimilar remains of antiquity, are found there, aswell as appearances indicative of some process ofmetallurgy having been carried on in the place.These vestiges, combined with the name, seem toshow that a Roman settlement existed here earlierthan that of the J^adan or Vlakhiote colonies, whosedescendants now occupy these mountains. Onthe opposite side of the plain to Berat6ri standsa beech-tree, called in the Vlakhiote tongue Agon.] 2PIRU8. 297scripta, from some appearance of inscriptions onit. The plain produces in summer some rye, anda great abundance of excellent grass, all which isconsumed by the cattle of M^tzovo or those of passengers.During the remainder of the year theplain is either covered with snow or is in a stateof marsh. There are no sheep or cattle upon it,though it is now dry ; the soil apparently is good.The small streams which water it flow to thenorth, through the district of Zagori, towardsKonitza, and are therefore the extreme tributariesof the Vous.Having traversed the plain for an hour, weascend a ridge connected with the northern endof Mavro-viini, and covered towards the summitwith pines \ and at 4.30 arrive at the guard of theTjankurtara derveni, after having passed a largekhan of that name a little below the summit of thepass. At the derveni there is nothing but a temporaryshed. Here the mountains Mitzikdli andOiytzika are seen in one direction, and in the otherMount Burino, with the mountain of Siatista to theleft of it, and nearer the lower hills about Grevend.After a halt of fifteen minutes we descend fromthe derveni through a dense forest of large pines,remarkable for the straightness of their stems. Onthe ascent where the trees are not so close, someof them are fifteen feet in circumference, and sixtyor eighty feet high : several of them have beenstruck with lightning, and are burnt at the top.wtvKoi, This word is applied bj the Greeks to the pinessylvestris as well as the maritima.298 spiRUB. [chap.There is reason to believe from Livy, followingPolybius that this part of Mount Pindus bore theappellation of Citium, probably from a town ofthat name which stood in some part of the passleading from Green to loannina. Mount Citiumis mentioned by the historian in his relation of theexpedition of Perseus, when he led an army oftenthousand infantry and three hundred horse toStratus, in the winter of the year 170—169 B. C.On the third day from EUmeia, he reached MountCitium, where he was much impeded by the deepsnow, and with difficulty found sufficient space forencamping. The fourth day, in which his beastsof burthen particularly suffered, terminated at atemple of Jupiter Niches ; and the fifth, whichwas a very long march, at the Arachthus, wherehe was detained by the swollen state of the riveruntil he had constructed a Image. At the end ofone day's march from thence he was met by Archiethe strategic of the italians, halted on theiH>rders of j£tolia, and on the following day encampedon the Achelous, near Stratus ^ Perseusappears to have marched through Epirus becausethe Molossi' had invited him, and because theAthamanes, who were on the more direct route,were in alliance with the Romans. As it is evidentLiy. 1. 43, c. 21. were at that moment''Yocantibus Epirotisy" is of Pius Claudius before Pha-all that Livy says ; but Mo note ; and the Molossi resistedlosses was the only part of Epithet Romans to the last : thesenu which it was necessary for therefore were clearly the £pi-perseusto enter; the Thesproti rotes intended by Livy,vi.] EPiRus. 299that he descended upon the right bank of theArachthuSy since otherwise there would have beenno necessity for crossing it ; and as he made onlytwo marches from his bridge to Stratus, there canbe little doubt that he crossed the river not farabove Artaa, and that his route from Mount Citiumwas either through Zag6ri into the plain of losingor through the same district in a more southeydirection to Mount Dhrysko, the site perhaps ofNicdBUMy and from thence by the Tomarokhoria.In either case it follows, from the geographicalconstruction of the country, that during the longmarch terminating on the right bank of the Arach-thus, he pursued the course of that river, andduring all that day perhaps was seeking for apassage. He then, probably, passed through themodem Rhadhovisi to the Achelotts, or by thevalley of Komb6ti into that of the PetitaruBy butavoiding Ambracia, which was in the hands of theRomans.After following for half an hour a small river,we arrive, at 5.40, at Milk, a Vlakhiote village offorty families, situated in the midst of the forest,on the bilk of the stream. A few com and maize-fieldsdispersed on the hills around, and severalmills on the river side, are all the property of thevillage, except the cattle, which they employ ascarriers. We halt ten minutes, and then follow agood horse-path along die banks of the samestream, in a ravine bordered by a continued forestof pines ; and at 7.20 quit the river, which hereturns to the left of our route in a northerly directionalong the foot of a ridge, which is thickly300 EPiRUS. [chap.covered with pines, mixed occasionally with beechesand a few horse chestnuts. The numerous smallcaravans which we meet, show that this is one ofthe great lines of traffic between JEpirtu and Macedonia.At 7.30 we arrive at Kranid, a Vlakhiotevillage of fifty neat cottages, pleasantly situatedin an opening of the forest, amidst fields of maizeand other corn, fenced with a well-made palpitating.The scene has an appearance of comfort andsuccessful industry seldom seen in Greek or Turkishvillages : but, unhappily for these poor Vlakhiotes,their village has lately become one of Al Pasha'stjiftliks. The com, after deducting the Vezir*sportion, suffices only for a small part of the consumptionof the inhabitants, whose means of subsistenceare chiefly derived from the cheese of theirsheep and goats ; from the wood which they cut inthe forest and transport to lamina and othertowns ; and from the profit of their horses andmules, which are let to traders and travellers.The master of the house in which I lodge, whopossesses two horses and two oxen, formerly kepta shop at Smyrna, Constantinople, and Salonika ;and now employs himself in transporting wood toloannina, Green, Larissa, and Trikkala, bywhich he is just able to pay the twenty per cent,interest on the money he has been obliged toborrow.Sept. 2. — This morning we arrive in half anhour at the summit of a ridge facing Kranid to theeastward, just as the sun is rising behind the broadOlympus as Homer so properly describes thatmountain. The range which unites it with PindtUfVI.] BPtRUS. 301and at the foot of which are the towns of Siatistaand KastoHa, is seen stretching from Olympus tothe north-westward. Our road is well beaten, andwinds agreeably through a forest of pines and oaks,gradually descending until at the end of one hourand fifty minutes from Kranid we pass, at 7.30,through Kieper6, one of the small Vlakhiote villages,of which we have seen several on either sideof our road. At Kieper6 men and women are employedin threshing rye *, by driving a sledge withone man standing upon it, round the threshing-floor.The huts of the Vlakhiotes are well built, andneatly plastered with earth : and to the travellerafford better shelter than the cottages of a similarclass among the Greeks and Albanians, the innerapartment being well protected against cold andrain in winter, and most of the cottages having agallery in front, closed at either end ; which is nottoo cool for a lodging in the fine season, when theinner part of every house, not excepting those ofthe Vlakhi, swarms with vermin.From Kiepero, having descended rapidly theroots of the mountain where fields of com andvines, fenced with palisades, are intermixed withwoods consisting of oaks of various kinds, andwhere the soil, like this side of Mount Pindus ingeneral, seems capable of a productive cultivation,we arrive at 8.40 at the junction of two rivers.The larger is that which we followed down thevale of Mili4, and left at Urania, taking there aturn to the left of our route ; the other proceeds302 BPIBU8. [chap.from the woody sides of Pindus on our right to thesouthward. A little below the junction a bridgecrosses the united stream, which then flows eastwardover a rocky bed of limestone, composed ofthin flakes lying vertical to the horizon, along avalley closely bounded by undulated downs, likethose which border the Oranges near Hama, butwith banks not so high. Though now shallow, theriver is wide, and in winter impetuous. It is calledVenetian. We follow the right bank for a shortdistance under a woody hill, then pass below aheight of bare rock washed by the river, and afterwardsalong a narrow vale which is grown withstunted oaks and wild pears, and is bounded bywoody hills, or irregular downs of fine com land,a description of country which continues to a considerabledistance below Greveno. At 9 we haltat the Khan of Venetian, which has lately beenbuilt at the expense of a Tutunji, or smoke-master,of the Vezir, and stands on the river-side at afountain of excellent water, issuing out of the sideof the hill. The charge for eggs, butter, melons,water-melons, bread, ssdt, red pepper, and brandy,is about sixpence a head, which I have some difficultyin persuading my tatar is not unreasonable.Departing at 10.15, we cross the river, andhaving followed its left bank for a quarter of anhour, traverse some downs to a much smallerstream, which, having also crossed, we immediatelyascend, at 11.30, to the Metropolis of thebishopric of Grevena^ where stand the cathedralVI.] Epirus. 303church and palace of the bishop, surrounded bytwenty Greek houses. The bishop I left at loannina.The Turkish Makhald of Greveno is a mile distantto the north-eastward,, and though it containsonly eighty families, is the chief place of Greenwhich in the plural number comprehends a greatnumber of small Turkish villages and tjiftliks.The country resembles Northern Europe morethan Epirus or the other parts of Greece, consistingof an undulated surface, well supplied withsources of water, intersected by numerous streams,and diversified with beautiful groves of oak andother timber trees. Nor is the soil inferior to theaspect, but would produce com in great abundance,if population and security were here in anymoderate proportion to natural advantages. Themany irpay^iora ^oj>r&»^€va, or loaded horses andmules, which we have met on the road fromMetzovo, and the far greater part of which werecharged with flour, show that even now it suppliesEpirus and the islands with bread.The Venetian and river of Greene join theVistritza, separately, to the eastward near thefoot of Mount Burino ; after which the united riverwinds round the southern extremity of that mountainto Servia, and having passed that town, flowsnorthward through narrow valleys and deep chasmsin the great Olympian range, until it emerges nearBerrkcsa, which town still preserves its ancientname. There can be no doubt that this greatriver, which the Turks call Inje4Lar4«6u, is theancient Haliacmon.The largest villages in the district of Green304 BPiRtTS. [chap.are Aydhela and Periv61iOy Inhabited by Vlakhiotes,and each consisting of about 300 houses. Theystand near each other on the eastern side of thegreat ridge to the W.S.W. of Greene, whenceproceeds one of the branches of the Ven^tiko,which is joined before it enters the plains by thosefrom Spilio and Kranid* The Turks of Preventoccupy, as usual, the lower and richer lands. Thelargest of their villages are Tjurkli and Kr^fdssa,not far from the river which separates the districtof Green from that of Anaselitza. To the southward,towards Stagus, Grevend extends six hoursover unproductive hills, where the villages areneither lai^e nor numerous.Sept 4. — From Green to Siatista. At 6.35 wedescend in a quarter of an hour from the Metropolisto the Musulman quarter, which has a ruinousand wretched appearance, like all the Turkishvillages of Greece. After following the left bankof the river for a quarter of an hour, we turn to theleft across an undulated country, intersected bynarrow valleys, where the cultivated land is mixedwith woods of oaks. Neither the olive nor themulberry for the silkworm, are grown in thiscountry, which produces scarcely any thing butgrain and cattle, with a little wine; but carts,which are not to be met with in the greatplains of Artaa, loannina, or Arghyr6kastro, areused in agriculture ; they are drawn by twooxen, run upon four solid trucks, and have asquare space for the load, inclosed within wattledsides.At 7.45 we pass to the left of the small TurkishVI.] MACEDONIA. 305village of Kubla, and at 8.30, opposite to anothersimilar hamlet called Dorado, v/e cross a smallbranch of the Vistritza. From thence the roadtraverses a rich and pleasant country of the samedescription as before, but little cultivated, untilat 9.30 we arrive at a khan, and a high narrowbridge of six arches called Pasha Kiupri, whichcrosses the Vistritza just at the point where, afterhaving pursued an easterly course, it turns to thesouth along the foot of Mount Burino.At 10.15 we quit the khan, and ford the river aquarter of a mile above the bridge, then immediatelyleaving to the right the road to Vena and Servia,we ascend the slope of the mountain of Siatista,having the Turkish village lankovo a little on theleft An opening between the mountain of Siatistaand Mount Burino shows the mountain of Verria,the ancient Bermius^ Soon afterwards we enterthe vineyards of Siatista, and mounting a rockyhill, arrive at the principal makhala called n yi^paat 11.45. After some delay we are sent to the lowerquarter, named yupavii, from whence I am conductedback again to the Hora, to the house of Kyr N.,one of the archons, and nephew of the bishop ofSiatista, whose ordinary residence is here, but whohappens at present to be at Selitza. His title isbishop of Sisanium and Satista^ the vulgar pronunciationof which is Shatsta. His superior isthe archbishop of 'Akhridha.The town, which contains about 500 houses, isHerodotus. ]. 8, c. 138. * rov ZiffaWov icai r^c ^Wa-Strabo p. 880. nice or 2car/9nfc>VOL. I. X306 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.situated upon a narrow level, between the upperand lower heights of a high rocky mountain, at thefoot of which extends a large tract of vineyards.From this fruit the Siatistans^ make some of thebest wine in Rumili, and which has an extensivesale in Macedonia and Thessaly but is seldomsent into Epirus on account of the difficulty oftransport over the Pindus. The wine is of foursorts : — 1. The vXiov^vov, or sun-dried*, which isa mixture of white and red grapes, left for eightdays in the sun, or for six weeks in a coveredbuilding, after which the produce is a white sweetwine, of strong body and high flavour. 2. A dry,white wine. 3. A dry, red wine. 4. The ai/^tOcvov,or wine of Absinthium, which is made also in otherparts of Greece, and is flavoured with a species ofArtemisia, laid among the grapes when placed inthe press. This wine is sweet and high flavoured,but not the better for the wormwood. The Statisticskeep their wines three, four, five years,and sometimes more. Each considerable proprietorhas a wine-press, and there are cellarsunder all the larger houses, exhibiting the agreeablespectacle of butts arranged in order, as incivilized Europe. The most stony soils are heldto produce the best wine. The grapes this yearhave not attained their full growth, in consequenceof the want of rain, and the vintage, it is expected,will be small in quantity, though good in quality.01 Scariffravoi.The Tuscan Asiatic seems time instead of the participle,to be the same word in the colic It originated probably in theform, and in that of the adjec- Greek colonies of Etruria.VI.] MACEDONIA. 307I was not a little surprised to observe the proofs ofdrought in the appearance of the vineyards, theweather having been very different in Epirus. Itshows the great atmospheric difference between thetwo sides of Mount Indies. Besides their mine, theSiatistans have to boast of the excellence of theirmutton, fed on the delicate herbage of their limestonemountain ; and of an abundance of game.The hares are even troublesome, being so numerous,that when the snow lies upon the vineyards,as it often does in the winter for many days together,it is a common custom to go in pursuit of themwithout dogs, and to kill them with sticks, halffamished as they then are, and unable to run. Alittle earlier in the season they afford good sport,and coursing is a common amusement of the Statistics.Our mode of killing partridges on thewing they are not accustomed to, nor have I seenit in any part of Greece. The birds, indeed, whichare all of the red-legged species, are larger, longerin their flight, and wilder than ours ; and it is notvery easy to shoot them. To catch them in netsis the common practice in Greece, but they areseldom seen for sale in the markets. They aremore abundant however in Macedonia and Epirusthan in Southern Greece.Almost every family in Siatista has one memberof it residing as a merchant in Italy, Hungary,Austria, or other parts of Germany, and there arefew of the elders who have not spent ten or twelveyears of their lives in one of those countries. Germanis of course very generally spoken, and Italianalmost as much. The houses are convenient,x2308 Macedonia. [chap.clean, and well furnished, and the people morecurious in their tables than any I have met withinGreece. This, as the stipendiary physicianof the place observes to me, is almost the onlysource of disease, so healthy is the air and situation.But they drink, he remarks, rather toomuch of their own good wine, of which one of hispatients is an example, who is now dying of theexpects of a fall from his horse, after an indulgenceof that kind. This physician's name is Paul Renaud,son of a Frenchman, who was attached to theEnglish Consulate at Zante. His brother is nowFrench Commissaire in that island, and there wasa third brother in the English East India service,who rose to be agent at Busra. All this, which Ihappened to know, was news to M. Paul, who,having written to his brothers some years ago andreceived no answer, had long been ignorant of thefate of them both.The Siatistans complain bitterly of the oppressionsof Aljr Pasha. They say, that not contentedwith robbing those who have, he puts in prisonthose who have not, and thus succeeds sometimesin extracting money from their relatives.The ordinary annual payments, regular andirregular, amount to five hundred purses, besideswhich the bishop makes the Vezir an annualoffering of 4000 piastres, 2000 each halfyear. Such has been the practice for the lasttwelve years. Like the Kalarytiotes, the Siatistanshave lately been obliged to supply workmen andhorses for the castle of Suli. When Aljr makes atour round this part of his territory, he never failsVI*] MACEDONIA. 309to visit this place. The Archons generally meethim in the plain, and offer perhaps twenty purses,begging him not to come into the town. He receivesthe present with smiles, promises that hewill not put his friends to inconvenience, afterwardscomes a little nearer, informs them that noprovisions are to be had in the plain, and afterbeing supplied upon the promise of not enteringthe town, quarters, on them, in the course of a dayor two more, with his whole suite, perhaps forseveral days, nor retires until he has received afresh donation. In these progresses he expectssomething from every village, and will accept thesmallest offerings from individuals. His sons intravelling fail not to follow so good an example.As he dares not exercise this kind of oppression inAlbania, the districts on the eastern side of Pindusare the great sufferers ; and neither pestilence norfamine are more dreaded by the poor natives thanthe arrival of those little scraps of coarse paperscrawled with a few Greek characters, and stampedwith the well-known little seal which makes EpirusThessaly and Macedonia tremble. Sometimesthese papers contain a request, that in consequenceof a momentary want of money, they will supplyhim vdth a few purses, and place them to his account,though he has never been known to admitof any deduction in consequence of these loansfrom the annual contributions. It is admitted,that sometimes the Pasha is supplied with a pretextfor his extortions by the Greeks themselves, whohave the folly to refer their quarrels to him. Inthese cases, after extorting something from both310 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.parties, he commonly ends by sending his decisionby some faithful servant, with an order that he shallreceive 500 or 1000 piastres for his trouble in carryingthe letter. This is generally some favouriteAlbanian, who, having been for several years employedin executing the Vezir 's orders Without . reward,is at length recompensed in this manner atother people's expence. Not long ago the richesof a certain great cattle-feeder, brother-in-law ofKyr N., having excited the Pasha's avarice, waskept in prison until he had paid thirty purses, andwas then obliged to feed his cattle in certain pasturesof the Vezir's not far from Siatista, whereHis Highness hired thieves to carry off 2000 sheep.The usual mode of squeezing a rich man, is to sendfor him to loannina, and put him in prison uponsome pretended accusation. There are no meansof avoiding the summons but by flight, which witha family is extremely difficult, as the Pasha generallytakes care to keep a strict watch upon themotions of all the relatives of those who are knownto possess property. Numerous emigrations have,nevertheless, taken place, in consequence of thelate extension of Aly's power ; and many of themerchants of Moskh6poli, Korytza, Kastoria, Selitza,Kozani, and Servia, instead of carrying oncommerce as formerly with correspondents or relativesin Germany, or other parts of Europe, havewithdrawn into those countries, while some havemigrated to other parts of Turkey. The Osmanlisof Thessaly and Macedon entertain as great adread of Ali as the Greeks themselves, and perhapsa more keen hatred ; because it is inflamedyi.] MACEDONIA. 311by a consciousness of military inferiority. On theother hand, the Greeks of these countries are readyto admit that they are much more secure now fromthe lawless depredations and highway robberies ofthe Albanians than they were before the extensionof Aiy's power over these districts, when there waslittle safety in the roads ; and when Siatista amongother places had often to resist the organized attacksof Albanian freebooters made in great force. Hencethe houses of the town have all been built with aview to defence as well as comfort. Each has itssmall garden, but which, from the deficiency ofwater, serves only to supply a few vegetables inthe spring and early summer.Sept. 5. — This forenoon, in company with KyrN. and M. Renaud, I visit the Boghaz, or Klisuraof Siatista, a remarkable pass, leading from thechampaign country of the Injekara, or Vistritza,into the plain of Sarighioli. The latter name is aTurkish word, meaning yellow lake ; the commonuse of which by the Greeks in preference to theirsynonym Xifivn icirpivi^, shows that we here approachthe limit of the general use of the Greeklanguage. Sarighioli comprehends a large extentof level country, subject to inundations, one ofwhich is in part permanent \ We were twentyIt appears from Cantacu- sound, bearing a particularzenos, 1. 4, c. 19, that there meaning in their own language,was a place called ^aplioXa and which was not inapplicablein this part of the country, to the peculiarities of the dismaynot the Turks in occupy tract ? We find in every conningit have converted the Greek try names corrupted by foreignword into a name of similar settlers in this manner.312 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.minutes in descending from Siatista through vineyardsto the beginning of the pass, from whencein one hour and twenty minutes more we arrivedat the end, where it opens into a plain whichbranches off to the left behind the mountain ofSiatista, and from thence conducts into the districtof Marian, or Karai&nni, which, like Sarighioliand another named Djuma, to the eastward of theformer and southward of the latter, is inhabitedchiefly by Turks dispersed in many small villages.The whole of this champaign country is boundedeastward by a lofty range of mountains, branchingnorthward from Olympus and at the eastern footof which stand the Greek towns of Verria, Nausea,and Modena, on the edge of the great plain ofLower Macedonia which extends to Saloniki.Karaianni is separated from Sarighioli by a ridgeof inferior heights, and from the district of Kozani,which town is situated three or four hours eastwardof the Klisura, by other hills of greater elevationwhich branch from Mount Burino.The Klisura of Siatista is a valley about a quarterof a mile in width, included between the mountainof Siatista, which is a high white naked rock, andanother mountain to the south equally steep andlofty, but green with shrubs. The latter is calledTjervena ^ and is connected to the southward withBurino : it is noted among the sportsmen of Siamfor its abundance of partridges. The vale ofKlisura consists of open com land, interspersedwith wild pear-trees, which, though one of theT^ep/3cVa.VI.] Macedonia. 313most common natives of Greece, are not indigenoushere, but are planted by the peasants, towhom they are recommended by the toughness ofthe wood serving many useful purposes in agriculturalmachinery, and by the dense shade of the tree,which never grows to such a height or expansionas to injure the com. The lands of Karaianni andSiatista meet in the middle of the pass : near thisspot stands the tomb of Selim Bey, of Monastic,who, after having been kept in prison at loanninaseven years by the Vezlr, was at last dismissedwith an appearance of friendship ; but on his wayhome was strangled in his bed at Siatista by oneof his own attendants. Having returned from theKlisura to Siatista, I set out from thence at 4. 15, withthe same two gentlemen as companions, for Selitza,which lies in the opposite direction to the Klisura.There are two Hellenic ruins near Siatista, oneon the face of Mount Tjervena, three quarters ofan hour distant from the lower makhala of Siatista,at a village which receives the name of Paleokastrofrom the ruins. The other bears the common bulgarianame of Grayish, or Graditza, and stands onthe highest point of the lower ridge of the Siatistamountain, in front of the upper town. Neither ofthem being of large dimensions, they may both,perhaps, have been fortresses, dependent upon acity which occupied the site of Siatista itself. Bythe learned of this place, Graditza is supposed tobe the ancient Orissa, a Macedonian city noticedby Pliny and Ptolemy', but as the latter places» Plin. 1. 4, c. 10. Ptolem. 1. 3, c, 10.314 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.its Dame Next to that of Europe in Mathias, thereis reason to believe that Orissa was very far fromhence to the north-eastward. Whatever the namemay have been, the situation was of great importance,as commanding the principal entrance intoMacedonia from the plains of the Haliacmon, whichriver was here the boundary between Upper Thessalyand Upper Macedonia ^ It seems to havebeen near Siatista that Domitius Calvin's was encampedwhen opposed to Scipio, while Caesar wasemployed against Pompey in Illyria. We learnfrom the Commentaries that Scipio occupied someheights on the right bank of the river, at a distanceof about six miles from the camp of Dominions.Scipio leaving twelve cohorts under Favonius, withorders to fortify his position, attempted to surpriseLonginus, who commanded a legion of Barbariansin Thessaly, but was speedily recalled by Favonius,and returned just in time to prevent an attack uponhim from the superior forces of Domitius. Soonafter his return, Scipio crossed the river, but noaction ensued ; and on the second night he foundit prudent to resume his station on the right bank.In a subsequent attempt to .surprise the enemy'sforagers, eighty of his cavalry were slain, and soonafterwards he was tempted to quit his strong positionby a stratagem of Domitius, who pretended toretire for the sake of obtaining supplies, but withdrewonly three miles into a pass, which concealedhis whole force. The cavalry and lightedlumen Haliacmo- B. C. 1. 3, c. 36. Strabo,nem, quod Macedonian a p, 326, 437.Thessaly divided. — Ceesar deVI.]MACEDONIA.armed in advance of Scipio, on entering the pass,discovered the ambuscade, but too late to preventthe loss of two turns and a prefect. The Kli-sura of Siatista seems perfectly adapted to thistransaction from its nature and its situation relativelyto the Haliacmon, but still more as beingthe Gate which led from the extensive open countrywatered by that river through Sarighioli , whichwas probably the ancient Eordaea into Lynnfor we learn from Caesar, that Domitiusafterwards really retired to Heraclia (of Lyncestis^),where he narrowly escaped from falling into thehands of the enemy, marching into Macedoniaafter his victory over Caesar at Dyrrhachium. Aposition in front of a pass, which secured the entranceinto a large extent of fertile country, wasexactly such as we may suppose to have beenchosen by Domitius for his camp.^ Caesar de B. C. 1. 3, c. 79.The words are, " HeracleaSenticam, quae est subjectScandalise," where the lastwords clearly show that Senti-camis an error either of Caesaror of the text, for Heraclia Sin-ricawas towards the easternextremity of Macedonia, whereasCandavia lay exactly in theroute of Pompey from Dyrr-actium to Heraclia of Lynnso that, when Domitiusmarched thither from the Ha-liaison," fortuna ilium pompeiiobjicere videretur."CHAPTER VII.MACEDONIA.River Prambritza — Selitza — Sisani — Mount Sini&tziko — — Anaselitza — Bobushti — Smighes — Kastoria — lakeCeletrum — Krupista — Zelogdsh — Kapesnltza — Devol —Biklista-^klisura of Tzangon ^Pliassa — Korytz^ — CcmdaoiaVotsk6p — Mo8kh6poli — Livdhari — Rivers Khelidhoni andDev61 — Mounts Ostrovitza, 'Opari, Lenia — Ddshari — Kom-meno-litharge — Dombreni — Mount Tom6r — village of Tora6rTomoritza — Descent to Berat — River Uzumi — Berat, orBeligrad — Vezir Ibrahim— Mount Spiragr — Antipathy.Sept. 6, (continued). — Leaving the peak of Grason the left, we descend the mountain fromSiatista by a rocky road, and at 5 enter again theplain of the Vistritza ; where near the foot of themountain, to the left, the river Pramoritza joinsthe Vistritza below the village of Tzerusia. Wecontinue our route along the foot of the ridgeof Siatista, and at 6.20 arrive at Selitza, which issituated in the hollow of a ravine descendingfrom the summit of the same mountain, and atthe head of a slope which towards the Vistritza iscovered with vineyards. Numerous springs waterthe gardens of Selitza, and render the situationpreferable to that of Siatista in every respect exceptthose of its healthy elevation and coolnessin summer. Selitza is two or three miles distantfrom the river which here pursues a courseCHAP. VII.] MACEDONIA. 317parallel to the foot of the mountains, and receivesfrom them several small streams. The summitabove Selitza, which is higher than either of theother points of the same chain, namely, Burino,and the mountain of Siatista, is named ScvcarJ^cjcov,Vulgarly pronounced Sinatjko. On the other sideof it are the villages Clarissa and Pepelista, belowwhich lies the plain of Sarighioli.In front of Selitza, beyond the great valleyof the Haliacmon^ the entire range of Pindus ispresented to view, from the summits near M^tzovoto a point beyond Korytza, called Xerovuni.Mount Smolika, or Zmolska, above the Vlakhiotetown of Samaria, is the most remarkable peak,beyond which, above the centre of the range, and tothe left of Mount Smdlika, is seen the great serratedrock called Lazar, which is near the villageof Paying in Zagori, and not far to the southwardof Konitza. The undulated low country, whichborders the Vistritza and its western branches,constitutes the district of Anaselitza, of which theTurkish Kassaba or capital, named Baptista, isvisible at the distance of a few miles to the westward.Selitza formerly contained many Greekmerchants trading to Germany, but having falleninto the hands of the Vezir Alj^, it has been abandonedby them. The houses are tolerably built,and have good gardens ; the vineyards yield a winenot much inferior to that of Siatista ; the other cultivatedlands produce wheat, barley, maize, andmillet ^ ; but none of the richer productions oflower Macedonia or Southern Greece are found in«XP*'318 MACEDONIA. [clap.these cold regions ; neither silk nor cotton, ricenor oil. An olive tree planted by the bishopin his garden at Siatista did not thrive after thesecond year. On my inquiring of the bishop forremains of antiquity, he sends for an inscriptionwhich he has partly traced in charcoal, and partlycopied, but without attending to the lines of theoriginal, from a marble still existing in a monasterynear Sisani, which, though now only a small village,is one of the places from which his bishoprictakes its title The monument shows that atSis4ni, or near it, stood a city of some importance,but not named in the inscription, — an unfortunateomission, as the ancient authors have left no descriptionof this part of the country sufficiently preciseto supply the deficiency. Elimeia I shouldconceive to have been nearer to Green. Theinscription is complete at the beginning, but imperfectat the end ; it contains a list of Ephebi,with the names of the gymnasiarch and ephe-march, and a notice that the city supplied the oilfor the gymnastic exercises. It is dated in theyear 135, which, taken from the battle of Actium,corresponds to 1 05 from the birth of Christ, or theeighth year of the reign of Trajan ^Inscription at Sisani :'AXei^vffijc TTJc irdXcoic' "Erovc p\L "Ap^orroi rov yvfiya^lovT. KXav^^ov 'lovXiarou, ei^rifiap\ovyroc Tc. Kkavitov Ilapcayotf,l0i|/3oi oi hxoyiypafAfUyoi. Ilfx^^Xoc *IovXiov, Tirol AvicaciKXaalWf AcXcoc Ei^poovyoc, GciS^iXoc 'AXeidvipov, i^paaUoroQfTv\ik6€ KotrroVf Avcoc, Aovkioq MapioQ Iloro/i^v, Ma{i/ioc'A^po^eiroc, *X^lyoyo^ Etrram-ovy 'JLtpdrtay \ov\iavov, l^KovySoci^lXiTTiroc Maicc^wv, Eiryciaci Ttpnavoc NiroirdXcwcy *IovXiayocHoviii^yf Fa IOC ^Ayrtwa V. Inscription No. 3.VII.] MACEDONIA. 319Sept. 6.— After treating the bishop with anEnglish breakfast, which seems not much to histaste, I proceed on horseback with my two companionsto the monastery of St. Athanasius, situatedin a wood on the side of Mount Siniatziko,and afterwards to one of the nearer summits onfoot, a laborious walk, and scarcely worth thefatigue, as the height commands no very importantpoints that are not seen from below, with the exceptionof Olympus which rises above the ridge ofSiniatziko in all its breadth and majesty, and showsits superiority to this range still more strikinglythan from the plain. A little to the left of Olympusappears the mountain of Livadhi, or Vlakholivadho,a large Vlakhiote town, four hours beyond Servia,in the direction of Olympus. On a little elevatedplain between us and the summit which rises aboveSiatista stands Konasko, a small village formerlynoted for the skill of its inhabitants in the use ofthe musquet, their activity in climbing the mountains,and those other qualities of the independentmountaineers of Greece and Albania, one of whichwas generally a disposition to robbery. They havebeen subdued, and are now kept in quiet by thestrong arm of A\jf Pasha.The monastery contains at present no morethan three monks, all the others being absent ontheir usual tours of begging, which sometimescarry them as far as Germany. The houseis supported by these means, and by the produceof a few corn-fields and sheep pastures inthe bosom of the mountain, assisted by the presentsmade to the church by the neighboursMACEDONIA. [CHAP.ing inhabitants, who often come in the summer topass a day or two in this pleasant retreat, and onthe festival of the saint, frequent it in considerablenumbers. The monks are building a new konakfor the accommodation of their profitable visitors,while a painter, who has the reputation of beingone of the best in Greece, is employed in thechurch in retouching, new silvering, and gildingthe pictures of the saints ^ In the minutiae ofdrapery, in the expression of muscles and features,his effect and finishing are remarkable, while thefigures themselves are in the usual Greek taste, intolerablystiff and unnatural. But they resemblein many respects the early productions of theItalians, among whom the revived art of paintinghad its beginning in the pictures of the Greekchurch. The same painter is the most celebratedperformer on the violin in this part of the country,and fails not to be in attendance whenever there isan assembly at the monastery.At 3.20, taking leave of my two companions andthe bishop, I proceed through the vineyards at thefoot of the mountain, and cross at 3.50 a smallbranch of the Haliacmony coming from the mountainon the right. Sisdni stands on the right bankof this stream, at the distance of two hours fromthis spot. The hills seen up the glen are wellwooded, and are not so high as the bare whitesummits above Selitza and Siatista. We proceedover the barren roots of the mountain by a ruggedroad, having the river on our left, very near the^ rove hytov^ cirovoc.VII.] MACEDONIA. 321foot of the hills. At 5.25 we cross another tributaryof the Vistritza, where it emerges from anopening between steep banks, which leaves only asmall level on either side of the stream, where aresome mills and cultivated lands. Beyond theriver we pass through a pleasant grove of oaks andelms, again cross the roots of the mountain, andarrive at 6 at Boghatziko, a large village situatedat the head of a slope covered with vineyards, andimmediately at the foot of the mountain, in a situationvery similar to that of Selitza, except that hereis no ravine at the back. The roads about thevillage are made practicable for wheel carriages,and the cars, instead of running on trucks, havewheels with spokes. It is the only place in Greecewhere I have seen agricultural mechanics in soadvanced a state. Boghatzik6 is a Kefalo-khori,producing little grain, but a considerable quantityof wine. The principal inhabitants are masonsand carpenters, who find work at Constantinople,and in the other principal towns of Turkey, andafter residing there for several years return homewith their gains. The village belongs to the ecclesiasticalprovince of Sisanium and Satisfy, but likeseveral others in this part of Macedonia, accountsfor its taxes at Olossona.The district of Anaselitza, which extends infront of us, along the opposite side of the river,contains upwards of 100 villiers, the greater partof which are small ; about one half of the numberare Turkish. In the opposite chain of mountains,a rocky summit, towering above the others,and bearing W.S.W., is called Rushotari. OnVOL. I. Y322 MiiCBDONIA. [chap.this side of it stands the Greek village of Tzoban,OQ the other Burbutzik6. Between them is aderv^ni, which leads from Anaselitza into theAlbanian district of Kol6nia, and the valleys of theupper Viosa, or Au$.Sept 7. — Sending forward my baggage by thedirect road to Kastoiia, I begin to descend at 6through the vineyards of Boghatziko, pass over afine plain, quite uncultivated, and at 6.45 crossthe Injekara, for the purpose of visiting Bobushti,a small Turkish 'village situated on the summit ofa steep bank above the river, where, agreeably tothe information which I received at Boghatzik6, Ifind an ancient statue. It is of white marble,draped, and of the human size ; the head iswanting, and the legs and feet are buried in theground, in which manner it serves to support astone trough, made to convey water to the villagefountain. The right hand is folded in the mantleover the breast with the fist clenched, the lefthand hangs down by the side. The drapery isheavy, and the whole performance indifferent.Near it are several wrought stones, rich belongedto some ancient building ; but there is no appearanceof any walls or other indications of the siteof an ancient town. After a loss of three quartersof an hour at Bobushti, I follow the heights nearthe river, over a rich but uncultivated soil, andthen descending from them, recross the Inj^karaat 8 by the bridge of Smigfaes, probably so calledbecause the river just below it is joined by anotherstream which issues from the Lake of Kastoria.This point is less than an hour from BoghatzikoTil.] MACEDONIA. 323by the direct road. At the bridge the slope of themountain reaches to the left bank of the river*We now cross a plain higher than the level of theriver ; at its extremity to the right is the Lake ofAstoria, on the margin of which we arrive at9.30. The waters are stagnant, putrescent at theedge, and entirely covered with a green pellicle.The town appears on the opposite side, built onan isthmus, which connects a high rocky peninsulawith the northwestern shore. The peninsulaextends into the middle of the lake, and a largemonastery is seen at its extremity on the waterside.Having skirted the western shore of thelake, we enter some gardens abounding in walnuttrees, and halt among them at 10.10, near thegate of the town, waiting for the return of thetatar, whom I had sent forward to provide alodging, with a letter of recommendation fromSiaiista, to Kyr T. K., one of the primate.After some delay we are conducted to the houseof a papas, where I am soon afterwards visited byKyr K., who is now very pressing that I shouldremove to his house, which, under the circumstances,r decline, though my kon4k is humbleenough, compared with the handsome houses ofsome of the Greek merchants, particularly that ofKyr K. himself. It would seem that the merchantsof these Macedonian towns have lost something ofthe barbarous virtue of hospitality by a residencein civilized Europe, though at Kastoria somethingmay perhaps be ascribed to an anxiety to resistevery infringement of an ancient privilege whichexempts the Greeks of this place from the bury2324 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.then of lodging passengers. A traveller is themore sensible to this difference of reception, asthe Greeks in general are eminently of a socialcharacter, and practise hospitality to a dreewhich could hardly be expected in their poor andoppressed condition. But without this advantage,travelling in the Levant would hardly be tolerable ;for although the traveller may, by the power ofhis firmahn and of Turkish attendants, force hisway into the Christian houses, he would be disappointedin his objects of inquiry if he werenot generally met by a disposition to hospitality.This indeed is the most agreeable characteristicof Oriental travelling, as it gives the traveller abetter view of manners than can possibly be obtainedin civilized Europe, in moving from oneinn to another, and thus more than compensatesfor the inconveniences arising from the want ofpublic accommodation. In point of expense, thereis no saving, or rather, notwithstanding the greatervalue of money in Turkey, the Oriental mode isthe more expensive of the two, the traveller'sattendants being more numerous than are necessaryin civilized Europe, and the presents whichhe makes at departing to the lower class of householderswith whom he lodges, or to the servantsof the rich, amounting generally to as much aswould pay the bill at the most expensive inn inChristendom. I met with a similar delay atMetzovo as at Kastoiia in obtaining a lodging,and at Sidtista should probably have found stillgreater than that which occurred, had not Kern.,being a nephew of a bishop, been particularly fearfulof offending the Vezir's musaflr, or stranger guest.VII.] MACEDONIA. 325Astoria or, according to the vulgar transposition of the accent in this termination, Kas*doria, contains about 600 families, of whom theJews form a tenth, and the remainder is dividedequally between Turks and Greeks. All thepopulation of the villages is Greek, with theexception of a subdshi, or agent, in some ofthe Turkish tjiftliks. The present Turkish commandantis Demir Bey, who pays the Porte 25purses a year for the mukata, or farm of therevenue of the district, which includes fifty villages.His family is of long standing at Astoria; Mehemet, the head of the house, is now at'Akhridha with his troops, on the public service ;for these Beys, being Chariots, hold their landson condition of personal service, and are boundto the maintenance of a certain number of men,who receive provisions from the government whencalled into the field. A third brother resides atloannina by command of Aljr Pasha, who generallytakes care to keep one member of everyprincipal family near him. Their father was beheadedby the Porte.The Lake of Kastoiia is reckoned a six hours*ride in circumference, but does not appear to meto be above six miles long and four broad. Thepeninsula is near four miles in circumference, andthe outer point is not far from the centre of thelake. In the evening I make the tour of the peninsulain a canoe, in company with Kyr K. Themonoxyla of this lake are longer and better madeMACEDONIA.[chap.than those of the Lake of Io4onina ; that in whichI embark is 15 feet in length, so deep that a mansitting down at the bottom is quite concealed , andis capable of holding thirty persons KThe two ends, which are exactly alike, are raisedabove the gunwale, and hollowed within, so asto furnish a very comfortable seat with a back,while by their form they improve the outwardappearance of the boat. Towards the stem, twooutriggers, with an upright at the extremity ofthem, finish a pivot for the oars, which thusplaced have great power, and are capable of turningthe boat round upon the head, as a centre,with remarkable quickness and ease. The annualvalue of the fish caught in this lake amounts to100 purses. Besides the quantity consumed freshin the town and surrounding villages, which aresupplied from hence in winter, as far as Korytza, aThe /iovo£vXa trXola of theDanube are mentioned by Ar*ran, de exp. Alex. 1. 1, c. 3,and those of the Rhone byPolybius, 1. 8, c. 42. Pliny,H. N. 1. 16, c. 40, states thatsome of the canoes of Germanyformed of a single tree containedSO men. Those of Kastoriaare generally formed outof a single tree, but a part ofthe upper works are sometimesof a different piece.VII.] MACBDONIA. 327large proportion is salted and meets a ready marketin every part of Macedonia and Thessaly. Thoughthe lake is now entirely covered with a greensurface, and the water is hot, turbid, and by nomeans tasteless, it is preferred for drinking to thewater of the wells, and of some fine springs at thefoot of the hills beyond the gardens, which are allconsidered as /3apvii vera, or heavy waters. Infact, when cooled in jars, the lake water is notdisagreeable, though I should never have thoughtof preferring it to the clear and sparkling produceof the springs; but the Greeks are extremelycurious upon the subject of the quality of water,and attentive to its possible effects upon theirhealth ; in which they are prudent, as they drinkan immense quantity of it in summer, especiallyin those fasts when they live chiefly on saltedprovisions. The fish of the lake are carp, tench,eels, and the yovXcavoc ^ ; carp are taken, weighing15 okes, eels 4 okes, and Kyr K. has seen aglands weighed of 64 okes, or 176 lbs., butthey are sometimes much larger. The fisheryof the lake, which forms part of the Mukata, isletby Demir Bey for 12 purses to Hassan Effendi,who exacts from the fishermen of the town onethird of the produce of the sale, and grants theprivilege to those of Topiakos, a village on theside of the lake, for 10 piastres a year to eachperson. All modes of fishing are allowed ; theTopiakiotes chiefly employ traps, and the Kas-toriesround spreading nets, or seines, which aresometimes 200 opyvcaic in length.^ Silures Glans.328 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.The lake is frozen over occasionally when thenorth winds are constant in winter ; seven or eightyears ago carts passed across upon the ice.The Lake of Okhri, in Greek 'Akhridha, andsometimes 'Okhridha ^ differs essentially from thatof Kastoria. Its waters are extremely bright andclear, though perfectly sweet and fresh. It neverfreezes, and abounds in trout, which are not foundin the Lake of Kastoria.The present fortification of Kastoria consists onlyof a wall across the western extremity of the isthmus,which was built in the time of the ByzantineEmpire, and has a wet ditch, making the peninsulaan island. The wall has been slightly renewedby the Turks, who keep it well whitewashed,which among them often serves insteadof a repair. In the middle of the wall stands asquare tower, through which is the only entranceinto the town. A parallel wall, flanked with roundtowers, which in Byzantine times crossed the peninsulafrom shore to shore, and excluded all theeastern part of it, although now in ruins, stilldivides the Kassaba, or quarter of the Turks, fromthat of the Greeks, whose town occupies the middleof the peninsula, and extends down to the wateron either side of it.The remainder of the peninsula eastward of theGreek quarter is a high rock, bare and uncultivated,and which intercepts from the town the viewof all the southern and of great part of the easternside of the lake. There are many small churchesof ancient date in different parts of the peninsula,^ 0ri)v''Axfu^''Oxp«3a, the'^AxiHc of the Byzantine authors.VII.] MACEDONIA. 329which are said to have been built by personsbanished from the capital, and confined here by theGrreek emperors. The accurate description of astoriaby Anna Comnena, shows that no greatchange has occurred since the twelfth century ^At the eastern extremity of the lake is a largevillage named M&vrovo. Here begins a long andwell-cultivated plain, bounded to the south by thehills, the opposite side of which we followed fromS^litza, and to the north by the ridge of Siniatziko,which, taking a more northerly direction than towardsSiatista, embraces the plain, and joins themountains which bound the lake on the northernside.The hills at the eastern end of the plain of M&v-rove separate it from that of Sarighioli. Northeastwardof Kastoria is the lofty summit calledVitsh, written in Greek Bir2^i|. It is the samewhich I saw bearing N. 22 E. from Mount Kakar-crista, and is a very remarkable bare abrupt peak,having a region of pines below it. The road fromM4vrovo to Kali&ri leaves it on the left in passing,the ridge which separates the plains. Midway inthis route is situated Vlakho-klisura, the name ofwhich explains both the origin of the inhabitantsand the situation of the place.The scenery around Kastoria is extremely beautiful.Trees and verdure adorn the higher partsof the mountain, and below are small villages andcultivation mixed with woods. To the New. andW. the lowest slopes are green with vineyards;and below them a narrow plain stretches along themargin of the lake, which on either side of the gar-annaConsent, 1. 6, p. 152. Paris*330 MACBDONIA. [cHAP.dene, near the entrance of the town, ia coveredwith walnut-trees and poplars, mixed with com*fields. To the south a plain of corn land extendsto the hills of Bc^atziko and to the Injekara. Inevery other direction except at the eastern extremity,the slopes of the hills reach to the margin :from the southern extremity of the lake issues thestream which joins the Injekara at Smighes. Atthe point of its exit from the lake the Topiakiotescatch an abundance of crayfish.The ecclesiastical province of Kastoria is very extensive,but the bishop, although metropolitan, is,together with those of Green, Pelagonia,Vodhena,Korytzd, Berat, and Strumnitza, considered subjectto the archbishop of ' Akhridha. To the north theprovince is synorausYnih that of Patagonia orBitolia;and extends to the west into Albania, where it includesKol6nia, which has a suffragan bishop.Of the Hellenic name of this remarkable positionwe should have been left in ignorance, but for a singlepassage in Livy, which leaves no room for a doubtthat it is the site of Celetrum, and thus affords a mostuseful point for the adjustment of the comparativegeography of the surrounding part of Macedonia,which, although still sufficiently obscure, would,without this aid, have been much more uncertain.In the first Macedonian campaign of the Romans,B.C. 200, the consul Sulpicius marched from thebanks of the Apsus through the country of theDassaretii into Lyncestis, and from thence, afteran engagement with Philip at Octolophus, forcedthe passes which separate the valley of the riverEngon from Eordsea. From the latter province hemoved into EUimaea, and from thence into Orestes :VII.] MACBDONIA. 881here he invested Celerity ^^ a town situated on apeninsula which is surrounded by the waters of alake, and has only a single entrance over a narrowisthmus which connects it with the continent."Having received the submission of Celetrum, theconsul returned into Dassaretia, and from thenceregained Apologia, the place from whence he haddeparted on this expedition.The travelled men of Kastoria seem not moreanxious about education than their fellow-countrymenin general : nothing more being taught inthe school, which they support here, than themere rudiments of the ancient language. So powerfulis the effect of the Turkish system, that allthose who dwell long in the country seem inevitablyto feel the effects of this moral atmosphere bya want of energy and an indifference to every thingbut the vulgar pursuits of life, or to their personalsafety, which, being always in some danger, affordstherefore some excuse for their conduct. Eventhose who return after a long residence in civilizedEurope, are seldom tardy in resuming the generalfeeling, and among other indications of it, makenone but the feeblest exertions for the improvementof the rising generation. It is almost entirely tothe Greeks permanently settled in foreign countries,and to some of their countrymen at Constantinople,that Greece is indebted for the progress she hasInde impetus in Orestes cingit : augustus faucibus unumdem fecit : et oppidum Cele- ex continent iter est. — Liv.tram est aggressor, in penis 31, c. 40.aula num* Lacus ionia332 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.made of late years in education, and that progress,therefore, although constant, is slow on the continentof Greece. Few men are to be found herewho have any curiosity as to the ancient geographyor history of their country ; and even the youngmen who have had the benefit of an Europeaneducation, soon lose their literary taste and acquirements,when they are settled in their native land,where, straightened, perhaps, for the means of existence,living under a constant necessity of deceivingtheir oppressors, and deprived of all instructive conversation,they soon become entirely occupied withthe only objects which a government such as theTurkish leaves open to them. Nevertheless, itmust be acknowledged, that in these matters thecontinent of Greece has been exemplary, comparedwith the islands of the western coast, where thevicious government of Venice seems to have beenmore effectual even than the Turkish in repressingthe natural disposition of the Greeks for mentalimprovement. The Greeks of Kastoila are somewhatless exposed than those of Kozani, Si&tista,Selitza, and Korytza, to the exactions of DalyPasha, which have driven away so many fromthose places. Enough, however, has been doneto thin KastoHa of its inhabitants ; and several ofthe large houses, both of the Greeks and Jews,are falling to ruin, or standing empty.Sept. 8. — ^^This afternoon we cross in half anhour the hills to the westward of KastoHa, and descendinto the plain of the Injekara, where thejunction of its two principal branches is half a mileto the left. In another hour we cross that whichVIT.] MACEDONIA. 333comes from Tzelova, a village in the mountainstowards Figuring, and enters the plain through anarrow opening just above the place where wecross it. The village of Sligdni is in the glen halfa mile to the right. The other, or western branchof the river, which originates in the great mountainson that side, fiber winding through gorges inthe lower hills of that range, enters at a pointbearing about N. 60 W. from Kastoria the openchampaign country ten or twelve miles in breadth,which separates those mountains from the heightsnear Kastoria. On a ridge along the right bankof the river are situated several Turkish villages,of which the principal are Zelogosh and Krupista.The latter was not far to our left at 4.30, and Zelo-gosh was at five miles in direct distance in thesame direction at 5.10 as we mounted some heightswhich close the plain to the northward, and whichare the barren roots of a range of mountains runningnorth-westward from Kastoria. Near Zelo-gosh, which stands on a rising ground, the riverflows from the west, and receives several smallbranches from the mountains. After havingcrossed the heights we arrive at 8.10 at Rapesand there descend into a valley, the directionof which is parallel to that of the Indianrange.The waters which collect in this valley from thesurrounding mountains, form a stream flowing tothe north-westward, and thus the low ridge whichwe crossed separates the waters running to theHaUacnum and the jSEgcsan sea from those whichflow to the Adriatic. The valley, with its includesMacedonia. [chap.ing moimtaiiis, as well as the country to the northward,to within a short distance of the Lake of'Akhridha, is called Devon The river bears thesame name. At its sources, in the western ridge,are the villages Nikholitza and Bushigrad ; to thesouthward of which, in the same great range, isthe town and district of Gramista.After following for a short distance the foot ofhills on our right, we arrive at 8.40 at a khansituated on the road side below Biklista, a Mahometanvillage with two large serais belonging toAly Bey, who owns the neighbouring lands. Bik-list may be considered the frontier village of Albania,as the inhabitants speak that language. Thevalley, like most of those in Albania, is chieflycultivated with maize. Near the town are a fewgardens of melons and pumpkins. The vale isthree or four miles in width, bounded to the westwardby hills of no great height, but connectedwith the high range.Sept. 9. — At 6 this morning I proceed from thekhan to the Boghdz or pass of Tjangon, situatedat the extremity of the vale of Biklista, to theN.N.W. of that town* In three quarters of anhour a narrow glen opens on our right, from whichissues a small river, said to originate in a lake inthe district of Prespa, called Ventre. At themouth of the glen is a narrow level, on whichstands the village of Then. A high mountain isBeen through the opening, having a direction ofnorth and south. The plain is now three miles inbreadth. Leaving several small villages to theright at the foot of the mountain, we cross at 7 theVII.] MACEDONIA. 335river Devoly which, not having yet received thatof Then, is still very smalL At 7.40 Tjangon, asmall Moslem village, is on the left, on the foot ofthe heights, which form the pass on the southernside. Here we halt eighteen minutes, then proceeding,arrive at 8. 15 at the narrowest part of thepass, where the river, now greatly increased insize, occupies all the space. Here they are buildinga new bridge.The Pass of Tjangon, or Klisiira of Devol, as itmay be called, and probably would be if the Greekswere more numerous in this part of the country, isa remarkable feature in the geography of UpperMacedonia. Like the Klisura of Siatista, it is anatural gate of communication from the champaigncountry of the Haliacmon into other extensiveplains, and it is moreover the only break in thegreat central range of Pindus from its southerncommencement in the mountains of ^tolia, towhere it is blended to the northward with thesummits of Hsemus and Rhodope. The pass is notas strong as it is narrow, the hills which immediatelyborder it on either side being not very abrupt.But they soon become steep and lofty, and thegreat rocky summit to the north called Kurudagh,GrsBce Xerovuni, is a suitable link to the chain,formed by the great summits Grammes, Russo*tri, and Smolika. Beyond the bridge we turnimmediately to the south, enter the great plain ofKorytza, and pass along the foot of some hills connectedat the back with the central ridge. On ourright in the plain are several Albanian villages,situated between Xerovuni and the Devol. The336 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.largest is Poyani, on the right bank of that river,which flows from thence to the north-west, enters alarge lake towards that extremity of the plain, andon emerging from it, begins to wind through asuccession of narrow valleys among the great rangeof mountains which border the plain of Korytza onthe west In its progress through them, the Devolreceives several large tributaries, and finally joinsthe Beratinos, or ancient ApsuSy two hours belowBer4t, in the great maritime plain of lUyria.At 8.55 we pass through Plidssa, a small villageat the foot of the mountain, remarkable for a verylarge serai, which was built here not long agoby one Mehemet Pashd, an Albanian of large possessionsin the neighbouring plain, whose family isconnected by marriage with that of Al^^ of Tepe-leni. Mehmet died suddenly last winter at Io4n-nina, where his son Veljr is still detained by theVezir Alj^ : the other sons are here. Continuingalong the foot of the hills, we arrive at 10.20 atKorytzd, which is situated entirely in the plain,though separated only by some vineyards from aprojection of the mountain, which is crowned by aruined castle. It is a structure probably of theBulgarians, though vulgar report attributes it tothe Spaniards.As there are some doubts whether the plague,which broke out here about eight months ago, hasentirely ceased, I pitch my tent on the outside ofthe town, but on receiving, after the delay of anhour, an assurance from the Bey that the Greekquarter is entirely free from suspicion, remove tothe metropolis. The bishop returns to town in theVII.] MACEDONIA. 337evening from the village of Bobushtitza, on hearingof my arrival, but not before I had taken possessionof his apartment, the only comfortable one in themetropolitan palace ; the others, which are inhabitedby the archdeacon and deacons, being allruinous, exposed to the weather, and covered withsmoke and dirt. The bishop's closet, which measuresten feet by six, has two small glazed windows,a sofa on two sides, a shelf in one comer piled withecclesiastical books, and other shelves on whichare ranged plates made of pewter, or of Germanearthenware. Affixed to one wall, as customaryin Greek houses, is a deal case, containing a pictureof the Virgin, with a lamp perpetually burningbefore it. A German clock, the pastoral staff,and a Sl^arpi, or scratching machine made of hardwoodscored with furrows, complete the list of furniture.Sept. 10. — Korytza, vulgarly pronounced Qortja,or Gkiortj4S and by the Albanians Ghiorghia, containsabout 450 houses, of which more than a halfare Christian. The filthy streets and comfortlesshabitations proclaim the Albanian town. Its artizansmanufacture most of the articles of Albaniandress and furniture; and the snuff of Korytza,which is made chiefly from the tobacco of Artaa, isin good repute.One of the most ordinary causes of delay to thetraveller in Turkey, which I experience to-day, isthe want of horses, generally caused by the insufficientcapital of the farmer of the post, so thatKopvrfa, Ficcopr^fi.VOL. I, Z338 MACEDONIA. [cHAP.whenever there is an uncommon influx of tatters,or a Pash passes through, the traveller who followshas no alternative hut to wait for the returnof the horses. Abdullah Pasha passed throughKorytza two days ago on his way to Okhri. He isa pretender to the Pashallk of Elbassan, and issupported in his pretensions by Aljr Pasha, but hehas no less than three rivals, two of whom are fromthe northern part of Albania, where the Skodrianhas the chief power : the third Ibrahim is in actualpossession of the place, and is supported there bythe troops of the Vezir of Berat, after a war betweenBerat and Skodra, which has ceased nowthat the Beratinos has gained his object But asAljr has an interest in reviving the contest, it willnot be long, probably, before hostilities recommence.At dinner, the bishop not being able to resistthe Frank cookery of my servant, breaks the fast,but sets the archdeacon at the door to preventintruders. He has a plate of octapodhi, or saltedstarfish, set before him, and takes care neither tochange his plate, nor to allow more than oneexcavation to appear in the pudding and pilateproduces from his cellar a light dry wine,which is made from the vineyards on die hillsnear the town, and is not inferior to the wine ofSiatista. His all-holiness, or high friendship \ asametropolitan bishop is styled, was a deacon formany years at Kastoria, and purchased his presentdignity from the Porte in the usual manner. OnVII.] MACEDONIA. 339appointing a Bishop, or rather on approving therecommendation of the Patriarch, the Porte givesa seal, in the centre of which is written the name,in Turkish, of the mansion, or office, and roundits edge the Greek Title. The bishop found hissee burthened with a debt of 50 purses, bearingan interest of 12 per cent., which, on account ofthe growing poverty and depopulation of thecountry, his province will scarcely ever be able topay. The metropolitan bishopric of Korytz4 andSeldsforo ^ comprehends the country to the westwardof Korytz4 half way to Berat, includes Premediand Tepeleni to the southward and westward,and in the opposite direction Dev61. Sel&sforo isnow a village by the Turks called Veste, situatedat the foot of Mount Xerovuni, 3 hours north ofKorytzd. There is a remark in the Notitiae EpiscopateQrsecorum, of the date of the 13thcentury, that Selasforo was then better knownas Deabolis ; Devol is the modern form, or rather,perhaps, Dev61 was always the local name,and Deabolis the Greek version of it. In theeleventh century, Anna Comnena described Dea-bolesas a town situated at the foot of a mountain,(thus agreeing with Selasforo,) and informsus that Alexius frequently occupied it inhis campaigns i^inst the Normans, when thelatter first obtained a footing in Illyria It isevident from Anna's narrative, that Chris andDeabolis were then the two places of chief im*Kopvriag Ka 2eXa<r^<$pov. ' Anna Conned. 11. 5. 13,pp. 126. 32S. Paris.z2340 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.portance to the eastward of the Canadian range,but though many other names, still existing, orslightly corrupted, occur also in that part of herhistory, there is no trace of that of Korytza. Abishop of Deabolis was instrumental in havingfirst invited the Normans into this country fromItaly'.There are 80 villages and 2800 Greek housesin the episcopal province of Korytza ; as thebishop receives 8 paras from each house, hisregular income is between five and six hundredpiastres, or about 36Z. sterling. His other emolumentsconsist in customary presents of provisions,and in fees which are chiefly for the arrangementof disputes among the laity. In the larger sees,such as Larissa and loannina, where the clergyare more numerous, and there are Greek familiesof opulence, the bishop demands a portion of theprofits derived by the former from the confessions,domestic services, and the c^fi/icpfacc, or dailyprayers, which are read in many families by apriest. But Korytza produces very little to itsbishop in this way.In common with many of the Greek clei^y, myhost is desirous of an union of the Greek and Latinchurches, entertains a very indifferent opinion ofhis own countrymen, but ascribes the ruin of thecountry principally to the Musulman Albanians,whose power and tyranny have arrived at such aheight, that Turks and Christians agree in wishingfor the arrival of a Frank conqueror. Hence he hasScylitoeSy p. 865, ed. Paris.VII.] MACEDONIA. 341always considered Bonaparte deficient in policy,in having gone to Egypt instead of coming here,where the consequences would have been muchmore important, and from whence he could nothave been driven out. The bishop admits, however,that the three Veins of loannina, Berat, andSkodra, could collect 50,000 men in a short time,and that an army landing at Avlona, and advancingas far as Berat, would be unable to proceedfrom a want of provisions, Albania producingnothing but men, and this fine looking plain returningvery little to the cultivator. It is saidthat the fig, which so near as Premedi ripens atthe usual time, here seldom comes to perfection ;from the present appearance of the vines, indeed,it is evident that the climate is that of a muchmore northern latitude, and the soil may be lessfertile, than that of Anaselitza and Kastoiia ; butawant of security, industry, and good agriculture,are probably the chief causes of the scanty harvests;for we learn from Livy, that these plainsfurnished an abundance of forage to the Romanarmy, under the consul Sulpicius, in the campaignof the year 200 b. c. *The bishop's geography and history ascend nohigher than the Bulgarian conquest of this country,which he considers as a part of IlaXaia BouX'yap/a,or Old Bulgaria, subdued and in part peopled byAlbanian freebooters. As a proof of this fact, heinstances some Bulgarian names, such as Beloved(white water), a village and river in the neigh-liv.1. 81, c. 33.342 MAcsDOifiA. [chap.pouring mountain, — Bushigrad and several others.But namefi of lyric origin are found in every partof Greece. A stronger proof is ^e use of theBulgarian language, which is still spoken insome of the villages of this district. The plainof Korytza is about 20 miles long, and from 6 to10 wide, terminated at either end by hills of nogreat height, of which those to the northward furnishan easy passage into the great valley of 'Akh-ridha, which is occupied in great part by the lake ancientlynamed Lychnidus. The town of 'Akhridhalies nearly due north from hence, distant twelvehours near the nor them extremity of thelake. Southwardof the plain of Korytza are hills forming a districtcalled Kiari, beyond which is Colonia, and thesources of the branch of the Apsus^ which flowsby Viskuki and Skrepari to Berat. The districtof Kol6nia begins on the other side of MountPep^las, which branches from the mountain ofGramista in a south-western direction, and falls tothe southern end of the plain of Korytza, Fromthe western and north-western side of the plainrises a range of very lofty mountains, on the sidesof which are seen villages, and cultivation on themiddle and lower slopes, and behind them .toweringsummits, known by the names of L^nia and'Opari. Farther south other lofty ridges are insight,as far as the great serrated mountain nearPremedi, named Nemertzika, which bears fromhence S. 49 W. by compass. The hills are lowestto the northward beyond Selasforo, where appearsome very high and distant mountains beyond'Akhridha, between which and Mount Lenia is seenVII.] MACEDONIA. 343the mountain of Elbassan, which I take to be theproper Cimdama, ; it bears N. 23 W. by compass.The boghaz, or gorge through which the riverDevol enters the mountains, after emerging fromthe lake, bears N. 11 W.Sept. 11 — This morning at 7.36 I set out forBerat in the rain, with a wretched set of horses,procured from the menzll, and crossing the plaindirectly in its breadth, and nearly in a due westerlydirection, arrive at 8.45 at Votskop, which nameis now applied to two small villages on the lastroot of the mountains. They are the remains ofan old Wallachiann colony, which at the time ofthe Turkish conquest possessed the circumjacentdistrict, and was very populous, but in consequenceof that event was dispersed. A part ofthem retired to a situation in the neighbouringmountain, where they founded the town of Vos-poli;the security of the situation attractedthither numerous settlers from Greece and otherparts of European Turkey, who having traded toGermany and rendered the place opulent, becameashamed at length of inhabiting the city of theShepherds, and changed the name therefore toMoskopoli, or Moskhopoli, which, meaning thecity of Calves, seems no great improvement. Ihave frequently heard the assertion, that the townonce contained eight or ten thousand houses, buthave great difficulty in believing even the smallerof these numbers. Its greatest prosperity wasabout a century ago ; for seventy years it has beendeclining, and for the last ten so rapidly, that atpresent there are only two or three hundred in-344 MACBDONIA. [Clap.habited houses in the place. After ascending thehills for three quarters of an hour from Votskop,we enter open cultivable hills and downs, which,compared with the steep ascent from Votskop,and the abruptness of the mountains around, maybealmost termed a plain. At the end of it, at10.45, we arrive at Moskopoli, situated at thefoot of a very lofty summit. Whatever it mayonce have been, Mosk6poli now presents only theappearance of a large village surrounded withgardens, in which the Lombardy poplar is veryfrequent, — a tree common in these mountains, butapparently not indigenous, as it is found onlynear the villages.For a considerable distance round the town areseen the ruins of houses, most of which were ofsmall dimensions, and altogether cannot haveamounted to more than a thousand. It is verypossible, however, that these ruins are much posteriorto the great decline of the place. Amongthem are several small tents and temporary coverings,tenanted by families which have been obligedto retire out of the village, under suspicion of beinginfected with the same contagious disease whichraged at Korytza. The disorder, however, is notthe proper plague, or it has been unusually mildin its effects, for not more than forty have died atKorytzd in eight months, and here about fifty inthe last two months, at the beginning of whichtime the disease first made its appearance.Having lost a quarter of an hour by a circuit, toavoid passing through the village, we regain thedirect road, cross some barren heights grown withVII.] MACEDONIA. 345brushwood and wild strawberries, and at about12.30, having gained the highest part of the ridge,descend to a stream flowing from the left towardsthe west, over a wide stony bed between steepmountains, whose sides are well peopled withsmall villages. We descend by a zigzag path,and cross the river at 1.25; then, ascending themountain of 'Opari, at 2.30 arrive at Lavdhari, asmall village of Greeks, or rather Christian Albanians,and the ordinary residence of Shem-seddonBey, son of Mehmet Pasha, of Frashari ',which place is under the authority of Aljr Pasha.After a long delay, caused by the conduct of thetatar, who, instead of searching for a lodging forme,demanded a contribution of money for himself,I obtain admission into a long apartment,open to the roof, and belonging to the Papas, whois likewise Proestos of the Greek community. Atoneend of the room is a ladder descending to theground floor, which is a stable, and at the otherend a fire place. The dispute between the tatarand Proestos continues after our arrival ; the formerasserting that the Papas has a better house,the latter swearing that he has not, by the Christ,by the Cross, by the Bread, by the Virgin*, whichis the orthodox ascending climax of Greek asseveration.The summit rising immediately above Lavdhariis here known by the name of Ostrovitza : fromKorytza it bore N. 86 W. by compass. The riverifpatraiapt* Sravpov, fAo. to ^vfilf fM r^vfia rov XpieroVf fia rov Hayayiay.346 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.which we crossed is called the KJielidhoni ; aGreek name and probably ancient. It joins theDevol at the foot of Mount Lenia, which appearsbefore us to the north-west, and is not much inferiorto the great Tomor in its height and imposingappearance ; the latter mountain is hidfrom us by the range of 'Opari, or Khopari, norwas it visible from Korytz4. Mount Khopari is awesterly continuation of Mount Ostrovitza, andcloses the hollow watered by the Khelidhoni. Boththese summits, as well as Lenia, are thickly studdedon their lower slopes with villages surroundedby cultivation, so that the mountains seem to beinhabited beyond their powers of production, whilethe plains are deserted, — a circumstance to beascribed to the bad government of the Turks, andto the difference between their military characterand that of the Albanians. Inferior as horsemen,the latter are unable to maintain themselves inthe plains, while their hardiness, activity, andgreater skill in the use of the musquet are welladapted to the defence of their mountains.The villages on either side of the hollow whichwe have crossed, form the district of Kh6pari;with the exception of Lavdhari, they are principallyinhabited by ravage Musulman Albanians,of the Toshke tribe, the Christian houses notamounting to more than 230 in thirty villages.In these, though the ordinary language is Albanian,many of the men speak Greek, because theParades are in general from Greece, and becausemany of the male inhabitants find that languagenecessary in their employment, as carriers, orVII.] MACEDONIA. 347keepers of flocks in the neighbouring parts ofGreece. Like the Greeks of Asia Minor, and ofother parts of Turkey where they are greatly inthe minority, they seclude their women. TheWallachiann language is partially used also inthese mountains, being spoken by some remainsof the Wallachia immigration which precededthe rise of the Albanian power ; and thus within ashort distance the traveller may hear five tongues,Turkish, Albanian, Bulgarian, Wallachiann, andGreek, all radically different, though from thelong mixture of the people they have many wordsin common. The Turkish is much the most rare.It is a melancholy reflection that all the Mahometanof these mountains, and who now formthe majority of the population, have become apostatesfrom Christianity since the reign of MahometII., in which they have been imitated by manyof Vlakhiote or Bulgarian race.My host the Papas complains of having to pay300 piastres a year in contributions. The greatstaff* of life, maize, is produced in the Mizakia, ofwhich the market is Berat.Sept. 12. — At 6.40 we leave Lavdhari, pursuethe side of the mountain, and, in the neighbourhoodof two or three small villages, pass throughseveral gardens, where the cornel and walnut aremixed with pear, apple, and some other fruit trees,which, being the growth of colder climates, areeither not found or rarely found in SouthernGreece and the Morea, Having then descended,fc'pano.348 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.we cross at 7.45 a branch of the Khelidh6iii, comingfrom the south, and from thence ascend toPrototypes, which, notwithstanding its name, isnow entirely Musulman, and has a mosque with aminaret, a distinction proper to be mentioned, asthis picturesque adjunct of the mosque is by nomeans general in Albania. The road in manyplaces is destroyed by the late rains, and in allparts is so extremely bad that our pace is veryslow. The tediousness, however, is in great measurecompensated by the beauty and sublimity ofthe prospect. Though the sky still lowers, theweather is less threatening, and admits a view ofthe great summits at intervals. Occasionally theyare illuminated by the sun, while fleecy vapoursare. seen settling on the ravines and vallies. Sometimeswe find ourselves in the midst of these vapoursunable to see more than a few feet before us,until suddenly the mist clearing away, shows thehighest mountains in that partial manner whichnever fails to augment their apparent height andmagnitude. Continuing to ascend over ruggedhills, we halt for 15 minutes at 10.45 at Dushari,situated under a woody peak called Bosnia, thecontinuation of the Khopari range : half an hourbefore Dushari we crossed a stream from the south,which unites with the Khelidhoni near its junctionwith the Devol, of which the previous course was fromthe north-eastward, but which, after the junction,flows along the south-eastern side of Mount Lenia.At 12.45, after a continual ascent from Dushari,we arrive at the Comment Litharge or Cut Rack,KofifUyoy XiOopc.VII.] MACEDONIA. 349in Albanian Guri Preii. This is a small rock risingfrom the crest of a ridge which ranges with MountLenia, and divides the hollow of the river Khelid-hon from that of another principal branch of theDevol, which flows along the eastern side of MountTomdr. The ridge being exactly at this point lowerand more accessible than in any other part, the^' Cut Rock" is the natural point of communicationfrom the one valley to the other, and for thatreason has been occupied by a castle which surroundsthe rock. Comment Litharge was takenfrom the Pasha of Berat, about seven years ago, byAlJTy who now holds it with a garrison of a dozendirty half-starved Albanians. The fort is nothingbut a thin wally surrounding a quadrangular space,in the centre of which rises a kula, or small keep,standing upon the litharge or rock itself : this towerwas formerly the only fortress. The poor soldiershave a few chambers with fire-places in the tower,but so dirty and miserable that I prefer remainingon the flat roof of the tower in the midst of fog,rain, and wind ; doubly chilling after the latesultry weather in the plains. The soldiers complainof the cold in winter, when the snow lies onthe ground for several months ; but still more ofthe wind, which rushes through this lofty openingin the ridge, in concentrated blasts from whateverquarter it may come. Mutton they contrive toobtain occasionally, as even in winter some sheepremain in the sheltered vallies, and sometimes alittle kalambokki, but neither wine nor spirits, theirteam consisting only of romana, or black bread :and having never yet received any pay, they must360 Macedonia. [chap.rob, starve, or desert, but for the contributions ofpassengers.After dining on the roof of the tower we quitGuri Preii at 8.15, and soon exchange its fogs andcold for the sunshine of a sheltered valley ; in descendingto the bottom of which, we pass at 2.45through Dombreni, a Mahometan village withmosque and minaret, pleasantly situated amonggardens and fields of maize, but bearing marks c^the late war between the two vezirs in a rained kulabelonging to the Bey, who resides in the village.All this valley, with the including slopes from GuriPreii to the crest of Tomor, is called Tomoritza.From Dombreni there is a descent of another halfhour to the branch of the Devol last-mentioned,which we cross at 3.15; then, after riding for ashort distance along the bed, begin to ascend fromits left bank the lower declivity of Mount Tomor.In the ascent, one of the horses, mounted by apostillion, falls to rise no more. Continuingthrough a very uneven and woody region, wearrive at length at the foot of the stupendous cliffsand forests of the great summit, from which manyfragments loosened by the rains have recentlyfallen into th road. At the end of two hoursfrom the river we have made the tour of thenorthern end of the summit, and are beginning toproceed along its western face just under the highestcliffs, which are entirely hid from view by thevapours.As we advance along the western side of themountain, the sun becomes visible at short intervals,and lights up portions of the great plain ofVII.] MACEDONIA. 361the Mizakia with the sea beyond it, but theseviews are soon shut out again by interposing cloudsand rain. Just as it becomes dark we obtain a sightof the village of Tomor or Donor in the highesthabitable part of the mountain, and perceive on ourright, at the extremity of the long rugged slope ofthe mountain, the Castle of Berat, and the valleyof the river Uzumi. At 7 we arrive at the village,and as the rain is falling heavily, I am not sorryto obtain speedy admittance into a tower belongingto the family of a Papas recently deceased, whowas the Proestos of Tom6r. The village which issituated immediately under the immense cliffs,which surround the summit of the mountain, isbuilt amidst a great number of walnut tree ofnative growth : in other parts of the mountainbeeches and pines are the most common trees.The village is inhabited entirely by pastors of theMizakia, who remain here during the months ofJune, July, August, and September, old style, andthen return to their pastures and winter villages inthe plain* Some of these persons possess severalthousand head of cattle and sheep, from whichbutter and cheese are made, and labouring oxenreared for the supply of Rumill, Albania, andGreece. The butcher has scarcely any demandfor the oxen, as beef is not much eaten by Turks 'or Christians either in these or any other parts ofTurkey, and is seldom to be seen but in the Frankor Jewish houses of the great towns. The lydianplains are subject to inundations, which sometimesdeprive the cattle of wholesome pasturein thB spring, and generally cause' a mortality,352 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.as happened this year, and rendered necessarya large importation of beasts from the Ultra-nubianprovinces. The pastors of the Mizakiaare chiefly of Vlakhrote descent, and speak bothWallachiann and Albanian. A Bolu-bashi, appointedby the Pasha of Berat, resides at Tomor,but has no power independent of the primates, thechief of whom, now present, is one Demetrius, whohas a tolerable house as compared with the generalityof the miserable huts. He is one of the fewpersons in the community who can speak Greek,which he has learned by having travelled in theprosecution of his trade into several parts of Greece,particularly Acarnania and JEtolia^ great feedingcountries. I find him a well-informed man for hisstation, and anxious to supply me with every thingwhich the village can afford, nor can I prevail onhim to accept payment for the provisions consumedby us. In truth, it is by no means uncommon tofind not only more hospitality, but more informationamong the simple shepherds and husbandmenof Greece, than among the inhabitants of thetowns.Demetrius describes to me a Hellenic fortificationon the summit of a height rising from a steepslope, which half an hour to the southward of thevillage of Tomor is surrounded at the back withprecipitous cliffs, separating it from the upperheights of the mountain.Sept. 13. — The mountain of Kudhesi, to thesouth-eastward of Avlona, is conspicuous fromTomor, and to the left of it, more distant, is seenthat of Dukai, Jamaica Dukadhes, in Chimera.VII.] MACEDONIA. 353At 7 A.M. we begin to descend the mountain toBerat. Its immense declivity is interrupted byvery uneven ground and numerous ravines.Sometimes the road leads over sloping strata ofbare limestone rock, rendered slippery by therain, which still continues to fall, and in someplaces is so narrow and muddy that it could notbe more difficult in the middle of winter. Severalsmall villages appear on the right and left, chieflyMahometan. Little cultivation is seen, but thereare many large flocks of sheep and goats in theopen pasture. In other parts the hills are coveredwith small trees, principally oaks, mixed withbrushwood, consisting chiefly of pimari, ilex, andlentisk. At 8.40, passing along the side of a precipicewhere the narrow path has been renderedstill narrower by the late rains, two of the loadedhorses fall over, roll down for about fifty feet, andwould have been precipitated to the bottom of theravine, but for the trees and bushes which arrestedtheir fall ; neither baggage nor horses were hurt.This causes a delay until 9.At 1 1 we arrive in a narrow valley, where theriver Uzumi flows from the south, inclosed on theother side by a long mountain of no great height.Here the road turns to the westward with thecastle of Berat in front, joins the loannina road atthe river side, and follows the right bank. As weapproach Berat the valley widens, and then againbecomes narrow, until, at the Castle Hill, there isspace only for the river between the precipices ofthat hill and the point of the opposite range.The Kassaba, or town, is divided into two partsVOL. I. A a354 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.by the gorge at the Castle Hill. Goritza, on theopposite side of the river, inhabited solely byGreeks, forms a third makhala ; and the castle itself,which is occupied only by the Pasha's palace andsome houses of Christian Toshke, is a fourth. Ienter the Kassaba at 12, and in half an hour more,in passing the castle gate, to the Greek quarter,observe in the wall adjacent to the outer and innergates, particularly at the latter, some small remainsof a massy Hellenic wall. After some difficulties,produced by the folly or roguery of thetatar, whom I discharge immediately, I obtain alodging in the house of the principal Greek merchant,which by no means resembles the houses ofthe same class in Greece. Even in the best apartmentthere are neither glass windows, nor a ceiling,nor furniture to the divan, and the light appearsthrough the shutters, floor, and tiles. It israther a bad omen to find three physicians residinghere. Two are Corfiotes, living wretchedly; thethird is Dr. G. SakeMrios, of K6zani, who washappily settled at Ambelakia, on Mount OssQjwhen, at the request of Ibrahim, he was obligedby Aiy to change his situation from a place whichenjoys the comforts of civilized Europe more thanany other in Greece, for the centre of Albanianbarbarism. Dr. S. is well acquainted with German,Italian, French, Latin, and ancient Greek,has translated (in company with some others) thefour first volumes of the Voyage d'Anacharsis intomodem Greek, and has printed the first andfourth ; but has given up the work, lest suspicionsshould attach to him, because a part of the trans-vii.]MACEDONIA. 365nation was made by Riga, and because the firstvolume was printed by another of the conspiratorsof Vienna, who were betrayed by the Austriangovernment to the Porte. Dr. S., anxious tobenefit his countrymen, and sincerely attached toletters, is now engaged in translating into hisnative language the general history of Greece, byCousin Despreaux, and is already advanced as faras the seventh volume.The character given of Ibrahim Pasha, even bythose not attached to his service, is favourable.He is said to be a humane and lenient governor,and in many respects a favourable contrast to theTepeleniote. He is desirous of peace, but his twoenterprizing neighbours will not permit him, particularlyAly, who will probably be satisfied withnothing short of his destruction. Ibrahim, however,is himself an usurper : he was son*in*law ofhis predecessor Ismail, at whose death he seizedthe castle, battered the palace, where MehmetPasha, the son of Ismail, had taken refuge, anddrove him out. Mehmet is now living in povertyat Livonia. Ibrahim has lately finished, or ratherhas not quite finished, a lofty building at onecorner of the castle, consisting of three or fourstories, to which a palace in the usual Turkishtaste is attached. Here he constantly resides,scarcely ever moving from his divan but once intwo or three months to some neighbouring village,and very seldom entering even his harem, unlessit be that part where his treasures are deposited :he has only one wife, the mother of a son, who,though only six or eight years old, is alreadyA a2356 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.styled pasha, and has an establishment of officers.Sept. 14. — ^^This forenoon I visit His Highness,for being a venir he is styled by the Greeks v^Xo-nfC) like Aiy. Nothing is here to be seen of thecrowd, and noise, and multitude of dirty Albaniansoldiers, which give such an air of business or confusionto the palace of Aljr Pasha; only a fewtatars, or other persons silently seated, in attendancein some long passages which lead to thePashd's apartments. After passing through ananti-chamber, in which several handsome youthswith pallid countenances are reading the Koranaloud, I find the Pash stretched out at full lengthin one comer of his sofa in a small apartment,neat, but quite deficient in the magnificence whichis often overdone in Aiys palaces. The latter, ona first visit, is generally found walking about theroom ; after a few words of salutation, he immediatelyasks his guest to be seated, more polite inthis than Russians in authority, whose interviewswith persons of inferior rank are on foot. Aljrseems to have adopted his method as a compromisebetween the ordinary European custom andthat of the Turks on these occasions. But Ibrahimhas made no such advances in civilization : hedoes not move from his posture when I enter, butmerely makes a motion for me to be seated. Nopipes or coffee are handed : he speaks very little,and shows nothing of the curiosity, shrewdness,or engaging manners of his brother of loannina,as the latter styled him in the letter of introductionwhich I brought. In manner and conversation.]MACEDONIA. 357tion^ however, he is neither rude nor haughty.He invites me to visit any part of his territories Imay wish, and has no recollection of having seenan English traveller here before, though captainsof English ships have not unfrequently visited him,both here and at Avlona ; and not long since, onthe occasion of a shipwreck near Apologia, heclothed and fed a part of the crew and sent themto Constantinople. Some attempts to raise theship are now in progress.The dominions of this Vezir extend to a distanceonly of four hours to the south, having been reducedto that limit by Aly Pasha, who had beforeconquered the country as far as Pale Pogoghianiinclusive, from Kurt Pasha, the predecessor ofIsmail. To the north Ibrahim commands as faras Lusnia, distant six hours on the road to Duras.He has lately acquired the district of Elbassan,and in that direction his dominion extends farthestinto the mountains. Tjnrana and Kavaya are anappanage of the Sultan Mother, and are his boundariesin the maritime plains. At Less, inclusive,begins the government of the Vezir of Skodra.Ibrahim's brother was Pasha of Avlona ; since hisdeath the government has been filled up withIbrahim's name in the yearly nomination of thePorte ; and last year that of his young son Solimanwas inserted, the Porte having been willing toaugment his power as a counterpoise to that of Al,The Beratinos \ to use the familiar Greek expression,is at present greatly in want of money,^ Bcpanvoc*358 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.and, having gained his ends at Elbassan, has beenglad to put an end to the war with him of Skodra \Ibrahim's necessities obliged him last year to oppresssome of the villages, but he was checked bythe Turkish beys of Bert, who own many of them,and whom he has not mastered so completely ashas been done at lodnnina by Al^^. He possessesa considerable landed property, having, when hesucceeded to the Pashalik, purchased the malik-hans, or farm, for life, of all the Belies, whichhad been held by Ismail Pasha. As the annualpayment to the Porte was calculated by the relativevalue of com and money, when he obtainedthe grants he has been a great gainer by the debasementof the Turkish coinage ; and althoughthe Porte will probably make a demand upon himin consequence; such demands are not very quicklycomplied with in Albania, when the persons uponwhom they are made have the means of avoidingthem.Corn-lands in the adjacent plains generally payhalf the produce to the owner : farther north, inthe proportion of three to the cultivator and twoto the owner; but in the latter case the farmerbears a greater share of the expences. Com ismeasured here by the Bare of eight Kiase, eachof which is 100 Airpmc, or Greek pounds, whichare the same as Venetian. The crop of the ricegrounds, watered by the river in the plain ofBerat, is divided into three parts ; one of whichgoes to the Pasha for miri, and the expence of1 ;. V6 IWd^pac.Vll.] MACEDONIA. 359keeping the channels in order, the other two tothe owner and the cultivator. Wheat in the plainof Berat and in the M izakia is sown at two seasons,October or November, and February. The latterbears a small hard grain, and makes excellentflour : it is called Kutz^li. Barley is also sown inFebruary. The last harvest was very bad fromthe same cause which produced mortality amongthe cattle, — the excess of rain during the winterand spring. Flax is sown at the present season.Kalambokki (which is chiefly arabositi or maize)in May : it is not watered, except near the riveror near the canals ^ derived from it. No Christianhas any landed property in the Mizakia, but thepastures are open to the public on paying a moderateKi^aXmriKOj or tax on each head of cattle.Berat, in vulgar Greek ro Mercian, is named bythe writers of the Lower Empire BcXaypira, or BcXI-ypoSa, which latter is still the title of the bishopric.It is nothing more than the Greek formof the same Sclavonic word, Beligrad (white fortress),of which Berat is the Albanian corruption.The name shows that the place was a part of theBulgarian conquests, and long in possession ofthat people.The castle is defended by a strong battlement inthe Turkish style, raised on a wall which is flankedby square towers, but armed with only two or threesmall pieces of ordnance. The greater part of theinclosed space slopes in such a manner as to beentirely exposed to another height now coveredwith vineyards to the north-east, where the Pasha360 MACEDONIA. [CHAP.has lately contracted a small square castle. Atthe foot of this hill is the principal Turkish quarter,which extends from thence up to the cliffs ofthe castle-hill, and is pervaded by a long bazarfrom one end to the other. The extremity nearthe castle is the only part of it inhabited byGreeks. In Goritza, or the quarter on the leftbank of the river, there are about sixty houses,which, added to those in the castle, make theChristian families amount altogether to four hundred.In the Kassaba there are about six hundredMahometan houses. Just below Goritza the riveris crossed by a handsome bridge which was builtby Kurt Pasha. From the left bank of the riverrises a long and lofty ridge named Spir4gri >,beautifully clothed with wood on the slope. Atthe foot of it stands a palace which was built byIsmail Pasha, and which, having been much injuredby the shot from the castle in the war whichfollowed that Pasha's death, has since been neglected.Below Berat the Uzumi winds to theN.N.W. through a valley called Topalti, whichexpands to a breadth of three miles between theparallel ranges of Tomor and Spiragr, and at theend of eight or nine miles opens into the greatmaritime plains or champaign country which ancientlybelonged to Bullis, Apollonia, Dimallum,Dyrrachium, and some other cities of minor note.The Uzumi, soon after entering the plain, makesThe final i in this name, nians in their pronunciationas in Beati and many others, omitting it.is the Grreek form : the Alba-vii.]MACEDONIA. 361a turn to the left, and then receives the Devol,not far from the place where the latter emergesout of a narrow gorge in the mountains to theeastward.The castle of Bert, although a lofty point, issituated too far in the valley to command an extensiveview : the sea is not visible. To the norththe mountains near Kr6ia and Tjnrana are pointedout to me ; and in the opposite direction in a linewith the Uzumiy the hills near Skrepari and Dus*nitza, above which rises the great serrated crest ofNem^rtzika. The range of Tomor shuts out allview to the eastward, and the parallel range almostequally in the opposite direction.The Hellenic remains in the castle wall, andtheir situation on a precipitous height overhangingthe river, at the entrance of a valley leading fromthe plains of Illyria into the strongest parts ofEpirus, afford indubitable proofs that Berat standson the site of an ancient city of some importance.But there is no evidence in history sufficientlyprecise to afford any certainty as to its name.The probabilities are in favour of Antipathy,which was certainly hereabout, and is describedby the historian as a great city strongly fortified,and situated in a narrow pass \ It was taken in theyear B.C. 200, by L. Apuleius, who was detachedby the consul Sulpicius from his camp in the neighbouringplain, with directions to lay waste the Macedonianfrontier. In strictness, indeed, this countrywas a part, not of Macedonia, but of Titania,Liv. 1. 31, c. 27.362 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. VII.Dassaretiay or lUyria ; but nothing is more likelythan that the kings of Macedonia had added itto their dominions when their power was at itsheight, in the ages preceding the Roman wars,and when a new name may have been given tothis place in honour of Antipater.CHAPTER VIII.ILLYRIA, EPIRUS.From Berat to ApoUoma^Flsaxi of Topalti— Vakopoli— Dona-fit— ^Luari — Stafixi — ^Riyer lenity — Radostin — monasteryof P611ina — Poghiani — Apollonia — Ananias Byllis, OricumRivera Aous, Celydnus^ and Cleanthes — Nympfuevm —Return to Berat — sand to loannina — River Uzumi — Totjer —Venakos — Mount Trebusin — Klis^ra — Aoi Siena — Defeat ofPhilip by T. Qtdnctius — Mounts JSropus and Asnaus —Pieced — Zagoiia, Kieperia« Eleusa — Tjer80v& — MountNem6rtzika — Ostanitza — Pyrrhi CaMra^ and retreat ofPhilip thither — Konitza — Rivera Viosa and Voidhomati —Mavro viii — Pogogbiani — Raven — Retreat of Philip fromPyrrhi Castra to Mount Lingon — Sources of the river Ka-lama— Kalbaki — ^Lykostomo — lo&nnina.Sept. 21. — ^^The route from Berat to Avlona afterdescending into the plain follows the course of theBeating, or Uzumi, at a small distance from theriver, and sometimes passes along the bank itself.The road is wide and rendered very dusty by cars,which we meet, drawn by buffaloes. These beastsare entirely covered with dried mud, a consequenceof the habit which they have in the summer,of rolling or immei^ng themselves up totheir necks, and even to their nostrils, in the mudand shallow water of the rivers, lakes, or ponds.There they remain enjoying the coolness, freefrom the torment of insects, many hours at a time364 ILLYRIA. [chap.and when they emerge, obtain in the dried mudan armour against the flies. The carts are loadedwith wood, hay, and other commodities for theuse of the town. The wheels have spokes andvery broad fellies, narrowed at the edge, but areso loosely and clumsily fixed to the axle as tosway about at every step with an incessant creaking.At the end of 1 hour and 50 minutes wecross the river at 5 p.m. by a handsome bridge,which was built by Kurt Pashd. Near it we meetthe metropolitan bishop of Velegrada, or Berat,coming into town from his residence at Kolkon-dash, and accompanied by two priests with yata-glans in their girdles and pistols in their holsters.The bishop's house in the castle of Berat is occupiedby the Pasha's Grammatical, a Greek whomanages all the money concerns of the lazy Ibrahim,making good use of the favour he enjoys forhis own advantage, and affecting such pride inhis official station as to be above visiting thePasha's physician, the learned Sakellario. Halfan hour beyond the bridge the road ascends thehills which bound the plain of Topaltl on the west,and at 6 we arrive at Vakopoli, a village of 25Greek houses in a retired situation among thehills, surrounded with gardens, and an extensivetract of vineyards. There are two patches inthe village, with one of whom I lodge in a ruinouscottage, but the best in the place. He informsme that at Pakhtos, a village among the hills, anhour and a half to the left of Luari, which is onthe road from hence to Avlona, there is a fountainof a<r^aXrov, which rises like water out of theVIII.] ILLYRIA. 365ground. Strabo describes a fountain of warmwater mixed with asphaltum at the NymphseumofApoUonia^ where a bituminous substance wasextracted also in a solid form. But the latter mine,which is still wrought, is atSelenltza, near the Viosa,much nearer to AuUm and Apolhma. The fountainof pitch at Pakhtos, therefore, is different fromthat of Strabo, and shows the great extent of thesubterraneous riches of this quarter of Greece.The same papas describes a place near a villagecalled Kali, where are two Paled Castra, one ona peak above the other, and the latter immediatelyabove the river Viosa, or Vulva, as he pronouncesthe name ; they are in a hilly district on the rightbank of that river, not far from its entrance intothe plains. He measured one of the stones in thecastle wall, and found it 14 crirtOa/iaic, or spanslong, and 4 high. Here also, he adds, is a greatrock, inscribed with ^payKiKa ypafAfiaray OS Frankwords, which nobody can read ; perhaps they areLatin, though I have often heard the same descriptiongiven to Hellenic inscriptions by halfeducated Greeks. The ruins are the same asthose which were described to me at Tepeleni'.There is a small village on the site named Grasa Slavonic name analogous to the GreekKastri. The two castles probably belonged to thesame Greek city, the upper having been theAcropolis. Kali is reckoned 7 hours from Vako-Strabo, p. 316. by the Latin inscription whichThey are the ruins of Bui- he found,lis, as Dr. Holland has proved366 Illyria. [chap.poll, 6 from Av16iia, and 5 from ApoUania ; butbeing inhabited by wild Toskidhes, not in thegovernment of Ibrahim nor controlled by Al,whose authority does not extend along the Viosa,below Liopesi, it will, I fear, be inaccessible tome.The Greeks of Vakopoli, in common withthose of all the villages which lie on the greatroutes, suffer extremely from the Albanian soldierswho quarter upon them.Sept. 22. — At 7 this morning we begin to crossa ridge which separates Vakopoli from a southerlybranch of the great plain of Mizaki^, by theGreeks called Mizakla, or Mizakia. At 8.30 wearrive at Donafr6s, a small Musulman village witha mosque, situated in a retired valley amongheights, which are the last falls of Spir4gri, andthe hills of Dusnitza. This is the frontier ofMizakia and M alak&stra, which last district beginsfrom the western side of the plain of Topalti, and,skirting the roots of these hills, extends to nearAvlona. Leaving Donafros, we have a largeopening of the plain of Mizakia on the right, andone hour and a half distant in that direction, thelarge village of Dronovitza, inhabited by a mixedpopulation of Mahometanss and Christians. At9.30 Kernel is on our left, a scattered villageoccupying two summits, between which is a cultivatedhollow. One of the summits is crownedwith a church, the other with a mosque. At10.20, crossing an extremity of one of the heights,we pass through the skirts of Luari, a small village; the hills towards Pakhtos are chalky orgypsies. At Luari, one of my servants beingVIII.] ILLYRIA. 367seized with a violent fit of the intermittent fever,we are obliged to remain at a khan, a quarter ofan hour beyond the village, till 4 p.m. We thencross a large branch of the plain, to the projectionof a low root of the mountain which bounds it tothe westward, and having turned the extremity,arrive at 5.35 at Stairs, where a large churchand a bazar show that it is a Christian village ofrelative importance, though the houses are merehuts of wicker and mud, without chimneys, andthe bazar a row of miserable shops. The cultivationof this noble plain, capable of supplying grainto all lUyria and Epirus with an abundance ofother productions, is confined to a few patches ofmaize near the villages. Nevertheless the Miza-kia is as well peopled as most of the great plains,either of Asiatic or European Turkey, and betterthan many of them. This part of it is well wooded ;the hedges and great trees are festooned with wildvines, which produce a small grape of excellentflavour : and the villages in general are embosomedin clusters of trees, the huts standing far apart,each with its piece of garden ground. At Staflriwe cross a stone bridge over a lazy rivulet, namedlenity, flowing from the heights on our left towardsthe Apis, and here inclosed between high banks.At 6.50, after having traversed another bay ofthe plain to another point of the hills, we arrive atthe large scattered Turkish village of Radostin,agreeably situated at the foot of low woody hillsabove a grove of fine oaks. Some of the inhabitants show an inclination to insult us as we pass,until they espy a negro tatar, a favourite seriesILLYRIA. [chap.want of the Vezir Ibrahim, who accompanies me,and who is well known throughout his dominions.The burying-ground of Radostin is full of pieces offluted columns, and other fragments of the goodtimes of antiquity. Having crossed a height beyondit, and descended a little of its western slope,we arrive at a quarter past 7 at a monastery, ofwhich I take the correct name to be ^ iravayca riic'AiroXX^vcac, as Standing upon a part of the site ofApollonia, but which the ignorant monks havebeen pleased to convert into the ridiculous title offi wavayla tov 'AiroXXftivoc : the vulgar name of theplace is Polling, or Pomona. A small village namedPoyani^ lies at the foot of the hill to the north; andnearer to the monastery, in the opposite direction,a few labourers' huts called ra KaXvjSca, in a narrowvale lying between the hill of the monastery anda parallel low ridge, clothed with small beeches.Behind the monastery, towards the summit of thehill, are some gardens and vineyards in a ruinedand neglected state, (like the greater part of theextensive lands of the monastery,) the cause ofwhich is the exposed situation of the place on aroute much frequented by the Albanian soldiery,and so convenient as a halting place that parties ofthem often remain here for two or three days forthe sake of the free quarters, and in the course ofthese unwelcome visits have ruined all the cellsand other apartments of the building. The bestlodging I can find is the cell of the Igumenos, alittle chamber perfectly Albanian as to dirtiness,VIII.] ILLYRIA. 369and of which the thick stone walls are gaping openat one comer. Only two monks now reside here.The church has been built and repaired at differentperiods, but is chiefly composed of Roman tiles,and of ancient squared stones of a large size takenfrom the ruins of Apologia ; some of these havebeen carved into monstrous ornaments of the lowerages. There remain the sepulchral monumentsof two 'Hyov/ucvoc of the ninth century. The monasterycontains some fine pieces of sculpture,which having been found, for the most part, inploughing the fields on the ancient site, have beenfixed into the walls in the room of other stones displacedfor their reception. It is to this custom ofadorning their convents and churches, which stillgenerally prevails among the Greeks, that we areindebted for the preservation of the greater partof existing inscriptions and remains of art. Ofthose in the walls of the monastery of Apolloniathe most remarkable are as follows: — 1. The bustof a matron with the veil thrown over the hair,and then passing under the breast. This bust themonks say was quite perfect, until some soldiersof Berat thought proper to amuse themselves byfiring their musquets at it, which has destroyedthe nose and chin. 2. The bust of a young man,with curled hair, and a short thick beard coveringall the lower part of his face ; the breast and rightshoulder are bare, and a loose garment hangs overthe left shoulder and under the breast. Both thesebusts are of the human size, and of white marble,apparently Italian. The nose of this last bust wasdestroyed by the plough when it was discovered.VOL. I. B b370 ILLYRIA. [Chalk.3. A small enema or monumental stone, representingin relief two young persons in loose garmentswith the right hands joined, and the left hand of thefemale upon the left shoulder of the man. Theface of the man is perfect, that of the female isdestroyed. Her name was Prima, as appears bythe letters DPIMAXAIPE over her head. 4. Avery spirited Priscus or Satyr seated on a rock,with his goat's legs crossed, grinning and blowingon the pan-pipe, which he holds with both hands.5. A fragment of a prize, representing the lowerpart of the drapery, and part of the wing of afemale figure flying, together with a man's frontface upon a shield ; around the face are locks ofhair, twisted upon the forehead. 6. Another similarfragment representing in low relief a man settingone foot on the hip of a woman, and dragging herbyher arms, which are passed over her head.Behind him is a warrior with a shield and flyingrobe, in the attitude of combat : the very commonsubject probably of the Greeks and Amazons.Underneath the figures is aii Ionic border, whichis continued round one of the other sides of thestone : there are some other figures hid in the wall.This fragment and the preceding appear to havebeen parts of the prize of the same building. 7. Asepulchral stone, with a ' man on horseback : verygood. 8. Another enema, bearing the figure ofa bearded old man with a long staff in one hand ;below is the head of a greyhound looking up at theman. This is roughly wrought, but in good design9. A dog seizing an ass, both animals onfull Stretch : an Ionic border below shows that itVin.] ILLYRIA. 371was part of a prize. 10. Another piece of prize toohigh in the wall to be seen ; it seems to be a manon horseback opposed to a lion, while behind himanother wild beast seizes an ox. 11. Two frontfaces with locks of hair hanging down on eitherside ; part of a prize. 12. The head of a lion,which anciently served for a spout.There are only three inscriptions, and all merelysepulchral, but curious as all containing Romannames, and thus according with the known fact ofApollonia having been much resorted to by theRomans, who sent hither their youth to study theliterature and philosophy of Greece. Augustushad thus passed six months when the death ofCeesar called him to Rome'. One of the inscriptionsis in memory of Lucius Lucilius Tere(ntius),who died at the age of 65^ ; another was in honourof Titus Julius Clemens, who died at 45, andwhose wife's name, Claudia There, was only halfRoman'. The third is the monument in honourof Prima.It was at the end of the seventh century beforethe Christian sera, that this fertile part ois lUyriafirst received the laws and customs of Greece.Dyrrhachium and Apollonia were then colonizedby the Corcyra, who, according to ancient custom,placed at the head of each colony a leaderfrom Corinth, as being the metropolis of Corcyraitself. The northern colony was named Epidam-I Sueton. in August, c. 8, ' Inscription No. 4.10, &c. Dion. Cass. 1. 45, ' Inscription No. 5.c. 3. Pater. 1. 2, c. 59.Bb 2372 ILLYRIA. [CIIAP.nas, the southern Glacis, from Gylax, the Corinthianleader, but neither appellation continuedlong in use, those of Dyrrhachium and Apologiahaving prevailed \ Apologia is described by theancient authors as situated at a distance of tenstades from the right bank of the Aous', fifty' orsixty ^ stades, or four miles ^, from the sea, twodays' journey to the south of Dyrrhachium *,twenty-five Roman miles from Anion % and threehundred and twenty stades, or thirty Romanmiles', from Amantiaia. ' There are some traces ofwalls close to the monastery on the north, extendingfrom thence upwards to the summit of the hill,and along that summit in a northerly direction.Below the monastery they followed the crest of theridge to the plain, where their traces are lost.There is also part of a transverse wall which, a littlebelow the monastery, branches from the main wallto the northward. To the southward of the hill of themonastery are the remains of two temples, one inthe valley at the Kalyvia, the other beyond thatvalley, at the extremity of the heights which risefrom that side of it. The former temple appearsfrom some fragments to have been Ionic. TheThucyd. 1. 1, c. 24, 26. ' Scylax in 'IXXvpio*.Scymn. Ch. v. 435, 438. * Strabo, ibid.Strabo, p. 316. Plin. H. N. • Plin. Hen. 1. 8, c. 23.1. 3, c. 26. Euseb. Chron. * Scylax, ibid.U. C. 120. Pausan. Eliac. ^ Antonio. Idn. p. 829.pr. c. 22. Stephan. in *Atone Weasel.Xbtvia, Av/5^'x^oy, VvXaicia* * Scylax, ibid.Strabo, ibid. Ptolem. 1. 3, ' Tab. Plunger, seg. 5.c. 13.Veil.] ILLYRIA. 373low situation and deep loam of this valley seemedto promise, that some considerable remains of thetemple might still be concealed below the surface ;but on inquiring of the monks, I was informed thatno less than seventy cart loads of materials hadbeen taken from thence to build the new serai atBek^t. Similar spoliations have been committedat the western temple, and so recently that theexcavation made to carry away the foundations,of which not a single stone is left, affords a verytolerable measurement of the length and breadthof the building. One column standing in solitarygrandeur is the only part of it which has been sparedby the Pasha's masons. The length of the templewas about 135 feet, the breadth 55 ; the column,which has 20 Doric flemings, with a capital morespreading than in the Parthenon, and probablymore ancient, is 14 feet in circumference at itsbase, and consequently 4-^ feet in diameter, which,compared with the dimensions of the ground plan,and supposing an intercolumniation of 5f feet,would lead to the belief that the temple was ahexastyle with 14 columns on the side. The extantcolumn is composed of 12 pieces of stone, and theheight is about 22 feet, including the capital andplinth, which are of a single stone, and togetherabout 2 feet 9 inches high. The material is a dullwhite limestone, hard, but nevertheless much injuredby time and the effect of the sea air. AtKalj^via there is a fountain, perhaps the ancientEphesus which was near the gymnasium ^ TheseStrabo, p. 424.374 Illyria [chap.are the only vestiges I can find ofrthe great Apologia.The existing line of walls meeting in anangle at the summit of the hill behind, the monastery,and diving from, thence to the north, tendsto show that the city faced the north-west, and thatthe two temples and gymnasium were without thewalls, which would have been very far from asingularity. It is possible, at the same time, thatthe present remains of walls may not be of Hellenictimes, as there are no certain marks of such antiquityin them. If the woody height to the southwardwere explored, some other vestiges mightperhaps be found, which would give a clue tx thedimensions and general plan of the city.The hill of Apologia is not of sufficient heightto command a very, extensive prospect, or to afforda very advantageous geographical station, thoughby no means useless in this respect. To the southwestwardis seen' the island of Sazona, twentydegrees to the right of the northern end of which isthe mouth of the Viosa, and seventy-two fartherto the right that of the river of Berat, forming along promontory. The farthest part of the shoreto the north is the hill of Kavaya, appearing as anisland. ( A little to the left of Sazona. is seen CapeGlossa, or the Acroceraunian extremity, betweenwhich and the island is the southern entrance intothe Gulf of Avlona. That town is not visible,being hidden by some heights on the eastern sideof the lagoon, which extends along the shore atthe northern entrance of the gulf. To the left ofGlossa occurs the Acroceraunian ridge, separatedby the valley of Nivitza from the range of Griva,VIII.] Illyria. 375which bounds the valley of the Visa to the westward.At the northern extremity of this range isthe district of Kudhesi, containing twenty villagesand a lofty summit, forming a conspicuous terminationto the range of Griva. To the left of themountain of Kddhesi appears that of Skrepdri, tothe south-east of Mount Tomor, then the giganticTom6r itself, occupying eight degrees of the horizon.The hill of Spider, which bounds the plainof Bert, extends several degrees to the northwardof Mount Tomor, and in the midst of the plainwatered by the Apsus, or river of Herat, is seenthe height of Ardhenltza, so called from a monasteryon the summit.The valleys of Dukadhes and Nivitza formedanciently the territory of the Martini, or Aman-tenses,or Amantes?, the last of which forms waspreferred by the people, and was employed bythem on their money, in memory of their originfrom the Abates of Euboea, who settled near theCeraunian mountains after the war of Troy, andpossessed Oricus and Chromium'. That the districtof Amantiaia lay in that direction from Apologiaand Oricus is confirmed by Ceesar', whilethe distances afforded by Scylax and the TabularItinerary, added to the evidence of Hellenic walls'A/Aovriwc, •A/»ovrutc, ' Caesar de* Bell. Civ. 1. 3,"Aiia^TtQ* c. 40.. . . . jca« 'Kiiavrlrtiv * Scylax in ^IXXvpcoc. Tab.fKtvav 'Dpar(>r — Cabin. ap. Peutinger, seg. v. The formerStephan. in *A/3aVric. Pansan. places Amantiaia at 320 stades,Eliac. pr. c. 22. Stephen. in the latter at 30 Roman miles*A/3ayrcc> *A/*avr/a, Etym. from Apollonia.Mag. in "Aftoi/rec.376 iLLYRiA. [chap.at Nivitza, show that place to have been the siteof the town of Amantiaia. The only objection whichcan be made to this conclusion is, that accordingto Ptolemy both BuUis and Amantiaia were on theseacoast between Anion and the mouth of theCelydnus^ in which he seems to agree with Caesar,who just before he quitted this quarter for the siegeof Dyrrhachium, left a detachment of his fleet underMelius to prevent supplies from being thrown intoOricus from Amantiaia and BuUis. The only modeof reconciling the apparent inconsistency is to supposethat Amantiaia, Bullis, and Apollonia, possessingall the country adjacent to the Gulf of Anion,and being all situated at some distance from thecoast, had each of them a port or maritime dependencyon the gulf. It was probably to thesemaritime places that Ptolemy alluded, and towardsthem that the vigilance of Melius was chiefly directed,in order to intercept supplies intended forOricus.The branch of the Aous, which irrigated thevalley of Amantiaia, would seem from Lycophron tohave been named Cleanthes*. As to Thronium^Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 13.cZc ^AfiavTiav ir6\ivnXtfffCi, ircXac hk y^c 'ArivriiwK fidXtiVfnpdicrty was aini^y aiirv vafftrertu Xhra^fTov XaoPlrov ydfia HoKvdyOovc ipiimy*Lycoph* V. 1043.The poet supposes Elephe- brought a colony first to Othxo-nor the apxoc ^A^yrmy^ who, nus (Fan), and afterwards toaccording to Homer, was slain have founded Amantiaia.by Agenor at Troy, to haveVIII.] ILLYRIA. 377it appears to have stood at the northern extremityof the Aventine territory, on the borders of thatof Apologia, for it was reduced by the ApoUoniataeand added to their district in an early age, asappears by an epigram annexed to a groupe of statuaryat Olympia, which the ApoUoniatae haddedicated on that occasion from the tenth of thespoiltIt is remarkable that the Roman road fromApologia to Nicopolis by Hadrianopolis, in thevalley of Arghyrokastro, ascended the AnumtiTievalley, and not that of the AouSj although the latteris at least as direct, and there was a continuity ofplain or valley from Apologia to Hadrianopoliswithout any intervening mountain; whereas, onthe former route, some high ridges are interposedbetween the head of the valley of Amantiaia and theplain of Hadrianopolis. Possibly there were somerocky projections on the banks of the Aous, whichit would have required great labour to renderpassable, or frequent ferries or bridges, which itwas desirable to avoid '.Selenltza, where the mines of pitch mentionedby Strabo are found, is about four hours to theMi^/iar* *AiroWwvlaQ &yai?e//xc0a ray girl 7r6yrf"QiKitrey *liayif ^dipos kKtp9tK6fxaQyOi yac rcpftaO* eX^Frec 'Afiarriios, eyOdie ravra""Earatray navy toil etc Opoyiov ^evarav.Ap. Pausan. Eliac. pr. c. 22.II would seem, however, the colony of Bullis to somefrom the inscription of Grddista, other place. But this inscribereferred to, that there tion is long anterior to thewas a Roman road in the val Itineraries,ley of the Aous^ leading from378 illyria; [chap.north-eastward of Avlona, near the left bank ofthe Vi6sa, not far above the junction of the riverof Nlvitza, and a little below Gradista, which ^s onthe opposite side of the river. The asphaltum isdug out of the earth in large masses, mixedwith a considerable quantity of earth. IbrahimPasha farms the mine from the Porte, and issaid to receive from those to whom he underliesit 120,000 piastres a year. It is a hard blackresin \ and when mixed with vegetable pitch ismuch used in the Adriatic in the careening ofboats. Strabo, or rather Poisonous, whom hecites, had an idea that earth thrown into the minewas converted into pitch: the fact, perhaps, is,that the asphaltum, liquified by subterraneous heat,flows in that state into the cavities of the earth,whether natural or formed by the excavations fromwhich asphaltum had been already extracted, andthat it there hardens, whence the mineral may appearto be continually, renewed in the same cavity.Near the mine a gaseous effluvia on the surface ofthe ground sometimes takes fire, and maintains aflame for several days. This is evidently the cele-^ The familiar allusion to mention l^ Strabo, that thethis substance by Ovid, shows mine was extensively workedstill more strongly than its under the Romans ;Omnibus moliere licet mala ; fusca voceturNigro Illyrian cui pice sanguis erst.Art. Am. 1. 2, v. 657.Adde quod lyrics si jam pice nigro essen,Non mordent mihi turba fidelis erat.Exist. ex Ponto, 1. 4, Ep. 14. v. 45.VIII.]ILLYRIA.rated Nymphaeum of Apologia which is recordedon the coins of that city by the type ofthree nymphs dancing round a flame '.Sept. 27, 28, 29, 30.— Instead of exploringlUyria and Chaonia any farther, I wa obliged toemploy these four days in returning to Berat, inconsequenceof a violent fever which assumed anintermittent form. Being unable to sit upon ahorse for more than half an hour at a time, I wasunder the necessity of performing the greater partof the journey in the arabas of the Mizakia. Thefirst day I halted at Kalkondasi, and lodged inthe house of the Bishop of Velegrada (Beifat).In the walls of the church are several Fragments(brought probably from Apologia) of sculpturesin low relief, and of. architectural ornaments,and there is a tomb-stone with an inscription oflower times, but not Christian. The next day Icrossed over the hill of Ardhenitza, which standsin the middle of the Mizakia, and in a great monasteryon the summit found the Bishop, whose house^ The mines andN3niiphaeumwere visited in 1813 by Dr.Holland, who descended intothe mine. He remarked also,in the vicinity, several placeswhere streams of carburettedhydrogen, emanating from theearth, readily burnt on the applicationof flame*Mr. Jones who examinedthe place in the year 1815,discovered, in a situation twomiles higher up the river thanthe mines, some remains ofancient buildings, which areperhaps ruins of a temple ofthe Nymphs. The rock, itseems, is of the same gypsieskind as that about Pakhtos.It is particularly describedby Dion Cassius, 1. 41, c. 45,and by ^lian. Y. H. 1. 13,c. 16. According to the latter,it was called to kBdvaroy irvp,as constantly burning.380 EPiRUs. [chap.I had quitted in the morning, together with hisaged predecessor, who had resigned in his favour,and the venerable Igumenos of the convent, all ofwhom were extremely kind to me. Our progresswas the slower, as I found it impossible to hire acar for the whole journey, and was obliged tochange it frequently. On the third day we crossedthe point of the hill of Spiragr into the plain ofTopalti, and at night I lodged in a store-houseamong casks, baskets, and bags of com. Herethe fever, not having been improved by the joltingof an lydian cart for three days, with intervals ofriding in the sun, assumed a form which is not uncommonin Italy and Greece, and is called by theItalian practitioners a copia terzana, because thefever returns daily, but with increased violence onthe alternate days. These alternate fits were accompaniedby delirium, and on the second occurrenceby complete insensibility.Oct. 14. — Having been restored by the goodcare and judicious treatment of my friend Sakesto a state just equal to travelling, I quitBerat this day for loannina, being, in consequenceof the delay that has occurred, under the necessityof giving up the intention of visiting D j^rrhachium,and tracing the operations of Pompey, Caesar, andBrutus. This has been doubly unfortunate, becausehaving intended after visiting the maritimelUyria, to follow the entire Egyptian way to Sale*nlki, I had preferred the direct road from Korytzato Berat across Mount Tomor to the circuitous butmuch more interesting route by 'Akhridha andElbassan, which was a part of that Roman road.VIII.] EPIRUS. 381At 1 P.M. we cross the bridge of Berat, passthrough the small Greek quarter called Goritza,at the foot of the opposite hill, then skirt the riverfor a quarter of an hour, and enter a valley whichbranches to the right of the main vale of the Uzumi.Here the road in many parts passes along the bed ofa torrent, and at other times over branches of ruggedbarren hills, which exclude the prospect on bothsides, except that sometimes the rocks of Tomor appearon the left. The Uzumi is at no great distance inthe same direction ; one of the roads leading fromBer4t to the southward passes along its banks, butthat which we travel is the most frequented. Afteran hour's riding the rain begins to fall, and continues,with short intermissions, until at 5.30 wearrive at the Khan of Totjer, so called from a villageof that name, half a mile distant, in the steephills to the right, and consisting only of a mosqueand three or four large Mahometan houses. Thelatter part of our road was over a very steep branchof the hills, and was, for the most part, paved.These heights are cultivated only near several dispersedhamlets of three or four houses, situatedgenerally on steep summits. The vegetation bearsall the marks of an advanced autumn. The Khanof Totjer, which stands in a narrow bottom betweenrugged hills, has been lately improved byIbrahim Pasha. Though the doors and windowshave no security to prevent their being blown openby the wind, which perhaps might be too much toexpect in an Albanian khan, the floor at least ismuch more compact than that of the UptoTo-Tlpay^382 EPiRus. [chap.fiarcvriiC} or first merchant of Berat, and the roofa better defence against the rain — a fortunate circumstance,as in consequence of a deluge* whichfalls all night,Oct. 15.*— The torrents are reported impassable,until the afternoon, when it is too late to reachKlisura, the nearest place where any provender hrthe horses can be obtained.Oct. 16. — At 7.45, continuing our course alongthe ravine, bordered as before by rugged hills, wearrive, in less than three quarters of an hour, at astream which flows to the left through a gorge intothe Uzumi, and from thence, for near half an hour,we ascend the bed of this torrent, which is now butjust safe for the baggage horses. We then turninto the channel of a branch of the same river, andat 10, crossing a height, descend, in half an hour,into a vale watered by a stream which flows to jointhe Viosa near Klisura. The hills are of the samedescription as those mentioned on the 14tfa, butthe cultivation and the hamlets are more thinlydispersed. One small village only with a mosquewas in sight, in a lofty situation on the right Aswe advance, the great ridge of Trebusin, whichappears higher on this side than from Tepel^ni,stretches in a direction parallel to the valley wearefollowing, which becomes a little broader aswe descend it, and is covered with fields of arabositi,not yet gathered in. From 11.30 until I we haltat the khan of Venakos, so called from a villageof that name situated a mile on the right, amidrugged hills at the foot of Mount Trebusin. Onvin.] EPiRus. 383proceeding, our road, every where extremely badoften crosses the river, and then pursues, for ashort distance, the course of its stony bed : thevalley is still narrow and grown with maize. Onthe left are hills more rugged, but in other respectsof the same description as before. Behindthem rises a lofty range, but not so high as TreeThus we continue our route till 3.45, when wefind ourselves opposite the village and castle ofKlisura, at the entrance of a valley which ishere about a mile in width. Instead of followingth direct road, which ascends the Viosato Premedi, we turn to the right, and in eightminutes begin to mount a steep slope at the footof the eastern extremity of Mount Trebusin, whichrises bare and precipitous above it, and soon arrivein the scattered village of Klisiira, containing aboutone hundred and fifty houses of Musulmans, whofor the most part speak only Albanian. A littlebeyond the village an immense edge of rockdescends from the summit of the mountain to theriver, and forms, together with the opposite mountain,which is separated from it only by the riverViosa, the eastern entrance of the celebrated passanciently called the Fauces Antigonenses, or Stenof the Aous, and now the Stena of the Viosa.Klisura has obviously received its name, which isanalogous to the Latin Elysium, and other similarappellations, from its situation. It is mentionedby Cantacuzenus in the fourteenth century,together with other places which are still to be recognisedas having been the chief strong-holds in384 EPiRus. [chap.this part of Greece ^ The river, after havingfollowed a north-western direction from its sources,here suddenly turns a little to the southward ofwest ; and having pursued this course for twelvemiles, between two high mountains of extremesteepness, then recovers its north-western direction,which it preserves to the sea. Above the villageof Klisdra, at an elevation of about one-third of thesummit of the mountain, the Vezir Aly has constructeda castle, consisting only of a squarewhite-washed inclosure of a single wall, with atower at each angle, But perfectly commandingthe only road into the pass which leads along acornice over the right bank of the Viosa. Thecastle occupies the site of an ancient fortress, asappears from some remains of a Hellenic wall nearthe entrance. Half way between the castle andthe river stands a serai lately built by Aljr Pasha.The mountain on the opposite or left bank ofthe river, is the northern extremity of the greatridge of Nemertzika, much lower than that summit,but nearly equal to Trebusin in height. Atthe top it is a bare perpendicular precipice, butthe steep lower slope, unlike that of its oppositeneighbour, is clothed with trees quite to the river.Through the opening between them is seen a magnificentvariety of naked precipices and hangingwoods, inclosing the broad and rapid stream ofthe insinuating river *.^ Cantacuz. 1. 2, c. 32. Besides KXfivovpa, he mentionsBcXaypcroy (Herat,) Kavcva, Sicpcirapiov, and Tifitfpoyf (Tomor.)per ipsa angnsdas qua se inter valleyfootmen (Aous) insinuate. — ^Liy. 1. 82, c. 13.rVIII.] EPiRus. 385It was on this singular field, in the year B.C.198, that the Romans obtained the first and thereforethe most important of a series of victories,which extinguished for ever the independence ofGreece. The young consul, T. Quinctius Flamininus,being resolved to avoid the fault of his twopredecessors, Sulpicius and Villius, who had allowedthe greater part of their consulships toexpire before they entered Macedonia, lost notime after his election at Rome in crossing theAdriatic, from Bnindusium to Corcyra, with areinforcement of near 9000 men ; and from thence,with equal celerity, proceeded into Epirus, wherehe assumed the command of the Roman army.Their camp was at a distance of five miles fromthe enemy : who was intrenched in the pass ofthe Aous, called the Stena, and on the steep mountainson either side of it, and who had fortified allthe weaker points with ditches, ramparts, and militaryengines. Philip had occupied this positionever since the beginning of the spring. His mainbody was encamped on Mount iEropus, on a conspicuoussummit of which his own tent was placed.Athenagoras with the light troops was stationedon Mount Asnaus, on the opposite side of theriver.Flamininus, after due consideration, adopted theintention of his predecessor Villius, and determinedto force his way through the passes, insteadof entering Macedonia by a circuitous route,through Dassaretia, as Sulpicius had done. Butthe undertaking was of extreme difficulty, and40 days were passed in inactivity, with the except.I. c c386 Epirus, [chap.tion only of a fruitless attempt to make peace bymeans of a conference which was held betweenQuinctius and Philip, in the narrowest part of thepass, and which was abruptly broken off by theking, on hearing the unreasonable propositions ofthe Consul. On the following day there was anaction first in a plain just large enough to admitof it \ and then in the pass into which the Macedoniansretired ; and where the superior disciplineand skill of the Romans were fully compensated bythe strength of position and the catapeltic engines ofthe Macedonians. The loss on both sides was great,and night alone put an end to the combat. Soonafter this event, Pharos of Megara, in Molasses,to whom the Romans had already been indebtedfor information and assistance, sent to the Consula shepherd who undertook to guide a detachmentof the Roman army in three days, by a circuitousroute, to the summit of the mountain which wasabove and in the rear of the camp of Philip. Fourthousand infantry and three hundred horsemenwere sent upon this service, and were ordered tomarch only in the night, the moon being then atthe full.During the two days of their circuitous route,the Consul disposed his army for a general attack,and at the same time occupied the enemy's attentionby frequent assaults. On the third day, whenhe saw the concerted signal made by his troopswith smoke on the summit of the mountain, hemoved forward with his whole army, marchinghimself in the centre at the bottom of the valley,In plantae, satis ad id patent, c. 10.VIII.] EPiRus. 387and sending forward his wings on either side.The Macedonians advanced out of their entrenchments,but found the enemy so superior to them,as well in valour and science as in armour, thatthey retreated again behind their defences. TheRomans then became the assailants, and wouldhave suffered for their rashness, in proceedingover very difficult ground against a well-fortifiedposition, had not their detachment on thesummit of the hill at the same moment advancedto the attack of the enemy's rear ; when a shoutin that direction having revealed the truth to theMacedonians, threw them instantly into a disorderlyflight, and their whole army would havebeen destroyed, had it been possible for horsemenor heavy armed infantry to pursue with effect oversuch rugged ground.The king retreated 5 miles to a height, fromwhence, suspecting that the Romans would beunable to follow him, he sent out parties of thetroops who accompanied him, to collect the remainderof his dispersed forces from the mountainsand ravines, and to protect their retreat. Bythese means there were not more than 2000 of hismen missing, when the army began a disorderlyretreat towards Thessaly. The next day the Romans,who had passed the night in Philip's camp,eme^ed from the straits, and pursued the enemy.On the first day Philip reached a place namedCastra Pyrrhi, in Melodies; on the following dayhe encamped on Mount Lingon, and from thence,after deliberating for some days whether he shouldc c2388 Epirus. [chaptake the route to Macedonia, he proceeded at lengthto Tricca, in Thessaly \Although it is not expressly stated either byLivy or Plutarch, that the camp of Philip was onthe right side of the river, and that of Athenagorason the left, it could hardly have been otherwise,as the road is continuous only on the right bankthrough the whole pass, and as that side aloneaffords such an extent of open space as seemsabsolutely necessary for the encounter which tookplace on the day of Philip's defeat. The heightto which the king then retreated seems, from thedistance mentioned by the historian, to have beenthat of Klisiira, which furnished a good defensiveposition, and was well adapted to the king's design,of collecting his scattered forces. ValerianAntics, a Latin historian, asserted that Villius,while in command of the Roman army, had enteredthe pass, thrown a bridge over the river,and attacked the enemy ; but Livy opposes to histestimony that of all the other Greek and Latinwriters, who were agreed that Villius had donenothing worthy of mention. Hence it is crediblethat Philip was in possession of the entire passuntil he was attacked by Quinctius, and consequently,that until that day the Roman campwas 5 miles from the western end of the pass,probably in the valley of the Dryno, aboveits junction with the Vi68ie. The plain, therefore,near the western entrance of the pass, betweenLiv. 1. 32, c. 5, 6) 9, et teq. Plutarch, in Flainin.viii.l EPiRUS. 389Kotra and Tepel^ni^ would seem to have been thescene of the combat which occurred on the dayafter the conference between the two commanders.If Philip's camp was on the right bank of theAous, it follows of course that Mount Trebusin isthe ancient ^ropus, and the opposite mountain,or northern termination of Mount Nem6rtzika, theancient Asnaus. Whether the latter name belongedto the whole of that great mountain, it isimpossible to say, no ancient author having dis-^tinct alluded to it, although it is one of the mostremarkable in Greece.Plutarch has added nothing to the narrative ofthe Latin historian worthy of notice, except hisdescription of the pass, in which, if he is morethan usually clear and accurate, it is probablybecause he has borrowed freely from the sameGreek historian from whom livy chiefly derivedhis information. Plutarch describes the Straitsof the Aous as not less strong than the similardefile of the Peneius at Tempe : ^^ It is deficient,"he adds, ^ ^ in the beautiful groves, the verdantforests, the pleasant retreats, and the meadowswhich border the Peneius ; but in the lofty andprecipitous mountains, in the profundity of thenarrow fissure between them, in the rapidity andmagnitude of the river, in the single narrow pathalong the bank, the two places exactly resemble.Hence it is difficult for an army to pass under anycircumstances, and impossible when the place isdefended by an enemy ^"ec 2erai^v\drrocro,iravreXMC confirmed by the fact which^vopoir— a remark not exactly Plutarch proceeds to relate.390 SPIRU8. [chap.In all the editions of Plutarch there is an errorin the name of the river, which by the substitutionof a ^ for an <# has been made Apsus instead ofAous. That it really is an error cannot admit ofa doubt, fo)* no position on the Apsus can bereconciled with the circumstances of the battle,or with those which occurred before and after it.Nor does the Apsus, or indeed any other river inGreece, flow through a defile which so nearlyresembles that of the Peneius as these Straits ofthe Viosa, although they are not to be comparedto the Thessalian Tempe in beauty and grandeur,as well in consequence of the deficiencies remarkedby Plutarch, as from the smaller dimensions of theriver, and including mountains which constitutethe main features of both these defiles.Oct. 17. — Having descended to the point of theroad from Berat to Premedi, from whence weturned to Klisura, we proceed from thence at 7.10to follow up the valley, until having reached, inabout three quarters of an hour, a spot where alow branch of the hills on the left touches theViosa, we pass close along its right bank. Theriver is deep and rapid, but not so much swollenas might have been expected after the late rains,in a quarter of an hour the valley becomes wideragain ; the chief produce continues to be maize ;the upper part of the plant has been cut off forthe cattle, the pods alone remaining on the stemto ripen in the sun. Musulman tombs are frequenton the road side, and the same was observablein every part of the district of Berat. Theridge of Nemertzika follows the same south-easterlydirection as before, and so continues as far as Pa*VIII.] EPIRUS. 391leo Pogoghiani : the highest summit is a little tothe southward of Premedi. On our left are somesecondary heights which unite Tom6r and themountain of Skrepdri with the central range ofPindus, and which have a general direction parallelto Nemertzika ; they are very uneven in theirforms, but are cultivated in many parts.At a turning of the hills, an hour from Premedi,we come in sight of its castle, situated on a lowacclivity overhanging the Vi6sa, at the foot of thesteep slope of Mount Nemertzika. The town liesto the eastward of the castle, in a narrow bottomon the side of the river, which for a considerabledistance below the town, flows rapid, fiiU, andturbid, between banks composed of a rock whichis a congregate of small pebbles united by a whitecement. Where this substance prevails as it doesimmediately opposite to the town, and for somedistance below it, the valley is quite barren, whilein higher situations, especially on the eastern hills,the land is fertile and well cultivated. At 10.30we cross the Viosa by a bridge, and enter thetown.Premedi', sometimes called Termed, or Per-met, contains about 300 Musulman and 100Christian families. The houses are built of loosestones put together without cement — a kind of masonrynot uncommon in Albania ; and few of themhave walls which are quite perpendicular. Thatwhich is assigned me for a lodging, belonging to atailor now absent, is tolerably comfortable within »392 EPIRUS. [Chapand far better than any I saw at Berat. One ofthe most remarkable objects is a high rock on thenorthern side of the town, towards the river, thesummit of which is surrounded by a ruined wall,containing within it a pool of water supposed topossess medicinal virtues. According to the localtradition, Premedi belonged once to the Spaniards.Above the town the Yezir Aljr has lately built anew fortress, in the form of an oblong quadrangle,flanked with towers at the angles, and at intervalsalso on the sides. It stands like many such constructionsin Turkey, on a slope, and one angle iscommanded at a very short distance. The castlewas prolonged on the descent in great measurefor the purpose of including an old ruinous Serai,which Alj^'s avarice not allowing him to pulldown, he has thus, as he now admits, injured hiscastle, without escaping from the necessity ofconstructing a new Serai near the upper wall.An Italian renegade calling himself Soliman Aga,who has been employed as engineer on this occasion,informs me that he did not find any tracesof antiquity when he cleared and dug the g^undfor the foundations, though it is the spot wherethe Acropolis is likely to have been, if Premediwas an ancient site, which is highly probable «The great ridge of Nem^rtzika rises with extraordinaryabruptness behind the castle. Beyondit is the valley of Zagoria, watered by the streamwhich continues through that of Kiepeiia, andjoins the Viosa in the pass of Klisura. Zagoriaconsists of several villages, inhabited chiefly byChristian artisans and travelling tradesmen ; someviii.] Epirus. 393of. whom proceed as far as Germany. BetweenZagoria and Libokhovo is the district of liimtja.Mukhtir Pasha, who is stationed here by hisfather, in consequence of some suspicions of warwith the Pash of Skodra ; and because the placeis centrical, and convenient for collecting theToshke, returns this afternoon from a huntingparty at Eleusa, a village in the mountains, fourhours distant. This name is remarkable for itsGreek form, amidst so many others of indigenousor Sclavonic derivation, and tends to the beliefthat Elseus, which Ptolemy enumerates among theinland cities of Chaonia, was situated at Eleiisa.But in this case Elaeus was a different place fromthe plain Eleeon mentioned by Livy, which wasevidently that of Arghyrokastro. It will be necessaryabo to suppose that Ptolemy is in error in regardto the province to which he attributes Elseusnamely, Chaonia : for the valley of Premediwas certainly not a part of Chaonia, but lay betweenthe Atintanes and the tribes of Upper Macedonia,and probably belonged to the Paravsei, whoreceived that name as dwelling on the banks ofthe Aua, which appears to have been one of theancient names of the Viosa. I am inclined tobelieve, therefore, that although Eleusa may beanancient name preserved, it has nothing in commonwith the Elffius of Chaonia.Oct. 19. — At 10.30, proceeding from Premedi,we continue to follow the route by which Philipfled before the victorious legions of Rome. At11.20 we cross to the right bank of the river by asomewhat dangerous ford, at a spot where the stream394 Epirus. [chap.is compressed between rocks of the same kind asthose near Premedi. It is a position in whichPhilips rear-guard might easily have checked apursuing enemy ; but as Quinctius did not completehis march through the Straits until the dayafter the battle \ and Philip seems not to havelost a moment in commencing his retreat, therewas little chance of his being overtaken.Beyond the ford of the Viosa the valley is in nopart more than a quarter of a mile in breadth , beingbounded to the right by the last falls of theabrupt Nemertzika, and on the other side by a continuationof the parallel range of rugged hills whichI before described. In some places there is novalley, and the road crosses over the hills. At2.40 we turn out of the main route to the left, andascend the rugged heights in order to gain the villageof Tjersova ' for our kon4k ; the steep acclivitiesare clothed with shrubs ; of which the most commonare the arbutus and arachne, both coveredwith a mixture of blossoms and ripe fruit. Thefirst has a smooth red stem, large leaves like alaurel, and a small tasteless fruit, growing in araces ; the arachne a rough brown stem,small serrated dark-coloured leaves, and a largerfruit growing singly. Both plants are called mv-/uopca, which is the ancient xoftapog, little changed.Tzersova, which we reach in fifty minutes from thevalley, stands on the eastern side of the ridge, justbelow the summit, and contains forty-five houses,Postern die, per ipsa an 1. 32, c. 13.gutta kostem sequitur. — Liv. ' T^^ep^^.Viii.] BPI&U8. 395surrounded by vineyards, below which are a fewcorn-fields on the slope. All the mountains aroundare much broken and intersected by ravines : thesummits near Konitza are conspicuous to the eastward,with the branches of the same range towardsMount Ru8sot4ri. On the opposite side of thevalley of the Aaus^ and almost immediately abovethe point from which we began to mount the hills,are the most precipitous of those great cliffs of which are so remarkable from lodnninaand other distant places : the summits of theserocks are hid in the clouds, while their bases arebut a little above the level of the valley and river.They are probably between two and three thousandfeet in height.Oct. 20. — At 7 we descend by a rugged path,and in three quarters of an hour re-enter the mainroad in the valley of the Vi6sa, at a spot which isabout thirty-five minutes from where we left it.The valley is narrow and grown with maize : thelower slope of Mount Nemertzika, though still exceedinglysteep, is more practicable than before,and there is a monastery upon it, as well as oneor two small villages, which, like those on the hillsto our left, are inhabited by Musulman Albanians.At 9.5 we ford a large branch of the Viosa, ofwhich the sources are in the mountains on theleft, near Khierasovo. At the junction, the Viosa,by means of a derivation perhaps artificial, formsa large island, at the upper point of which is amill, turned by a part of the water of a cascadewhich falls over the bank of the Viosa ; behind396 Epirus. [chap.these objects an old deserted monastery completesa most picturesque scene.At 9.20 we cross the main river by a bridgehigh and narrow, and with scarcely any defenceson the sides. Here again the stream, being compressedbetween the rocks, is narrow, and toodeep to be forded, though below at the mill it wasso shallow as to be forded by asses. Immediatelyafter crossing the river we begin to ascend a loftyroot of Nemertzika, and at 9.40, near the summitof the ridge, pass Ostanltza, once a place of importance,but now small : the people have built akhan on the road, which, affording better accommodationthan any of their own huts, relieves themfrom the lodging of travellers. Ostanitza, beingabout thirty-two miles by the road from Klisiira,and lying in the direction which Philip was pursuingtowards the modem districts of Zagori andMetzovo, is probably the position of the CastraPyrrhi, at which the king arrived in his retreaton the afternoon of the first day after the battle.The position was exactly suited to his circumstance,being a strong height, well defended inthe direction of the enemy by the narrow gorgethrough which the river passes immediately belowOstanitza. No remains of antiquity, however, areto be observed here.At the summit of the ridge of Ostanitza we arrivein sight of K6nitza, a large town, situated on theright bank of the Viosa, at the foot of an abrupttermination of the central range of Pindus, butconsiderably elevated above the valley. It ap-viii.]Epirus. 397pear to contain 800 or 1000 houses. The adjacentmountain is rugged, broken by torrents, andcovered with wood : behind it rise the bare precipicesof Mount Ldzari, one of the highest pointsof the central range, often called the mountain ofPaying, from a village at its foot belonging tothe sub-district of loannina, named Zagori. Theheights of Konitza are separated from those ofOstanitza by a plain about six miles in diameter,through which the Viosa winds alonga broad stony bed, and then, entering the hills,pursues a serpentine course for two miles throughthem in approaching Ostanitza, beyond which itpasses through the narrow glen, a little above theisland to which I before alluded. In the plain theViosa is joined by another great component branchof the Anus called the yoidhom4ti, (ox eye, orfountain,) which issues from a deep ravine of themountains of Zagori, a few miles to the south-eastof Konitza : the Viosa itself enters the plain immediatelybelow Konitza, through a narrow openingbetween two precipices higher and more abrupteven than those of Klisura.Our road now leads through a wood of oaks ofsmall size and of various kinds. At 10.20 wehalt twenty minutes at a fountain in the middle ofthe wood to dine; then descend the hill into anarrow valley, where at 12.30 Mavroviini, a Favoritevillage, is near us on the left, and two mileson the right Pog6ghiani, which, though small,gives name to a district extending northward fromthence to the sources of the Sukha, or branch of398 KPiRUB. [chap.the Dryno, which enters the plain of Deropoli atLibokhovo. Delvinaki is now the chief town.The great cliffs of Nemertaka terminate aboveOstanitza, where they suddenly fall to a lowerwoody branch which connects that mountainwith a high rocky peak to the northward ofDelvinaki. Between the latter and an inferiorrange, which has a northerly direction, stretches along slope, on which appear some of the villiers ofPogoghiani : through an opening at its northernextremity I recognize the summit near L4bovo,called Strakav^tzi, and to the left of it one side ofthe Klisura of Libokhovo. At the end of the valleywe ascend a steep hill, and a little beyond thesummit arrive, at 1.15, at Raven, containingeighty poor houses, and included among the villagesof Zagori.It is probable that our road from Ostanitza tothis place has no longer coincided with the routeof Philip, and that in his second day's march hefollowed a more eastern line, crossing the plain tothe westward of Konitza, and making as direct acourse as possible to the highlands of Zagori, whichhe may have conveniently entered about Artist.Livy's description of Mount Lingon is so exactlyapplicable to Zagori, that we cannot doubt the identity,nor that he adopted that description from Polybius,who was well acquainted with the country.The Latin historian remarks that Lingon (in GreekAiyyoc, or Atyyov) was a mountainous district ofEpirus, bordering on Macedonia northward, andon Thessaly eastward, covered with woods, but inVIII.] BPIRUB. 399the higher parts containing open plains and perennialwaters \ Although it might be more correctto say "fertile valleys," than "open plains," inreference to Zagori, the only plain properly socalled being that of Imperatoriaia, the descriptionleaves at least no question that the line of Philip'sretreat was through Zagori to Imperatoriaia, wherehe was probably encamped while undecided whetherhe should retreat into Macedonia or Thessaly ;for at one end of that plain the road to Green, inUpper McLcedania^ begins to cross the great ridgeof Pindus ; and from the other end branches thatwhich leads over the Zygos of Metzovo into UpperThessaly. The name Lingon I should conceiveto have been particularly attached to those summitsin the middle of Zagori, which are embracedon the north and east by the extremebranches of the AcuSj and on the west andsouth by those of the Arachtkus. It is remarkablethat one of the villages of Zagori is named Linghi-aches. It is situated on the eastern side of ,which mountain is separated only by thevalley of the northern branch of the Arachthus fromthe mountain which I imagine to have been theproper Lingon. As soon as Philip had arrived on thesecond day of his retreat within the recesses of thismountainous district, he might encamp wherever^ Postern die (ingens iter Macedonia objicitur. Vestigearminius, sed metus urgent) in frequenters silyis sunt : jugaxnontem linton peirexit : ipse summa campos patentee, aquas-montesEpiri sunt, intersect que pyrenees bent. — Liv.Macedonia Thessaliaeque. La I. 32, c. 13.tns, quod vergit in Tressilian, ' AtyytdJec-orient special : sententia a400 Epirus. [chap.he found it convenient ; but even if he advancedno farther than the valleys eastward of Suddenand Dovr4y his horizontal distance was more thanequal to that of the preceding day, besides whichthere was a considerable increase of elevation , sothat the '^ ingens iter arminius" of Livy seems perfectlyjustified.Oct 21. — A violent fall of rain last night, whichcontinues all this day, with a strong gale from thesouth, detains me in the cottage of the papas ofRaven, in a wretched chamber pervious to the weatheron all sides.Oct. 22. — At 7.15 we descend into a small cultivatedplain to the south of Raven, from whencethe road winds through low barren hills till 8,when it enters a plain which is included betweenthe last falls of the mountains of Zag6ri and a steepridge on the western side. This plain, whichcontains the sources of the Kalamd and a smalllake, is nearly as broad as long, and is ten ortwelve miles in circumference. We skirt it at thefoot of the hills which border it on the east, and at8.20 arrive at the khan of Kalbaki, lately built bythe Ver on the edge of the plain. We then entera narrow vale, in few places cultivated, betweentwo ranges of low barren hills. Those on the rightincrease in height to the westward, and upon oneof the highest points of them is situated a villagecalled Zagoria. We continue to pursue the tediouscourse of this uninteresting vale till 10.40, whenwe find ourselves at the foot of Mount Mitzik^li,above the northern end of the Lake of Baptista,where the village of Petals' is half a mile on theUirCtuXij.VIII.] EPIRUS. 401right) not far from the bank. The abundance ofrain has maintained the lake at its highest all thisyear. A further descent of half an hour brings us,at 11.50, to the Khan of Lykostomo, situated atthe eastern end of a causeway, or long bridge, herecrossing the narrowest part of the marsh, whichunites the Lake of loannina with that of Lapslsta.The causeway of Lykostomo is the only directcommunication between Zagori and the plain ofloannina. Having remained at the khan till 1.40,we cross the causeway and the plain, and arrive atthe entrance of the city at 3.3. Here I am lodgedfor a few days at the house of the Bishop of Artaa,and then remove to that of S. B., a young manwho inherited from his father 800 purses, all which,with the assistance of the Vezir, he has long sincegot rid of. He was a frequenter, like other youngmen of fashion, of the house of the celebrated Fro*sj^ni K But he was not always so refined in hisfemale society, and the Vezir, who is very rigorouson these subjects when it suits his purpose, andwho had an eye to a share of Kerr S.'s fortune, setthe police to watch and arrest him on the spot, andby threatening a public example, extracted 400purses from him.As to the famous trviCcftov, that atrocious actwhich seems first to have shown Alj^'s subjects towhat an extent his pitiless disposition could carryhim in a single act of cruelty, I have received thefollowing particulars from Kyr N. G. of Kalarj^tes,whose wife was one of the sufferers. The VezirVOL. I. D d402 EPiRus. [chap.invited himself to supper at the Kalarytiote's house,an expensive favour, which he is wont to conferoccasionally on his confidential servants, of whomKyr G. is one. Here he collected his intendedvictims, either by sending the bolu-b^shi of thepolice for them, or proceeding himself on horsebackto their respective residences. From thehouse of G. he went on foot to that of Frosj^i,which he entered at the back by climbing over apart of the neighbouring house. He thus appearedsuddenly before Frosjrni, and without saying aword, made a motion to the bolu-bashi, signifyingthat she was to be conveyed with the others toprison. The relations of G.'s wife say that herhusband was privy to the Vezlr's intentions, andthat when she was preparing to appear before thePasha, in obedience to his summons, her husband,in order to save her trinkets and best clothes, toldher that the Pasha wished to make her some present,and might be indisposed from doing so if shemade too great a display of dress. The Kalarytiotehimself, however, denies all knowledge of hismaster's intentions, which seems much more probable; and although his suspicions could hardlyhave been short of conviction, when the womenwere collected at his house, it would have been invain for him then to attempt any interference. Heasserts, that when the design became manifest, hemade every effort to move the Vezir's compassionfor his own wife, without effect. The women wereall conveyed to the church of St. Nicolas at thenorthern extremity of the lake : so much timehowever had been consumed in assembling them,VIII.] Epirus. 403that the morning returned before boats could beobtained from the islands the fishermen, moreover,refusing to assist without a written order ; so thatas Turkish custom requires darkness to be addedto the other horrors of this mode of punishment, itwas not until the following midnight, in the midstof one of those furious thunder-storms so commonin loannina, that the women were collected in fiveor six boats, and not being inclosed in sacks accordingto the practice of Constantinople, the Albanianswere under the necessity of using force when theyclung to the sides of the monoxyla.During the intervening day, such was the stateof the Vezir's mind and appearance, that no onedared to approach him ; and it unfortunately happenedthat Bishop Ignatius, who would certainlyhave made some attempt to save the wretchedvictims, arrived only at loannina a day or twoafter the event. The Pasha has since observed tomore than one person, with a pointed allusion tothis event, that he has no good counsellors ; thusshowing the probability that he would at leasthave spared some of the women for a good ransom• FrosJTii ^ was niece of the bishop of Green,and was about 28 years of age ; she is saidto have been witty and accomplished, and seemsto have revived exactly the ancient Greek characterof an iraipa. The loannites speak withpride and affection of her, and seem to considerthe existence of such a person at loannina asproving their superiority to the rest of Greece iucivilization, not less than a bookshop in the Bazarand their two colleges for education. Frosjoii'sDd 2404 Epirus. [chap.coterie, however, was better suited to France orItaly than to Greece in its present state, and wasattended with extreme danger in a Turkish town,where the example of a person of good family hada pernicious effect among the Greek women, whileit was viewed with abhorrence or envy by theTurkish. The jealous complaints of Mukhtar'swife to her father-inlaw were chiefly directedagainst Fros5^ni : those of her sister, the wife ofVely, against two or three married women; andthese accusations were undoubtedly the immediatecause of the horrible result \ The whole numberwho suffered were 17, of whom five or six onlywere of the higher class. The bodies were notall collected for several days, during which timethe Satrap remained inclosed in his harem toavoid witnessing the indignation of the Greeks ofloannina, which for a moment got the better oftheir prudence, and showed itself by their attendingthe funerals in great numbers, particularlythat of Fros^^ni.Nov. 1. — ^A sharp frost in the morning: thelake is now peopled with astonishing numbers ofthe duck tribe, which often furnish good sport tothe loannites. The Vezir and his sons often havea battue, which lasts the greater part of the day.As the Pasha permits any body to accompany^ Drowning seems to have of Methymna, that they orderedbeen not an uncommon punish several women of irregular consentfor females among the duct to be sewn up in sacksancient Greeks. It is related and thrown into the sea. —both of Printer, king of Co Theopomp. et Uermip. ap.ninth, and of Clements, tyrant Then. L 10, c. 12.Viii.] Epirus. 405him, every boat in loannina is in requisition onsuch occasions. They proceed in a long linethrough the narrow channels which pervade thepapj^ria, and thus surround the cover where thebirds are collected, when a sudden shout beinggiven, they rise and are brought down by scores.They are generally very fat at this time of theyear, but in general coarse and ill-flavoured.Aiys intentions are at present directed towardsMargariti and Paramythia, and his Albanianshave lately taken Koranopulo in Fanari, a villagebelonging to Hassan Tjapari, of Margariti. HisHighness declares his intention of building a newfortress and palace at Litharitza, an importantpoint to the security of loannina, being a commandingheight not far from the lake, at a distanceof 600 yards from the south-eastern towerof the citadel. It commands every approach tothe town from the southward, and enfilades thewhole length of it in a northern direction, andwill thus give the Vezir a command over hiscapital which can never be obtained from thecastle, while the latter is an excellent citadel, andwould furnish a secure retreat if the post of Litha-ritza were lost.The Pasha's avaricious disposition carries himto such a length, that he never allows any worn-outpiece of furniture, or arms or utensils to bethrown away, but lays them in places well knownto him, and would discover the loss of the smallestarticle. In the dirty passages and antechamberleading to some of the grandest apartments of hispalace, and which have cost some thousands tp fit406 Epirus. [chapup, the worn out stock of a pistol, or a rustysword, or a scabbard, or some ragged articles ofdress, may be seen hanging up, which his numerouB domestics never venture to remove, wellknowing that it would be remarked by him.This mixture of magnificence and meanness isvery striking in every part of the palace. Hisgreat apartment covered with a Gobelin carpet,surrounded with the most costly society, musicalclocks, and mirrors, is defended by cross ironbars, rougher than would be considered tolerablein the streets of London. They are intended toprevent his servants from passing through thewindows when the chamber is locked.Having had occasion when I was at Corfu totransmit a small sum of money to the Vezir, Isent it purposely through the hands of Mehmet,the Roman, in the hope that when he presentedit, his highness would make him a present ofit. In a fit of generosity he did so; but notlong afterwards changed his mind, and sent histreasurer for it. One year he gave the super*intended of the collection of his revenues andrents to the bishop of Artaa, with the injunctionthat it should be done jcaXo, which word diebishop well knew did not convey any intention offorbearance. The new system failed not in producinga greater amount than usual, but numerouscomplaints having followed, the Vezir informedthe complainants that they mist apply to thebishop for a remission in their next contributions,amounting altogether to 80 purses. For these 80purses, however, he never allowed the bishop anyTill.] EPIRUB. 407credit in the account between them, thus pocketingthe increase, and leaving the bishop to settleit as he best might with the villages. Though theGreek prelates suffer in this manner occasionally,he is too well aware of their importance in thegovernment of the Christian population, and asinstruments of extortion, to treat them with extremeharshness. Indeed, he generally favoursthe Despots, as he qualifies them, much morethan the Turkish Beys, and seldom denies thebishops a little military assistance in obtainingtheir personal dues. Not long, a^o, however, healmost frightened to death the Bishop of Green,a mild and timid man, by a proceeding which wasmeant to increase the bishop's authority. Beingabout to visit Green, he ordered the bishop toprepare the episcopal palace for his reception, butinstead of proceeding there went to another ,pretending to believe that the bishop had soordered it. Having sent for the unfortunate ''AytogTpsftivufVy or Holy of Green, he assumed an airof extreme anger, ordered the bishop to prison,and issued a proclamation that all persons havingcomplaints against him should make a statementof them. Nobody having appeared, the Vezir sentfor him the next day, and congratulated him onthe proof that he had no enemies, and that hegoverned his flock with kindness and justice.Nov. 11. — Visiting the Pasha this afternoon,previously to my departure, I find him sitting inhis state apartment, in close conference with aBektashli Sheikh, whose sect he affects to favour.During our conference he employs himself in selectsEPiRUs. [chap. vii.ing some large pearls for a chaplet of beads, whichtwo Greek jewellers have brought. I was afterwardsinformed that he purchased twenty-four ofthese pearls for fifty purses : though of course uncommonlylarge, they are not round or regular.He added some which he* before possessed, andtwo emeralds of the same size, to make up thirty-three,one of the legitimate numbers of a chaplet.This he afterwards wore, for the first time, at asupper, to which he invited himself, at the house ofMehmet the Roman, and who was thus put to anexpence of two or three hundred piastres.CHAPTER IX.EPIRUS, Thessaly.Departure from loannina — Dhrysko — River Artaa — Tria Kh&niaMetzovo — Passage of the Zygos — Sources of the Salam-via— Khan Malakassi — Khan Kotovdzdhi — River of-KlinovoMeteora — Kalabaka or Statius, jEgmhtm — Illustrations ofancient history — Mount Kotziaka — Trikkala, river Lethaus^rricra— Kha8sik .Kardhiki Kolokot6-Tzighi6ti GrisonsZarko — River Salamvria, Pen^ttM— Alifaka — Larissa —Pannonia — River Fersaliti, or Enipeui — Fersala, PharsalwVrysia — Ghynek6kastro, Proemaa — Dhomok6, Thaumaci —Plain of Taukli — Xynta^ lake Xynias — Maliac forest — FurkaDerveni — arrival at Zituni.Nov. 12. — After six or seven clear calm days, witha light north-east wind, the appearance 6f the weatheralters this morning, just as I am about to leaveloannina for Larissa and Athens, and threatens adifficult passage over the Pindus.The water of the lake, which in the months ofJuly and August reached to the paved road at thefoot of the rocks of Kastritza, is now near a miledistant from thence ; and all that extremity of thelake is dry, with the exception of a few marshyspots. The reeds are either cut down or withered,and some large spaces, which in the summer werecovered with water, have since that time produceda crop of coarse grass, which has lately been mown410 EPiRUS. [chap.with the scythe. Through this desiccated terminationof the lake, a small stream flows to the extremity,and there enters some cavities at the foot ofthe rocks along which the road passes. Theseopenings are called the khoneftres ^ or katavothra,the latter being the common Greek word for suchchannels, and the former the term more peculiarto loannina. The place, according to Meletius, isnamed Voinikovo. In three hours we arrive at thekhan of Dhrysko. Although spacious and recentlybuilt, it is already out of repair, and in the bestroom half the ceiling is wanting, and a shutter toone of the windows. In an instant, however, animmense pile of fuel from the brushwood whichcovers the hill is brought in, and a blazing firesoon appears upon the hearth. The shop attachedto the khan supplies raki, eggs, and new wine.Nov. 13. — Setting out from Dhrysko at 8.30 wearrive, in a little more than three hours, at theTriakhania, travelling, as in September last, chieflyalong the bed of the river, which in winter is sometimesentirely filled : in that case, if the bridgeswere broken down, the road would be quite impracticable; it seldom happens, however, even inwinter, for many days together, that it is necessaryto follow the Acres all the way. Having crossedthe river beyond Triakh^a, we follow the leftbank to the point of junction of the branches fit>mMetzovo and the mountain of Khaliki ; and fordingthe latter, proceed, for upwards of half anhour, along a road overhanging the ravine of theIX.] EPIRUS. 411Metzovo branch, when at the end of two hours andfive minutes from Triakhinia, we arrive at Anilio,where I am lodged in a neat Vlakhiote cottage,which has a plastered floor and walls, and an airof comfort unknown in the houses of the Greekpeasants. The town is half buried in snow, andlong icicles hang from the eaves of the houses.We lost a short time towards the end of our journeyby meeting a great number of asses and mulescoming fix>m Thessaly, laden chiefly with flour.These caravans were moving heaps of snow, andhad passed the Zygos, or ridge of M^tzovo, withdifficulty, on account of the violence of the wind.Those who attempted it latest were obliged toleave their ^o(>rwfiara, or burthens, on the top ofthe mountain. The Papa-priests of Anilio informsme that they have had similar weather, withlittle variation, these fifteen days, during a greatPT. of which i.,» clear .„dcalM llniS.Nov. 14. — Although much snow has fallen inthe night, and the weather still continues squally,the Metzovites report the mountain passable ; weset out therefore at 8.30, and follow the left sideof the gien of Metzovo for a quarter of an hour,and afterwards the bed of a torrent which joins thatfrom the plain of Imperatoriaia a mile above thetown. We soon enter the clouds, and lose sightof all objects at more than a few yards' distance ;apt quitting the torrent, begin to mount the Zygosby a zigzag road. In ascending, the snow becomesdeeper, lying in drifted heaps, and forming hillocks,under which the shrubs are buried. Boxand pine are the most common trees, and become412 Epirus. [chap.more plentiful as we ascend. The east wind comesover the ridge in squalls with a piercing keenness.Where the snow has been blown away, and therocky surface left bare, the narrow slippery path onthe side of the steep slope is not a little hazardous.The road on the lee side of the mountain is generallyin this state in winter, because the wind,coming over the ridge in squalls, drives away thesnow from the rocky parts, and hence the lee sideis considered the more difficult, unless the quantityof snow on the weather side be such as to render itquite impassable. I hired three conductors fromM^tzovo, whose business it is to trace the roadwherever it is entirely covered, to support thehorses where it is bare and slippery, and if thehorse cannot be saved from falling over the side ofthe hill, to drag off the rider. As it is impossibleto save baggage and merchandize with the samecelerity, the loads are often left on the top of themountain tiU the weather improves, but this seldomhappens when they come from the westward, becausethe Metzovites are well acquainted with thedisposition of their mountain, and will not venturewithout a certainty of passing. We are accompaniedby the mules sent to resume their loads,which we find just at the foot of the highest ridgeon the western side. Here we dismount, in orderto make the last ascent of about fifty paces on foot.This little interval, however, is so steep and slipperythat, not having yet recovered from the effectsof my Apologia fever, I should have been sometimein reaching the summit, had not two of myguides, each taking an arm, hauled me up, andIX.] Epirus. 413then running down the steep on the opposite side,saved me the trouble of making a step. The roadon the sharp summit passes between two rocks, onone of which is a konisma* of St. Nicolas, whomthey invoke as they pass, and hence the place iscalled Aio Nikola.The proper Zygos terminates at no great distanceto our right, beyond which rises the summitcalled Dhokimi, connected by means of the heightsbehind Anllio with the summit above Khaliki.Beyond St. Nicolas we immediately enter a forestof beeches loaded with snow, which lies upon theground four or five feet deep, or more than doubleits average depth on the other side of the ridge.This is said to be generally the case, whether thewind be from Thessaly or Epirus, for though thesnow generally falls in much greater quantity inthe latter case, sometimes covering the ground tothe depth of several feet in the course of a night,it seldom remains long unmelted on that side. Theeasterly winds, on the contrary, being frosty, thesnow is more permanent, falling commonly in afine powder ; whereas from the southward or westwardit descends in large flakes. The two windsmost noted at Metzovo for foul weather are calledPatriot and Avlonitis*, names indicating thedirections of south and north-west, but comprehendingunder the one or the other denominationmany of the intermediate points. It is remarkabledKoytafia, a little pillar of to hold a small picture of thestone, in which there is a niche saint.Ilarpivocy AhXtavirrig.414 EPiRUS. [chap.that the snow lies at present upon the ground asfar down the valley to the westward as Tria*khania, while upon the highest points to thenorthward, and on Tzikurela, and the neighbouringheights in the opposite direction , which aremany hundred feet higher than the Zygos, thereis only a slight sprinkling on the summits. MountsTzum^rka and Kakardhista are more deeply covered.This peculiarity of the Zygos is probablycaused by its position between much higher mountainsto the north and. south, at the same time thatit is the ridge of separation between two long narrowvalleys which lie in a transverse direction tothe chain. The wind is thus drawn up the one orthe other of the two valleys, and is confined tothose two opposite directions, while the Zygos ineither case intercepts the vapours.The forests which cover this part of the Pmdmconsist chiefly of firs and beeches'. On theZygos, beeches are only found near the summit,lower down are firs, and still lower, small oaks.In the latter end of February and beginning ofMarch, at which time the snow generally collectson the ridge in the greatest quantity, the beeches,although lofty trees, have their stems sometimesburied, and the ridge is impassable for many days,except to foot passengers : nor would it be practicableat all during strong winds, but for the shelterafforded by the trees. Hence they are carefullypreserved. The firs on the western side, on thecontrary, are used for fuel, and are diminishing.iXaVia. ' d£va/c.IX. J Epirus. 415The Zygos of M^tzovo is geographically themost remarkable mountain in Greece. Situatedin the heart of Pindus as to its breadth, and centrallyalso in the longitudinal chain which pervadesthe continent from north to south, it givesrise to five principal rivers, in fact to all the greatstreams of Northern Greece except the Spercheius :north-eastward to the Haliacmon^ south-eastward tothe Peneus southward to the Ackehms^ south-westwardto the ArachthuSj and north-westward to theArtis.Remounting our horses a few hundred yardsbelow St. Nicholas, we proceed in half an hour toa fountain, where our guides leave us, and wherethe beech wood ends. The zigzag road continueswith a diminishing depth of snow for another hour,when we arrive, si 11.30, upon a part of the slopeof the mountain, where in the bottom of a deepravine to the right, flows the Salamvria, or Salam-briancomposed chiefly of the streams collectedfrom the eastern face of Mount Dhokimi. At 12this river is joined by a branch from the northward,which rises at the yaXaicrtrnc Xi0oc, or milestone, arock so called because there is a calcareous depositat the fountain which has the reputation at M^tzovoand other neighbouring villages of having the effect,when pounded and mixed with water, of promotinga woman's milk. Although this is not so distant asource as that of the southern branch, it was veryprobably the reputed origin of the Peneius, frombeing the most remarkable of its fountains. TheZaXafAppiaCf SoXa/iirpcoc.416 Epirus. [chap.road from Metzovo, by the milk-stones passes quotfar from the site of Imperatoriaia, and descends tothe Salamvria by the monastery of libokhovo'.At the junction of the two branches stands a khannamed thatof Malak&sh', from a village situated halfan hour above it on the mountain to the left. Herewe remain until 2 p.m., then immediately crossingthe northern river by a bridge, continue for a shorttime along the left bank of the united stream, whichis not large, but very winding, with a generalcourse of S. S. E.The mountains on either side have a more gradualslope than those which border the river Artaabelow Metzovo, and the passage of this valley wouldbe easier to an army than that of the Arachtkus.The woody summits rising above the acres or extremepoints, clothed with oak, which overhang theriver, present, as they fold over one another, a continuationof beautiful scenery. As we advance, thesnow, which at Khan Malakassi was lying on theground, retires to a higher limit on the hills. Wefollow generally the gravelly bed of the river, butsometimes cross the acres for a considerable distance,especially towards the end of the day'sjourney, which terminates at 4.15, on the rightbank, at the Khan of Kotovazdhi', so called ashaving been built by the inhabitants of a village ofthat name in the neighbouring mountain, who are^ Aifnr4fxofios» eut is separated from the terrisMaXaKcttrtrt, One of the tory of this village by the wholefour sub-districts into which of Metzovo.the rural district of loannina is ' Korofiaih,divided bears the same name,IX.] Thessaly. 417bound to keep the building in repair, and to seethat it is furnished with provisions and a khanji tosell them.Aljr Pashd has caused khans to be established inthe same manner, at intervals of about an houralong the whole route from loannina to Trikkala,but only those of Dhrysko, Tria Kh&nia, Malak&ssi,and Kotovkzdhi, have chambers for travellers ofthe higher classes. From Kotovdzdhi there is aroute of six hours to Kalarj^tes, leaving Khalikiat no great distance to the right. The riser ofKotov4zdhi receives streams from Vendista andKastanid^ two large villages situated among woodsof chestnut. Between the khans of Malakassi andKotovazdhi a tributary joins the SalamvHa fromthe northward, having its origin in the ridges towardsMiles, from the opposite face of which thewaters flow to the Venetian of Grevend. To theright of our road were the villages of Labovo,K6kkino-lithari, and Gletjadhes* : to the left thatof Struniza', nearly opposite to Labovo. AU theseplaces stand at the head of sloping vineyards andcorn-fields.Nov. 16. — At 8 we continue to follow the bedof the river from the Khan of Kotov&zdhi, butsometimes passing through narrow meadows on itsbank, or among plane trees which began to borderthe stream a little above the khan. The vale widensgradually. At 8.30 we cross a branch of the riverflowing from the mountains on the right, and at'Biviltrra or Bevr/ora, Ka<nayid,AdfiKofiiKf KdKKiyo'Xiddpif TXeridBic*2rpavvi{'a.VOL. I. E e418 Thessaly. [cHAP.9.20 a larger from Klinovo. Here the main valleyis about a mile in breadth. The opening of theriver of Klinovo admits a view of a great branchof Pindus which follows a direction nearly parallelto the course of the Peneius. This mountain isknown by the name of Aspropotamitiko, as beingcontained in the district of Aspropotamo, andas falling on the opposite side to the river socalled : it is now deeply covered with snow. At9.40, being near the foot of the right-hand hills,we have, at the distance of half a mile on the left,the junction of the Salamvria, with a stream ofalmost equal magnitude flowing from the northward,and from the Trickling sub-district of Krat-nova. Soon afterwards we cross a tributary fromthe right. From the left bank of the Kratzovabranch rises a range of hills of a secondary altitude,which terminate towards the valley of thePeneius, in the perpendicular rocks named theMeteors upon which are built the monasteriescalled ra fiovatrriipia rov IlivSov. At 10.10, afterhaving turned a root of the mountain to the rightwhere the valley changes its direction to the south,a part of the plain of Trikkala becomes visible :the plane trees still continue. At 10.20, the principalmonastery or Meteora, individually so called,is on a high rock to the left, distant two or threemiles, and another midway on a point half as highas the former. After having passed over a root ofthe mountain, we cross to the left bank of the riverand arrive in sight of the Castle of Trikkala, then^ ra Miriufpa,IX.] THESSALIA. 419taming to the left; of the direct road leading tothat place, arrive in ten minutes more, at 11 a.m.,at Kalabaka, where I am lodged in the house ofa Kalarytiote silversmith.Kalabaka, by the Greeks called Stairs, in thenominative Sti^hi ^, is situated on the south-easternside, and immediately at the foot of a perpendicularprecipice, which is five or six hundred feethigh, and of an uniform surface from top to bottom,but is divided into two parts by a deep verticalfissure, affording a narrow passage from thetown to the village of Kastr&ki, and the monasteriesof the Meteora. The cleft widens towards the top,and gives the rock of Kalabdka a bicipital appearanceat a distance. There is a third precipitoussummit to the eastward, called the mountain of'Aio Sterno, from a convent of Saint Stephenwhich stands on the summit. The town is spreadover the upper part of a long slope covered withmulberry trees, which declines very gently to theriver Salamvria, and commands a fine view of theplain of THkkala, beyond which appear the heightsof 'Agrafa, and behind them the summits of MountMeta, entirely covered with snow. To the left ofthe plain rise the heights behind Trikkala, overwhich another snowy mountain is seen, probablyOthrys. At 2 miles below Kalabdka, the Salam-via,after having encircled the slope which descendsfrom the town, makes a sudden turn to thesouth, towards the foot of the mountain of Kot-jake, which borders the plain to the westward,E ei420 Thessaly. [cHAP.and after a course of six or eight miles in thatdirection, sweeps again in a graceful curve towardsTrikkala. A wide gravelly uncultivated space oneither side the river, caused by its inundations, ischaracteristic of the wcrafMOKXwnoQ OirraXui \ but itis common to the rivers in general of the plainsof Greece, and may be said to be injurious bothto agriculture and to picturesque effect. AlthoughKalabaka belongs to the live or government ofTrikkala, its public revenue is at present aseparate mukata in the hands of Self Pasha,whose agent is the only Turk residing in theplace. The Pasha receives 30 purses a year ; theother contributions, including the local expencesof the district, such as kondks, support of Albaniantroops, &c. amount to 20 more. This is paidalmost entirely by about 120 houses, the rest, tothe number of 30 or 40, being wretched cottages.The house of Kyr lanaki, the Hodja-bashi, islarge, and there are some others which indicateformer opulence, but the place has been muchinjured of late by robbers, or by the Albanianssent in pursuit of them. The mulberry plantationsstill produce 12 or 15 fortunate of silk per annum,each fortuna being 100 okes. The territory ofTrikkala produces about 60 fortunate. Stagewas formerly a metropolitan see, but is now onlya poor bishopric of the province of Clarissa. Thecathedral, which is not large, was built about theyear 1300 by the Emperor Antoninus Palseolo-gus, as appears by an inscription on one of theTara B* harl ra fUoa r^c pa, rX^v oozy wom^dKXvffrotOtrraXlac ihcaifwyiffrdrri xw- cflrrer.^Strabo, p. 430.IX.] Thessaly. 421walls of the church. It has a large pulpit of stonein the centre, and is supported hy columns of acoarse white marble. Below the altar is a smallcolumn of verd-antique. All these columns areheld to be flav/iarovpyaic, and distil water on thefeast of the saint to whom the church is dedicated.Adjoining to the church is the humble palace ofthe bishop rwv ^aywvy who is now at Constantinople.That Stagus stands on the site of an ancientcity, appears from many indications. On theslope below the town are some massy foundationsof Hellenic walls, and ancient sepulchres are foundoccasionally in the vineyards in the same direction.In the town several wrought blocks areobservable in the walls of the churches and privatehouses. There is an inscribed marble in theouter wall of the episcopal church, and two othersat a fountain at the church of St. Prodromus.The first of these monuments (No. 7) records theliberation of some slaves, and contains, togetherwith their names, those of the purveyor \ andsome other officer, under whom the manumissiontook place. But one of the inscriptions at the fountain(No. 6) is of more importance, and comesmost opportunely in aid of the ancient authors, toresolve many historic and geographic uncertainties.It is cut in large but much worn letters ona plain squared stone, and attests that the city ofthe ^ginienses had honoured the emperors Severusand Antoninus (Caracalla). Stagus thereforerafiiag.422 THBB8ALIA. [CHAP.Stands on the site of /Bginium, a fact in perfectconformity with Strabo, from whom we learn that^ginium was in the country of the Tymphsei, andthat it confined on Tricca ^ for Mount Temple issufficiently identified with the summits near Met-zoo,by its having contained the sources of theArachthus * ; and Stagus lies exactly between theZygos of Metzovo and Trikkala. The singularsituation of the place, fortified on two sides byperpendicular precipices, accords also with themention of ingenium by Livy, who relates, thatwhen the consul Quinctius entered Thessaly afterthe battle at the Aoi Stena, he first took Phaloria,and then advanced against .Sginium, but thatfinding it next to impregnable, he was deterredfrom even attempting to besiege it, and turnedtowards Gomphi '.The importance of ^ginium is shown on otheroccasions in ancient history. Notwithstanding itsstrength, it was taken by the Athamanes, whenthey were in alliance with Antiochus against theRomans, but was soon afterwards recovered bythe united forces of Eusebius and Philip ^. It wasgiven up to plunder by L. amplius Paulus forhaving refused to open its gates after the battle ofPydna ^. But perhaps the most interesting illustrationwhich the inscription of Kalabaka affords,AXylviov U Tv/i^/mv, ' lay. 1. 82, c. 15.6iiopQv AiOiKi^ Kal TpiKKy * Id. 1. 36, c. IS.Strabo, p. 327. * Id. 1. 44, c. 46 ; 1. 45,o^Apaxdoc irorafjLOCi Af)x<5- c. 27.fuvoQ Ik Tv/jujtTic opove koI rffcwapiapalat, — Strabo, p. 325.IX.] THB8SALIA. 423is that of the march of Julius Caesar, in his wayfrom lUyria to Pharsalia. ingenium, which hedescribes as object opposUumqvbe ThessaUce^ wasthe place where he was met by the forces underDomitiusy coming from Heraclia of Lyncestis '. Itwas from Apologia that Caesar had begun hismarch into Thessaly ; his route therefore probablyfollowed the Aous and its branch, the modemDryno, traversing from thence the plain of loan-nina,and crossing the Pindus by the pass ofM^tzovoy while Domitius, moving from Heraclia,which was near the modem Bitolia, returned tothe vale of the Vistritza, or HcJiacmonj where hehad been opposed to Scipio previously to hismovement upon Heraclia, and following that valleyto Green. from thence crossed the heightswhich separate it from the Upper Thessalian plain ,in which Kalabaka and Trikkala are situated.Scipio about the same time marched from theHaUacmon to Larissa, probably by the modernServia and Elassona, in order to effect a junctionwith Pompey, who from Dyrrhachium had crossedMount Candavia to Lyncestis, from whence, wemay suppose his route to have been through Per-rhsebia and the Larisssea.It is proper to observe, that besides Caesar'serror as to Heraclia, to which I have before adverted',the text is manifestly wrong in describing hismarch as being through Epirus and Acamania ; forthe latter province lay very wide of his route to theCaesar de B. C. I. 3, c. 79. cestus. See p. 315 of thisNaming it Heraclia Sin volume.rica instead of Heraclia LynnThessaly. [CHAP.right The latter name ought evidently, therefore,to be Athamania ; for though in strictness Caesar'sline of march only passed along the northern bordersof Athamania, it is easy to conceive that theimportance which the latter district had assumedabout the time of the earlier wars of the Romansin this country, may have caused the name to beapplied, especially among the Romans themselves,to a larger portion of the mountains adjacent tothe south-eastern part of Thessaly, than it had originallyincluded. As the inscription of Stagusgives to the emperors the titles Parthian, Arabic,Adiabenici, its date was subsequent to Ad. 201,the year of the expedition of Severus into theEastNov. 16. — This morning at 8.30, descendingthrough the mulberry plantations, we rejoin, inless than twenty minutes, the direct road fromloannina to Trikkala. On looking back towardKalabaka, the rock of Aio St^fano appears higherthan the double summit immediately behind thetown. To our left, as we proceed, low hills skirtthe plain, and thus continue all the way to Trik-kala, beyond which they trend more easterly ; andthe mountains on the opposite side having also adirection more southerly than before, the plainbecomes suddenly much wider. Our road isseldom more than half a mile distant from thehills on the left. In a little jcoXtoc, or retiredplain, at about a quarter of the distance to Trik^kala, stands Koveltzi, and in another, at half way,Voivoda, both villages of the district of Trikkala.The land is a light and light-coloured mould, nowIX.] Thessaly. 425under the plough, after having produced a crop ofkalambokki. Cars are used like those of theplain of Green, but the trucks, or solid wheelsupon which they turn, are higher. These trucksare thicker in the centre than at the edge, whichis shod with iron : the car is drawn by two oxen,and moves, without creaking and bending, fromone side to another, like those of Berat and theMizakia. The plough-share is a flattriangular piece of iron, like thehead of a spear. As we approachTrikkala, many large elms andplanes are observable towards theriver, which is two or three miles tothe right. We crossed a torrentissuing from the mountains at Cordova; and another half an hour short of Trikkala,which passes through the town, and contains onlypools of water in the deepest parts, with little orno current, though in the rainy season it wouldseem to be of a different character, as the roadcrosses it by a large stone bridge. It is probablythe ancient Letheeus ^At the entrance of the town stands a new seraiof A]y Pasha. Here we overtake a caravan ofhorses, mules, and asses, in number about twohundred, laden with the women, children, andhousehold gear of Gramista on their road to Ar-myron.Gramista, like several other towns on theridge of Pindus, consists chiefly of ay^^iaraic and/3o9icoi, or in the Turks-Greek dialect of Thessaly,Strabo, p. 647.426 THB88ALIA. [CHAP.KipartiSt^ and r2^ov/uiravc&c ; that is to say, carriesand shepherds, very few of whom remain in themountain in the winter. The carriers, from thenature of their employment, are frequently absentfrom home at all times of the year, the shepherdsproceed constantly in the winter to their pasturesin the plains : so that in that season the villagesin the mountains are almost deserted. Each villagehas its particular' place of resort, where theMukatesi levies a capitation upon the cattle for theright of pasture.The castle of THkkala occupies a hill projectingfrom the last falls of the mountain of Khassia \ andis commanded by one of those heights at no greatdistance. It is a structure apparently of the middleages, which has been frequently repaired. It isof considerable extent, and has a small keep atthe summit which commands a noble view of thegreat plain of Upper Thessaly, from Stairs toMaskoluri, backed by the mountains of Kotjakaand 'Agrafa. These two great ridges are separatedonly from each other • by a klisura, or pass,called the Gates of Trikkala, where are two villagesnamed Portes, standing in the pass. To theleft of this remarkable feature of the view, themountains of 'Agrafa occupy near ninety degreesof the horizon. A low projection of them immediatelyopposite to Trikkala, and nearly due southof it, is crowned with a village and ruined castlenamed Fandri.XoffCTid, vulgarly pro ' ai wopratc r&y TpiKKoXmy,bounced Elisha.IX.] Thessaly. 427The town of Trikkala covers the slope and plainon the southern and eastern sides of the castle,and is said to contain between twelve and fifteenhundred families, a great part of whom live inmiserable cottages. The houses are all built ofsun-baked bricks, and have a poor appearancecompared with those of lo&nnina, where in all thelarger the lower half of the wall is of stone.Though Trikkala has rapidly declined since it hasbeen governed by Aljr Pasha, it is still one of thelargest towns in Greece, has seven or eightmosques, more than as many churches, two synagogues,a well furnished bazar, and a market onSundays, much frequented from the surroundingcountry.A large proportion of the houses, although builtby and belonging to Turks, are hired and inhabitedby Greeks; so that the Christian population exceedsthe Turkish. This has arisen from the conductof Al Pasha towards the Turks, whose landshe has obtained from some by purchase at a cheaprate, because their extravagance and debts had reducedthem to that necessity, and from others byhis accustomed modes of fraud or tyranny ; othershaving been unable to bear their share of the expencescaused by the wars of the Vezir, the visitsof himself and his sons, the passage of Albaniantroops, and those arbitrary demands which hemakes at intervals, have either sold their propertyto live elsewhere, or have removed into some villageand let their town-houses in apartments. Thepost is another heavy tax on such a thoroughfareas Trikkala, and the Menziiji, or postmaster, is428 THBS8ALIA. [CHAP.one of the leading men in the place. He contractsto keep one hundred and fifty horses for two hundredpurses a year. An old inhabitant tells me,that he remembers when it was done for sixpurses.In one of his late visits to this place, A\^ carriedaway with him a Trikkaline^ Greek, whom heimagined rich, and put him in prison at loannina,signifying to him that the price of his liberationwas two hundred purses. After two years' confinement,the man escaped and went to Adrianople,whence he immediately wrote to his son at Trik-kala to join him. But the Venir had been beforehandwith him, and had already caused the sonto occupy the father's place in the prison. Aftera long bargaining, fifty purses was agreed to bythe Vezir as the lowest price of the son's liberty.The father had not so much ; but after selling hishouse, two or three small farms, and some vineyards,in short, the whole property of the family,he collected thirty-six purses, which were paid tothe Veil, who, however, still kept his prisonerconfined, until fully convinced that he had not themeans of completing the fifty purses. The father,meantime, died at Adrianople, and the son is nowin poverty at Trikkala. Al^^ refused to accept theproperty in house and lands from the son in full ofhis demand, but obliged the young man to sellthem himself; purchased them secretly, and thenreceived back the purchase-money from his vietim.TptKicaXivoc.IX.] Thessaly. 429The bishop of Tiikkala, a man of some curiosityand information, supposes Stagus to be the site ofthe Ithome of Homer, judging so with great appearanceof reason, from the poet's epithet icXiufia-Koitraa ; but Ithome still retained its name in thetime of Strabo ; and his description of the site willnot agree with that of Stagus. The bishop was ofcourse ignorant of the decisive inscription containingthe words IIoXcc Aiycviloiv. He informs me,that there are some remains of a Hellenic townor fortress at Ascham, a village two hours fromTHkkala to the north-west, in the Khassia hills,where also are the sources of the lazy stream,which flows through Trikkala. He is rather scandalizedat my having passed without visiting theMeteors, which he qualifies as ' royal and heaven-builtworks.The only traces I can find of the ancient Triccaare some small remains of Hellenic masonry, formingpart of the wall of the castle, and some squaredblocks of stone of the same ages dispersed in differentparts of the town. On the summit of thehill behind the castle stands part of the shaft of acolumn one foot eight inches in diameter, taperinglike the Doric, but not fluted. It is fixed with thesmaller end in the ground, and is not, therefore,in its original position. There is another similarcolumn in an adjoining Turkish cemetery. Theyseem too small to have belonged to the Asclepiumof Tricca ; for aesculapius having been an objectipsa /3a€rtXiica xai it^tcriffra.430 Thessaly. [Clap.of peculiar veneration as a native deity, whose sonsconducted the Triccsei to Troy : his temple wasprobably one of the chief ornaments of the city.Some remains of it may, perhaps, be envelopedin the buildings of the modem town, orburied under the accumulated ruins and rubbishof ages. Strabo describes it as the most ancientand illustrious of all the temples of aesculapius ^,and as the constant resort of invalids, whose cureswere there recorded as in his temples of Cos andEpidaurus '.Nov. 18. — At 10 A.M. we proceed fromTrikkalaon the road to Larissa, and at the eastern extremityof the town pass by the serai of Velj^ Pasha, which,although built only a very few years ago, is alreadyin such a dilapidated state, that the window-shuttersare dropping off their hinges into the street.The road is dry and even dusty ; the hills ofKhassia are at no great distance on the left: tothe right the plain extends for twelve or fifteenmiles to the foot of the lower heights of 'Agrafa,behind which the central ridges which connectPindus with (Eta, exhibit their majestic summitscovered deeply with snow. At 11.40 we halt todine at the little village of Kurbali : the men areall absent with their flocks, but we are received bythe women without fear — one of the favourabletraits of Aljr's government. A quarter of an hourbeyond Kurbali, a hill, one mile and a half to theTO Upon Tov *AffK\fi'inov to ap\ai6raT0v koI iirifayiffraToy,Strabo, p. 437.• Id, p. 874.IX.] Thessaly. 431left, which is one of the extreme points of themountains of Khassid, and is connected with theheights behind Trikkala, is surrounded by Hellenicwalls of considerable extent. A church crownsthe summit, and there is another in ruins at thefoot of the hill. The place is called Kardhfki,and still gives title to one of the suffragan bishopricsof the province of Clarissa. In the intervalbetween our road and the ruins is a small lake,which yields an abundance of fish.An opening in the hills, not seen from Trikkala,now discovers itself, through which the Salamvriaflows, and the northern part of Mount Pelham makesits appearance. Our road, on turning towards theopening, approaches the hills on the left, and at 2brings us to Kolokoto, a small village at the footof a rocky insulated height not far from the hills,and about half an hour distant from the left bankof the Penitus. Immediately above the villageare some remains of a Hellenic wall of rude andantique construction, which inclosed only the summitof the hill, together with a small space downthe side. On the top of all is a modem tower inruins. A little before Kolokoto our road touchedthe bank of the small stream which flows throughTrikkala : it is narrow, in most parts deep, andmoves so slowly that the current is visible only inparticular places. From Kolokoto we pass over apaved road, between the rocky height of the Palesand a marsh on the right, which is fed bysome springs issuing from under the rocks, andthen cross a bay or recess of the plain betweenthe hill of Kolokot6 and those of the district432 Thessaly. [cHAP.of Khassid. At 3.10 Great and Little Tjigoto, orTjighioti, or Tjai6ti \ are on the left ; and to thenorthward of the latter Grisons, or Gritziano', abovewhich are a large church, and the ruined walls ofa considerable town, apparently of the time of theByzantine empire. To the right, at the sametime, a round insulated hill, situated at about thesame distance from the right bank of the Salam-viaas Tzighioti is from the left, is rendered veryconspicuous by the ruined walls of a large Helleniccity inclosing its summit and face.We now come in sight of Zarko, situated, likeTzighioti, just within a projection of the heightswhich here form with other hills on the oppositeside of the Salamvria a strait through which theriver makes its way towards Larissa. Havingcrossed the plain which extends to the left to Grigand the hills of Khassia, we arrive at 3.45 atZarko, a town of 350 houses, built of a coarse granitefrom the adjacent hills, and which forms withTjighioti an agaUk of Mukhtdr Pasha, who, besidesthe royal revenue of the two villages, receives anannual contribution as an exemption from thequartering of Albanian soldiers. For the accommodationof Tatars, or persons travelling with imperialfirmdhns, or with buyurdls of Alj^ or Mukh-tar, the priests has built two apartments adjoininghis house, in one of which I take up my abode forthe night. The priests himself is now in prisonat loannina, whither he was carried by AJ^^ whenIX.] Thessaly. 433this primate had allowed the thieves to infest thecountry around Zarko, and had been oh good termswith them. Zarko is chiefly noted for its cotton,which in good years produces 1000 fortunate ofpicked cotton y in a state fit for spinning. Eachfortuna is of twenty okes, and requires ninety-threeokes of cotton from the field. Notwithstandingthe fertility of these plains, cultivation is confinedto the vicinity of the villages ; the remaindersupplies only winter pasture to sheep and cattle.Cotton is almost the only agricultural productionof this place, and a bad cotton-year is starvation toZarko. It is the ordinary residence of the Bishopof Kardhiki^ who is now at Constantinople.Nov. 19. — At 8.30 we begin to turn the pointof the mountain of Zarko, and entering the boghdzor strait already mentioned, through which theSalamvria flows, arrive in twenty minutes upon thebank of the river. The water being now low, andfordable in many places, we leave on the right thevopoc, where at other times the river is passed by aboat, and continue to follow the left bank. At 9.45there is an interval of only a mile and a half betweenthe hills on either side. Here a rocky advancedheight on the right bank preserves the ruins of aHellenic wall, which incloses the summit togetherwith the slope towards the river, and contains withinthe ancient inclosure some remains of a smaller andmore modern castle. Ten minutes farther, we fordthe Salamvria, which flows with a slow currentover a bed formed of a mixture of mould andfine sand, resembling the deposit of the Nile ; theo KapBiKtou.VOL. I. F f434 Thessaly. [CHAP.depth in the deepest part is about four feet. But thedry autumn has made the river lower and less rapidthan usual. In proceeding, the village of Alaskais a mile on the right, not far from the foot of theheight of the Paleokastro, from whence the hillson that side take a southerly direction. We nowcross the plain to Larissa, along the chord of alarge arch formed by the Salamvria: the riverhowever does not, throughout this distance, flowthrough the great plain, but first passes in a northerlydirection through a valley included between acontinuation of the Zarko range of hill, and arocky ridge on the opposite bank, which forms theboundary of the plain of Larissa to the westward.The river then emerges into the plain two hours tothe westward of Larissa, at a narrow opening betweenthe northern extremity of the last-mentionedridge and the southern end of a root of MountOlympus at the foot of which stands Turnovo, twohours to the north-eastward of the opening. Afterpassing the city, the river makes a remarkableturn to the northward before it arrives at Tempe.As soon as we had passed the opening of Alifaka,Olympus OssUy and Pecunia were displayed beforeus in all their magnificence. Ossa, with its woodyslopes and its conical peak now. deeply coveredwith snow, is one of the most beautiful mountainsin Greece, and is well contrasted in character withthe broad majesty of its neighbour. The lowersides of Olympus are well wooded, but the summitpresents a wide extent of a .bare light-colouredrock, which has very little snow on this side,though it is evidently the highest of the mountainsIX.] Thessaly. 435which surround Thessaly, and probably the highestin Greece.From the ford of Alifaka, as &r as Thumai, wecross an uncultivated plain, with a soil resemblingthat of Egypt. Thum&i is on the rise of a lowridge which projects into the plain from the hillson the right. It consists of twenty or thirty families,with one Turkish house. Having halted here from10.50 to 12.40, we cross a slight elevation, uponwhich are two or three other small tjiftlik villagesand descend again into the lowest level where thetown of Clarissa surmounted by more than twentyminarets, displays itself in front. Having traversedsome gardens and vineyards, where the Salamvriaflows at a small distance on the left, we enter thetown at 2.45, and at 3 arrive at the serai or Trajanof the metropolitan bishop, situated on the rightball of the Peneius. The palace, together with theadjoining cathedral, which is remarkable neitherfor its size or decorations, is inclosed by a wall;serving in some measure as a protection fromTurkish insult. The upper story commands a nobleview of the Laisse campus opinuB, surrounded byOssa, Olympus and the Perrhcebian hills. Immediatelyabove the metropolis, the river is crossedby a bridge of nine arches, 300 feet in length,faced with large squared stones, and having a road-thevulgar sound, iu con of the Greek and Roman au-sequenceof the position of the thorn, though not that of coinsaccent, is L^irsa, hut I have and inscriptions, which is Ad-followedthe modern orthography or Adptiffn,ply, which is the same as thatFf 2436 THB99ALIA. [CHAP.way which, very unlike that of the narrow Albanianbridges, is wide enough for two carriages : the pierswhich terminate below in spurs, are pierced withSaracenic arches, curved and pointed.Larissa, though standing in the lowest part ofthe plain, and subject to excessive heat in summer,is not considered unhealthy, which is ascribed toits being unconfined by neighbouring mountains,and therefore always well ventilated; nevertheless,as in the generality of Grreek towns, theautumn is seldom unattended with some degree ofsickness and mortality. Although the plain immediatelyaround is as dry and dusty in the summermonths as Egypt in June, there is a marshyspace to the north-east, caused by an inundationfrom the river in winter, . where the water is neverquite absorbed by the sun. The exhalations fromthence, and the cold air which descends at nightfrom the mountains, can hardly fail to producesome degree of disease, when after the terminationof the Etesian breezes, that stagnation of the atmosphereprevails, which throughout Greece is prevalentfrom the beginning of September to theautumnal rains.Since we have crossed the Pindus the weatherhas been perfectly serene, with a slight breeze fromthe north or north-east, and a sharp frost everynight, yielding at an early hour to the power ofthe sun. While deluges were falling on the westernside of that chain of mountains, Thessaly was sufferingfrom drought, and the land is now so parchedthat the peasants cannot sow : it is admitted, however,that this is an unusual occurrence, and that inIX.] THESSALIA. 437general there is a sufficiency of moisture to makethe bight rich mould of Thessaly the most producetime soil in Greece. A beautiful autumnal seasongenerally follows the equinoctial rains, and continueswith short intermissions to the end of theyear, while in Epirus the same kind of weatheroccurs only at intervals, which after the beginningof November are both short and rare. The softnessof the Thessalian climate, compared with thatof Epirus seems to have had its effect upon thecharacter of the inhabitants, who are more cheerfuland civil than those to the west of the Pindusalthough living in the midst of poverty and themost grinding oppression.Finding the Mitropoli too much like a Turkishkiosk for the present season, and that the inmates,although bearing the sounding titles of vpwTo<rvvKeX'\o^, ocfcovofiocj and upo^aKovog^ are too ignorant ofevery thing beyond their walls to afford muchassistance to my inquiries, I procure, not withoutsome difficulty, an apartment at the house ofKyr P., a medical practitioner. But I have reasonto regret the change of lodging. Though a nativeof the place, my host knows very little about it,and thinks only of turning my occupation of hisapartment to his own benefit He proceeds in thismanner : according to custom, the town undertakesto entertain the Vezir's musafir, and to supply himwith a tain of meat, bread, wood, oil, and candles.The iatros having taken this duty upon himself,soon begins to complain of the extreme difficulty ofobtaining such commodities (in Larissa of all placesin Greece), and gives various ingenious reasonsVOL. I. 2 F 3 -t-438 TllESSALIA. [chap.for it, until at length, to avoid starvation, we areobliged to make our own purchases, and to entertainour entertainer and his whole family, who willmake his own charges as soon as I am gone, whenthere will no longer be any possibility of a referencefor the truth of them. Among the greatnumber of petty inconveniences, which put thetraveller's patience to trial in these countries, theunavoidable necessity of contributing occasionallyto the misery of the lower classes, and of abettingthe oppression and roguery of the higher, is thatwhich is most mortifying. Last winter Kyr A.,the hodj4-bashi of loannina, after starving myfriend M. and his suite for several days, chargedthe town at the rate of sixty piastres a day for theirmaintenance.Mr. P. asserts, that there are 8000 Turkish familiesin Larissa, instead of which probably they donot much exceed half that number. There are 300or 400 Jewish houses, some of which are said to beamong the richest of European Turkey, and about400 Greek. Formerly, there were many Armenianfamilies, but the greater part have had the wisdomto withdraw to places where the Christians canpursue their trades in greater security. The Armeniansare the most prudent, crafty, and knowing,of all the Ghi&urs of the Levant, and are generallyto be found in the best situations. They areindustrious, always intent on gain, and far moreprofound knaves than the Greeks, whose flightyand inconstant tempers render it difficult for themto attend to any fixed plans, and who, amidst alltheir roguery and deceit, are capable of liberal andIX.] Thessaly. 439disinterested • actions, end have 'a curiosity andthirst for mental improvement, 'which is very rarelyfound among the Armenians of Turkey.Nov. 20. — Larissa, like the generality of thesites of Greece, which have been continually inhabited,preserves few remains of Hellenic times.The circumference is less than three miles, onefourth of which is contiguous to the river on theopposite bank of which there is a grove of elmsand white poplars. The remainder of the town issurrounded by hillocks, and at intervals by largespaces covered with Turkish tombstones. Amongthese cemeteries is found almost all that now remainsabove ground of the ancient Larissa, consistingof plain quadrangular stones, fragments ofcolumns mostly fluted, and a great number ofancient cippi and sepulchral stelae, all now servingfor Turkish tomb-stones. In many instances asepulchral stone with a Greek inscription has beenplaced at the head of a Turkish grave, without anyTurkish inscription now apparent, so that many aMehemet or Musae is reposing under the name ofan Aristarchus or Cassander. It would be tediousto examine thoroughly all the burying grounds,but a person who had the patience, and the goodfortune to do so without insult, for the Turks ofLarissa are very insolent, might possibly find somethinginteresting among the inscriptions. Almostall those I saw were simple /uvqfuira. In the wall ofthe metropolitan church is a register of the namesof certain freed men and women, who had each paida stater to the city upon the occasion of their liberation.The marble is incomplete, and containsThessaly.[chap.only the names of seven persons who had been theslaves of one Marcus AriusLarissa is the most Ottoman town in Greece tothe southward of Saloniki, having been the chiefsettlement of the Turks ever since the conquest ofthis part of the country previously to that of Constantinople.It then received the name of Veni*sheer, which is still the official appellation.When Mahomet IV. was engaged in the siege ofCandia, he made this place his residence, andhere Dr. Brown, an English traveller, found himin the year 1669. The doctor relates, that theSultan encamped during a part of that summerupon Mount Olympus, in order to avoid the heatand malaria of Larissa, but that the cold of themountain was fatal to many of his followers. Asan instance of the daring character of Mahomet,Brown states, that he killed one of his finest horsesin an attempt to ride up the peak of Kissavo*, (thesummit of Ossa.) Although Yenisheher, in civiland military arrangement, is subordinate to Tir*hala (Trikkala), which gives name to a live ordistrict of the eyalet or province of Rumili, it haslike many other places in Turkey, a jurisdictionseparate from its district, the judicial and ecclesiasticalaffairs being in the hands of a Mora, who is'AyaBj rv^^. Papa Aov-kIov Tiriov 'Oyrifylfiov tov ra/ilovrile irSXiiae rijy Ztvripay Uja-fjLilvoVi iviypafOti 'IinrovpaW^p,itvaypafil AreXevOepitfOcKrirtK,ieBvK6Tmy rove arariipae ryir6\€i. MapKov 'A^lov. TeXeV-'HpaKXiktVf Xdpira, IrpaTmy,*lovKovySa. — • V. InscriptionNo, 18.The doctor seems to havemistaken Kissavo for a part ofOlympus; it is possible, therefore,that Mahomet's camp mayhave been upon Asia.IX.] THESSALIA. 441appointed like the pashas every year at the TurbanBairam, and whose maintenance being assignedupon a certain portion of the live of Trikkala, hasgiven to that portion the name of the Mollalik. Thecivil power at Larissa is divided among several richBeys styled the Ayans: the chief is Abdim, who possessinga large portion of the Pehsgic plain, has noreason to envy the precarious fortune of any venir inthe empire. There are several other Turks herewithgood landed properties, but in general theirexpences in arms, horses, furniture, and women,oblige them in a few years to cheat the Christian orJewish trader, or to oppress the farmer so much byforced contributions of produce, that he is obliged tomigrate elsewhere, and to leave the estate unproductive,for want of cultivation. In the tjiftliks ofthe surrounding plains the peasant generally receiveshalf the crop for his labour, he supplyingthe seed, but the farming-stock belonging to thelandlord. In any other country this would leaveenough for the farmer ; but such is the conduct ofthe Turks, that the Greeks are continually migrating,chiefly to the districts of Ionian governedby the family of Kara-osman-oglii ; in return,Turkish peasants from Asia Minor have settled onsome of the Larissaean farms, and have been ableto live better than the Greeks, because they areexempt from the kharatj, and some impositionsto which the Greeks alone are liable. Some ofthe grievances to which both the townsmen andpeasants are subject are owing to the Veadr A15^,who, as Pashd of Trikkala and Superintendant ofthe Servants, considers himself privileged freeThessaly. [CHAP.quietly to visit Larissa, when it is well understoodthat he expects a large gratuity and will not departwithout it. He generally finds some excusealso for carrying away with him some Jew orGreek, to be kept in prison until he has extorteda sum of money from him. The Greeks afibrdhim little plunder, being generally poor. Themost flourishing trade seems to be that of physician,of whom there are several at Larissa ; atTrikkala, the favourite abode of aesculapius, therewas not one. The expression cKaAaadtiicc o icocrfiocy(the world is mined), so common all over Greece,is repeated here loudly, not less by the Turksthan by the Greeks. They allude to the increasingpoverty, and to the excessive rise in the priceof provision, and every necessary of life withinthe last few years, which has been the ruin ofmany families. Its causes are the necessities ofthe Porte, the progressive debasement of the currency,the extortion of local governors, and particularlyin this part of the country the destructionof industry consequent upon the oppressive governmentof A15^ Pash, his wars, his progresses hisarbitrary demands, and the forced maintenance ofhis Albanian soldiers.The Greeks being in that small proportion atLarissa which I have stated, are ill-treated wheneverany affair in which a Turk is concerned isbrought before the kadj^. Not many days ago, aGreek entering the town with an ass-load of charcoal,from one of the mountains which supplyLarissa, was killed by a Turk, for no other reasonthan because the latter wished to have the charon.]THESSALIA. 443coal, while the Greek insisted upon carrying it tothe market, where he was more sure of being paidfor it. As the poor Greek had no friends readywith the proper compliment for the lady, andnone of the persons who were present at the murder,and who were chiefly Turks, were able orwilling to swear that he saw the Turk point thepistol or pull the trigger, the kadj^ declared therewas a want of evidence, and discharged the prisoner.As three Christian witnesses are only consideredequal to one Turk, there is little chance of justicefor the Christian at the Turkish tribunal. WhereChristians only are concerned, the Turkish lawseldom interferes, except in criminal cases, leavingthe affair to the bishop or hodjabashi. The Greeksnevertheless not unfrequently carry their disputesto the mekhem^, though they generally have reasonto repent it.Here, as in other parts of Turkey, the Jews areless oppressed, unless perhaps when by some imprudencethey allow it to be suspected that theyare wealthy, and thus excite extortion. The preferenceof the Turks for the Jews does not arisefrom any respect for this people, whom they holdin extreme contempt, but because they have nofears from the Jews, while they consider theChristians as the natural allies of their Europeanenemies, by whom the Ottoman Empire is destinedto be overthrown, and the Musulman faith to bedestroyed. The Jews moreover recommend themselvesto the Turks as being ardent haters of theGreeks. At Larissa they speak Spanish, in commonwith those of the rest of Greece, whose accessTHESSALIA. [CHAP.tors migrated to this country in great numbers,when expelled from Spain by Ferdinand and Isabella.Benjamin of Tela, in his journey throughGreece, three centuries earlier, did not pass throughLarissa, so that we remain uninformed whether anyJews then inhabited this city.The greater part of the rich plain which lies betweenLarissa and Mount Olympus is inhabited bya race of Turks cultivating their own lands andemployed almost entirely in agriculture. They aredescendants of the earliest Turkish settlers, and bythe Greeks are called Koniaridhes ^ a name as oldprobably as the eleventh century, when Iconiumwas the seat of Turkish power, and when Turkishauxiliaries were employed by Alexius Comnenusin Thessaly against the Normans : though theirpermanent settlement in this country cannot beattributed to an earlier period than the 14th century,after their conquest of Adrianople. Some ofthe Koniaric villages, which are about twenty innumber, are situated towards Mount Ossa, andothers to the southward of Larissa. The larger aredivided into several makhalas, and the whole Ko-nitricpopulation is not less than ten or twelvethousand.Nov. 22.— From Larissa to Fersala. — The greatplain of Lower Thessaly , or Pehsgiotisy of whichLarissa is still the chief city, extends from themountains Titus and Ossa to Plumy and thebranches of Othrys, interrupted only by a mountainof no great height now called Karadagh, or inGreek Mavrovuni, which, by means of an inferiorKoyiaptieg,IX.] TH£88AUA. 445ridge not far north of F^rsala, is united with theheights on the right bank of the Salamvria, whichseparate the Elastic plains from the equally extensivelevels of Upper Thessaly which constitutedthe ancient divisions named Thessaliotis and .The ridge to the north of Fersala, althoughthe lowest of all the heights around theseplains, is sufficiently high to be seen from Larissaat a distance of fifteen miles ; and one point in it,which lies nearly in a line between Larissa andFersala, is rendered conspicuous by several tallcypresses round the tomb of a Turkish sheikh orsaint. The road begins to rise very gradually tothis ridge, from a point not far from Larissa ; sothat between Zarko and Larissa the lowest level isnarrow on the right bank of the river, though veryextensive on the left. Below Larissa the lowestlevel widens on the right bank towards the foot ofMount Ossa and here is the inundation which Ihave already mentioned : it is called Karatjair,and corresponds exactly to the ancient Lessonswhich Strabo has described as ^' a lake in theLarissaea, formed by the overflowing of theriver." In fact, there is no other lake in theThessalian plains, except that of Kara, whichseems from its position to accord equally well withthe ancient Boebeis.^ Aapwvaioi ir\fi<rloy fit rp "Setrtrwylhf etc fjy {nrepirXv-olKovyr€c Tov Hfiyiiov, yiimtiy' (wy 6 irora/ioc dfffpeiro ri r^crcc ^ Icccvocc (sc. Perrhflebis) dpoirifiov rove Aaptwaiovt'ye/x6fuyoi Be ra eh^ifioyiarara aAA' Ijorepoy irapay^ifiiaoiv kir/i^fupfl Tuy treiliityf irX^v ct n yutpOunray Aapiwdtoi., — StrayKoiXov rpoc r^ ^*f^yp bo, p. 440.446 THB88ALIA. [CHAP.From the point where the road begins .to rise, asfar as the summit of the ridge of the Sheikh, thewhole country has a gently undulated surface, andconsists of a fertile soil, which, though well cultivatedaround several small villages, has far thelargest portion, particularly on the right side ofthe road, in a state of nature, and covered withthorns. The cultivated land is ploughed but notyet sown. The other parts furnish an excellentpasture to the sheep, which are driven here ingreat numbers in winter from the mountainsaround Thessaly. All the southern part of thecountry just mentioned I take to have been the territoryof the Crannonii, more anciently namedEphyraei \ the extent of whose pastures may be inferredfrom the allusion made by Theocritus to thenumerous flocks and herds possessed by the Scopas', one of the leading families of Cannon.At the end of two hours and a half we halt fordinner at a fountain ; and proceeding at 12.40,arrive at the summit of the ridge of the Sheikh at alittle after 2. The only trees I have seen on the routePindar. Pith. 10, v. 85. Strabo, p. 442. Stephan. inIloXXoi 3e ^&KOiraiat(ny iXavyofityoi vol aoKoyyLo^xDi true Ktpaoiffiy i/xviciiirayTO fi6€inn.Mvpia ^ diiirthioy Kpaywytoy ty^iaavKoyHoifiiyic eKKpira fiiiXa ^iXoi^lyoiffi Kpcwvdaic.Theocr. Id. 16, v. 36.Scopas was son of Creon hand of the daughter of Cleis*and Echecratia. themes of Sicyon. — Herodotus.Victories, one of the Scot 6, c. 127*pads, was a suitor for theIX.] Thessaly. 447are wild pears and dwarf oaks, the latter of whichcover a large tract of the uncultivated downs, andare not more than a foot high, though exactly resemblingthe common oak, and still bearing bothleaves and acorns. The road crosses the ridge ata mile to the right of the Sheikh, and at the summitopens upon an extensive prospect, but whichis not seen to-day to advantage on account of thecloudiness of the atmosphere. On a clear day itcommands the greatest part of Thessaly, includedwithin the renowned barriers of Olympus, Ossa,Pelium, Othrys, and Pindus. Pelium, however,particularly its southern part, is considerablyhidden by Mount Karadagh. We look downimmediately upon the valley of the Snipes, andthe scene of the great victory which gave theworld to Ceesar. It is bounded on the otherside by a range of mountains branching fromOthrys^ the summit of which is seen above themto the south-eastward. The town of Fersala liesat the foot of the hills, immediately opposite tous.To the right, the extensive plain, wateredby the JSnipeus^ Ajndanus^ and Peneus is spreadat the foot of the Agrafiotiko, or great snowy rangeof 'Agrafa. The ridge of the Sheikh, which has arise almost imperceptible on the north, slopesrapidly into the Pltarsalian valley, leaving on thedescent the village of Patris a little to the right.Several other Turkish villages occupy the valleyas well as the hills on either side. At 2.23 weenter the level, and at 2.55 ford the Fersaliti, asthe Greeks now call the JEnipeuSy just below ahandsome bridge of seven arches, which shows thatTHB88ALIA.[chap.the river is sometimes formidable, though nownarrow, clear, and about two feet deep, flowingwith a slow current ; from thence, crossing someopen corn-land we enter F^rsala at 3.30.F^rsala, called Tjatiltje by the Turks, and oftenby the Greeks *, covers the foot of a height, somewhatdetached from the rest of the range, whichbounds the valley of the Snipes to the southward,sid having a natural citadel formed by a tabularsummit which is encircled by a low precipiceof rock. The town contains between six andseven hundred inhabited houses, and many othersempty : there are five or six mosques, and thepopulation is entirely Turkish, except at the twoextremities of the town to the eastward west, whichare inhabited by Greek artisans, and keepers ofshops in the bazar, or by zevghites ', who cultivatethe Turkish lands in the immediate neighbourhoodof the town. Our konak is at a shopkeeper's atthe eastern end of the town, — a neat cottage witha plastered floor, well furnished with mats andother stromata ', and having a yard which containsa stable and a good provision of fire-wood.rd ^ipaaXa, TfardXr^c.2rp«^ara: mats, carpets,cushions, and mattresses, coveredwith carpets or cloth,and sometimes with costly stuffsmade of linen, cotton, or silk ;with the exception, in short, ofa diminutive table used onlyforeating, stromata are the entirefurniture of an Oriental apartment,serving for drawing-room,dining-room, and bedchamber.The description ofAristophanes (Ascham. v« 1089)in the line icXiVac, rpaxi^tUfvpoKti^Xaiaf frrpitfAoraf showsthat the Greeks have alwaysfurnished their houses nearlyin the same manner. It is oneIX.] THESSALIA. 449F^rsala is one of the most important militarypositions in Greece, as standing at the entrance ofthe most direct and central of the passes whichlead from the plains of Thessaly to the vale ofthe Spercheius and Thermopylae. With a viewto ancient warfare, the place had all the bestattributes of a Hellenic polis or fortified town :a hill rising gradually to the height of six orseven hundred feet above the adjacent plain,defended on three sides by precipices, crownedwith a small level for an acropolis, watered inevery part of the declivity by subterraneoussprings, and still more abundantly at the foot bysources so copious as to form a perennial stream.With these local advantages, and one of themost fertile plains in Greece for its territory,Pharsalus inevitably attained to the highest rankamong the states of Thessaly, and became one ofthe largest cities of Greece, as its ruined walls stillattest.The height which was occupied by the Acropolis,consists of two rocky tabular summits, unitedby a lower ridge. The western summit is lowerthan the eastern, and is not above a third of it inlength. The entire Acropolis was about fivehundred yards long, and from one hundred to fiftybroad, but still narrower in the connecting ridge,where are the remains of two gates nearly oppositeto each other, one of which led down aamong the Greek luxuries which another powerful instrument inhave subdued the hardy Turk, his corruption.The American weed has been «VOL. I. G gTHB88ALIA.[chap.Steep descent at the back of the Acropolis, theother into the city. On one side of the northerngateway, the ancient masonry consists of irregularmasses of rock, having smaller stones in the intervals,as at Tiryns ; but the masses are not so largeas some of those in the latter ruin : one measures5 feet 7 inches, by 3.10 by 2.4. Another pieceof wall toward the eastern summit seems to be ofan antiquity not less remote. 'All the other remains,both of the town and citadel, are of the kindof masonry which was employed about the timewhen history gives reason to believe that Pharsaluswas very populous and powerful . Thereis a monument, however, of very early times inthe middle of the Acropolis, which taken togetherwith the remnants of Cyclopian walls,may favor the opinion that this city was thecapital of Pythia in the time of the Trojan war.It is a subterraneous construction, built in thesame manner as the treasury of Atreus at Mycenae.Below an oval opening, level with the presentsurface of the ground, eight feet two inches long,and six feet ten inches broad, eight courses ofstone, in all about ten feet high, nearly cubical,None but the most opulentrepublics could maintainlarge bodies of cavalry, and forthis kind of military force Pharsaluswas eminent*even amongthe Thessalonians. In the battleof Gaugamela, the Pharsalianhorsemen (oi r&y ^apatiXiufviTnrelc) were the most numerous,as well as the best of thecavalry of Armenia ; and bytheir conduct had already savedthe right wing, before Alexander,who was diverted by itsdanger from his pursuit of Darius,had arrived. Arian, 1. 3,c. 11. 16.IX.] Thessaly. 451and laid together as usual without cement, are visibleabove the rubbish which fills up all the lowerpart of the monument. In the three or four uppercourses each course'projects a little beyond the onebelow it ; but those below, as far as they are visible,have the spheroidal curve of the interior of thetreasury of Atreus.The Acropolis of Pharsalus was replaced by acastle of Roman, or Imperial Greek times, which isnow itself a complete ruin. It included not onlythe level occupied by the Acropolis, but the upperpart of the adjacent slope to. the north, inclosingabout a sixth part of the ancient city. At the topof the hill the walls of this castle were raised on theremains of the Hellenic inclosure, but on the slopethey were constructed, from the foundation, ofrough materials mixed with mortar, though casedin some parts with squared blocks taken from themore ancient ruins : in this part they are thickereven than the Hellenic walls, being not less thaneleven feet. In the Acropolis are two or three cisternsof the same kind of masonry as the moderncastle ; one of these is fifty-five feet long andtwenty-five broad. The summit of the hill commandsa most extensive view, bounded to the northby Olympus and comprehending to the westwardall the great plains of Upper Thessaly as far asTrikkala and the rocks of Meteora. Due south isseen a high summit near Zituni, between whichand the ridges near Fersala is an elevated valleycontaining the villages Kaklidji and Tjeutma.The ancient city was near four miles in circuit,VOL. I. o g 2 -^452 THESSALIA. [CIIAP.and of the very common form of an irregular triangle; the walls are traceable on the two descendingsides in their entire extent. On the easternslope of the mountain, which is very steep, andnaturally defended by a torrent, there are notowers, nor even any of those short flanks whichwere common among the Greeks when towerswere not employed. Near the north-eastern anglea piece of the ancient wall, having eight regularcourses of masonry, now forms part of the wall ofthe episcopal church of Fersala. In few otherparts of the ancient inclosure so many coursesremain.On the western side, the walls, towards theupper part, made a wide sweep, for the purpose offollowing the crest of two detached heights, andthat of a ridge which unites them. Between thecitadel and the nearest of these two summits, whichis rocky, and rises almost to a level with the citadel,the ground is hollow, with a gradual declivity,and is consequently weaker than in other parts ;hence the hollow was fortified with a second wall,distant fifty yards from the outer, and having anobtuse re-entering angle in the middle. The ridgewhich unites the two heights just mentioned beingalmost at right angles with the double wall,formed an additional security to this weak point.The northern, or lower wall of the city, on theedge of the plain, was a mile in length; it is traceableonly in a few places, chiefly where excavationshave been made by modern masons, to takeaway the foundations, and which thus sufficientlyIX.] THBSSALIiU 453show to what we are to attribute the disappearanceof this wall. There are 3tiU, however, some remainsof it above ground at the western extremityof the modem town, particularly at the foot of arock above a pool and some sources of water,uniting in a permanent stream, which, after awinding course through the plain, joins the Snipes,near Vashti. Near the pool are two coursesof a tower, 20 feet square, from which it may bejudged that all this northern front of the town, onaccount of its being naturally the weakest, wasfortified by a chain of towers, although there werevery few on the western, and none on the easternface of the city. A few stones remaining in theirplaces to the westward of the springs, show thatthe northern wall joined the western, exactly atthe spot where the road from the west enters themodem town.Besides the fountains which issue from the rocksbelow the town, in many pellucid streams, andwhich were obviously one of the recommendationsof the site to the founders of the city, the Pharsaliiwere supplied from sources on the height by anaqueduct, excavated in the form of a deep troughin the rock, and covered with large stones reachingfrom side to side. At one place I observed adescent into the conduit of several steps, and apiece of wall of a later date, formed of tiles whichcrossed the opening. The modem Pharsalianssupply the fountains of their town in the same manner; the lower sources serving only for washing,or to gratify the Turks in summer by the coolness,the agreeable sound of the running water, and the454 Thessaly. [chap.shade of the plane trees. In order to enjoy thesefavorite luxuries the better, they have constructedseveral kiosks, in some of which the water issuesfrom the ground in the building. The mans ofthe springs are bordered by squared blocks, someof which were probably placed there by the ancients; others have been transferred from theruined walls to their actual positions by the Turks.Many wrought stones are to be seen in the houses,steps, and pavements of the town, but I can findno relics of sculpture, and only one inscription(No. 14), which is inserted in the wall of theGreek church. It was the monument of AurelianPhil who denounces a penalty against any onewho shall open her tomb, or place another bodyin it, and is curious only for its bad spelling:wapayyiWu is written ira(>avycXXi — reOitvat, rcOifvc —etc, tc — ovoii^ac, avv^c.Nov. 23. — Having moved from Fersala at 1.25,P.M. in a westerly direction, we pass through anopening which separates the ridges adjoining tothe ancient site from a north-western projectionof the same range, and at 2. 1 5 re-enter the greatplain. The hills now take a direction to thesouth-west, as far as Ghynekokastro, from whenceto the head of the plain under Dhomoko theytrend more to the south. • At a distance of about10 miles to the westward are the lower heightsof 'Agrafa and behind them the steep snowymountains of that district. In re-entering the plainVrysia (Turcic^ Bey Lunar) is a mile on the left;,at the foot of the hills ; the village takes its namefrom some very copious springs which issue fromIX.] THESSALIA. 455under the rocks a little below it, and form a considerablestream which we cross by a bridge at2.30. From hence the road leads directly to thepoint of Ghyneko-kastro \ where we arrive at2.55. All this comer of the plain, and as far asmean be seen on the right, consists of a fine turf,now covered with sheep and cattle, with the exceptionof a few patches of arable land, surroundingsome small Turkish villages. The soil seemsequally adapted to cultivation or pasture, and asthe adjacent hills furnish food to the cattle insummer when the plains are parched, the countrywell deserves the double character conveyed bythe epithets which Homer attached to Pythia ^Ghyneko-kastro is the modem name of a Hellenicruin, standing upon an extremity of thePhthiotia ridges; remains of walls of the thirdorder of masonry inclose the north-western face ofthe hill, which slopes in that direction, and surroundalso a long narrow tabular summit, whichwas the ancient Acropolis. At the back the descentis more rapid, and on that side the wall andtowers of the citadel remain perfect to one thirdof their original height. Although small comparedwith Pharsalus, this seems to have been a place ofsome importance. After having remained here aquarter of an hour, we proceed, and soon arrive insightof Dhomok6, situated on the summit of theridge which here closes the plain. Half an hour^ rwaucS'Kaarpoy,U. A. V. 155.456 THESSALIA. [CHAP.beyond Ghyneko-kastro we pass some sources on theright side of the road ; and on the left a ruinedmosque standing on a height. Here is an extensiveTurkish burying-ground, in which one of thetomb-stones is an ancient Greek statue of a female,wanting the head. From the mosque we crossdirect towards Dhomoko, which does not lie exactlyabove the extremity of the plain, but rathertowards the 'Agrafa side, and in one hour and 25minutes from the mosque reach the foot of the hills,on which the town is situated, when leaving onthe left the direct road to Zituni, we arrive at thetown at 5.15, after a tedious ascent of 40 minutes,rendered disagreeable by the rain, and difficultby the slippery path, and the weakness of ourwretched cattle. Dhomoko' contains about 300families and several lai^e houses : half the inhabitantsare Greek and half Turks. The situationresembles that of Dhimitzana in the Morea, standingupon the two sides and crest of a ridge in avery lofty situation. In the mensis road, whichwe quitted at the foot of the mountain, is a largekhan, on one side of which a copious spring andpool of water supplies canals, which after turningseveral mills on the side of the hill, arecollected into a small stream flowing to join theothers of similar origin, which we have this daypassed. The house in which I lodge belongs tofour partners in trade, all of whom have theirfamilies in the house.Nov. 24. — This being Sunday, the usual marketIX.]THBS8ALIA.day in Greece, a concourse of people crowd thevillage, buying and selling corn, maize, and otheragricultural commodities. There is no want ofevidence to show that Dhomoko stands exactly onthe site of the ancient Thaumaci. The bishop,who is one of the suffragans of Larissa, is styledo QavfMKov KOI Ziirovvtov ; and two inscribed marblesare still preserved, in which the words ironicOavfMKiiv occur several times \ Many Hellenicfoundations are to be seen around the town, though1 .roic cvrvyx<iK0V9c car l^lav rev xoXcr&y avfi^povrtiy rfj ir6\€i rj QavQiaK&y)1JC iiyT€\ofjLiyf t^(oi€ rfj iroXci t^ QavfiaKiiy £ira/>'e-)eai re *Ay^potr6ivJiy liri rp Tpoaipiaii fjy €x(**'*' rvyxo^y^i wpoc rijy ir6\iy)iy roic BtuireTpayfAiyoic Ins alncv tifXpriir(Hi^afft, ical tlyai ahoy r^c x*^-)Xcwc 1% OavfioKwy irp6^yoy xaX ehepyirriy (jcai inrapx^iy aWf^ xa»)pd r^c xi^Mc BavfiaKiSy ra rifita koI fi\dy&{pi$nra Bora roic ^UXocc)(c{r£py«)roic ttjq irdXiuc virc^px** ««* rove Tayov(c(dyTl)ypatffoy tov yfnii^lirfJLaro^Q. . (Iv) 6.yaypa^^ ri if^^io'/ia Kol ra Zthoyfiiya • • .'Aya09 Tvx^. IIAiC Oaw-fuuc&y iiuMCt *AyiaTf 'AypoXf m-voc KaXXtct irpo(eWav, circFO-pav, kavKlay^ &9^'Xeiav, ty~KTfiaiy^ driKtiay icdyrtty^ koXiroXifJLOV Roi elpaVacy cv royAirayra '^(fioyoy^ koX ahrf caleKyoyoiCf Kol sea roic cSfXXotcirpoifyotQ wdyra' dpxorrtfyZfofylaf Ac lava,iyyvoc rac irpo&i'/ac IIoXv/n-ri*Aya69 Tvx?. OoXii' Oav-fixity eBwK€y Uvfi^ Ti^ayo-pow *HpacXet^f , oin-i th§pyir^airrdct irpo{cviav, co-oxoXcrc/aF,iviyofiiay^ davXiay, dtr^Xttay^cvfcn)0'(V| areXccav Tdynay, KalToXifiOv Kal ilpdya^f Roi airr^Kal iKy6yotC9 cv roi' Awayraj(p6yoy Kal oaa Told aXXoccxpo£eyocc xaKra, dpi^6yTtty . . .'SiKOfJui\aVy Ivyvoc rdcirpofci'/ac NcoKTiiXefioc ElrifOt-3bv.V. Inscriptions 15, 16, 17*458 THBS9ALIA. [CHAP.too disjointed to indicate the exact plan or extentof the place. The inscriptions are grants of prox-enim,to foreign benefactors, with the accompanyingprivileges : two of the favoured persons werecitizens of Heraclea and of Gallium, both whichtowns were in or near the valley of the Spermcheius. At the southern end of the town arocky point overtopping the other heights, commandsa magnificent prospect of the immense plainwatered by the PefieiuSj and its branches, whichextends from Pharsalus to ingenium ; behind thelatter rise the rocks of the Meteors, distant atleast 50 miles in a direct line. This is the viewwhich Livy describes, following probably the wordsof Polybius, in relating an attempt made upon Thau-mach by Philip son of Demetrius, at the close of theyear (bec. 199) which preceded that of his defeatat the Aoi Stena. The historian remarks thatThaumaci was situated in the pass called Cela, inalofty position defended by precipices, where thetraveller entering Thessaly from Thermopylae andLamia, after having passed over rugged mountainsand intricate valleys, suddenly came in sight of aplain resembling an immense sea, and so extensivethat its extremity was scarcely visible *. A reinforcementof italians having penetrated throughthe guards of Philip into the city, he abandonedthe siege, and retired into winter quarters inMacedonia.Thaumaci a Pylos sinuous Theasaliseque transient con-maliceper Lamia eunti loco firagosa local implicatasque flex-altosit] sunt isis fiiucibus ibis pallium vias, ubi centumimminentes quae Cela vacant : ad banc urbem est, repentIX.] Thessaly. 459The situations of Pharsalus and Thaumaci beingdetermined with certainty, there remains the greatestprobability that Ghyneko-kastro is the ancientProemaa which Strabo names among the towns ofPhthisis, together with Thaumaci and Pharsalus \and which in the war with Antiochus, eight yearsafter the transaction just alluded to, was taken bythe Consul Alius, in his way from Larissa toHypata. On this occasion his first march was fromLarissa to Cannon. As he advanced, he receivedthe submission of Pharsalus, Scotus, and Pierce,took Proemaa and some castles near it, but wasattacked as he approached Thaumaci from thewoods and mountains overhanging the pass; hepenetrated however to the town, which had beendeserted, and the next day, arriving upon thebanks of the Spercheius, ravaged the lands of theHypataei*.On quitting Dhomoko we make a circuit of thehill, and proceed by a short descent into an elevatedplain, which extends south-eastward to thefoot of the mountain of Cura, the proper Othrys,and to the northward rises by a gentle slope to thesummit behind Fersala. Having traversed thisplain, we descend over an uncultivated tract intothe lower plain of Taukli, leaving a mile to thtright the nearest part of the lake of Taukli, whichvelut maris vast sic immense quod saxo undique absdssopanditOT plantes, ut subjects quibus imposing est. — Liv.campos terminate oculis baud 1. 32, c. 4.facile ques. Ab eo miracula ^ Strabo, p. 434.Thaumaci appellate, nee alti- ' Liv. 1. 36, c. 14.tine solum tota urbs, ' sed460 THB88ALIA. [cHAP.occupies all the lowest part of the plain, and is sixmiles in circumference. The greatest dimension ofthe plain is from east to west ; the soil seems fertile,but is little cultivated. We cross it obliquely bya road which the rain of yesterday has renderedvery bad, and having reached the hills on thesouthern side, leave Taukli on the right, and beyondit a promontory or peninsula in the lake, distanttwo or three miles from us, on which are someremains of ruined edifices. It is probably theancient Xynia, for that place gave name to a lakeon the southern borders of Thessaly, not far fromthe country of the iBnianes, who inhabited thevalley of the Spercheius\ Beyond the lake theground rises to the hills of ' Agrafa.In the plain of Taukli we joined the main roadfrom F^rsala to Zitiini, which crosses the mountainat the back of the former town, leaving thesummit on the right. The heights of Taukli arepart of a ridge which branching from the mountainof Cura, borders the plain of the Spercheius on thenorth, and is connected with the mountains of'Agrafa to the west. Our passage over it is in thelowest part ; but there is another pass to the westwardcalled the derveni of Kara, which leadsfrom Taukli directly to Cleopatra. These are thetwo natural entrances into Thessaly from the southward; and the plain of Taukli with Zituni, Dho-moko, and Fersala, are therefore the most imoLiv. 1. 32, c. IS ; 1. 33, Caul. Can 68, v. 287. Step.3 ; 1. 39, c. 26. Polyb. plans also mentioiui the lake,ap. Stephan. Bys. v. XwU. but confounds it with theApoUodor. Argon. 1. 1, c. 67. Bcebias or Boebeis.IX.] THESSALIA. 461portant military positions of the frontier. Havingascended the ridge along the side of a gorge formedby a small torrent, we arrive in two hours andthree quarters from Dhomoko at a derveni, wherea guard is stationed for the protection of the pass.The rain falls heavily as we proceed, and the roadis very bad, winding among woody mountains, butwithout much ascent. This is the Sp/uoc MaXcoioc,or Maliac forest, which not long ago, was as dangerousas it seems to have been in ancient times, butwhich now, thanks to the strong arm of Al^^ Pasha,is acknowledged to be free even from suspicion \like the greater part of the country over which hisguardianship as Derwent Aga extends. Ancientlyin some part of this forest stood the sepulchral monumentof a young man named Derxias, who hadbeen murdered by robbers, and whose epitaph isstill preserved in the Apologia '. At the end ofseventy-five minutes from the first derveni we passasecond, which, as well as the whole defile, isknown by the name of Furka. The road thenbegins to descend towards Zituni, and soon bringsus in sight of the plain of the Spercheius. Fromthe Furka to Zituni is a distance of one hour, in adirection more easterly than before. After somedelay at the entrance of Zituni I obtain a lodging£(irc irorl May eifafiiriKoy ^v troy* txriaiKal ic6\iy a^aiav^ iS £cFe, Oav/iac/av,'Oc ipvfioy MaXcaloK ayaartlftbiy iron' eprifxovEI^CC Aafiirwyoc T6y^ iii irai^l ru<^ovA€p£i9, Sy iron£ fiovyoy eXoy SoXf ohS' ayai^ay^ovRAiJjrfc ctJ ^vdpray say Itrtiydfxtyoy.Anthol. Jacobs, vol. iii. p. 287*462 THESSALIA. [CHAP. IX.in the house of one of the principal Greeks, who isabsent, but whose family is at home. The houseis built on the same plan as the generality of thebetter sort of Greek houses in this part of the country: a lower story serves chiefly as a stable andstorehouse, the upper consists of a row of fourchambers opening into a wide gallery, almost aslarge as all the other apartments together ; none ofthese has any door or window but into the gallery,and within they are black with smoke and dirtThe walls of the lower story are formed of loosestones cemented with mud, those of the upper ofsun-baked bricks, plastered and whitewashed. Infew of the houses are the walls upright, or the floorslevel, owing to the green timber and loose masonry,which settle into a distorted form. My konak isan extreme example, and seems to require only aslight earthquake, or a strong euroclydon, to crumbleit into a heap of ruins. It has, nevertheless,stood these forty years, and is said to have settledinto its present shape soon after it was built.ADDITIONAL NOTESTOCHAPTER I.Note I.BIOGRAPHY OF ALT PASHA.AH poetry in a rude state of society generally precedes prose,as a record of events, or of the exploits of individuals, it is notsurprising to find among the Albanians, that the actions of theirhero Aiy, have been committed to writing in verse. This composition,of which I procured a copy in MS., consists of about4,500 arlxoi xoXcriroi, and although as barbarous in versification,phrase, and sentiment, as the manners which it depicts, isprobably, as far as it goes, the most authentic memoir of the lifeof Al which can be procured. The author was a MusulmanAlbanian, acquainted only with the colloquial Greek of Albania,and its borders, without the smallest tincture of Greek learning,and not even able to write his own verses. The language of thepoem, therefore, most correctly represents the vulgar dialect ofthose countries, and may serve to compare with that of SoutheyGreece, of which an example has been given in Travels in theMorea, chap. viii. The work being thus in more than onerespect curious, I have been induced to subjoin a brief descriptionof the subject-matter, together with a few extracts as specimens.The peculiarity of the dialect consists in the frequentuse of Turkish words, which arises not so much from any extensiveknowledge of that language possessed by the Mahometanssof Greece and Albania, as from the Turkish manners and habits,which have been a consequence of the change of religion amongthe Albanians. In considering the poem as a historical docu-464 ADDITIONAL NOTES.ment, it is necessary to remember, that as a poet the authoruses exaggeration, and that as a Musulman, he regards theChristians as an inferior class, upon whom the treachery andcruelty exercised by his hero are little else than laudable proofof wisdom and power. It is natural that he should differ inmany of his facts relating to the Suliote war, as well as in someof the motives by which he accounts for them, from the Christianhistorian of Suli and Parga, of whose work an abstract is subjoinedas an additional note to chapter v. But this is the onlymaterial difference; it is certain that the Pasha's craft andperseverance, his riches and superior strength, had graduallyundermined the union, courage, and patriotism of the Suliotes,had filled them with suspicions of one another, and that someof them, tainted with avarice, had listened separately to hisdeceitful promises, when famine came to his assistance, andcompleted that subjugation which after all might not otherwisehave been effected.The poem begins without any title or name to it, thus :1805, No£fi/3p/ov 25.i^oif ypa^iii rod *Ax prairie iLi^yrtifiac ra Bavfiara oirov c^ctKafitafJiiya Iciic ri^y rtXtiiaffiy rov ^vXiov : —*' Behold I write the wonders of our master, Al Pasha, whichhe has done until the end (of the affair) of Suli."A\^ was the son of V ely and Khanko, who had a presentimentthat if her son should be a male, he would live long, and laydown the law from Tepeleni to Edrene (Adriaaople).K* cTirc ^i' eJvai treviso ^ iroXv OcXec vd (iitrff&v e^cii Kol prov *2»vTptyt vi(afu ' Bi ya ^ti^ay.Concerning the Pasha's ancestors, the author remarks onlythat Mukhtir, his grandfather, distinguished himself at the siegeof Corfu (in the year 1716), where he entered the castle byassault, and hung up his sword upon the gate.Yel}^ Pasha being in a dying state calls his dependents aroundhim, and recommends his son to their guidance and protection,during the inexperience of youth, lest he should lose the revenuedp9ivu:6v. > nisi T. order*ADDITIONAL NOTES. 466of forty purses ^ accruing from the district of Zagdri, which was hisprincipal inheritance.Ti 6 Kovpnratnac eTvai ^TTKrroCy tvBvc rye exartityeifKol ro Zay6pi vpo^hl tv6vQ koi to (airuvti.For Kurt Pasha is faithless, and will immediately kill him,And will proceed to Zagori and take it."The first act of Aly Bey's government is to summon all thechiefs of Zagori, and threaten them with his vengeance, if theyshould he persuaded to join Kurt Pasha.irfiyay xal tov irpotricvyritray tov i^iXriaay to xipt,Kol TOV eliray ya otto fipOafii vow corccXcc X^f'^^P'*^/iciC yrofin * troy KUfiyofiey ai^iyTfifiac ya C>/oi7C»ya 9rcpi<tf8$c <fT6 Tc6imaov ya fide KovfiayrapiaTic.** They went and submitted, and kissed his hand,And said. Behold we have come upon receiving your message.We pray, my lord, that you may live,And he confirmed in your post, and command us*'Aiy then proceeds to Pale Ponghiani', from which he exactsa ransom, and from thence to Zagori, his paternal property (to/3io TO irarpix&rov),Kal TO Zayopi /3y//«cave Roi to kirpoaKvvovye,Ay^ptg yvvalicec koi brachia ro fxiimTOv * i^tXovy€m'* Zagori came out (to meet him) and adored him :Men, women, and children kiss his sock."Having collected his dues (jceiyo irov tov Tv^aiyei), Aly returnsto Tepeleni. The people of Pogdghiani and Zagori, thinkingthemselves in danger of total ruin, resolve to have recourse toKurt Pasha.4 xo/ie/icic* Toy KovpTiratnd Toy ndvoyfiac ya ctTrov/icr,f[ irafie <rro tSi€p6(ia\T0 VTriy Xifiyriy ya iryiyovfiey,** Either let us go to Kurt Pasha and tell him our griefs.Or let us go to Xero-valto and drown ourselves in the lake."Equivalent at that time to 3000^ * Most, T. the under slipper,Sterling. formed of a single leather, and gene"Dove, T. prayer. rally sewn to the trowsers.H6yytavfi, properly XloyAytavti. * inrdyoiuv riiitig.VOL. I. H II466 ADDITIONAL NOTES.Kurt consoles them with the assurance that he will send forAl and punish him : then reflecting, that if he can rid himselfof the young Bey he shall get all the Rayas into his own power,he sends a flattering letter to Tepeleni, offering to make Al hisC k^haya and son-in-law. Al, with the consent of his motherand tevabs (guardians), many of whom had been bribed by KurtPasha at the rate of a thousand Venetian sequins each, proceedsto Berat.Not being admitted to an immediate audience on his arrival,the young Bey suspects some treachery. He refuses to drinkthe coffee offered to him, or to deliver up his arms; nor dare anyof the attendants take them from him.The old Pasha then consults the Harem (to ^ape/ii, that is tosay, his wife,) who remonstrates with Kurt for his intendedtreachery ; recalls to his recollection that none of his family hadever been guilty of such an act ; asks him what account he willgive of it after his death, and ends by advising him to make Alhis son-in-law instead of destroying him.Kurt states his reasons to his wife for wishing to get rid of Al.She sends to AJ^, bidding him to be of good courage: informshim that the complaints of Pogoghiani and Zagori have been thecause of the Pasha's evil intentions towards him, and assures himthat he shall be delivered.Khanko, hearing of the imprisonment of her son, collects alarge body of troops, and sends a threatening message to thePasha, at the same time that she implores the wife of Kurt toobtain Al's release.On the further intreaties of the Harem the Pash angrilyconsents, predicting at the same time that he shall repent ofallowing Al to depart.The people of Berat rejoice at the deliverance of A\f, andsalute him as he passes through the streets ; he returns the compliments,and utters threats against Kurt Pasha.6(10 ya ij 6 Kovpriratnat pari ^ sty tov iiywKOI M TO diKorov to ^ayid icayiya lily ii<l>tyUf6 Kovprrig tiroKifirifn to T(aKifiov ya KkiiirtfKol TO hK6fwv TO paid ya roy KXtipoyofifiir^.'* As long as Kurt Pasha lives I will not allow him to have any repose ;Rahat, T. repose.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 467Nor will I leave him a single Raya ^(For) Kurt has endeavoured to shut up my chimney',And to inherit my Raya£.t»On his arrival at Tepeleni, Al transmits similar threats in aletter to the Pasha, who replies in the same style.Khanko represents to her son the inequality of the contest, andthat Kurt has riches to pay his troops, whereasWe have no pay to give to the army'*Aly replies, that he does not fear consequences, and will neverpardon Kurt, who sent for him on pretence of giving him hisdaughter in marriage, and then endeavoured to take awayhis life.Khanko having found a wife for her son, he marries : hut cannotforget the affront of Kurt Pasha ; and Pogoghiani and Zagori,alarmed at his menaces, having intreated assistance from thePasha of Berat, he is resolved to he revenged upon them aswell as upon the inhabitants of Khormovo, who, after havingbeen long attached to his finely, had rebelled against him.He fills his palace with ammunition and provision, treats allwho come to him with hospitality, holds out the hope of plunder,and thus collects a considerable force ; but is obliged, in an addressto them, to confess his poverty.airXwKCC Kal <m)v ri^ivtirou icac (ipitrKu sita {ijvrapa*,fjLiay ibivra^ fjiova^ij rflv minaret ax' ri^v rimini,r^v t^eile trraaKiptrov jrairdvaQ va rrlv fiXiirpfK* else irovore^ atrKipifWv Kal ihinifiov papa,yta TOP \ov<^ivag o^/xcpa drag di^bf filia (i}i^apa,air e^cii KilBe (epcre va trap ro tiirii Kal kino^ When the allied powers endear t. e. to put an end to my family :poured to intercede in fervour of the odjak, T. chimney,insurgent Greeks, the substance of ' *E(i|vr^^y a piece of sixtythe answer of the Porte, for along paras, worth at that time four ortime, was little more than, " Are five shillings,they not our Ray&sf* meaning, have * iron ((<rrf , where are you.we not a right to do as we like withour own human cattle?Hh 2468 ADDITIONAL NOTES.aWffMc fwv yvpeif/rre €y Aawpo Ztv 9a^ ZLtm'Roi Tov tiwayi^ htv ^pOafu 4/ie<c y^o TOr irapa^oVfKovpfiirdri 0e Fa ycyw/ifr T^pa m)y d^rWoov.fillet }pktfil liy Bi\ofi€y aVo ri d^yZtdtrcv^lioy^ QiKoiuy yd fmpw^^Q trro 7r6tm tov fAfrafiwd^ov,** He opens his pocket and finds one exindara :One exindara only he takes oat of his pocket;He shews it to the army, that every one may see it.Behold, my army, says he, and my own trie.For your pay I give you to-day one exindara.Henceforth know, for I tell it to you,That if you require an asper from me I cannot give it you.And they said to him we came not for your par (money).But we will become a sacrifice for your Lordship ;We only desire that you may be established in the post ofyour father."Kurt sends three or four thousand men to Pogoghiani, and alarger body to Zagori ; when Aly moves from Tepeleni, attacksand defeats them, and proceeds to Delvinaki.Siroioc Kol Kelrav trro \wpi6 rove cva/xc eXaicc,6(roi Kal hy l^ray ara vapid Toltc tf^ayay Td ^cdia,rove riaKKTE ra yoyara Kal irXdraic Kal iray/^«a,All those who were in the town he slaughtered.As many as were in the villages, the serpents ^ devoured ;He broke their knees and shoulders and buttocks."He then inflicts a similar punishment upon Zag6ri.ctfTO rate Tiaaape^ fiepialc rove e/3aXc tov^Ikik'XdQri 6\o^ 6 paycdc i:ac aKdpmaay dxiKti,From the four quarters he gave them the musket ;The Rayas were destroyed and dispersed."Kurt Pasha, meantime, endeavours to surprise Tepeleni ; butAly, learning his design, returns home in haste, performing ajourney of twenty hours in eight. The Pasha retreats immediately.» Aly often ended his written will do lest the serpent bite you"—orders with the words, " This you yd /ii) rac rpiayy r6 sift.ADDITIONAL NOTES.Aly now sends a summons to the people of Khormovo, orderingthem to submit, to honour the Turks *, and to pay theKharatj.o< Xopfw(ilT€Uc dvoi^ay to ypdfAfia koI hafiai;ovy,TOP TCaovc irp/^rif yXriyopa ariiv £KK\ji<na rov KpdioWavTog clj/at trro Xdp/Aolio vow inripvei Kai dtplJ^ti,KoX 'Kpoetrro roy e^ovyi wow tovq KovfAayTapi^Bi.The Khormovites opened the letter and read it, ^They quickly called Tzaus Prifti to the church :At Khormovo he was the man who sows and reaps ;And they had him as priests to command them."They send Aly a message of defiance, upon which he mountshis horse Belies, swifter than a flying bird, and falls upon Khor-novo sword in hand.ay ra frt^axra oro xa^airco Kwj^TOvy kcu ireXcvovvc,illicit ddp^ e^ovye xal Biy rev irpotrKvyovye'tray K\6fraic /i^ voXXa xovXm iron flXiirovy to tratyi^Irft fwyd(ovy oi nucpoi Kal pd'i sty tovc l^lBifkfififlKt diro TTJy fjiia fupia koX diro t^Iv ofWiy Pyivu,iro^oirdraei ra Kopfiid Kal dK6fU Bey xopTalytf'AXfj BiXfjc Pov\riOfiK€ \f/vxi yd fji^y cf^^o^,roi x^OriKay TaaKepirov ad fiaynafiiyoi Xvicoc.They cut and hew them like sheep in the butchery,Yet they still have courage, and do not submit :Like hens with many chickens, who perceive the falcon,So they bitterly cry out while he gives them no quarter jHe entered on one side and came out at the other :He treads on the bodies and is not yet satisfied ;(For) Aly Veljf ' resolved to leave not a soul.^ The Khormovites had beennotorious for murdering every Turkthey could lay hold of. The poet issilent as to the ill-treatment of Alorsmother and sister soon after hisfather's death, which was the chiefcause of his inveterate hatred towardsKhdrmovo; but this was asubject which neither as a Musulman,nor from respect to his hero,the poet could allude to.In his youth Aiy was calledAiy Vely, i. e, Al, son of Vely .The Very was dropt when he becamea Pashft, except on his signet470 ADDITIONAL NOTES.His troops poured down like hungry wolves ;Aly Vely commanded them to find the Tzaus Pxifti :The unhappy man was hidden in the midst of blood."At length —TO (TKOTivo TO \6p/JLo(io iylvtiKf fiipdyi *Kal T^aovc Ilp/^riic tytvrtKi KefAwd/iiri ' trro TtiydvLThe dark Kh6rmovo became a ruin,And Tzaus Prifti became roast meat in the frying-pan."Aly next attacks Mali86va, a town inhabited by Rays ofKurt Pasha, who were so much favoured by him that he wouldnot listen to any complaints made to him of their repeated robberieson the highways. They treat the summons of Aly Beywith contempt, upon which he enters the place, slaughters manyand makes the rest prisoners. He then takes Klisura, withKurt*s officer, prov avQpmwoy rod Kovprira<rm,) who commandedthere, cuts off his mustachios, and allows the garrison to return.Thence he proceeds to L&bovo; whither Kurt Pasha sends alarge body of troops to expel him, but they are defeated after asevere contest.The Sultan, (o fiaaiKia^^) pleased with Aly's performances,confers the government of the Sanjak of Delvino upon him, andmakes him Pashd of two tails. He proceeds with 10,000 men *to Delvino, but is not long there before he receives a new firmanfrom the Sultan, ordering him, after putting the affairs ofDelvino in good order, and collecting the merito proceed toTrikkala, from whence he is instructed to expel the deputy (roydvOpwroy) of Kurt Pasha, who commanded the militia (ro ap/ia-toXIki) because they devoured the Raya like ravenous wolves, adfiavnafiivoi Xvicoi.Aly, having transmitted the miri of his Albanian districts toConstantinople, proceeds to Trikkala, and Kurt Pasha's lieutenantmakes his retreat to Berat. Kurt, afflicted at his loss anddisgrace, laments that he had not put Aly to death when in his> Wirin, T. ruin. poem : in which respect, indeed, ellKeb&b, T. roast. Oriental numtivea may be great reliance is to be placed petted of exaggeration,upon any of the numbers in thisADDITIONAL NOTES. 471power, and soon afterwards dies. Alps grieves a little (XinH^Oi^rcXcYdi:t)at the loss of this 'column of the Sanjak of Vlidra" (Av*lona).As soon as the troops of Kurt in the Dervenia, or passes ofNorthern Greece, hear of his death, they disperse, and thethieves make their appearance. Mahmud Pash of Skodra, desirousof succeeding Kurt Pasha in the office of Derwent-Agaof Northern Greece, and holding Aly in contempt (jm-ov vovv-Tov Bey Toy /SaFCi) orders all the Gkegkidhes to assemble atOkhri* Although the people of Okhri receive Mahmud withrespect and bid him welcome, (jov ctiravc ro x<^^yy^Xn^) heimprisons their rich men, seizes their property, and puts some ofthem to death ; upon which the people of Okhri petition theSultan, and among other things accuse Mahmud of disloyalty.Kol Xiyti ditto r6 fiairiKid ra^irov iky iSputvecdfidv ifiyrti (iaffiXiA yd fi&c iXivBep^trflCfn)y''Oxp< TOV ^6yrpa waaia yd /i^ rijy napaButayg,'* He says that for the king (Sultan) his ear does not sweat :Mercy, my lord king, and liberate us,And deliver not up Okhri to the Skodra-Pasha."Upon receiving these complaints, the Sultan confers the Der-venaupon Aly Pasha, and directs him to expel Mahmud fromOkhri*.In addition to the 10,000 Toskidhes he has with him, he collects1000 Tzamidhes of the troops, of Mahmud Daliani, andmarching to Okhri, enters the town, cuts off a thousand heads,and takes 2000 prisoners. Mahmud demands a cessation ofarms, and in the night effects a retreat on the road to Skodra.Aly, at the entreaty of his own army, spares 300 of the prisoners,and leaves them in possession of their arms. The rest he beheads,and sends their heads to Constantinople.The Sultan, on hearing that Mj has put things in order atOkhri, sends a ^ep/xaVc x^'^* xovfiayiovy*, appointing him to the> Ho«h Gheldi, T. welcome. advances to power.It was to check the two other ' Fenn&hn H&ti Humsyftir, T. agreat chieftains of Albania, that the sublime written decree.Porte encouraged Aly in his first472 ADDITIONAL NOTES.government of loannina, and reminds him that the Derveniawere conferred upon him for the safety of the Rayas.Kol rd VTipfiivta aovvrtCKa 'Akfifiov vd wepdmncyiarl 6 payidc kaKopTritrt vd oretXjyc yd rov fidtrjuc.I Bent you the Derveniay my Aly, to traverse,Because the Rayas had dispersed, and that you might sendand collect them."ravra — koI ripai/t icaXa 'Ax iruirca irai^/xovahy irdei arrive "Oxpi *Ax iraviac i^ac To^ae ytZdfii^vai Kai 6\fi 4 'Apairla roar 6,K0V(rav to K&fJiy,These — and look to it, Aly Pasha, ray son,That no Raya complains — you have my prayer.When Aly Pasha went to Okhri, and put it in order,The West and all Arabia heard what he had done."He now proceeds to loannina, where the Beys tremble at hisapproach, but hide their arms and their power. They go out tomeet and receive him, but their hearts are cold (ju r^y xap^idrove <cpva).He summons Beys, Kadis, and Ages before him, threatensthem with death if they continue to oppress the poor, and forbidstheir wearing arms.He distributes governments to his faithful Toskidhes, and beginsto construct a palace at loannina, the magnificence of whichthe poet declares himself unable to describe.Here the Pasha enjoys himself in repose : all Rumili kneelsdown before him and kisses his sock, while he thinks of thepiece of sixty paras with which he began.'ApfiaviTta Kal *Pov/ii}Xi} race ^cvcc gii Iva ^dfifui,6 Xvroc Kol TO wpdfiaTO ra svo fi6aKOvy dyTdfia,*^ Albania and Rumili he ties together with a thread :The wolf and the lamb both feed together."Soc 6 Kdafioc ytovpTitrs Ki6\a ra fitkaiTiaKol ^ipyovy troy 'Ax maid ^Xwpcd ^ fie Td atntTia1 f Xitfpia. ^\mpit this word was hence, but in now applied to all goldprobably sint introduced into the coin,language with the gold coin of Flo-additionalNOTES. 473Upa n)y Upa 'Ax wamaQ dK6fu wXtio (iapivUfr6 6yofA&rov dKOverSiiKe orb *Hvr€ sto Fcfcivc,tn^rd fiiiyara ^pdyyuca dicovaOfi to *yofiaTOVfKayirac i»v rd trrffiepa sey aradfiKi /itrpoffTdrov*All the world made festivities, and all the districts :They bring Aly Pash golden coins and coffers.Hour by hour Al Pasha weighs more heavy :His name is heard in Hind, in Yemen,In the Seven Frank Kingdoms his name is heard ;And no one to this day hath stood before him."The Sultan now goes to war with the German — {tx^i atf^ipt fjiiToy Ni/i«rfa.) And orders the Rumili Yalesi, or Governor-generalof Amelia, (6 'Pov/icXijC)) to the defence of Belgrade,where the army of the Kiaf(6r (infidel) had crossed the Duna,(Danube,) and taken the fort of Kuliik Kale. The Rumelispitches his camp thirty hours distant from the enemy. Butnevertheless,Kal rov ypd(^ei rov /3a<rcXta novpQa trro MxeXtyfKirt,Aral T^^aKiira rov Ne/iir(a rd KOKxaka KOfifidri.He writes to the Sultan — I am arrived at Belgrade,And have broken the German's bones a little."He recommends at the same time that Aly Pasha should besent to his assistance, who, receiving a firman accordingly,leaves a Veil and body of troops at loannina, and marches tothe frontier. The Rumelis, on his arrival, takes courage, andencamps nearer to Belgrade.They invest the Kuluk Kale. Aly» with his own troops,takes the castle, puts half the garrison to the sword, sends theother half to Constantinople, then crosses the Danube and takes4000 prisoners, male and female, (wXa/Sovc koI <rirXa/3aic,) andon the credit of his success writes to the Porte, requesting leaveto return home.KOI rwpa fJLOv irpoP6iiai 6 r6woafLov iLp(ov\dKifTO KaKoaovKi fiovypai^y w&c frvKtaat iceni.474 ADDITIONAL NOTES.My place has now sent me a petition :They have written to me how Kako Suli has raised itshead."The Porte complies with his request, but directs him to leavehis troops behind.On his arrival at loannina, he orders the assemblage of freshforces from the Sanjak of Delvino, from Dagho, and from ,to assist him against the Din-bushman, or enemy of thefaith, as he now designates the Suliotes.The poet then introduces the mention and praise of Ai's twosons, Mukhtar and Vely» now become Pashas of two tails, andthen describes the defeat of the former at Suli (in the year1792), which he attributes to the treachery of the Tzamidhes.Aiy prepares to punish them accordingly ; but on their sendingmessengers to appease him, he dissembles his resentment,offers their soldiers double pay, and augurs victory to theirfuture efforts.ffiifiepa xaXaaBiiKafjtef ra^v Oe yd KiAT^ffw,To SovXi Tov KaXSyepoy eyiit Oe vd rov yf/Ti<ruf,'* To-day we have been ruined ; to-morrow I shall conquer :At Suli the monk ^ I will roast."To secure their future fidelity, he requires their chiefs to sendtheir children as hostages to loannina. Ibrahim Demis, ofFiliates, and several others, and even Pronio and Tzapari,comply with these terms. Thus strengthened, he meditates thereduction of the maritime Kiafii' (Kid rov FtaXov). Havingrepresented to the Porte that the Christians of that district arerebellious ; that they refuse to pay the Kharatj, and that theyhave taken possession of the harbours {ffKoXwfiara) for their ownbenefit, he receives from the Sult^, together with the annualconfirmation of the government of Delvino, permission to punish1 The Paphos Samuel, who already part of the district of D6lvnio, lyingbegan to make himself conspicuous between Vutzintr6 and Khirainufor his courage and perseverance. Nfvitza and St Basil are the called to distinguish it from cipal Villages.Ki&fa of Suli. It is the maritimeADDITIONAL NOTES. 475the rebellious Christians, if they refuse to submit peaceably tohis authority.The people of Kiafa are alarmed.Kol rwpa ETpoficiayi cat (^pl^ay ol KavfiiyoiyiaruKovaay aro X6pfio(io tI Op^KOc c<X^ V^^liTJiQ MaXt9o/3oc TOKovaav ra fxavpa ra /iayraraxov hey iiir6/jL£iye ypv^ifl fjifire aicvXl teal hydra,Roi K€iyoi tn/WoyltrStiKay trro ^pdyicb vd ^ufdovyeKal To mraQi r*aX^ iraind ya fail wapa^odovye.** And now they trembled and shivered the wretches,For they had heard at Khormovo what lamentations had takenplace,Of Malisova they had heard the black news,Where there remained not a soul, nor a dog, nor a cat.They thought of hiding themselves with the Frank,And to the sword of Al Pasha not to yield'*Kala6z (an officer of Al) enters the country, sword in hand,and occupies all the villages. The Pasha thought at firstof putting all the people to the sword, but instead of that, hesends 1000 families to the plains of Trikkala to cultivate hislands, and to build farm-houses (iraXdyyatc) for themselves.Al then visits the coast near the Vivari (Vutzintrd), fromwhence he sends a letter to Corfu, inviting the French governorto a feast and conference. The invitation is accepted in theperson of General Rosa (6 P<${oc). After dinner Al inquiresthe news from Paris, when Rosa tells the Pasha that Paris (roJlaplaif f. e, the French government) has bought all RumiU asfar as Edrene (Adrianople) of the Sultan, that in the approachingspring he (Rosa) is to take possession of it ; that he willmake Al a king, or give him Venice if he should desire it.6 myripoc *Ax mx^iac tn^aXdei riiy KaphidrovKoX 6 *F6ioc o Tcipi^yoQ ixXwOiffrc /xirpoarcirov.The crafty Al Pasha shuts up his heart.And the haughty Rosa was opened before him*'Al pretends to enter into the scheme, agrees to abandon hisown territories, and the Sultan's cause, on condition of receiving20,000 purses, without requiring either Venice or loannina.476 ADDITIONAL Notes.On Rosa's return to Corals, two ships are sent to Artaa as apresent to Al;^. The Pasha, alarmed at what he has heard,transmits the intelligence to the Sultan, and to the Vezir of theSeal (pit (iovXa^ roy BcCvpiyi"), with the additional informationthat Bonaparte (Mxovairdprcc) is preparing in France an expeditionagainst Rumili.The Porte in its reply assures Al that there is no fear for thepresent : that the French have lost their wits at home, have theother six Frank kingdoms to contend with ; and are many ofthem flying to Constantinople for protection; finally, recommendinghim to attend to the concerns of his government andkeep the Raya contented.Al exclaims on receiving this answer, —We have no sanction this year from the government*'yd iipert fide fMyf^ay r^c ^pavrfac oi ^lafioXotfKal yywot ^ev dvofutyt rov /Sa^tXcd flrriyv MirdXt.Know that the devils of France have enchanted us,And no sense has remained in the King at Constantinople."0( yyiaoTiKoX irov jipiffKoyrai trrilv MirdXt ^£v jcorovve,Toy Stop fie(ipfi fTKid^oyTai va wdyt yd tov clxovi^e,Tov K.op (ii(lp^ yd TOV TTovy rd rara yd {crao^y,irpwTa Kiap\fig '''oy KovtrovXa fie {vXa Fa Toy Kayj/y.The knowing ones at Constantinople dare not,And are afraid of going to tell the hind Vezir *,To tell the hind Vezir to examine affairs to the bottom.And first of all to bum the Consul (Ambassador) with wood'*Alf therefore, notwithstanding the letter of the Sultan collectshis forces, and makes his Hasnadar (treasurer) Yussuf, summedArapi, or the Black, his Veil (deputy) in the command of24,000 men.ol fiiru^€Q TfJQ 'PovftcXiic c^Xoi Toy Tpotncvyovyeft6 fiavpo \ipi TOV XaXarov to yXvico^iXovre,oyTtQ yd flyfj vrd TpUaXa oi irXc^raic to fiadiyovy^jrriyiyovy crraypia rd (iovyd (r^il^ovy Tis yfiy Kal ^viyovyf1 Vussuf Pasha, who had lost an eye.ADDITIONAL NOTES.((Roi era mpfiivia wovOeyd dey (ipiaKoyrat (opfiirdBeg,Air* TO tnraOi rove iripaffe iLfiirpifrai^ \iKuiBeg,The Beys of Rumili all worship him,The black hand of the Pasha* s foster-father they sweetly kiss.When the thieves learn that he has proceeded to Trikkala,They go into the wild mountains, they open the earth andenter into it,In the Servants robbers are no where found,He has slaughtered unnumbered thousands of them**dKOfii Kol aradtcipiTOv ahro^ ^lyei taaVi,*Ax craving iev rov pard r\ xcvii /itapi *Apdirri.** Of the army also he gives account (has the direction),Nor does Al Pasha ask him, what are you doing, fellow Arab."Exactly at this time Al receives a firmahn, ordering him tomarch against Pasvan Ogle * (Uatrfidy'oyXov)^ and to commandthe forces which are to blockade Vidinn (Biyrlyi) by land ; whileHussein Capitan Pasha is to ascend the Danube with a fleet :'* for Pasvan-oglu,'* adds the firmahn, " and those who obeyhim on the Danube are rebellious. He keeps the miri in hishands, acknowledges neither king, nor firmahn, neither kadi, normuff, and exacts double kharatj from the Rayfi." Ai is dissatisfiedwith the firmahn; nevertheless, leaving his two sonsand Yussuf Arapi with 5000 men, he marches with 20,000 toVidinn.Hussein Pasha gives Al the chief command of the blockadingarmy, with twenty-four Pashas under him. Passant ogle sendsa message to Al, protesting himself a loyal subject, — that henever kept back the miri, that he is ready to have his conductThe real motive of Pasv&n-ogle's rebellion, and which he couldnot have avoided without residinghis power, was the opposition of theJanissaries of the northern frontierto the Nizam Djedfd, by which newtaxes were imposed, to support certainunpopular changes in the administrationand army. The modellingof the latter on the Europeanplan, and the abolition of the Janissaries,was the object of the wholemeasure. The oppression of theRayA is always an article of accusationagainst a governor in disgrace :whence it appears that the Porte isunable, rather than unwilling, toprotect the Christians, whose petitionson such occasions are generallyreceived with attention.478 ADDITIONAL Notes.fairly judged, but that being attacked, be is determined to figfat ;finally be remarks to Al,ailfupa cly 6 ydfAOfffAOVf Ta\v tiyai Biicdtrov.It is my marriage to-day : it will be yours tomorrow."And hints that the object of the Porte in sending Al to Vidinn is,Kol treiQ Kal /Jieig yd wiaiiffu vr^v vrovya vd Tyiyovfie,That both you and I may be drowned in the Danube'*Al acknowledges in reply, that it is not a time for them toquarrel and fight.6 fAiroyavapTii yalptrai 4/ifIc va (TKorwdovfitf6 yriy-yrovafiayriQ ^aipirai xal rd ^reparov dirXwrct,Kal rd ht:drov avvopa woXv rd ^vyafiutyei*ife 7600 litrpt llaaftdyroyXov eyiit dd woXifi^aVyro Kdarpoaov ftovxaaepe cyof 0c yd to rXciflriiiKal finale to Kaerpo^ov ecu pdyi /i»} fia Bite.'' Bonaparte rejoices that we slaughter one another :The enemy of the faith rejoices and stretches out his wings,And he strengthens powerfully his own frontiers by it.But friend Pasvan-oglu I shall fight,I shall besiege your castle with all my forces,So defend well your castle and give us no peace."For three months Vidinn is blockaded.Pasvan-oglu secretly advises Al to keep his troops out of therange of fire, but Al refuses ; and again recommends him to holdout, if he wishes to save his head, and not to trust even his ownmother ; meantime, writes a petition to the Porte in favour ofthe rebellious chieftain, representing his penitence, zeal, andbravery, and advising his being sent to fight against the realenemies of Turkey,Rosa passes over to loannina, explains to the Archons Bonaparte'sdesigns for delivering the Greeks, and tries to form a partyamong them ^ But the Archons rejecting his overtures, he returnsto Corfu, sends 3000 French troops to Prevyza, where theyAt this time the French Egypt Bonaparte had published bis celestialarmament was at Malta, and rated manifesto to the Greeks,ADDITIONAL NOTES. 479are received with great joy, and 1000 to the Vivari (Vutzindro),and endeavours by his agents to excite the Greeks to insurrection.Mukhtar causes a report to be spread that Al Pasha is aboutto return, and the Tzamidhes close their ports (^icaX^/iara)against the French ; upon which the French send an insolent remonstranceto them, and advise them not to resist the arms ofthat nation, which had conquered Arabia (Egypt) and all thedeserts.irov (diriaae rr^v ^Apairid Ktoko to T^oXoirrdyi*They reply in a high tone, —oXoi oi ^payrii(oi vdpdovve rcu rd kirrd pfiydra&y tXOovv ffTtly *Apj3avcnii tore ^iy jiplmcovy erpdra.Let oil the French come, and the seven kingdoms ;Let them come into Albania : they will never find a roadthere '."In great alarm, however, they apply to loannina for council andaid ; upon which Mukhtar Pasha and the Despot (metropolitanbishop) of Green write to Al to acquaint him that Parga andPrevyza are in a state of insurrection, and that even at Artaa manyGreeks have assumed the French cockade*.Al transmits the intelligence to Constantinople, from whencehe receives directions to return to loannina to fortify that place,and to chastize Prevyza.Ordering a large body of troops to follow him, he performs amonth's journey in ten days, enters loannina secretly, has an interviewwith his two sons and Yussuf the Black, and, having leftorders with them for throwing an entrenchment round the city,he mounts his horse for Filiates, from whence he sends over toCorfu requesting a meeting with General Rosa, whom he remindsof their interview of the preceding year, with the assurance thathe is ready to adhere to what was then agreed upon. He adds,that it was the Sultan's intentions in sending him to Vidinn to^ A common boast of the Alba well as to furnish a plausible groundnians. for requesting the Porte to put an endThis is said to have been a ma to the war with Pasv&n-oglu, or atlouvre of AVf^ in order to ascertain least to allow Aiy himself to returnthe extent of the Greek defection, as home.480 ADDITIONAL NOTES.destroy him; that the Turks had attacked and massacred hisAlbanians ; that he had effected his escape by the assistance oftwo friends, but that the Turks were in close pursuit of him ;finally, requesting Rosa to afford him refuge, to send troops tooccupy loannina, and to come over himself to Filiates instead ofHexamili (where they had met before), because near the latterplace his subjects are in rebellion against him.Rosa, upon receiving this letter, flatters himself that he hasgot Al into his power, and crosses over immediately toTzamuria.Al begins by dissembling and affecting great humility (eyi-vfjKe fiiKpoTipoc) ; but soon changes his tone ; inquires whether itis true that Bonaparte has disembarked in Egypt (fiyri<t trroMiff^pi); reproaches Rosa with his deceit (yiaTfiaai ypEvanri^^<Xe/iov); asks him where are the promised 20,000 purses ; whyhe sent troops to Prevyza and the Vivari ; why the two vesselswhich had been presented to him were taken away again ; andends by sending him to loannina as a present (iriaKi^i) to his sonMukht4r Pasha, who gives him over to the Bulu-bashi (MirXov-fliraarf) to be imprisoned. The poet then breaks out into a strainof true Musulman insolence against the fallen Frank.War being declared against the French, Al sends troops to theVivari, orders Mukhtar Pasha to meet him with his forces at Luro,writes to the Prevyzans that he has a firmahn of the Porte tomake them Rayas, and orders them to deliver up the Frenchtroops to him : promising that if they do so, and submit to paythe Kharatj, they shall be left in their town, and no Turk shalllive there.He observes, —K€fd\i Ka dew icdjSerac irore irftotricvprifiiyo,** The submitted head is never cut off."Otherwise, —t\ to ^iKOfiov TO <nradl payidSeg 5c v Xvirarai,Nul iricXajSot drily *Ap/3avtrcd 6\oia-ac Oi vd rare.My sword has no compassion for Rayas :You shall be made slaves, and sent away into Albania."The Prevyzans, nevertheless, return an answer of defiance,trusting in great measure to the assistance of Suli.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 481icai rov tiriaaay rale ^tifioffidif rac frrfHiTaiq rac raie Tropracg.*' At that time came the crafty SuliotesAnd seized the highways and the passes*'(?;(€ iva ^IXo 'A\^ Hafrtd^ icai rov heat ')^afjLvipifKaKovovXiuratg aovKQfiav twa fiiya Kapripi.(But) Al Pasha had a friend, who gave him the intelligenceThat the Kako Suliotes were making a great ambuscade."He advances, and orders Mukhtar, with 1000 men, to attackthe left of the enemy's position at Paleokastro (Nicopoliijjwhile he himself occupies, with the remaining forces, a heightopposite to the enemy's right.oi ^pdyicoi TO TLaXidKaarpoy fie roina to el^av KXeltni^payKOi Roi icXcVrotc Kol paying ro KaoTpo to ti\ay KktliniRoi ^yovy trod traXcidcaoTpo T&iria koX KovfivapdBeC'** The Franks the Paliokastro with gens had surrounded ;Franks, and rollers, and the RayS \ the castle had enclosed :They put cannons and mortars into the Paliokastro.'*They believe that Al Pasha has 5000 men, hut his wholeforce is only 1600 horse and foot (fra/3aXa koi ire(ovpa),Mukhtar having met with some resistance, his father advancesto his aid. They soon carry the Paleokastro, and put every manfound in it to the sword. From thence they advance to the town ofPrevyza, where Al shows no mercy.'Axis Uairiac trri^y TLpefitCa Ttroto yi(dfii BiyirKofhi rop/ica, nipyii if/vxaic, Bey Kafiyei \EtifW9vyri,ircp/crtaic (rjcXajSacg tirripav Sophia Kal yvtpdBeg,Kal OTiXyti arrive 'ApfiayiTid dfiirprfTaiQ \iXtddeQ'woXXaic f^aydSet \utpi(ray diro rove TrarepdBegKal raie irovXovy ard Fidyeya uaay rove ^ApairdBec*** Such is the manner in which Aly Pashd orders Prevyza :He cuts bodies, takes away souls, and gives no mercy,They took many girls and young married women ;The Franks were French; the by the Kay the poet means therobbers, the rebellious Greek mount Prevyzans.painters who had joined the French ;VOL. I. I iADDITIONAL NOTES.And he sends unnumbered thousands into Albania.Many mothers they separated from fathers,And sold them at loannina like negro slaves."Some of the French embarked, and attempted to escape by sea,but were drowned on the shallows.Kol 4 icXe^rovpca rtfc 'PovftcXiyc ^^oi Updaye ra /iir^icavir6.y ra (n^axtd tno \atrairib trod (uvrarovs yiap^Kay,The robbers of Rumili, who came and entered Prevyza,Were flayed alive, like cattle at the butchery."1000 heads ^ are sent to Constantinople, and 300 Frenchprisoners, with Rosa to command them {yd rove Kovfiayrapitni).Having left a garrison in Prevyza, Al returns to loannina,where he is saluted by the titles of Mubarek and Ghazi (fortunateand victorious), and receives from the Porte the third horsetail,the sword, and kaftdn (robe of honour), with orders to attendto the defence of. his own government, to construct a fortress atloannina, and to assist Kadri Bey, whose squadron is sentagainst Corfu.Aghia Mavra, Y onitza, and Paiga, dreading the fate of PresThe loo heads is a poeticalamplification. Of 175 inhabitants ofPr^v^^y who were taken in theplace and accused of having abetteddie French, three only were saved.The heads of the Prevyzans, andthose of the Greeks and Frenchkilled at Nieopolu, amounting to300, were sent to Constantinople.By heads is to be understood theskins only, which are stuffed withstraw and moistened before they arepresented to the Grand Vezfr. Theproperty of many of the Prevyzanswho took no active part in the warwas seized by Ahf, on pretence oftheir having aided the French, theirlands given to Albanians, and theirfamilies sent to cultivate some wastebut fertile lands on the borders of theAmbracic Gulf, where the Pashabuilt huts and formed ^ifUiks. Thepoet has been silent as to the aidafforded to Al on this occasion bybis old adversary Hassin Tapir,and the other Tz&midhes, many ofwhom were Christians. Some ofthese seized and carried with theminto Tzamuri^ as a great prize, athaumaturgout picture of St. Khar&-lamb CAycof XapdXafAiroQ), thepatron of Prevyza. The priests ofhis church made large offers toobtain its restoration, bat withoutsuccess; and the subsequent misfortunesof Pr^vy^a, particularly thealienation of the lands, and thebuilding of a mosque, were generallyattributed by the Prevysans,particularly by the priests andwomen, to the loss of the protecting^cfure.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 483vyza, petition Kadri Bey, that Al may not be permitted tomolest them. By his mediation they are left in tranquillity.iirffye wipe arovt Kop^vc ^ TovpKii:i) &pfidraKol rov 4^payr(i(ov tov kay r^ aKoretyil tj^ <rrpdra,Kal dwofulyar oi Kop^l odv pray fAaBfifi£yoiw&c Jjfray army ttoKio xaipo aro Patricii ypafifiiyoi,The Turkish fleet went over to Corfu *,And gave the dark road to the Frenchman ;And Corfu remained as it was formerly accustomed to be,As it was in the ancient time written with' the king."6 BcC<pi7c (the Vezir)' now prepares to attack Kaico^ovXi,moves from loannina, takes Lipa^, and blockades soli on everyside, which alarms the Tzamidhes and Ibrahim Pasha of BeratBO much, that an alliance is formed, consisting of Ibrahim,Mustafa Pasha, Selim Bey of Delvino, Mahmut Daliani of Ko-napoli,Premedi, and the districts of Dagho and ParakUamo inTzamurid.dii:6fii eirpoP6di(re x(t(md orb KcuroffovXii^iro rovrij 717 ^(poyid tya yd yevoi^ovXoi*.*' (Ibrahim) sent also letters to Kakosuli :Let us this year become one."And among other things, observes to the allies, —para trro SovXi iroktfAa Tayyitrrpirov yd piKal vtrrepa r^y T^a/jiovpyut ferri Xifiyff yd ri)v 9rW{i|Tipayei koI ^rro NreX/^iy'O yd (idyri to woMpty dirXwajf ical ro \tpLTOv r^ 'B\6pa yd fjiov ndpri.Not a word is here said of the ' By the third tail Aiy obtainedRussian armament, without which thb rank.the Turkish would have had little * A^ira, one of the chief villageshope of reducing the Seven Islands. of the Suliote confederacy, in theA common expression in Turk mountains between Suli and Cornishfor infects. By the treaty of nina.1900, establishing the Septinsular * yivw/icy Soi.Republic, an annual tribute was tobe paid to the Porte.ii484 ADDITIONAL KOTBS.First, upon Suli he labours to throw his hook.And afterwards Tzamuria to drown in the lake*.He looks into Delvino to set his foot,To stretch out his hand, and take Yliora from me."He hints also at Al's great credit at the Porte.re Twa (vywfft iroXv dirdvw trro yroflXinKal sids iror/{'ci a^iupa ^p/iajccpo ffcp/iircri.'* For he has much weight aloft at the government,And this day gives us a poisonous sherbet to drink."The (Mahometan) chiefs of Tzamuria and Dardan', who unitewith Ibrahim, make peace with the Suliotes who send hostagesto Delvino. But the allies endeavour in vain to gain over MaimedSekhmet, commander of the Castle of Delvino ; they blockadehim therefore with troops from Konispoli, Slates, Gardhiki, andDardan. At the end of two months Mahmud capitulates, oncondition of retiring to Nivitza, when they bum all his houses,and those of his adherents at Delvino.The Yezir divides his forces into three parts, one is left beforeSuli, another is sent into Tzamuria, the third against Delvino :Yell Pasha is sent against Ibrahim.nov ind€p6T0v Be vd wop Kai)(€i yrptnril /leyaXiy.btg r6(fo svo Bev yivtrat 6 \6yoQ rov varpoarovRoi Be vd trap dirdv<arov ac ^y koI ireOepotnov,He will go against his father-in-law though he has greatshame (very reluctantly) ;But his father's word does not become two (is not to becontradicted )tAnd he must go against him, though he be his father-inlaw**Rely marches to Konitza, where, not finding any symptomsof opposition, he falls upon the villages of Bala, and moves forwardto Toziani, where Ibrahim's troops had shut themselvesDrowning in the lake was so » The country northward of Para-commona punishment at lo&nnina k&lamo comprising Divino.that it became a figure of speech.iADDITIONAL NOTES. 485up. He refuses their request of being allowed to retire unmolested,unless they give up their arms ; they resolve to resist.Vely enters the place sword in hand. Some of Ibrahim's troopsescape, and some are slain or taken. Among the prisoners arefound the tevabs, or securities of the Suliote alliance, who haddeserted from loannina. These are put to death to the numberof fifty-two.Ibrahim sends a submissive message to his son-in law, who atfirst refuses all accommodation, but afterwards consents to evacuateToziani, on the condition that Ibrahim abandons his alliancewith Delvino and Suli. Meantime, Aly has received theappointment of Rumili Vales, with orders to proceed against theHide ^ He forwards the news to his son —*Ax Haffidt irpofi6iiae xafiwipi rov BcX/cov*.And orders him to make peace with Ibrahim and return to loan-nina.He then sends reinforcements to Mahmud Sekhmet Aga atNivitza, and directs him to demand the keys of the castle of Del-vinofrom the Gardhikiotes, who occupied it, allowing them todepart unmolested on the condition of delivering up to Alf theSuliote hostages, who were also in the castle, and two of whomwere men of note.The Gardhikiotes comply. Aly then sends Malo Metz ' tocommand at Delvino, and takes Sekhmet with him into Rumili,where he is directed by the Porte to put all things in order as faras Adrianople, and to proceed, sword in hand, against OsmanPasha, the Georgian, who with the Hide is opposing AkiPasha near Adrianople.The Vezir collects his troops at Bunila \ (Mirovv/Xa,) leavesHaiiK, or Haitalf, here written insecure.Xaivrec And aivraXiitc U the name ' B<X(koc, the x^^'^^''^*'' ^'given by the Turks to the rebellious term of endearment for Very.inhabitants of the mountains on ' Otherwise called Metzobdno,either side of the valley of the an Albanian officer in great favourUebrus, who in union generally with Daly.with some Albanian adventurers, * A tjifdfk, and military depot,have often disturbed the tranquillity two miles south of loAnnina.of Rumili, and rendered the roads486 ADDITIONAL NOTES.Mukhtar in command at lo&miinai and moves out of the townin state.hafidZovraQ ro dkxovpdy xai fik iroXXovc vrofidZtQ^vd itdtji KoKd aril 'PohfuXri icac irlirtif yd yvpiaif,• » •wipatrt air' to. Tpefieya oral ira£C trod MDyaoHipif&y^p€Q yvyauceQ /Sy^ravc ya iiBovye toy Ps^ipfi,"On his right hand stand the Sheikhs, on the left theEffendis \Reading the Alkorfin with many prayers,That he may have success in Rumili and legum home.* *Spahis and Agas ran beside him :He passed by Prevent to Monastic :Men and women came out to see the Vezir."From Monastic he sends a threatening message to two rebelchiefs who were at the head of 12,000 men.XaX/Xi Kal Xapa^c(f$ arfly KSpBafiov <raQ (idyw^wpiirei ya irpotrKvyiitrtrt rrpQ rov ya ^^aXao^i^re,tX ^iXXo T^api ^iy sert ara ^(ipiafiov Oa /iirijre*Chain and Karafeiai ', I will place you in my bow-string :You must make the act of submission that you may not beruined;For you have no other means, but must fall into my hands."They reply, that they wish to find some good opportunity ofsubmitting, (i^d irpovKvyfitrovyf) upon which Al moves fromMonad, pitches his camp at Sofia, accepts the submission of> A^yrdStQ — Efi^ndis. This is still say <Mkvrn, or d^ynf, forone of the few words of Greek origin master, lord,which have been naturalized among ' Karafeisd (black-cap,) an A1-the Turks, who, in this instance as banian freebooter, whose real namein general, soften the sound of the poet has not given,their borrowed words ; the GreeksiADDITIONAL NOTES. 487the two chieftains and proceeds to Feline, (Philippopolis,) andsummons Tjuitji Osman, who was at the head of 42,000 men*As 10,000 of these were under Abd-ul-Tjami, (AirrovXrCo/i<>)and 12,000 under MusH-Gkeka, (MovaXf^yciira,) both Albanians,as their names indicate, Al endeavours to gain themover. They agree to plunder the Tjurtji Pasha, on the pretextof his being indebted to them for the pay of their troops \ andhaving effected this design they offer themselves to Al Pashd ;but Musli, who had carried his depredations almost to Constantinople,and had been denounced by a special germain from theSultan, having learnt on his arrival at Feline that Al intendedto put him to death —(ray ro irerov^eyo wove (aircra^c sic Tanya irdfi ra j3p^ nev re^Ki|rov a:ac to ironic (ayaTi,*' Like a winged bird fled with his horse.To go and find his art and his old profession — (thai of arobber J.A few of his comrades accompany him ; but AI^^ having sent600 men in pursuit of the fugitives, an engagement ensues, inwhich Musli, receiving a wound, falls from his horse, and is takenwith 200 of those Invalides who had ruined the world (vowclio*' xaXdari Toy yrovyid.)Al beheads Musli, and sends his head to Constantinople, receivessubmission and hostages from the villages, as securitiesagainst the re-appearance of the robbers ; and then, havingobtained permission from the Porte to return to loannina —Roi Katie <rr6 TrdariTOv koI Kdvti to vti^dTOv,Sits down in his post, and takes his pleasure."The remainder of the poem relates to the capture of Suli, butas these transactions will be found more at length in the abstractfrom the history of Suli and Parga, which forms the subject of theAdditional Note to Chapter V., it will be sufficient to add a few ofthe passages in which the Mahometan poet has represented matters^ It iB common among the Alba* themselves : on the allegation, oftennan mercenaries thus to desert the well founded, of a failure in the re-chief with whom they have engaged gular payment of their lust, or pay.ADDITIONAL NOTES.rather differently from the Christian historian. The Suliotes,hearing of the Yezir's return, collect their scattered forces. Theyreflect that they have no longer any hopes of assistance fromDelvino or Berat ; and that the Vezir has so many securitiesfrom Pronio and Tzapliri in his hands, that these chieftains cannothe expected to move in favour of Suli.Tong tSiae irarofcop^j) ical rwpa sey rpo/iovrc,fofiovyrai ra ice^oXcarovc koI Pupa Se fiorjOovvt,rdxei frtaofiiva *Ax TLatrtaQ rd truyopdfiaq ovaSttov cTvac Tattoo ffipiriKOQ e)(jEi <^Tia<rfiiyri KovXa,*' He has hound them foot and head :They fear for their heads, and now they will not assist.Al Pasha has taken all our frontiers ;Wherever there is a difficult place he has built a tower."Kitzo Botzari \ (Klr(oc Miror^apiyCy) one of the chief of Suli,was living at Io4nnina, in a state of pretended submission to theVezir, hut secretly corresponding with his countrymen. Inreply to their requisitions for a supply of lead and gunpowder,he informs them that the Archons of Io4nnina have promisedhim to supply these essentials, and at the same time exhortsthem to he vigilant, as Aly's camp is ready, and he is hent ontheir destruction. From Parga they receive assurances of support,with offers of asylum, in case of disaster ; and they arejoined hy sixty-four Christians of Tzamuria, with their womenand children, and with a large supply of provisions.The robbers also assembled to defend Suli."icai // tfXc^rovpca * iia^it'^fii^Kt aro SovXi yd KXsitrdovyt,KItJ^oq, the x°^^^^^'^^^ ^^Xpitrroc* Soon after the captureof Pr^vyza, George B6tzari, thefather of Kitzo, thinking the affairsof the confederacy in a desperateState, accepted a sum of money fromAljf, and deserted with all bis tribe.The Vezir gave them Vurgar^li, avillage in the district of Tzam6rka,for their residence ; but obligedKites the eldest son of George, toreside under his own eye at Io4n-nina, as a security for the peaceableconduct of the rest of the tribe.George Bdtzari did not live longafter his desertion; and Kitzo, atthe time mentioned in the poem,was the head of the house.4 KXifrovpid, means robberycollectively, or the life of arobber, or the country occupied byrobbers : i^vyi ori^y Kkffrovpi/^t^~^ADDITIONAL NOTES*A resolution is taken to destroy the Pasha's Rules before hecan arrive with his main body.Wiuie Photo Metzikrani, (X6roc Mcrfurpai^c,) an Albanian,who commanded one of those towers, is waiting with fifty mento intercept 2000 kuvelia of flour going to Suli, the Suliotessend their convoy by another road, and marching to the Auladestroy it.The Vezir now summons troops in the name of the Porte fromBerat, Delving, Dagho, and Parakalamo, orders the Agas ofMargariti and Paramythia to seize Frari, (spahis) receivesfrom Mustafa Pashd of Delvino his eldest son as a hostage, collectshis forces at Bunila, and gives the conduct of the expeditionto his son Vely, whom he instructs first to take the town ofSuli, from thence to proceed against the wild mountains, (raAypia r&, povya \) and then, if the enemy should be willing toevacuate the place without battle, to allow them to retire unmolestedto the islands.ac grave /liaa miiy ^payyia ai/rol ical ra xac^carovc,&C irdve Wpa (trove KopfovQ Kal ^u va pil aradovvifya &vfJLfiOovy roy t6totovq Savoy xaipby Kal hy (ove,ya pkiwovyt roy r<$irorovc va Kaierai j^ cap^carovc,raypifAia ya yvplZovyt ara Kpva rd ytpdro^*^,Let them go into Franghia, they and their children ;Let them pass over to Corfu ; let them not remain here ;Let them think of their place (native country*) as long as theylive;Let them behold their place (at a distance), and let their heartsbumTo turn the wild animals at their cold waters '."*' He has fled and become a robber"^a phrase in common use will bestexplain the force of this Romaicsubstantive.1 In Greek Fan&ri. This fineplain was the chief support of Suli,and was in its line of communicationwith the sea-coast and Parga.Meaning the ridges of Trypaand Aghia Paraskevi.This was precisely what happened:the Suliote exiles atCorflinever ceased to regret their wildmountains ; and often took an opportunityof indulging in a distantsight of Suli, the only consolationthat was left to them. Theallusion in the last line to the chaceis explained by ^e custom amongthe mountaineers of Greece, of lying490 ADDITIONAL NOTES.Vel takes leave of his father, and receives the public prayersof Sheikh Yusuf. The Christians. of Tsamuiia on their side fastforty days, offer prayers, and make incantations for the successof the Suliotes.Kol 01 j(pi(rrtavo\ i-^c Tfa/iovpytac IfiaZtajfiifKay soiKal ro ceo irapaKaXovy yd fire wapdfl to SovXticac Xiyovy Hayayiafiov yXiroffTO rb Ka'ifuyo** *Xaydpia Kal tniijpofrriais wipyovy cal hyaKaTwyovyetsi fJLayrlfiovy roy fratris AvtoI Kal toy Kap<^ktyovy,The Christians of Tzamuria were all collected together,And pray to God that Suli may not be taken ;And they say, Oh my Panaghia, save the unfortunate place.♦ • *Carding combs and trivets for cooking vessels they take andturn upside down,So they bewitch the Pasha and nail him ^"The Greeks {uKti 4 'Pw/iuMrvvii) set apart a day for generalprayer for the safety of Suli. Al has many traitors in hiscamp, but they cannot move because he has their sons as hostages.The Suliotes, learning the approach of Vel towardstheir town, lie in ambuscade in a church, which they had fortified.While waiting the enemy they pray./3($i}0a XpitrT€ Kal Hay ay id rby ip6/io yd rov kXeitn^gKal fio yon ari irovSeyd rov TovpKov fitly A^Z/ajyc,fi6ffia XpioTc KoX TLayayid to fxavpicfUyo 2!ov\t^Xwpiyia yd r^v Kdfjiovyt Tt^y iKKXtimdaov 0X17.Assist, Christ and Panaghia, to shut up his road,And leave not any where a path for the Turk ;Assist, Christ and Panaghia, the unfortunate Suli,So shall they make your church all golden."Vely however arrives in such force, that they do not even firein wait for the deer, roe-bucks, places.swine, and other wild animals of the > The Musulman poet has a lashmountains, at the springs andrivu- here at the Greek superstitions: —lets : especially in summer, when making use of their exact words,water is to be found only in a fewADDITIONAL NOTES. 491a shot, and he proceeds to occupy Serekhati, and great Full,leaving in his rear the Suliotes in the church.Driven out of their villages, the Suliotes, retire to the ridgein four bodies.red ehSvc /jLirovXovKia rietrapa lyivav ol KavfuvoiKoX irrjpay T&ypia rd (iovyd trdv Jiray fiaQtifiivoi,One of these was at Kiafii^ one at Kugni (X<$vi), the third at .Tpvxa.rciXXo ftirovXovirc Tourist mrd KoifKia vd xKeurrovyeodv Tov *Ey kXI^o trro yioXo tnd (myra dd icayovve,The fourth division went and shut themselves in Kukia,To be burnt alive, like the Englishman at sea ^"Vel Pasha converts the church at Suli into a mosque. Hisfeather sends him a thousand masons to build a castle there.Messengers from the Suliotes go to Tzikurati to Hassan AgaTzapari, to entreat his assistance in obtaining favourable termsfrom the Vezir.Hassan laments his want of influence, — that Al retains hissons as hostages, has seized upon Fanari, and will perhaps collectthe Kharatj even in Tzamuria ; — advises the Suliotes tosubmit, and offers in that case to intercede, but fears that it willbe of little avail to them.Foto Travel, with a deputation of Suliotes, appears beforeVel Pasha, and asks permission to depart to whatever place hethinks fit.But the monk (6 Ka\6y€poc\ t. e. Papa Samuel, revises tojoin in this compromise, and persuades 500 men to join him indefending Kukia to the last.The Kal6gheros (according to the poet) had many sins toanswer for.> Alluding to the catastrophe of are the more likely to admire suchPi SamueL " Like the English an act, as they are very bad seamen,man at aea," is a proverbial Greek and seem totally out of their ele-expression, derived from the fact of ment when they are embarked, oftenan Englishman who blew up his showing a dee of fear, very sin-shipto avoid filling into the hands gular in men so brave and hardy inof a Arabesque. The Albanians generaL492 ADDITIONAL NOTES.Kal Kaiyovvrav ^ovpxSXaKat vrd yepoyrafiarciTOV* ♦KXeiffov Tov Xiii o/iop^a koX ica/ic to mi^aovvd Kpivovui KCLKdyripe prov K6trfio royo^dtrov'eKEiyoi irov vpoaicvyriiray wool 6d ftcraviwirovyKal iriya fiirpt KaXdyepe irv\ufpia yd prov ^unrovy'€t(i tov Xiytt b SalfAoya^ orovysi army koiKicltovyd ituf^Ti Toy 'Ax Ilao'id ^i Hey traXiKapidrov,** He inherited sins, the bitter man, from his parents,And burnt a Yrukolakas ^ in his old age.* *Shut yourself up in the castle, (says the Devil,) and take yourpleasure,Monk, that they may talk of your name in the world ;Those who have offered submission will greatly repent,And will approve of what you have done, friend monk ;Thus speaks the daemon, which he has in his belly,(And which prompts him) to drive away Al Pasha with hisbravery."Vel Pasha's troops, who are tired of the war, are happy tohear of the proposal of the Suliotes. Al;^ comes to Suli, approveshighly of his son's proceedings, and receives Foto Travel(^a»roc TCa/3cXac), or Foi {^ifTrfc)^ as the poet sometimes callshim, who kisses the Vezir's foot.'A\^ Hatnas kyvpitrt Roi k\ai^tv9t to ^wny,Kal Tlpaie tov tire icaXa r< yit aov Kaiia to CKOTifKal TOV clerc <rvp€ yXiiyopa yd tovq ctir$c ^d fiyovyttI to ^iKdfJLov t6 <nradl Bi yd to Ovfirfiovyi*Mf Pasha turned round and caressed Foto,And look well to it, he said, for I will bum your liver ' ;^ In the year 1700, Toumefort Levant, tome i. lettre 3. Thoughwas an eye-witness of the burning such instances of superstition areof a Vruk6laka ; the body of the now very rare, the word Vnik6lakadeceased person, who was suspected (derived fh>m the lyric) is in com-of rising out of his grave to tor mon use to signify a ghost,ment the living, was cut in pieces * This x^>^<v/Mt is quite in charya priest and burnt. — Voyage au rScter.«ADDITIONAL NOTES. 493And, said he, return quickly and bid them come out,Or my sword they shall remember*'The Suliotes hesitating, Foto proposes to bring away his ownfollowers ; tells the Vezfr that the others must then follow, andaccuses Kitzo B6tzari of dissuading them from accepting theVezir's proposition.The Vezir promises that those who quit the place that dayshall not be molested, but that those who remain till the morrowshall be made slaves, and answerable for the expences in thewar.Foto exerts himself to bring about the evacuation, becausehis wife is a hostage at loannina. He leads the way with hisown tribe, and to all those who followed him the Pasha openedthe road (joy BpSfwyrove roy &yotie) : the others became slaves,men, women, and children.ay^ptc yvyaiKiQ xal Tatiid Soi itrKXaflwdiiKay.But Al still refuses to release Foto's wife imtil Foto hadconsented to destroy the Kaloghero by secretly applying a matchto the powder magazine at Kiikia.cfXXioic Kciiiuyf. y^itmayk lyra troy dcr nfv Biyw^ri^y (Uxyw aro fWvnroKifWVf ya aov to tlwia Kal kccfo,Kparw yit n) yvyaucairov fia^i Kal rd ircu^id<Tov,Kol Sty rd Xiirovyi woes rd /Liana rd Sixdaov*Otherwise, wretched Christian, I will not give her to you ;I will throw her into my mutbak, that she may work like aslave.I will keep your wife together with your children.And your eyes shall never behold them*'Foto replies,mil Tov tire dfidy iipiyrri/iov rovrri BovXtd rife xAyia^ytd TO y(pva6aov rdyofia yd irayia yd diroddyia.Mercy, my lord, said he, this service I will perform ;I will go and die for your golden name."Foto then approaches Kukia, and, in a secret conversation withthe Papfcs, endeavours to persuade him that there is no possibilityof resisting the Vezir, and no hope for him but in submission.494 ADDITIONAL NOTES.The priest consents to depart, provided he has permission to sellthe contents of his powder magazine, in order to fill which he hadparted with all his property in the beginning of the blockade.Foto engages that the Pash himself shall purchase it. In consequenceof a dream, the Papas desires that the son of PapI&nni of Sopiki may be sent to him as a security, as well as toweigh and take account of the powder.The son of Pap anni is sent by the Pasha accordingly,together with Foto, and while the priest with many others areassembled in the magazine round the young Sopikiote, Fotoapplies a match to a train of powder, and the magazine exploding,destroys all that were within itifrrfrav prov Kak6yipo KaOokov Bev ^avfJKay6\oc 6 TOWOQ yvpt(rc, fiovvd {epc(ai6^i:aF,fcai rd xoprdpia rfjc y^c oral Kelva fAapaO^Kav,Those who were with the monk appeared no more:All the place was turned upside down; the mountains wereunroofed,And the plants of the earth were withered."The Vezir then takes possession of Kukia, when all its defenderswho remain alive are, according to his former vow, madeanswerable for his expences, and sold for slaves. He then restoresto Foto his wife, and makes him a present also of tenSuliote families, upon which Foto loses no time in proceeding toParga, without taking leave of the Vezir, and then passes overwith the Suliotes to the islands*The Vezir sends for Papa anni, and a conversation ensues inwhich the Pasha, endeavouring to console him, says,r/rav ypa^ro ytd va Rap ari 2ovXi to Taiiitrou.*' For it was written, that your son should bum at Suli."And, among other things, adds,Kal Ktivos irovfiaXe stadia diXw t6v€ OKOT&ffvKtayayairac <rrd \ipui(rov vd toy irapaSht^mfri TO BixStrov to ircu^l vd iipp^ t6v Xvirov/Liat,/lapa/vcrat // KapBovXafWv ovrec irov toy dvfiovfiai*I I have before remarked that the Suliotes and their friends relate thestory differently.ADDITIONAL NOTES.And he that pat the fire I will slay him ;And, if you wish, into your hands I will deliver him ;For know that I grieve for your son,My heart withers when I think of him."The Vezir then places a thousand men in Ki&£ft :X(X<ovc yofidrovQ fin-like 9t^v Kidfava xaBiffovy,as many in Kukia, and as many in Kugni'; takes possessionof Fan&ri, and returns to loannina.A Dervish having remonstrated with the Vezir on the practiceamong the Christians of wearing fine cloth, salamis of velvet andgold, and green dresses, so that at loannina he could not distinguisha Turk from a Greek*.Tovproc 'Pw/iioc terra Tidrtva Bky fitropaKcifiu i^pKt.Alf issues a proclamation commanding the Rayas to weardark-coloured dresses, forbidding velvet, and threatening to throwthose who wear green cloth or yellow slippers into the lake.The Archons {oi''Ap\ovT€Q ora Tiayeya\ afraid of the sack (ror{'ov/3aXi), t. e. afraid of being drowned, shut themselves up intheir houses and change their dresses, and lament that now, forthe first time, they sues this disgrace.Kitzo B6tzari still remained with the Vezir, who had built ahouse for him, and had given him a village for his support,but hearing that he \7as accused of having encouraged theSuliotes not to submit, and of having assisted in supplyingthem with ammunition, he retires into* a monastery in the districtof Tzumerka, but at the same time desires his friends tointercede for him at loannina.1 Probably two or three hundredin each, for most of the poet's numberswill bear a similar deduction.The Dervishes seldom lose agood opportunity of rousing the religiousbigotry of the Turks againstthe Christians, and Al, thoughcareless himself of such matters asthe dress of the Rays, could notavoid conforming occasionally toMusulman prejudices. The Greeksbeing fond of adorning their persons,aire very sensible to such ameasure as is here described; butinthe present instance they tookadvantage of the order, and representedit as a mourning for the lossofSulL496 ADDITIONAL Notes.ya /3y5r€ army d^vrri fxov yd Ttatrrc n)v iro^idrov.To go to the Lord, and take hold of his foot."But on learning from his intercessor (ptr(d\ia) that the Vezfrasserted, that on the capture of Suli some of Kitzo's letters hadfallen into his hands, Kitzo sends for assistance : —trrovQ /IXXovc rove SovXiwratfTov sap Kpvfifuroi ard ^taptd lady fiapafUyaiQ ft<$racc-to the other Suliotes,Who were hidden in the villages like pining hens."He requests of them lead and gunpowder, and adds,dxdfii Tbfpa '^^lariayol ayl<rwt koI yXvrwtrwr6 fiovatrriipi /)c/3aca QiXw vdyra tri^wau.'* And now if I yet escape, Christians,Truly I will purchase this monastery'try coTCiXc r&y \pi<mayCiy riroiac Xoyfjc ^aynriptaTov KovPaXovyt (a\£p€ r^y yvKTa fii rd aripiaduro ZafiirdyTi tov trreiXay yd £cpf}C ff l3ovdovfji£.When he sent the Christians this intelligenceThey transport ammunition hy night with the stars :They sent from Zahandi to say they would assist."Several captains (KaircraVt^cc iroXXoi) enter the monastery* toassist Kitzo with the musquet (fie to rov^cVc), as well as all theSuliotes, who were lying concealed (Kpvfiiyoi diro Toy BtZipriy),The rest assemble in the churches and pray for success. Twelvehundred men are collected in the convent.Here the poem concludes abruptly ; the poet having been appointedby the Vezir to some employment in Rumili. He takesthe opportunity of lauding the power of Aly, of whose wonderfulacts he has only related a tenth ; whose castles and tjiftliks arenumberless as the sands, and astonish the world.rd KaoTpa Kai ^ iraXayyaic tov aril y% rijy oUov/iiyjfyrd fiXiwovy oXo^ 6 yrovyidt Kal miKovy BafiirwfiiyouThe following are some of the concluding lines by which welearn the poet's name, and that of his scribe :ADDITIONAL NOTES. 497Kai r^po dfro^ffiffa ra vw^w rj)v fvXnBa• »••••ya videre rov r6irofiov koI fxty Kal yoyucdfiovito NreX/^ii'o Jjy TrarplBafiov^ trd^ ypd<^ T6yo/jid/iovXdr^e ^pirriQ Kpd(o/iaif irria^OQ aV* to trefiyrdfiov,6,y diXjETt yd fiddle Roi roy ypafi/iaTiic6fiovUayayiwTTis SaXov/royXovc Kal tric\a(ioc ra^cKrd/iov,dfidyf dfxdy ii^iyrrifjiov icpl^i (rxXcLpoc hiK6<r90-0two Toy Toy yvpevofity Kal air' T^y yvfiepyrftriyaov*And now I have resolved to finish the page. —That you may know my origin, myself, and my parentage,Delvino is my native country : I write you my name,I am called Hadji Secret, a poor man by destiny.If you wish to know who is my scribe,It is Panaghioti Salomtoglu, a slave also of my lord.Pity, pity, my lord, for subsistence your slaveSeeks from God and your good care*'• ••••♦yd Cvffovy ol waaidSe^Xaip yTofid adc Kdyo/i€ Kal fieiQ ol ^ovxapd^ec *.*' Long life to the Pashas,To whom we poor men offer our good prayer'*Note II. — Page 27.Valiant Khan,It was within the walls of the Valiant Khan that about 600 ofthe male inhabitants of Gardhiki were slaughtered by the guardsof Al Pasha, in the year 1812. Like another famous exampleof Turkish cruelty and treachery, the massacre of the Mamelukeat Cairo, it furnishes a curious instance of the cowardice and valuationwhich often blinds and paralyzes the people of thesecountries in cases of extremity, although accustomed from theiryouth to trust chiefly to their arms for security, to practice aswell as to guard against dissimulation and treachery, and toFukari, the plural of the Arabic fakir (poor man).VOL. I. K k498 ADDITIONAL NOTES.Suspect every kind of deceit from an enemy. Though the knew that their leader Demir Dost, together with MustafaPasha, (late of Delvino,) and the other hostages of their owntown, had been disarmed and thrown into prison at loannina,they yielded to the invitation of Al, to meet him, unarmed, at aplace where they could not but have suspected that they weredestined to destruction.After the massacre the Khan remained closed for a long time,during which an inscription in sixty-four verses, after havingbeen approved by the Vezir, was placed over the door. Itbegins with a dialogue between the Khan and the dead men,who explain to the former the cause of the massacre. Theyremark that —'OyriaKi Movr(o\ovtrdriKoy trois diei ya ^aXdflrpAhroQ yd tlyai (iifiaiot roy jiioy OiXii X^^*He that wishes to destroy the Mutjohussatic chimney ' willbe sure to lose his life' —And then proceeds to state : —When Al was a little boy, (/mcpo wai^oKi^) deprived of hisfather, with no brother, and only a mother, we ran with arms inour hands to cut him off. He escaped, skilful as he is, (cLc ,)upon which we went to Marian (Kapyiayif) and burnthis houses. It is now fifty years since. It is for that deed thathe slew us at the Khan ; that he has sent our chief men to theisland of the lake of loannina, and there put them to death ; thathe has dispersed our families among all the kazis under his authority,has razed our unfortunate town to the ground, and orderedthat it may remain a desert for ever. For he is a very just man,(Ac($rt eJyai Biicaiot iroXv,) and in like manner slew the Khormo-sites, and ordered that not one should remain alive*' In conclusion,Al himself speaks and says : '* When I consider this terribleslaughter, I am much grieved, and I desire that so great anevil shall never occur again :nXeov irap6fjiotoy xaKoy irorifwv dcv ro dieu,For which reason I give notice to all my neighbours that they> The house of Daly'.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 499must not molest my house (r6 6yr(dici ftov vd fti) Kaxoiroiiitnnfyi)but be obedient) in order that they may be happy {vd vworda'crutvrai sid yd eirrv^i/^ovv).**This sad event took place (eyive toto rd KoKoy) the 15th[27th] of March, 1812, in the afternoon, ro hiKiyby Koyrd^ t. e,near three o'clock.Neither here, nor in the poem on the life of Al, is any allusionmade to the real cause of the resentment of Al, and which is theonly excuse for his vengeance, namely, the horrible treatmentwhich his mother and sister suffered from the people of Khorroovoand Gardhiki. The poet does not even allude to the womenhaving been made prisoners when Al escaped.Note Il— Page 41.The following information concerning Aighyrokastro was derivedfrom D., an intelligent Christian native, who was in myservice.Arghyrokastro contains 4000 houses, two-thirds of which areMusulman ; but the Turks and Greeks live upon nearly equalterms. When friends visit, even although of different religions,they do not hide their women, but show them great respect,rising to make way for them ; and this custom is observed bothin the houses and streets. But all advances towards familiarityare scrupulously avoided, and the women are subject to the samelaws of jealousy and restraint as in other parts of Turkey. BothGreek and Turkish women are in the same servile condition.Each head of a family has weight and influence in proportionto the numbers of his relations and adherents, in which aregenerally included all the collateral branches. The persons ofchief power, and who upon ordinary occasions are looked up toas composing the government of the place, are the brothersMorte Bey and Khotad Bey. They assume the power ofimprisoning, judging, and even of inflicting capital punishment.The KaoTpiraic, (Kastrites,) as the people of Arghyrokastroare usually called in Greek, boast that in the city and dependentvillages, there are 1200 tufeks, (musquets,) and all in the handsof the best waXiicdpta in Albania. Many of them are in DalyPasha's service, and all are willing to be employed by him ; butthey express their determination of resisting his attempts to re-Kk 2500 ADDITIONAL NOTES.dace them to entire subjection, as they know it would be foUlowed as usual by his converting many of their lands into tjifUiksof his own.Family quarrels occur at Axghyrdkastro as in other parts ofAlbania, often spread to the most distant branches, and are sometimeshanded down from father to son. Al Pasha, who wished toremove one Mehmet Bey, and knew that he had wounded thebrother of D., who was then one of Al^*8 body-guard, sent oneday for him, dismissed his attendants, made D. sit down besidehim, proposed to him to go to Axghyrdkastro, and place gunpowderunder the house of Mehmet, and thus to blow him upwith all his family. D. said he could not undertake so desperatea task, but that he would shoot the Bey, and upon this missionproceeded to his native town. Here, having bribed a man whohad a window looking into Mehmet*s house, D. watched hisopportunity, fired, missed his object, but cut in two a candlewhich stood near the Bey, and left him in darkness, by which D.had time to elude the Beys search, and to make his escape. D.related the transaction as a thing that did him some credit, thoughfrom fear of the Vezir he desired that it should be keptsecret. The same person was a near witness of the death ofVely Bey of Klisura and his brother, whom Al enticed to loan-ninaon occasion of the marriage of Aly Pasha's son Vel;^ withthe daughter of Ibrahim Pasha. One day D. was ordered tofire a pistol on the staircase leading to the private apartment, inwhich the Vezir was in the habit of receiving only members ofhis family, and persons summoned to attend him on particularbusiness : Al then pretending to consider himself unsafe, directedthat no person should enter the apartment armed, by which meanshe had a pretext for disarming both the Bey and his attendants,who had always before been at no great distance from their masteron these occasions. His next step was to endeavour to persuadeeach of the brothers that the other was endeavouring topersuade the Vezir to put him to death ; and having thus provokedthem to a quarrel in his own presence, he suddenly pretendedto be alarmed, called his servants to his defence, anddispatched them.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 501Note to Chapter IV.Since this Chapter has been printed, I have been enabled bythe kindness of Mr. T. L. Donaldson, architect, to subjoin amongthe plates at the end of this volume a plan of the ruins of Nicolreduced from his drawings. From an examination of thosedrawings, and a comparison of the workmanship of the walls ofthe fortress now called the Paleokastro with that of the theatres,baths, and the great entrance of the city from port Comarus, itseems evident that the greater part of the Pale6kastro is coevalwith the other works, or of the time of Augustus ; and thatthe observation which I made (see p. 188) as to repairs of asubsequent time, particularly in that of Justinian, will apply verylittle to the western and northern fronts of the Paleokastro, butonly to portions of the walls, such as the Arabian gate, wherethe cross is seen.Notes to Chapter V.Note I. — On Suit.The work from which the following notes on Suli are extractedis intituled, ** A Brief History of Suli and Parga.*' —'Iffropta 2vvro/ioc ^vXlov, ical Qdpyag, The author is a nativeof Parga, who ultimately became a major in one of the corps inthe service of the Ionian islanders or their protectors. The firstpart of the history of Suli, together with that of Parga, dated bythe author in 1801, was published at Paris in 1803 ; the entirework at Venice in 1815. In 1823 an English version of anItalian translation was published at Edinburgh. As the accuracyof the original has suffered a little in this double transfusion,I have thought that an abstract of the work which I madelong ago might still be acceptable to the reader.Seventy years ago, (t. e, about 1730,) Suli had not more than200 men bearing arms : by degrees Turkish oppression compelledmany of the inhabitants of the neighbouring country to retireinto the mountain, and thus increased the Suliote population.The families of Suli, before the last war with Aly Pasha,were —502 ADDITIONAL NOTES.1 . The Zep/3aVai : these take their name from Zerva, a villageof the district of Artaa. There were three brothers of thatvillage, of whom one turned Turk, (crovpiccvffcv,) and settled inaMusulman village named Kap/vmivvapc, (between Margaritaand Paramythia) ; another settled at Lefka of Corfu, where thereis now a family of Enervates ; the third migrated to Suli.2. The M^ror^aparai, who came originally from Apoyani,four hours from Paramythia,3. The Aparcfrai, from MapraKi^, a village of the district ofAdfittpi,4. The Mirovf/4irarai, from the BXaxox^pw of MountPindus*'5. The AayrXmrac, from ^avapi.6. The Za/3e\Xoroi.7. The Ila^arot : the origin of these two is not known.These were the most ancient families ; there were many othersof inferior note. The farthest distance of time to which theauthor has been able to trace the Suliote history is 150 years.In former times Suli was a Spahilik, and the Spahi lived atloannina. His dues were regularly paid by the Suliotes, andso was the Kharatj (are^aXiaVucov) of thirty-five paras for eachman, and ten for each boy ; the latter being so considered aslong as he lived in his father's house, whether married or not.Butter and cheese, their only produce, paid a tenUi to the Spahi,all their com and pulse was imported from the plains. Untilthe time of Al, the Suliotes prided themselves upon being obedient(ove &irfi6e(c) to the Porte. After Aly had establishedhimself at loannina, he made many attempts to get the Spahilikof Suli out of the hands of the then Spahi Bekir Bey, who constantlyrefused, and was at length imprisoned and put to deathby Al.The author apologizes for the robberies of the Suliotes, by thenecessity to which they were driven when the increasing numbersof the enemy had deprived them of all the villages in theplains which had formerly supported them. They had neitherarts nor commerce, but attended only to arms from their youth(iraiBi6d€y), The women learnt the use of the musquet, and inwar were employed in carrying ammunition and provision intothe field. The wives of the most renowned warriors had the privilegesof TTpoiroyc'/itff/ia and irpwroiroriff^a at the ftpvtri^ — thatADDITIONAL NOTES.is, to fill their jars, or water their cattle, at the fountain, beforeall other women ; and it was a custom among them on thoseoccasions to utter reproaches against the wives of men who hadnever distinguished themselves. When the men quarrelled, thewomen were in the habit of interfering, to prevent them fromcoming to blows ; and this generally succeeded, because the menwere afraid that a woman might in the confusion be killed, whichwould not only be a national loss, but would lead to a retaliationbetween two £Unities which it might be difficult to compromise.There was no written law : in each family the head decided alldisputes. Those which occurred between individuals of differentfamilies were made up by arbitration ; and even in the case ofa loss of life, was immutable by a fine. In Suli, however,these barbarous manners (which are general in Albania)were corrected by a high sense of ttiUtbry honour, and of patriotism,especially when the republic was threatened by anexternal enemy.There were four villages in the great ravine of Suli, namely,2ovXc, Fna^a, Aj3apii:oc, and 2a/iov4/3a. ' These were the foundationof the league. Suli contained 19 i^paiQ, or alliances,and 425 families, the most noted were those of Za/3c\Xa (orT4^aj3cXo), Mworiaprif and ^ayxXtd. In Gkiafei were 4 fares,and 60 families. In Avariko, 3 £ires, and 55 families. InSamoniva, 3 fares, and 30 families.In the height of their power the Suliotes had 66. villages in theirconfederacy, the territory of which extended 4 hours, or two-thirdsof the distance towards Margaret, and about half way toParamy this' and to loannina : the former of which is reckoned8, and the latter 14 hours fit>m Suli.> The villages in the district of Margariti were : —T^iKovpdrat^,Za/3povxo*'»QoTafiid,rXvjcv,Jltpi^draiQfKariayo\iipifNe/i/rfa,KXec0ovpa,Mov^oicaraiCf"Aprfaif,KovyifMinp^v^XifZapolilra^Bep/iirer^iiiTiayyovrZiifKopvriai^,Mffvvrapi,Niayicdraic,Fop^rfa,Kop^vilfKopw voTTO vXo y^TovpKOTrdXovKoy,VKayn^Fp^fTOiCfKeXX2,Jiirttddpif2aXe90-i,IIa\ioar(r{taracc,SraV^aXoF,KovXovpc,^dyoflo,AovyKayiovc,ADDITIONAL NOTES,In the districts of Paramythia and loannina : —or T^ayKapif *A\iroxSipitTla\ato\&piyKovraVacci^plT^iava, or ava,Fopaya,NiicoXtr^^tovcMirovXiaparacC)KovT^tay&irovKoyfZepX/a,Ficit^Xa,Zt^XriKt,Zimaydf ■ •Tep/3/rfcava, or dpa,TtopydrviyMiranda,RXeira^iyA{,(ia,r«oXvftj).KoXcovc,rXwj3/rfa,KapiimayfifMireffria^MoKofiiyOfApayofiirhfApi6iniSvffrpovvi,VfafJutvaTatc,3v\a,In time of war all the outlying villages were left to their fitted,and the inhabitants of the following only were allowed to retireinto the mountain. Tzikurates, which has 5 fares ; PerikhateSy2 ; Vela, 2 ; Alsokhori, 3 ; Mandates, 1 ; Gkinola, 3 ; Tzefiiki,2 ; in all 18 exterior fares, helping to defend the mountain.The outer villages assisted the mountain secretly with provision,and were seldom much injured by the enemy, for fear of aretaliation upon his own villages. It was the practice of theSuliotes, when they met with large bodies of the enemy, toskirmish only, but when they encountered with numbers nearlyequal, to kill or make prisoners, and afterwards to take ransomfor as many as possible. They had as much prudence as valour,and seldom exposed themselves but when they coidd not effecttheir purpose by stratagem and cunning.The Suliotes not having committed their transactions to writing,have lost the exact history of them. Their wars werechiefly with the Turks of Margariti, Paramythia, and loannina*The following are the principal : —1. Against Hadji Pasha, son of Asian Pasha, who commanded12,000 men, when the Suliotes had only 180.2. Against Mustafa Pasha, and 7000 men.3. Against Dost Bey, and 8000.4. Against Maxiit Aga, and 6000.5. Against Soliman Tzapari, and 9000.The Suliotes drove him and his son Hassan into the church ofSt. George, in Suli, and threw hives of bees in through the roof,till they surrendered. The Suliotes received 1000 sequins forthe ransom of these prisoners.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 5056. Against Pasha Kokka, and 4000 men.7. Against Bekir Pasha, and 5000.8. Against Hassan Tzapari and Hassan Brain Aga, and 5000.9. Against A1^ Pasha, and 10,000.10. Against the same, at the head of 22,000 men, in thesummer of 1792 KOn the last occasion, when the Pasha had collected his troops,he announced that the expedition was destined against Arghyro-kastro, and wrote to the two heads of the houses, Botzari andTzav^lla, inviting them to accompany him, and offering doublepay to all those whom they should bring with them. Botzarideclined to go, but Tzavella with 70 men accepted the proposal.He had some suspicion that the expedition was really intendedagainst Suli, but his doubts were removed on learning that aportion of the Vezir's army had advanced to Axghyrdkastro, andhad even been engaged in action near the town. When the Vezirhimself, following in the same direction with the Suliotes, hadarrived at the banks of the Kalama, 30 miles from loannina, heseized an opportunity, when the Suliotes had laid aside theirarms after the march, to make them all prisoners, except three.Two of these fought till they were slain ; the third leapt over aprecipice into the river sera xaoc irora^iov), where no one daredto follow, and had the good fortune to escape a great number ofshot that were fired at him. The Pasha marched immediatelyto Suli, hoping to surprise it, but the fugitive had given thealarm. While the Pasha was encamped before Suli, he wassaved fix>m a plan, which the Suliotes had laid to surprise andcarry him off, by a certain tinker {yavtuiic fiyytitav) from theKatzano-khoria, who sent him a messenger with a letter in hisshoe. This tinker is now (1801) called AoyoOeVi^c, and is ingreat favour with Al;^. The Pasha having made Tzavella greatoffers if he would assist him in obtaining possession of the mountain,Tzavella engaged to do so, and left his son Foto in thePasha's hands as a hostage. Tzavella then wrote the letter of> In this expedition the Agfts of tahiti of Oriental accounts. As inMargaret and Paramythfa were Herodotus, the numbers of the de-unitedwith Aiy. The estimate of fenders were well known, and thosethe enemy's forces on all these oc of the invaders exaggerated,nations is liable to the usual ulcersNOTES.defiance which has been published by Eton, from whose' workthe author copied it \Al having formed a body of 8000 chosen Albanians, madethem a speech, after which they broke their scabbards, and advancedagainst Suli from Glyky, by the pass of KUsura. Kitzo,the nephew of Tzavella, who was shut up in a tower near theentrance of the pass, defended himself so obstinately, that all hismen, amounting to sixteen, were slain. The Suliotes, who wereonly 1300 in arms, were driven back to the pass of AgluaParaskevi, where a terrible contest took place, which lasted for10 hours. The superiority of numbers prevailed for a time, andthe Albanians got possession of the town of Soli, but had notbeen there many minutes when a general assault was made uponthem by the women as well as men of Suli, and they were putto flight. Al, who had beheld the battle with his telescopefrom the hill of Bogoritza (Mxoyopir(a), perceiving that therewas no hope, and fearing for his own safety, retreated with allpossible speed to loannina, where he ordered all persona to keepwithin their houses, in order that the extent of his loss might notbe witnessed by the loannites when his troops marched into thetown. One thousand armed men only returned ; the rest threwaway their arms and part of their dress, that they might escapethe more easily over the rocks, and thus after hiding themselvesin the woods, they arrived half naked at loannina. The Sulioteshad 74 slain, and 90 wounded. The enemy, besides 2500 killedon the spot, lost many more who were cut off by the people ofthe outlying villages of the Suliote confederacy. The twoparties fought from the 1st to the 20th July (old style), onwhich last day the Pasha fled '.> He em, however, in Supposingthat Eton himself was at lo&nnina,when the transaction took place.Eton never was in this part ofGreece, but derived his informationfrom a Greek interpreter, who wasin the service of the French ConsulatSaloniki, and happened to be atlo&nnina at the time.The author, though he refer toEton's work for some of the transactionswhich occurred previouslyto the bate, does not follow himany farther, but substitute this shortstatement. He was probably sensibleof the incorrectness of the narrativeof Eton, who relates that theAlbanians not only took Suli» butKi&ia also; that 400 Suliotes wereposted in the three towers of MountBira, and 400 in the forest on eitherside of the Klistira, and that whenADDITIONAL NOTES.Moskho (Md^xoc), the wife of Isabella and mother of Foto,particularly distinguished herself on the day of bate. Shebroke open some cartridge boxes with a hatchet ; and then loadingherself and the women with cartridges, distributed them tothe Suliotes in the trenches (jier€pi(ia). When Aly threatenedto roast alive her son Foto, who was in his hands, she replied,that she was young, and could have other children, and that shewould eat a bit of the roasted flesh rather than betray hercountry '.In 1798, when the war was on the point of breaking outbetween France and Turkey, Al returning on that account fromWithin, where he had been employed against Pasvant-Oglu,began hostUides by seizing the French General, Rosa, whom hehad invited to a conference, and sent him prisoner to Constantinople.He then marched against Prevyza, which was occupiedby a French garrison. The Frevyzans obtained a retire fortheir families in Lefkadha, Paxus, Thiaki, and Parga, and preparedto assist the French garrison in defending the isthmus ofNicopolis. Instead of a trench which would have been effectualagainst the Turkish cavalry, the French fortified the isthmuswith five redoubts. Their officers were at variance among oneanother, and stormy weather prevented the arrival of reinforcementsfrom Lefkadha, so that the Vezir gained an easy victoryat Nicopolis, and immediately marched into Prevyza, which hadno works to defend it.The battle was fought on the 12th of October, 1798. TheTurks, who were 4000 strong, were opposed by 300 French and600 Prevyzans ; the attack was made on the height near the great4000 Turks had advanced nearly totheTrypa, B6tzari, who was stationedin one of the towers, rang a bellas a signal to those who were inambuscade in the forest, and whowere commanded by his son Deme-tries,and accompanied by Tzav^lla.These advancing rapidly upon therear of the enemy, and cutting offhis retreat, produced the rout anddispersion which the historian ofSuli has stated. The author blamesEton for having said that Tzav^IIawas among the slain on this occasion,instead of which he died of diseasethree years afterwards.Eton's informant waa presentwhen Foto was brought before VelyPash, who told him that he was tobe roasted, in consequence of hisfather's treachery, when the boy replied," My father will roast yourfather, or brother, if he catchesthem."508 ADDITIONAL NOTES.theatre, after which the French retreated into the redoubts ^ AtFrevyza, men, women, and children, were slandered, and theremainder sold like cattle [^c rd AXoya C&a]» A few days afterhis arrival at Prevyza, the Vezir wrote to the people of Faiga, orderingthem to submit, and to put the French garrison to the sword ;hoping by these means to cut off the resources of the Suliotes,which were almost entirely derived from Prevyza and Parga:but the Parghini disregarded his summons, and made commoncause with Suli ; and seven days afterwards, the Russo-Ottomansquadron having arrived, took Parga under its protection.Though Al thus failed in deriving all the advantage which hehad expected from the possession of Prevyza, he determined tolose no time in attacking Suli once more. This was the eleventhwar of which the Suliotes preserve a tradition. Having calledthe Beys and Agas together, Al put them in mind of an ancientAlbanian prophecy, that the Turks were to be conquered by theFranks ; that the Albanians were to fight forty years longer withthe Franks, and then to make peace with them ; that the attackupon Turkey was about to take place, and consequently thatthey, the Albanians, must be prepared for war with the Franks.The resolutions of the council were kept secret ; audit was givenout that an armament was intended against Corfu : 28,000 menwere in the meantime collected, and when assembled, suddenlysurrounded Suli, which, in consequence of the treachery of GeorgeBotzari, was not sufficiently provided.This Suliote captain lived at Lakia, four hours from Suli, (onthe upper Acheron). Alf Pasha and the neighbouring Agas hadbeen glad to keep on peaceable terms with him, because by hismeans their lands were exempted from the inroads of the Suites.The stipulated number of lures (XovfiBet;), which it wascustomary for the Turks in time of peace to pay to the Suliotesin order to ensure safety to the places bordering on them, werereceived by Botzari, as commanding the advanced posts of theSalutes, and ought to have been accounted for to the community,instead of which he divided them solely among the men ofhis own far, and thus he first became suspected. His next stepwas to receive a bribe of 2500 piastres from Al, to abstain fromIt is generally stated by the Prevysans, that a few of the French onlybehaved well on this occasion.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 509intermitting him in his attack upon Prevyza, which his commandof the passes leading to Lamari and the isthmus of Nicopolisenabled him to do. At length he went over to the Vezir withseventy families. When Al found that, notwithstanding thisloss, Suli was as determined as ever in its resistance, he obligedGeorge Bdtzari himself to march against Suli with 200 men, whowere beaten at Redhovuni {'Pai^jiovyi), The traitor died inless than half a year after his defection ; some say of grief, othersthat he was poisoned by the Vezir. The Suliotes attribute his de-»flection, which is the greatest blot in their history, to Alaska, aman of Suli, who had been for some years in the service of thePasha, and who, pretending to desert the Vezir, joined GeorgeBotzari before his defection, and married his daughter.The Suliotes were now 1500, under ^wro^ Tfaj3c\Xac, AilfiotAparov, Tovtrat Zfp/3ac, Tf^/ia Zcp/3ac, KovrCoWicac, TtcSyKa^^AayicX^C, ^lafidyrriQ MdpKov, TiayyaKtic Siicov, UderxpQ AaXaCiBecjcoc ZdpfiiraCi Qayderic Udvovy Karj^i/iTreXijC) Tiutpyioc Mirov*ffiroc, Zf/yovpiyc ^afidvrriy KoXerf^c MaXdfWv, IXavra^^c Nnh^ac,Aramd^ig KdtrKayri, Avatrrdtrij^ Bctycac, Fcwpytoc Kapa/iiriVi7c»Nu:($Xao6c ArffxriTploVf *Ia»avvifc Fitaipy/ov, Tiayydicri^ Dicti, Fi^p"biog KaXif^ircpac, K/rfoc Ilavrafii, Hayayiwrrfc AdfAtrpov, Tiay»ydaic U€ir6yiit OaydtniQ TidicaXrif Mnro^ Hairayidyyti, KmotocKovp/rfifC*The Vezir*s attack upon Suli was thus ordered : — First, 5000men under Bekir Tjokador T(ioyaBovpov, Giocatore) ; of these,Hadji Bet (Mxirov) moved from Luro (Aovpoc) and Kutziand-pull (KouT(iay6irov\oy), and thence to Zermi (Zep/i^), where theyfought with 70 Suliotes under Nikola Dhimitriu, Nati Tjardji(Nitric Tf laprf ly), and Kolezi Fotomara (KoXerftc ^(orofiapdo).The Turks drove them beyond Seritziana (ScpcrCtaVa), and thenhalted : the Suliotes remained at Kaloghera (KaXoyepd), a mileand a half distant. Secondly, 8000 moved from Luro, Riniassa(•PiviaWo), and the bridge of Tzoknidha (TfocW^a), nearPorto Fanari, to Guritza (Fovp«rfa) in Fanari, where theyremained two nights, and on the third day arrived at Nemitza(Ne/i/rf a), where 400 Suliotes fought with them in the evening.In the night 200 of these, under Foto Tzavella, retired to Suli, inconsequenceof a false report, that the Pasha's Seliktar with 3000men was in possession of Mount Bogoritza; the remaining 200Suliotes resisted all the ensuing day about Tzikurates, Privates,512 ADDITIONAL NOTES.kept a pistol in Iub girdle, shot himself with it as soon as he haddiscovered the treachery, which they all expected to he followedby their destruction.Pronio, conscious that he was an object of suspicion to theVezir, and apprehensive of the consequences, withdrew his forces,under pretence of preventing the Suliotes from obtaining suppliesfrom his territory, but not before the Vezir, by means of an understandingwith some of the Ages of Paramy this opposed to Pronio,had introduced 500 of his Albanians into the castle at that place,which obliged Pronio to comply with the Vezir's demand of his son,as a hostage for his fidelity to the Vezir*s cause. The Sulioteshaving now no hope but from Ibrahim Pasha of Befit, sent PaskoLala to him ; when Ibrahim, who, though he had marched fix>mBerat to the Vezir's aid, was in truth not more sincerely attachedthan Pronio to Al^*s cause, consented to supply the Suliotes with200 horse-loads of kalambokki, and 30,000 cartridges. Al hadimmediate advice of this transaction, and as it left him little hope ofspeedy success, he sent his Seliktar with Kitzo Bdtzari to makepeace,before the Suliotes could learn the result of Pasko Lala'smission. The Suliotes being much straitened (flrcrox^P^/'^*^)'accepted the overtures, for the mere purpose of supplying themselvesand families with food, and sent back Kutzonika with thePasha's messengers to loannina. Ibrahim, on hearing of thesenegociations, withdrew his supplies, when Al immediately brokeoff the truce, but not before the Suliotes had laid in a considerablestore of provisions.They continued to resist courageously. Al offered them 2000purses and a fertile country to live in, if they would retire fromSuli. They answered, that their country was infinitely sweeter tothem than either his money or his delightful places (^ irarplv^acel vac iLxtiputt yXvrijrcpa Kol two rd 6,9irpairov ical two tovq tvrvx'^'icroTovc ffov). He then sent an agent (jiwtiiq) to offer TzimaZerva 800 purses, if he would withdraw with his adherents. Zervarefused the bribe, and replied that he should not know how tocount such a sum (ra oKraxovia vovyyela irapoicaXw /xi) fuw rivrtlXySf eiret^^ cal iev Ucvpw yd rd /jierpivui). The Vezir'stroops continued to desert, until being reduced at length to8000, they found sufficient employment in protecting their owntowers and trenches, and were more blockaded than the besieged.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 513As Suli received supplies chiefly from Parga* Al causedHieronymus, ('lefH^dcoc,) metropolitan bishop of lo&imina, to writeto Cfarysanthus, {XpvcratSoQf) his suffragan of Param3rthia, who re-tided at Parga, desiring him to use his spiritual influence againstthis alliance, or at least to give the metropolitan secret advice ofall the designs of the Farthing (rAy Uapyiy&y), The letter ofcourse was dictated by Al, who himself also wrote to Chrysan*thus as follows :My friend Duatzi S despot of Paramythia, with my salutation,I inform you that Hassan Aga Tzapari has come here, and hasinterceded for you : I therefore, for his satisfaction, and becauseI take you under my protection, have overlooked all your failingstowards me. Wherefore, on receiving my present letter,set out without any suspicion, and come here ; for you are myprotege, and I love you beyond any other. Only come without£ul, and do not let any thing rest upon your mind. No more.Farewell.loSfmina^ March 8, 1801.The bishop went to loannina very unwillingly, and chiefly inBovXXcK.^6v fio ok favtpmvkt hri Uu ^X3ev 6 Xaoav *AyaQ TZairdptic Kal fik IkoiupirT^St iid iffiva Kal lyu iid t6 xor^pirov, fiavrd^ Kal Ix'ic Pp^^fJ r^ip^ciiiKdvfiov, SXa tA oo^trl^taoov rd txipifra' S^cv Xafipdyovrac rb ttapovfiovdiX**t Kavkva oovftirtxk vd KtytioyQ Kal WlXdyc i^^t ^*^ ^^ surat r^cpaiei-fuov Kai 9k dyawA coX^nf a dwb Kddi oKKov fi&voy fnoarXdK yd IXdiic coiIM^v pdkge riwortQ trrihf voivoov, koa 5xt dKKo' vyiaivt.1801, yiapiTiov 8, *lmdwwa.This it a good speehnen of the of the ordinary words, besides theVeifr'a style, and of the Musulman proper names, are Turkish insteadnative of Greece in generaL Seven of Greek.VOL. I. L 1V514 ADDITIONAL NOTES.consequence of tht influence of a mother, two brother, and twomanned deters, who, being detained there by the Yesir, werecompelled to join in pending the bishop, who wm not allowedto return to Parga until he had paid the Venir sixteen purses(about fool) Soon afterwards, an agent of Ibrahim Paria wentto Parga; but Al, though he wrote a pressing request tothe bishop to learn the purport of this mission, received noanswer to his letter. The mother and one brother of Chrysan*thus died in the prison of loannina, the rest ultimately recoveredtheir liberty by the payment of a heavy ransom.In the nine months during which Al carried on active operationsagainst Suli, his army lost 3800 men, besides wounded :the Suliotes had only twenty-five men killed, but they lost manyby the effects of the hardships which tfiey underwent. For tenmonths their sufferings from fistmine were extreme ; although asaprecaiitioti they had sent many *of the women and old men,together with 200 men belonging to (he allied villages, {ni Tipti^tapitif) to the Septinsular Republic (^Eimlvffeot QoKtrefa). Atthe end of a year they were obliged to feed on 'grass, bark, andacorns, mixed with' a little flour, and without any better supportoften fought in the midst of rain or snow. About this time 41 Smen and 174 women made an expedition to Pais in search ofprovision, and on the fifUi day returned laden, both women andmen. All the men were armed, and 100 of them, who were lessheavily laden than the others, were placed as a defence in frontand rear. The Turks did not attack them.The three heroes of the Suliotes at this time were Foto Tza-villa, (^jwroc T(a/3c\Xac,) Dhimo Dhraku, (A^/ioc Apaxov,) andthe Priest Samuel, (^l€pofi6va\ot Sa^tov^X). Among the stratagemsby which they obtained provisions, that of John of Striving,(Tidyviie 2rp(/>(vi^ri7c,) is particularly mentioned. Clothed in awhite cloak, he passed unnoticed in the midst of a herd of cattleof the same colour, which WJ^re driven in the dusk of the eveninginto a stable, (mirdk»yiov,) from whence, in the middle of thenight, he succeeded ih conducting many of the cattle to soli.When the war had lasted eighteen tndfltinf, tee afteib of theSuliotes again assumed an aspect of hope,, by aa union of the oldenemies of Al against him. Theseweves'l. Ibrahim PashA,of Befit and Avlona, who, although ' father-in-law of Ales twoADDITIONAL NOTES. 515sons, could never forget that Ai had once endeavoured to poisonhim hy the means of his wife. 2» Mustafa Pash of Delvino,whom Al had formerly driven out of his town, and whose houseshe had hunt. S. Islam Prdnio of Paramythia. 4. MahmudDaliini of Konispotii whose daughter had been married toMukht&r Pasha, divorced by him, and then married to SelimBey Kokka. These allies gave forty purses to the Suliotes tobuy provisions and ammunition. Hostages were exchanged,and thus the war was rekindled from Avlona to Suli. Al;^,enraged at this league (^vfi^ax^a), hanged (crpc^^c) a cousin ofFoto TzavSUa^ twelve years of age, and a nephew of DhimoDhraku, who were among the Suliote hostages {iyixvpa) atloannina.The alliance, although formidable in appearance, had no importantresult : by dint of money Al turned some of the beys ofIbrahim's pashalik against him, and some of the beys of Paralyticagainst Pronio. But the chief cause of the dissolution ofthe league was the loss of the castle of Delvino. With a view toobtain this important post, Al gained over to its interest thefamily of Kalapodha, (pi KaXawoBdreg,) and through them aGavdhikiote bolu-bashi, who commanded in the castle. He thencaused a fictitious letter to be written to Mustafift Pash from hiswife, who resided with her £unity at Translates, eight hoursfrom Delvino; which letter having caused the Pashfi to quitDelvino for Translates, a thousand men in the interest of Al,who were at hand, entered Delvino, and were admitted by theGkirdhikiote into the castle. Ibrahim Pasha, alarmed at anevent which threatened to bring the war into his own country, aswell as by the conduct of the Beys of Berat, made a separatepeace, and thus the alliance was once more dissolved. TheSuliotes, however, had made good use of the moment to lay insupplies, had attacked the Tunics in their towers and villages, hadslain many, and had taken others, whom they generally releasedafter stripping them of their clothes and arms. Pronio remainedfaithful to the. alliance, notwithstanding that his son was still inthe Yesir's hands ^ and Foto, with 800 men, having marched toParamythia to his support, defeated his enemies, and returned toSuli on the second day with a considerable booty.In the castle of Delvino the Vezir found six Suliote hostagesl12516. ADDITIONAL Noteswho had been sent thither when the alliance was made betweenSuli and Delvino. Among them was a brother of Foto and ason of Dhimo ; these the Yezir spared, but beheaded the otherfour. Nevertheless, the chiefs of Suli performed the church servicefor all six, after which they made an immediate attack uponthe enemy, and obliged him to retire from one of his positionswith a loss of seventy men. This was followed by an expeditionagainst the villages of their neighbour Hassan Aga of Margariti,who had lately been active in the Yezir's interest. The objectof this excursion was to collect provisions, as they were now inthe expectation of being speedily attacked. The monk Samuelwas made superintendant of all the ammunition and provision.No immediate attack, however, followed ; the Vezir having atthis moment been ordered by the Porte into Rumili to opposeOsman Djuijim Pasha, who had appeared near Adiianople as arebel and as an ally (ofiofpova) of Pasv^nt-oglu of Within.During Al^*8 absence, which lasted a great part of the summerand autumn of 1802, the Suliotes prepared for his return by collectingsupplies. Samuel built a fortress {rux6Kaarpoy} as a receptaclefor the stores, (ivayraTa,) and to serve as a place of defence(Karafvyiov^), Al, on his return, sent Kitso Botsaiiwith proposals of peace on the following eondidons:—!. ThatKitzo, with forty men, should be governor of Suli, under conditionof being answerable that the Suliotes should do no damageto the Yezir's lands and villages (totovq koI x'^9^^)» ^* ^^^^^Foto Tzavella should be exiled from Suli. The Suliotes, consideringthat their own number was diminishing rapidly, whileAl's army was very numerous, that the Musulman Tz&midhesbegan to fight against them more in earnest than they hadhitherto done, and that no hope of further assistance appeared,so far complied with the Yezir's proposals that Tzavella retiredto Portia, two hours tom Suli. From thence he was persuadedto go to lo&inina, where the Pasha prevailed upon him to undertakea mediatory mission to Suli, with the view of persuadingthe Suliotes to agree to his terms ; or if that should beunsuccessful, to bring away with him all his adherents (oiTCojScXXflfrcc)* The Suliotes rejected the Paoli's offers, and1 The castle of Kfikia on Mount Knghni.ADDITIONAL N0TB8. 517endeavoured to prevent Foto from letuniing ; but he was faithfulto his engagement. Nevertheless, on retaining to lo^onina, hewas not admitted to the presence of Al, but sent to MukhtarPasha, who ordered him to prison.In May 1803 the Suliotes received 3000 lbs. of powder and6000 lbs. of lead from the French, which alarmed all the Musulmansof Albania, and set all the neutral neighbours of Suli againstthem. It enabled the Vezir also to obtain an order from thePorte to reduce Suli. Of all the points in the roXiopic/a, themost annoying to the Suliotes was Yyla, or Vflia, (BvXo, orBi^Xia,) where was a square castle, with a tower at each angleand another in the centre. One dark night they contrived toundermine and blow up one of the towers; and from thenceby making a breach in the central tower, to obtain possessionof the lower part of it* The besieged in the upper story thenpretended to surrender, but fired upon the Suliotes as they approached;upon which the latter collected wood in the lowerpart of the tower, and setting fire to it, suffocated, or burnt, orotherwise slew all the enemy in the tower, to the number of onehundred and sixty.Al now renewed the siege with vigour, and collected a greatnumber of Tzamidhes, and even some Greek captains of arma-toll{KaTiravioi r&y iLpfiar^KAr). Self Pasha took the command :his head-quarters were at Tzangari, (TCayrapi,) two hours fromSuli, with 7000 men. The Muhurdir (seal-bearer) of the Vezir, andMetzobon, were at Vela with 5000. Hassan Tzapari and IbrahimDemi at Zavinikho, an hour and a half distant, with 4500. BekirTzokador at Seritziana, four hours distant, with 3000. YusnfAr4pi at Tzekur^d, three hours and a half distant, with 4000.Notwithstanding this great force, the Suliotes were still successfulin making sudden attacks upon the enemy, by which theycontinually harassed him, and often cut off small parties. Thewomen were equally active in obtaining supplies of provision ;accompanying detachments of armed men over the woods andbye-paths, (X^ycvt xal arey^fAaraf) and returning loaded.Samuel, among other means of persuading the Suliotes to adetermined resistance, pretended to have a knowledge of futurity,and predicting that the Musulmans would soon retire,advised the Suliotes for a time not to fight. (He probably wished518 ADDITIONAL Vota.to entice the enemy into the inmost rayincs^ mad thus to bringabout such a result as had opened in 1702*) The Venir'sAlbanians, having approached the last strongholds of Suli, madea triple attack at Kiifa, Samoniva, and the mil of Dale, (cicTOP fivkoy rov NroXa,) but were repulsed at all those places, withdie loss of 400 men. Two more traitors now revealed themselves :Kutsonika and P^lio Gush (II^ioc Foi); the latter, on le*ceiling twelve purses and the liberty of his son-in-law, who wasin prison at lodnnina, conducted 200 of the enemy into his ownhouse at Suli in the night, when Vel Pasha, making at the sametime a general attack, the village of Suli, in which there wereonly fifty-five men, was lost. These men resisted for some timeat the hill in Suli, on which stood churches dedicated to St. Donatusand St. Elias ; but, receiving no succour, they were obligedto retire, and not only Suli was taken, but Avariko also, the defendersof which retired into Kiafa. This festal blow was receivedon the Sd of September, 1808. Vel then built Rules,and brought cannon and mortars against the remaining castles.On the 11th of November Foto Tsav^Ua arrived fin>m lo^nina:he had been sent by Al to bring away the Tzavell&tes, leavinghis wife and children as hostages at loannina. Secretly enteringKia&, he persuaded the Suliotes to seize this opportunity of relievingthemselves of their old and ineffective men, and to takehostages for them from the Vezir, as if they were able-bodied.He then went to Parga, to request the Paighini, as soon as thehostages arrived, to send them over to Corfu and Paxus. But asthis could not be done without the permission of the Russians,whose consent did not arrive from Corfu for fifteen days, Petoquitted Parga and went to Margariti, in order not to excite thesuspicions of Vel Pasha at Suli, and of Al at loannina. AtMargariti, having received information that the Zervfttes hadbeen gained over to the cause of the Vezir by Botzari and Kut-zonika, and had deserted from Kiafa, he was sensible that nohope remained for Suli but in his own exertions, and proceededwith all the relatives whom he could collect to shut himself upwith Samuel in the last remaining post on Mount Ku^^i.At this moment Al arrived at Suli, and demanded of Fotothe fulfilment of his engagements. He refused, leaving theVezir to dispose as he would of his wife and children. Vela'sADDITION >U. Notes. 619Albanians attacked the place in great numbers bat were metounce the wall by 150 Suliotea, who fought for seven hourswith muaquets, words, and stones. The assailants lost 700 men.Of the Suliotes there were 11 killed and 14 wounded and amongthe former three women. Being now entirely deprived of water,the besieged entered into a parley with Vel, who gave them awritten promise of free permission to depart, expressed in thestrongest terms, and signed by all the chief Beys and'Agas ; itwas dated the 12th of December, 1803. The following were thenames affixed to it : — Elias Bey of Libokhovo ; IsmaO Bey ofKonitaa ; Mohammed Muhurdar ; Pasha Bey ; Ismail Dervish ;Hassin Bey ; Ago Mohurdar ; Andin Z&rkani ; Omer Dervish ;Metzobon; Hadji Bedeto; Elatif Rhoda; Huss Metakosta;Amb4z Tepel^na.Foto Tzavella, Dhimo Dhraku, Tzima Zerva, and Susa Zerva,taking two-thirds of the Suliotes, accompanied by some childrenof the Agas as hostages, moved towards Paiga, while ElitsoBotzari, Kutzonika, and Alaska, marched to Zalongo (Za-Xoyxoy). Samuel remained with five Suliotes at Kughni, togive up the ammunition which remained there. During thisoperation, one of the enemy asked. Samuel what punishment hethought the Vezir would inflict 'upon him. Samuel gave aninsulting answer, and immediately setting fire to the gunpowder,destroyed himself and all who were with him, except two Suliotes,who are the witnesses that such was the fact.Vel, being now master of all Suli, immediately sent 4000men on the road to Paiga to attack the Suliotes, in direct violationof his promises, but too late to effect his purpose. TheParghini refused to give them up, |md Count Mocenigo, theRussian plenipotentiary, residing with the Septinsular Republic,allowed them to take refuge in the islands. After a short reposethe Yezir's troops marched from Suli to Zalongo. The Sulioteshad necessaries for two days only. Several of the women,despairing of escape, surrounded as they were on the summit ofthe hill of Zalongo, destroyed themselves and their children, bythrowing the latter over the rocks, and themselves afterwards.Some of these women were not killed by the £Edl, either becausethey fell on the bodies of their children, or because they werecaught by their clothes on the points of the rocks. This ADDITIONAL Noted.opened in the day. In the ensuing night, tie men, dividingthemselves into three bodies, and placing the remaining womenand children in the middle, forced their way through the enemy.Several of the men carried a child in one hand, and a sword inthe other ; twenty of them were slain in the attempt, many weremade prisoners : the rest escaped by dispersing themselves in thewoods and mountains. Three fourths, or about 150, escapedtowards Paiga ; the remainder were taken, and after having beensent to join the other prisoners at loannina, were forwarded,together with a portion of the latter, to Yurgareli, a village of80 houses at the foot of Mount Tzumerka, 6 hours from Artaa,which had for some time past been inhabited by Kitzo Botzari,and the Suliotes who had at different times seceded. AtRiniassa, where 20 Suliote families were residing by permissionof Aly Pasha, a body of Vela's troops finding no men there,murdered or carried off all the women and children. In thisvillage there was a tower called the tower of Dhimula (KovXaTov Ai}fioi/Xa), inhabited by the £Eunily of George Botzi (Mr^^'tf)*Besides his wife and married daughters, there were his son'swife and their children, to the number of eleven in all. Dhespo(A^ffiroc), the wife of Botzi, setting fire to the powder in thetower, destroyed herself and all the party.The Suliotes at Yurgareli. joined by those who had escapedfrom Zalongo, expecting some mischief from the Yezir, retiredto a monastery called Seltzo (2eXrCo), where a fair is held onthe day sacred to the death of the Virgin, (4 icoc/iifacc rvjc Oeo-r6icov). It is situated on a steep rocky height, 8 hours fromYurgareli, near a village named Yrestenitza (BpcffreWrCa), standingat the foot of Mount Frusia (^^povaw), which separates thedistrict of 'Agrafa frY)m that of Aspropotamo. One mile fromYrestenitza is the bridge of Koraka over the river Aspro. alaska,who on escaping from Zalongo had presented himself tothe Yezir, and had been well received by him, was sent to invitethe chiefs at Seltzo to submit, with promises that they shouldbe rewarded ; but as they refused to listen to these offers, theYezir determined to reduce Seltzo by force. In the beginningof January, 1804, his Albanians occupied Mount Friisia, andseven thousand men surrounded the monastery which stands atthe foot of the mountain, near the river. Those who had lostADDITIONAL NOTES. 521relations and friends in the Snliote war were placed in the front.So small however was the progress made in the month of April,that the Vezir threatened to remove all the investing force, andsupply their place with others, if the Snliotes were not speedilytaken either dead or alive. In consequence of this menace, themonastery on the 20ih April was attacked on all sides; theSuliotes having advanced beyond the was, 50 of them weresurrounded and slain, which threw the remainder into such disorderthat the Albanians obtained possession of the Monastery.The women were now more numerous than the men ; a hundredof them met a large body of the enemy, and resisted for sometimewith stones, sticks, and knives. At length 300 Suliotemen were taken, or killed ; 160 women, many of them withchildren, threw themselves into the Acheknu^ and the remainingwomen were taken, with the exception only of Maria, wife ofOhioti Pandazi {Ttmrti Uarra^if), who with 55 men, headed byKitzo Botzari, escaped to Parga. The Vezir urged the Parghinito drive the Snliotes out of Parga ; and AbduUah Bey, theSultan's commissioner for the ex-Venetian places of Prevyza,Parga, Vdnitza, and Vutzintrd, residing at Prevyza, wrote tothem in the same sense. The Suliotes therefore were obliged toretire to the islands, where the Government assigned to themlocations at Pails, and at Lefka, in Corfu.A few months afterwards, Hassan Tzapari of Margariti, findinghimself destined to be the next victim of Al's ambition,formed an alliance against him, consisting of Mustafa Pasha andSelim Bey of Delvino, with Daliani of Konispoli, Pronio ofParamythia, and Bull Khusa of Margariti. Convinced thatnothing could be done against Al until Suli was wrested frx>mhim, they invited the Suliotes in the Islands to join them in theattempt. Musa, son of Hassin, went for this purpose to Corfu,and as it suited the policy of the Russians, he easily obtainedtheir concurrence in conveying the Suliotes to Parga. Khris-take, formerly a monk, but then holding the rank of major inthe Russian service, accompanied them as agent of the Russianminister. Al at this time had only 200 men in Kughni, 120in Suli, 30 in Avanko, and 60 in Kia&. Hassan and his alliesmet the Suliotes at Parga, and signed a treaty, dated 2d July,1804. A body of the allied troops then marched into Fanari,522 ADDITIONAL NOTES.when, instead of attacking Suli immediately, Hassan thouonly of dealing his own territory of the adherents of Al ; andas the Suliotes had engaged to be under his orders, they wereunable to correct this ill conduct of his.Al soon reinforced his posts at Suli, and all the Notescould do, was to take possession of Z&longo. Although theRussians sent to Khristaki an ample supply of kalambokki andcartridges for the use of the Suliotes, besides allowing eachSuHote 32^ piastres a month, they were left so destitute by theRussian agent, that they were obliged to. forage in the neighbouringlands of the Greeks to prevent starvation. When thesethings were known at Corfu, Khristaki was recalled. Zalongowas soon surrounded by 6000 of the Yezir^s troops, but suchis the strength of the position, that they resisted with success,killed many of the enemy, with the hoes only of five men, andobliged them to retire.Five days afterwards the Suliotes, obliged by hunger, andseing little hope of assistance from the Tsamidhes, evacuatedZalongo, and marched to Fanari, where, protected by entrenchments{fA€Tipi(ia), they fought with a huge body of the enemy'scavalry. In the night they retired from this position, and in themorning reached Parga, with the exception of a body under BeikoBarba (BeiVoc Zdp^rac), who, having been left 2 hours in the rear,with 30 Suliotes and 34 Musulman Tsamidhes was attacked byvery superior numbers. They made a successful resistance untilnight, when the Musulmans wished to capitulate, but weredissuaded by Barba, who assured them of his own determination,and that of the Suliotes, to fight all the next day, and to escapeto Paiga in the following night ; and this he performed withoutlosing a man, while the adversaries lost 87 men and 27 horses.Thus the Suliotes on the 10th of September were again collectedat Parga, torn whence they returned to Corfu. As they objectedto the European discipline. General d'Anrep, the Russian commander,formed them into a body of light infantry. Six companiesof 100 men were formed, each commanded by a cjcariSy-r€LpxoQf two ireyrtiKoyra^oi, and one mifiato^poc ; 104 in all.To these six companies were added four which were from Chimaera,and the command of the whole battalion was given to theRussian Colonel Beckendorf, who was succeeded after a fewJkDDITIOHAL NOTES. 523month* by Emmanuel Paj^adopulo. The number of these troopswas increased, and they acoompaniedthe Russians to Naplesagainst the French. When the Suliotes. returned, many died ofan epidemic disorder, which was often attended with delirium. Inthe war between Russia and Turkey, the SuUotea fought in theservice of Russia, against the French in Slavonic, and againstAl Pashd near Lefkadha. And at length, when the Islandswere handed over to the French, in consequence of the treaty ofTilsit, they were taken, together with other Greek troops, intothe French service.Note II. — On Paros.The following remarks on Parga are extracted from the samework as the preceding on Suli. The author's date is 1801 : —Parga ^ occupies a rocky peninsula of a conical shape, less thanamile in circumference, upon which the Venetians built a castle.There are 400 houses in the castle, and as many without. Theplace is not strong towards the sea ; to the land there are 30guns : a garrison of 500 men is sufficient for the defence. Thereare two cisterns in the town, and a spring on the outside withinmusquet-shot, called Kr^masma (Kpifioafia). The territory,which is not more than 10 Italian miles in length, is of a semicircularform, and consists of olive plantations and vineyards,with a few gardens and corn-fields. The port is bad, and notcapable of containing more than 15 small vessels.About the year 1400 the Parghini \ finding themselves annoyedby their neighbours, sent four deputies (xpe^jSelc) to Corfu, whotook the oaths of fidelity to Venice on the 21st of March, 1401,before the Bail Mazarin Caravel. A more perfect treaty wasratified at Venice on the 9th of August, 1447, in the first Dogatoof Francesco Foscarini. In 1571 the castle was begun; in 1575it was finished. The Castle of Margariti was built at the sametime. The people of Aghia and Fanari were then so much underthe same protection as Parga, that they paid their tenths (dcjcaWa)at Parga. The Parghini at this time received from Venice ayearly donation of five mocha of salt for each married couple{icdOe av^p6yvvov)y and three for each child. This was afterMaya, or, according to Me * ol napycvoi.letius, sometimes 6 "Yarapyo^ .524 ADDITIONAL NOTES.wards commuted for 4000 mocha to be divided as the Archonsthought proper. They received also a farther annual gift fromVenice of nyyaWraic^, or pancakes made of oil, eggs, flour,and honey : of these the archons had 15, the resident strangers12, the priests and other official persons (*Iepccc Kai ol iref/ov^laio) 36, masters of ships and strangers of note (ol•copa/Somipaioi Apxoyrtc koI £eko2) 36. The UpojSXiimic, orVenetian Proveditore, residing at Paxga, was obliged, moreover,to finish two annual entertainments (^iio rf>are{ac) of cakesand sweetmeats (yXvirtVftara) for the success of the Venetianaristocracy (Bia iro\vj(poyitrfi6y r^c Tay *'EyerQv dpioTOKparetao),one on Christmas Eve, the other on that* of the Epiphany (6co-^ytlkty) ; to these were admitted the archons, priests, and personsin office. The Prototypes had a double portion {iivXoyviceroy). It was at these two feasts (lopracc) that the distributionwas made of the tiganites*. The magistrates accounted to theProveditore for the kumerki or customs, which were three percent,on the value of exports and imports. They were collectedon the 1st of May, and the seven days following, when there wasa festival (lirayriyvpitray) at the expence of Venice, which wascalled the Rosalie (4 'Pw^oXca). On the eighth day, the 'P»<ra-Xc^oi, or keepers of the feast of Rosalie, had a sham fight (tXo-troy 7r6\Efioy)f of two parties dressed, one as Italians, the other asTurks. The latter were made prisoners, and carried before theProveditore, who dismissed them with a present. It was customaryfor the Proveditore on this occasion to pardon any exile orcriminal (^vyac rj irar^^ucoc) for whom the archons might intercede.There were seventeen chief families in Parga; namely, olA£0'(Xarcc, BamXarec, IlerCaXcirec, Ai^/ioXcr^aVccy SravcXorec,ZovXarec» Mavi<£«5f c, Mavpoiwiyylrec, *l^pofUyoi, Bipyi^ig^ Tf ,Zoviravioi, Ilairvpt^ec, Aovfiirloi, Bepl^triiwr^Qf Bpamrec»KaXovpt^cc.It was customary for the Venetians to supply the Parghini withbiscuit, powder, and ball, in case of necessity, and they had» From Ttiydvi, frying-pan. Porte by the treaty of 1800, they in-• So tenacious were the Parching strutted their deputies at Constanttheir old Venetian privileges, that tingle to demand the cootiniiaiicewhen the place was consigned to the of the salt and pancakes.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 525always the prospect of a secure retreat at Paxus. This enaBledthem still to maintain their little territory against the Musulmansaround them, who looked with an envious and greedy eye uponthis flourishing little Christian community, and whose increasingpower and numbers caused the wars of Parga to be more frequentduring the last century than they were before. In thesewars they have sometimes been attacked by 5000 or 6000Turks, when they had no more than 400 musquets. In1801 they had 1000 armed men (&£ioc iid r ApftaTo). Whenthe French obtained possession of the islands in consequence ofthe treaty of Campo Formio, they deprived the people of Pargaof all the indulgences which they had received from the Venetians,and for eighteen months left them to shift for themselves. WhenAl Pasha took Prevyza from the French, he instantly desiredthe Parghini to send a deputation to confer with him. To thisthey gave no answer. He then dispatched a second letter, dated16th of October, 1708, ordering them to destroy or expel theFrench. They replied, that they were unable, even if they hadbeen willing to do so. At the same moment, having heard ofthe arrival of Admirals Uschakoff and Kadri Bey, with the Russo-ottomansquadron, at Z&kyntho, they persuaded the Frenchgarrison to retire to Corfu, and dispatched deputies to the admirals,who were well received, and assured of the protection ofthe allies, but were recommended to cultivate the good-will of Al.In consequence of this advice, a deputation was sent to the Pashat Pi^vyza, who forced them, though declaring that they had nopowers for the purpose, to sign a treaty, by which they gave upParga to the Porte, and agreed to hoist the Ottoman flag, oi thecondition that they should preserve their ancient internal government,that they should not be obliged to admit any Turk into theplace but as a guest, and that their tribute to the Porte should beno more than 200 florida of Constantinople per annum, with threeper cent. KovfAepxi on their maritime commerce. The treaty wassigned by Ignatius, metropolitan bishop of Artaa, on the part ofthe Pai^ia. The deputies on their return to Parga were accompaniedby an officer of Al, who was the bearer of a Turkish flagto be hoisted on the fortress. The treaty was disavowed, and theTurk was conducted into the castle as a prisoner, but at the endof ten days was allowed to embark in a boat sent for him by thePash. Al then tried to persuade the people of Parga that heADDinOKAL irOTBS.had' received finn&hna (fiwnXucd ftpfidyui) to take poiaessioii ofParga, Pr^vysa, and Lefk4dha, and that they had better acceptthe treaty signed by the deputies. They replied, that the flagsof the allied sovereigns of Tnxkey and Russia were then floatingon their ramparts in conformity with the orders of the Russianand Turkish commanders. Al^» on receiving this last message,moved, in the middle of a rainy night, to Maiganti (twa hoursand a half from Parga), from hence he wrote to say that theyhad improperly followed the example of the Island in hoisting thetwo flags ; that he had received a firmly from Constantinople onthe subject, and At unless they submitted, they should be exposedto his utmost vengeance. Finally, he desired them to sendhim deputies before the evening. This was dated, Mazgaiiti,12th of November, 1798. Their answer of the same date was asfollows : —** Ais Pasha, we salute you. Your sudden approach removesevery doubt from us, and makes us resolve upon death or victoryfor the sake of our native place. We neither listen to Khristikior any other of our neighbours The smoke of our native place,and the innocent blood of Pr^vysa, ore to us the wisest counsellors.Those which you call flags, we have received and venerateas royal banners, and under them we will all conquer or die.Your Highness comes against them, not against us. We areonly ftdthfbl and obedient to the two sovereigns, who will notallow us to suffer injustice. As you inform us that yon willremain where you now are tiU the evening, we promise you thatwe shall always remain here, and that for the present we are to befound in arms on our frontier. Farewell, and may Nod assist therigbtftii cause. — S^ned by the Priests and others of Paiga\"Thus disappointed, Al next tried the admirals ; he gainedA\4 na<n^ ffl fTpovKovovfiiv,t^6lu Kali dftftfioXlay dw* ift&tJOC yXvc^rarov Bavaria t^ yw^v.Viva d'irh to^q yuTdvoVQ dfovofttv.*0 Cdiry&c r^C UarplSoe ftaQ Kid t6dBticv alia riic TtptfiOK^t: iZawti «(c6trov 6vofidZtre waved 9ifuX£ rd IXiS-fiafuv Kal tA etfiifuOa iid pantsnayrilpacc tMt itTomdrtt ticfuv Soi Kai If *Y4^X^rif c 9ov Iwav-riot ilg aifvalQ ipxivai cai 6x^ '*Ci^fMcCf Sri ifuXc rev sub /SaciXlMvtifitBOf Kcd ^ Tt^roi aims ikv0^iKAd^utn999fup, 'Hrri^ rei ^riihn n^ a^n^iP ^i Mrnc rb fi^di^ADDITIONAL NOTES.over Kadri Bey by presents, but from Usehakoff he could onlyobtain that four Russians, four men of Kadri Bey, and four ofAl, should be sent to occupy the Castle of Parga in the name ofthe allies, which not satisfying Al, affairs were left in theirformer state. He attempted in vain to seduce Usehakoff *s secretary,Major George Palatine, a Greek of a Livadhiote familysettled at Kefalonia, and succeeded only in opening a correspondencewith a family of Parga called the KaXovXc3ec TZiyvdvoif buttheir fellow-citizens discovering the correspondence, expelledthem from the place. Usehakoff, to save Parga from the fate ofPrevyza, sent thither, as eirtri^piyr^c, Major Stimuli of Kefalonia,and afterwards Colonel Gabriel Palatine. Al represented theParghini to the Porte as friends to the French and Suliotes, andas harbourers of robbers; but all he could obtain from thesupreme government was a notification of its intention to sendfrom Constantinople a Yoivoda to govern the Ex-Venetian places,which took place accordingly.c7<rrc ahrov, i^/icZc (rac vfrovxSfuBaSri tifuBa wdvra IBtlt gal heard rbwapbv t{fpiOK6iuBa dpfiarutiiivoi dgrd vOvopa. 'Yyiaivc cal 6 6c&c a;i^Hfy r6 ilKaiov etc Siroioy yvtapiZtidBiSov, — Oi npofVTol Kal oXXoa r^cUdpyaC'END OF VOL. I.LONDON:Gilbert & RIVINOTON, PRINTERS,ST. JOHN'S Stuart.