TRAVELS IN NORTHERN GREECEMDCCCXCKrV^KSSSS'mIsJUfLONDON:Gilbert & RIVINQTON, Printers,ST. JOHN'S SQUARE.CONTENTSOFVOLUME IV.CHAPTER XXXIV.▲CABNANIA.ProbIsland of Petal— JScMnude^— Port Platina— Lutzianft, Triiga-mei, Vasildpulo— Mount Veluti — Crithote, city, cape, andmoimtam — Attach — Maker — Bambini — Pale6ka8tro ofPorta— Aet6« — Return to Katdna — Jlyzia — Islands CarmanTt^kvs—Thyrium — PaUaru$ — Soliman — Return to Balls— Aj Vasili — Return to Vdnitza — Eekinu^^Heradia —jlfyrhsi/fiaii-* Return to Pr^yza — Remains of Actum at Arior Punta — Harbour of Actium or Pr^yyza — Battle of Actium, . 1CHAPTER XXXV.Epirus.Mjftika — River of Kamarina— Kastroski^ — Rini&ssa and castleKanal&ki — ^Faniri — Glyky — Rivers Achenm and Noctua —Lake Ackenuia — Qlycy9 Limen — Cichyrru — Buchatium — Pan-dona— Gardhiki — Dhragomi — Mount KuHIa — Pararoythia —St Donatus — ^JBurAcni— Veliaiii — Districts of Margarita andFiMtes— Ce9<rta, or mwair^-Elateia'-Batia^EUnir^ClunmirQiUauB — £l^thero-kb6n — Bagotzus — Dhramisitis — Pale.kastro— Kosmird — Rapsista — loinnina 44IV CONTENTS.CHAPTER XXXVI.Epirus.ProbFrom loinnina to K6nitza — Bisddni — Radhot6pi — Karitza —Zitza — Cascade of the Kalamli — ^Vel4 — Kalbdki — Source ofthe Kalami, or Thyamis — ^Tzeroviaa — Lake— Dhelvin4ki —District of Pogoniani — Vissiani — Lakhandkastro— Tzaraplan6Sykid — K6nitza — River Visa, or Aous — Pttrav€Bi — Attn-tones — Meloi%9 — OmpAafitmi— Oref/0^-Retum to lodnnina —River Voidhom&ti — Artist — Sudden — Dovrd— Khan ofAl — lodnnina — Kastritza • 87CHAPTER XXXVII.Epirus.Topography of the district of lodnnina — Lakes of Io4nnina andLapsista, and the intermediate marsh — Katavdthra— Citadel —City — Population — Houses — Schools — Litharitza, and otherpalaces of Aly Pasha — Hie island — productions of the lake-scenery— Climate— Population and villages of the district —On the site of Dodona — Testimony of Homer — relative situationsof Mohsiis, ThegproHa, and the Dorothea — Evidence ofthe site of Dodona, from Dionysius, Pindar, Polybius, Hesiod,and others — Objections to other situations in Epirus — adjustmentof the Epirote tribes on the supposition of Dodona havingbeen near lolmnina—Site of the DodontBon temple— History ofDodona and of loinnina 130CHAPTER XXXVIII.BP1RU8.To Kalar)^— Return by Tsimovo to loinnina — Omer BeyVri6ni — ^Aiy Pasha — Climate — carta— Subdivisions and population— daly Pasha's revenue from Artaa, Io4nnina« and otherplaces— To Petaa, Komb6ti, K6prena, Vlikha — Neokh6ri, ArgosCONTENTS. ▼ProbAn^Moehiemm^B&itlei qf O^tf and Idomene—CrentB, MountThyamMi, Agnes — Return from Pr^vysa by Luro and Rog^BCCharadrtO to loiamBSi .205CHAPTER XXXIX.EPIRU8. TBBS8ALIA.From lodnnina to M^tzovo, Stagtw, and Trikkala — Sub-divisons of Trikkala district— 'Agrafa, ita topography, population,and produce — Colonia, Athamamaf 1]fniphm, ^thices, TallestRiver lon—Oxyneia — College of Devises at Trikkala—Gardhiki, Pefiaiunim—Tzighidti— Ferry of the Pflnetvt— Partim—Ali£ftka — Liriaaa—Tlimavo— River Titoremcf^-Citieaof Pekugiotit — Dhamisi — Dheminiko» Cgretim — Inscriptions-^Mol6ghu8ta~ JfaZ^a, Eritium, city of the PerrJuBbi, Ohouon^Ylakho- ilmni — Leftherokh6ri — Ericinivm — Gritzidno, Phar-canon — Bridge of Tzighi6ti — ^Vlokh6, Peiretia or Asterium —Rivers Enipeus, Aidan — Petro, PhyUus — Mount Mavro-vini— Orfan4— F^rsala 268CHAPTER XL.PHTUIOTIS, MA0NX81A.From F^rsala to Armyro— Tjaterli — Gbid^ — Phyluce — CrocusCampus — Kirtzini, or Armyr6 — Kef&losi, Aha — Sidrpi — Districtof Kokus — Fteli6, Ptekum — KhjuaHko—Larissa Cree— Fan, i^n^ron— Cape Delirium — hthmia — Oreus, orHistiaa — Retiun to Kefalosi — River Khol6, Ctiralius — ^Ak-ketjel, Sheba Patriotic — K6kkiDa, Pyrrkasus, Temple ofCeres — Cape Anghistri, Pyrrha — Ruins of Pagan — 329Chapter XLI.JIAGNB6IA. TMB8SALIA.Volo, lolciu — Demerits — River Taurus — Ancient towns ofMagnesia — Cave of Achilles — Modern state of Mount PlumTrikeri, jEanieium — Mount Bardz6ia, Tisteum — ApheitVI CONTENTS.ProbSesklo, jEsotiia — Ghereli — Kastri, ruins, inscriptions — DuganDh^iani — Aghi& — MeUbaa, EwymetuB, HomoUum, Thau-maria, Myree , 372CHAPTER XLII.THB8SALIA.Return to Kastri — Ganglia — Fishery of the lake of Karla, orBcebeis — Bcebe — Kiprena, Olaph^it — Orminium — Celestina,Perte — Mount Chaicodomum — Petra — Lacereia — Amarus —DoHan and Amyric plains — Cercimum — ^ilrmaitiim— Gheremi —Supli— 5co<iiMa — Battle of Cyfio5c<7>AaZ«— Duvlat^— Tangle,Eretria Pkihiotis — Ghenitzaro>khori — River Empew — Melttaa — Coroneia — Perineum — amount Narthacium — Pros — Theatrum• 418CHAPTER XLIII.THBS8AL1A.Battle of PharsaUu — Fountain Hypereia — Present state of F^rsalaDemure — Simikli — Yusufli — Etthydriim, Pakephanu —Sof&dhes — Maskoltiri — Matar&nga, Cimtnn— Rivers Curious,Apidamu — Kaputzi— Kardhitza — P&ledkastro, Metropolis —Loz4dha — Fanloi, Ithome, lAnmaa — Rivers Pamisus, Onocho-nus, Phoenix, Asopus, Menu — Ctemaw — GheUuathi — Episcopi,Chn^hi — Pheca — Rapsista — Mus&ki — Portes-il^Aeikewii —River Port^iko — K6tziaka — Mount Cercetktm, Phaloria,PiaUa — Polidna — 5itoa— Trikkala — Homeric geogrqpikjf qfThessaly — Melior — Stages — Kastr&ki — Met^ra — lo^-nina 476ADDITIONAL NOT£ TO Chapter Xxvii.Io4nnina in the 14th century 653TRAVELSINNorthern GJEt££C£.axEd yVif»A«#— rAyrtttwi — Papers — Sodium — Ketum to jdh-lxnal>ey Ai Vasili — Return toYonitza — Echinus — Heraclia —J^^rtunSivm, — Return to Prevyza — Remains oiAcixum at AriPunta — Harbour actium or Prevyza — Battle of Action.Ajrrix- 3, 1809, continued. — Having descendedfrom Tritardho into the plain of the Aspro, wesci to a mill two miles distant from the^w^liich is turned by a derivation from theflowing from the marsh of Trikardho. Inthis river is said to contain nearly asin noli, water as the Achelous, as its sources nevervol. IV. BVI CONTENTS.ProbSesklo, jEsonia — Ghereli — Kastri, ruins, inscriptions — Dug4nDhdsiani — Aghii — MeUbaa, Ewymena, HomoUum, Thau-fnaciOf Myra , , , , 372CHAPTER XLII.THBBSALIA.Return to Kastri — Kantiia — Fishery of the lake of Karla, orBasbeig—Bcebe — Kiprena, Olt^hyra — Ormttttum— Celestina,Pker^ — Mount CktUcodomum — Petra — Lacereia — Amyru8 —Dotian and Amyric plains — Cerciniwn — ^ilniMfttiim— Gheremi —Supli — Scotttssa — Battle of CynoscqtkakB — Duvlat^— l^angli,Eretria PhtUoiU — Ghenitzaro-khori — River EmpeuM—MeU-tma — Cornea — Perineum — Mount Narthaciwm — Prae — 7%eft'-rfinffi 418CHAPTER XLIII.THB86AL1A.Battle of Pkarsaha — Fountain Hypereia — Present state of F^rsalaDemirli — Simikli — Yusufli — Euhiydrimn, PdUephanu —Sof&dhes — Maskoldri — Matar&oga, Ctmiim— Rivers Chains,Apidamu — Kaputzi— Kardbitza — P&ledkastro, Metropolis —Loz4dha — Fanloi, Ithome, lAnuuBa — Rivers Pamisua, Onocko-nus, Phoenix, Asopus, Melag — C/cmeius— GheUmthi — Episcopi,Gomphi — Pheca — Rapsista — Muslin — Portes — Athauntm —River Port^iko — K6tziaka — Mount Cercetkm, Phaloria,PiaUa — Polidna — Simia — Trikkala — Homeric geography qfThessahf'-MelUKBa'- Stages— Kastr&ki—Met^ra— lo^-nina 475ADDITIONAL Not TO Chapter Xxvii.Io4nnina in the 14th century • 653TRAVELSINNORTHERN GREECE.FOURTH JOURNEY(continued.)CHAPTER XXXIV.ACARNANIA.Island of Petala — Echinadet — Port Platia — Lutziana, Traga-menti, Vasilopulo-mount Veluti — Criihote^ city, cape, andmountain — AitacuM — Makhera — Bambini — Paleokastro ofPorta — santos — Return to Katuna — Alyzia — Islands Camusand Typhus — Tyrian — Pal^erus — SoUhtm — Return to Ba-limber— Ai Vasili — Return to Vonitza — Echinus — Heraclia —MyrtufUium — Return to Prevyza — Remains actium at Arior Punta — Harbour of Actium or Prevyza — Battle of Actium*April 3, 1809^ continued. — Having descendedfrom Trikardho into the plain of the Aspro^ weproceed to a mill two miles distant from theruins, which is turned by a derivation from theriver flowing from the marsh of Trikardho. Insummer this river is said to contain nearly asmuch water as the AchelauSj as its sources neverVOL. IV. B2 ACARNANIA. [cHAP.fail. Finding an Ithacan boat at the mill, weengage it to carry us to the port of Petala, sendingthither by land the horses and as many of thepalikaria as the boat will not contain.After dining at the mill we descend quicklywith the wind and stream for about four miles,when a calm ensues, followed by a heavy fall ofrain with furious gusts of wind at intervals. Ourboat having grounded at the mouth of the river,we are conveyed in monoxyla to the island of Petals,which in the middle is separated only fromthe main land by a narrow channel connecting twoharbours, both of which are well sheltered by theisland, but have in no part a depth of more than sixfeet. The river of Trikardho discharges itself intothe northern harbour : in the southern the boat islying which I had ordered from Mesolonghi toconvey me to Tragamesti ; but such is the violenceof the gale, that although the wind is quite favourable,the boatmen will not venture even to passthrough the narrow channel uniting the two bays,still less to proceed to Tragamesti. We are obliged,therefore, to submit to be devoured by the fleas inthe hut of Hassan Aga, son of Yussuf Arapi, theVezir's Hasnadar, who commands sixty Albaniansplaced on the island by the Vezir to prevent itsoccupation by the Kleftes, who were in the habitof making incursions from hence into the neighbouringcountry. Hassan treats us hospitably asthe friends of his master, giving us fish and lambfor supper, and excellent Ithacan wine which hehas obtained by levying contributions of it fromthe boats which put in here.IJXXXIV.] ACARNANfA^ 3His hut, dignified with the name of a kula ortower, i& twelve feet square within, and serves forevery thing but a kitchen, which among Albaniansoldiers is generally sub dio. His palikaria occupytwo other huts of the same size, but formed only ofheaps of stones covered with branches, in whichthey all assemble when the weather is bad : whenfine, they repose on the lee-side of skreens made ofbranches supported upon rough posts, and whichmay easily be shifted according to the wind. TheAga's hut alone is tiled. The men consider themselvesin luxury, having fish from the harbour forthe trouble of catching it, and bread gratis fromthe villages. Hassan complains that in summerthe air is unhealthy, and the winged insects verytroublesome ; but adds, that gnats, the worst ofall, are seldom seen after June, the place beingtoo dry for them.Petala consists almost entirely of rugged rocks,having small intervals of soil which are covered asusual in such situations in the winter and springwith a luxuriant growth ^of herbage, and a greatvariety of succulent or aromatic shrubs. On thesummit are some veldni oaks, and wild olives,and on the western side of the island a few fieldswhich were cultivated by the Ithaca until DalyPasha occupied the island.A series of low swampy islets borders the maincoast opposite to Petala, extending from a narrowstripe of low land which separates the marsh ofTrikardho from the sea to the heights which risefrom the northern side of the mouth of the Ache-lausover against Kurtzolari.b2ACARNANIA.[chap.April 4. — ewe sail in the Mesolonghite boat infour hours to the Skaloma of Tragamesti, vulgarlyDragamesti \ passing between the JEchinades andthe Acamanian coast, in which, about midway, isthe harbour of Platia, or Pandeleimona. The windwithout is southerly but near the shore a calmprevails. The Echvnades may be divided into threeclusters : the Dhiaporia in face of Platia, the Dhra-snares to the westward of these, and the Mochato the southward. All the larger produce com ;Pondiko, Private, and Dhragonara, which last isthe largest of all, have kalj^via on them. As atPetala, wild olives abound, some of which on Dhra-gonara have been grafted by Mr. Pavo of Ithaca,who owns the island.Platia is a beautiful little bay with a narrowentrance, having a muddy bottom at a depth inmostparts of twelve or fifteen fathoms. On thesummit of a hill rising from the harbour are thewalls of a Hellenic city, which I take to have beenAstacus, as Scylax and Strabo concur in showingthat Astacus was the chief maritime city and harbournorthward of (Eniadse, near the Echinades'.The bay of Tragamesti is five or six miles long, byone in breadth, and would be much exposed to theTpayafjiiarri, sometimes^payofuani,Mercy ravra k6\ic *AXv{£caKol KaTd ravrriv v^ffog Kapvoc'TTorafiOi *Ax«^^«oc Kal Olyeid"tai xoXic— Scylax in 'Aicap-yayit»4 *A\v^(a £lra6xpa KpiOwTtl Kal ai *^^iyahcKal irSXiQ "AtnaKoc ofitityvfjLOQrfi TTtpl HiKOfifiSitay . . . KaleKpi0a»n) ^ ofi&yv/ioQ ToXiyyriTui ky r^ Opcuci^ \tp^yiiaf*teayra 3' thXifuva ra fura^v*elr OiyiaSai Kal 6 'A^^Xwoc* —Strabo, p. 459.XXXIV.] acarnania; 5sooth-west, which is the direction of its length, wereit not for the shelter afforded by the Echinades.The mountain Velutzi slopes steeply to the northwesternshore with a straight coast line. Thereis said to be a depth of 15 orgies, or fathoms,within 200 yards of the skaloma, or magazines,which stand on the beach at the extremity ofthe bay. Here is a rough mole, where severalboats of Kefalonla are now lying detained by theirfear of the Maltese privateers and an English brigwhich is cruising off Mesolonghi.Finding horses at the Magazines, I proceed tothe village of Vasilopulo, distant six miles, andthe residence of K. F. Hodja-bashi of Traga-menti, Vasilopulo, and Lutziana, three villagesoccupying lofty situations on the northern side ofthe valley. Vasilopulo is near its extremity.Tragamesti, the largest, stands just under thesummit of Mount Velutzi, and Lutziana is abouthalf a mile from the magazines at the head of thebay. There are not more than 100 families in thethree villages ; the boundary of the district followsthe crest of the surrounding mountains, except tothe S.E., where it extends to the marsh of .From the head of the bay the valleyturns eastward and then northward, in whichdirection it is separated from the valley of Bambiniby the mountains which are a northerly continuationof Mount Khalkitza.Between Lutziana and Tragamesti, below amonastery of St. Elias, distant a mile from thesea, a root of Mount Velutzi projecting into thevalley was the site of the town or fortress which6 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.possessed the district of Tragamesti as well inHellenic times as at a subsequent period : it isseparated from the steeps of the mountain by asmall hollow, and is surrounded towards the plainas well as on the two other sides by cliffs aboutthirty feet high. The remains consist of walls ofmortar and rubble, erected upon Hellenic masonryof a species almost regular, but which inone place only has preserved so many as five orsix courses, where it forms part of a large inclosurein the interior of the later work. Near it are theruins of a large church, within which a smallerone has been built. At the angle of the fortresstowards the sea are the remains of a tower, coevalapparently with the ruined church, and built upona high rock. The entire hill is covered with wildalmond-trees mixed with a variety of odoriferousshrubs in all their vernal beauty. On the northeasternside of the ancient site, at the foot of thecliffs, a stream of pure water issues from the rocks,just below which are some ancient foundations. Alittle lower flows a torrent which rises at the headof the valley, and on its opposite bank stands amodern church surrounded with ancient foundationsand sepulchres.The Hellenic town was probably Crithote ; forStrabo describes Crithote as a iroXc^vii, of thesame name as a promontory, and places the latter,together with the Echinades, between Alyzia,which was near the modem Kandili, and Astacus ',next to which southward was (Entadse : whence itStrabo, p, 459. — Scylax in 'Airapi/oWo. — V. sup.XXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 7seems evident that the promontory Crithote wasthat remarkable cape at the western entrance ofthe bay of Tragamesti, now called, as well as themountain at the foot of which the Hellenic remainsare found , Velutzi. Possibly it^may be thoughtthat the long bay of Tragamesti, so remarkable afeature of the Acamanicm coast, and the fertile valleyat its head, are themselves indications thathere stood the principal town of this part of thecoast, which certainly was Astacus. But it is tobe observed, that such a bay was not so welladapted, by its great depth of water and want ofshelter, to ancient navigation as Plated ; and thatScylax expressly notices the harbour of Astacus.The vale of Tragamesti is well cultivated : itsproductions are wheat, vines, but principallymaize, for which they are now ploughing or harrowing.The land intended for this grain is twiceploughed, then harrowed, then ploughed again,sown, and again harrowed. The harrow isformed of branches of trees roughly put together,and drawn by oxen driven . by a man who standsupon the harrow. The three villages being Kefalo-gloria, the Greek proprietors pay an eighth to theVezir besides voting. My host K. has a landedproperty of between 400^ and 600Z. a year, andgains about as much more, not very righteously Ifear, as Hodja-bashi. Being ostentatious, and verylike a Turkish governor, Ms house is built andfitted up in the Turkish style, covering a considerablespace of ground, and having three or four8 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.lai^e rooms, without any comfort. I find himmuch alarmed, as well as the Hodja-bashi of Za-vita, who is with him, by a recent declaration ofthe Vezir that he will make them responsible forthe conduct of all the robbers who are natives oftheir districts. Among other complaints againstHis Highness in this part of the country, is that ofhis having raised the duties upon the exportationof provisions from his territory to the islands.That upon an ox which was one piastre is now 85paras, and the pathos of com formerly paying sixpiastres now pays 28.The air of Tragamesti is considered healthy ; anatural consequence of the valley being free frommarshes, surrounded by dry mountains, and opento a free ventilation by the imbat of the bay.Mount Velutzi, which bore perhaps anciently noother name than that pf the town at its foot and ofthe promontory, in which it terminates, is morewoody beyond the villages than on its maritimeside, and contains red deer in abundance: onthe hills at the head of the valley the fallow-deerand roebuck are found : the woods consistchiefly of oaks ^ of a kind suited to knee timber,and rendered doubly valuable by the facility withwhich they may be transported to the head of thebay of Tragamesti. The hills on the south-easternside of the valley, as far as the marsh of CEniadte^including Mount Khalkitza, are covered with theveldni oak.April 5. — The southerly wind with rain conti-xxxiv.].ACARNANTA. 9Duties. In the afternoon, the sky clearing a little,we set out at 12.40 for Bambini, notwithstandingthe pressing remonstrances of our host Kyr K.,who, finding us determined to proceed, adds toour escort a few Albanians who are under hisorders, in consequence of his having receivedadvice yesterday of the thieves having made anexcursion from Kalamo and killed two Albanians.The hedges of the cultivated fields abound in theshrub called azoiri or vromoklari \ a kind of vetch,which takes the latter name from its stinking leaf.Beyond the valley we enter an opening in the hillsimmediately opposite to Vasil6pulo ; it is borderedon either side by a thick wood of oak of differentspecies, among which is the prinok6kki or kermes ;mixed with them is the daphne in full bloom, andthe usual proportion of lentisk ', one of the commonestof Grecian shrubs. The white orchis isin blossom, as well as many other natives of England,which do not flower until Midsummer. Thecommon oak here is only in bud, though a fortnightago the leaves of some large oaks round an oldchurch near Corydon were already opened.Having crossed the hills, we descend into avalley which extends to the heights of Lygovitziand Manila. Both here and farther down to thesouth-eastward the vale consists entirely, exceptaround Khrysovitzi and Prodbromo, of a forestof oaks ; some of these are large trees with shortanalysis foetid.10 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.crooked stems. The velani is not so plentiful ason the hills. Having turned to the left we skirtthe foot of the heights for a mile or two, and arriveat Makhera, once a considerable village, asits ruins declare, but now reduced to eight or tenfamilies. Here begins the fertile basin which issurrounded by the Lygovitzi mountain, the ridgeof Makhala, and those of Bambini and Khryso-vitzi. Having remained at Makhera from 2.50 to3.18, we follow the slope of the hills, and halt, at3.50, for the night at Bambini, where I lodge inthe house of the priest, which is very little distinguishedfrom the other huts of the village eitherby comfort or cleanliness. The house of the Proestos,which is somewhat larger, happens to beoccupied by some wounded Albanians returnedfrom fighting with the thieves.The Bolu-bashi, who was troublesome at thebeginning of the journey, has since returned withsigns of penitence, and has behaved like all theescort, with great regularity and discipline. Threeor four in particular, who are Toshke from nearBerat, are always in front, and if any steep rockor other place affording a good look-out occurs,there, as soon as we come in sight of it, they aresure to be seen, or to be heard by the dischargeof their musquets, should they have any apprehensionof their activity being unnoticed by us :some of them might have contended in swiftnessof foot with Achilles himself. Others are teleboae,or /3o^v ayaOoij famous for their voices, for whichquality Alj^ Pasha himself is noted. It is not,however, the loudness of bawling, or the power ofXXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 11running over a given space in the shortest timethat the Albanians seem to consider, but the moreuseful arts of making themselves understood whenspeaking at a great distance, of clambering overdifficult roads, and of making long journeys onfoot with rapidity. Another accomplishment onwhich the Albanian values himself is that of distinguishingobjects at a great distance.April 6. — From Bambini to the Paleokastro ofPorta is a ride of three quarters of an hour. Themonastery called the Panaghia of Porta is foundedupon a part of the ruined walls of an ancient city,which encircle the summit of an irregular height,rising from the middle of the vale which is inclosedby Mount Bumisto, the ridge of Makhald,or Katuna, and the mountain of Lygovitzi. Thewalls are mostly of the polygonal kind, and defendedby short flanks instead of towers, except onthe lower side towards Makhala, where they arebest preserved, and where, as I remarked fromMakhala, a tower of regular masonry subsists tohalf its original height. A little above it, anancient reservoir, about 15 feet square, still servesto contain the waters of a spring which rises there,and which marks perhaps the site of the agora ofthe ancient city. Around the source formerlystood a modem village named Pistiana.Within the Hellenic inclosure are many foundationsof ancient buildings, and the steeper partsof the hill still preserve the terraces, into which itwas anciently divided, and which are now separatedfrom each other by bay trees of the mostluxuriant growth. The monastery is large, but12 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.contains no remains of Hellenic sculpture or architecture.Below the lower side of the height towardsMakhala, a fertile bottom belonging toBambini is covered with vineyards, which produceyearly 800 barrels of wine, of 50 okes the barrel.The hill of Porta separates the valley of Bambinifrom that of Aetos, so called from a deserted villageon the foot of Mount Bumisto, opposite towhich, in the direction of Porta, a pointed hill,attached to a low ridge, and crowned with theruins of a castle of the lower ages, also namedAetos, rises from the middle of a valley which isinclosed around by the mountains Bumisto andSkafidhia, by the hill of Porta, and by the ridgeof Katuna and Konopina.Moving from Porta at 9.40, we proceed in thedirection of Katuna, through the valley just mentioned,which every where, except under Katunaand Aetos, is uncultivated, and covered chiefly withthe wild pear, one of the commonest trees in theuncultivated plains and valleys of Greece. At 11 .8we halt below the monastery of St. Nicolas of Aetos \which stands upon the lowest heights of the ridge,attached to the castle peak. It contains nothingcurious. The palikaria having reposed a little, weproceed at 11. 50. through the woods, and at 12.50make our meridian halt where the trees becomethicker, the wild pears being mixed with oaks,with an underwood of the paliuri, and other commonshrubs. Although this place is not four milesin a straight line from Katuna, it requires an hour1 ftAyioc NiKoXaoc tov *Aerov.XXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 13and a half to reach that village, as we soon loseour path among the bushes.April 7. — The following is some account of apart of Acamania, which the Kleftes have notallowed me to see, derived from my travelling companionsor from the intelligent family of Aromaticwith whom I am lodged. The distance fromKatuna to Zavitza is reckoned 3 hours ; the roadfrom the ascent of Aetos to Zavitza is along thesteep rocky side of Mount Bumisto, and veryrough. Zavitza stands at the opening of a hollow,between the mountains Bumisto and Skafldhia,and looks down upon the bay of Vulko or Kandili,which is separated by a narrow strait from thenorthern end of the island of Kalamo. From amill on a height half a mile to the south of Vathj^,in Ithaca, I saw Zavitza through the channel betweenthe islands Kalamo and Erastus. Half anhour below Zavitza are two ancient towers, completewith battlements ; they stand on either sideof the gorge, and anciently defended a pass leadingfrom Zavitza into the maritime plain ; an hourfarther, on the sea-side, upon the point of Mj^tika,which divides the bay into two parts, are the remainsof a building of Roman brick-work. Thisand another point of the bay are about as far fromthe nearest corresponding points of the eastern endof Kalamo as Pr^vyza is from Punta in the widestpart. The Paleo-kastro of Kandili is the namegiven to the ruins of a Hellenic city, situatedabove the village of Kandili, and about an hourfrom the sea.14 ACARNANIA* [CHAP.From the bay of Vulko begins the steep rockyuninhabited slope which borders the sea northwardfrom thence for 3 hours as far as Zaverdha, whichlies at the foot of a very steep cliff of the samemountain on the edge of the great plain whichextends to Bogonia and to Kekhropula, and isseparated only by a very low ridge from that ofVonitza. The greater part of this fertile district,which was formerly the profitable possession ofGreeks of Lefkadha, is now uncultivated. Za-bertha is half an hour from the sea-side, and anhour from Bogonia, at the opposite angle of thegulf from whence begins the mountain which extendsto the lagoon of Vulgaris, and upon whichstand the villages of Plaghia and Persia, overlookingthe channel of Lefkadha. Kekhropula isan hour and a half from Bogonia, about due north.Sklavena was a large village situated on the mountainnorthward of Zaverdha. Between it and Za-vita was a plain called Livadhi, possessed bySklavena, and by Vamaka. To the southwardof the bay of Vulko, as far as Cape Velutzi, theshore is scarcely less steep and forbidding than tothe northward, but is indented with several smallcreeks or bays, of which the most frequented isnamed Stravolimiona ; from the station, near Va-thyin Ithaca, before-mentioned, it lay exactly inaline with the southern extremity of Erastus.There can be little doubt that the ancient remainsin the valley of Kandili are those of Daly*ziuy which various authorities show to have beena maritime town of Acaruania, and on this partXXXIV.]ACARNANIA.of the coast \ The distance of the bay of Kandilifrom the ruins of Leucas, near Amaxikhi, correspondswith the 120 stades which Cicero assignsfor the distance between Alyzia and Leucas ', andnot less so the 15 stades placed by Strabo betweenAlyzia and its harbour, called the port of Hercules,with the interval between Paleokastro and Mj^tika,which latter was probably the situation of thatHeraclea, from whence a certain Roman wastempted, by the deserted state of the place, tocarry away some choice works of Lysippus, representingthe labours of Hercules \In the year b. c. 374 the bay of Alyzia was thescene of a naval victory gained by 60 Athenianships, commanded by Timotheus, against 55 Lacedaemonian,under Nicolochus, on which occasionthe historian relates that Timotheus retired afterthe battle to Alyzia, where he erected a trophy :that the Lacedaemonian having been reinforcedby six ships from Ambracia, again offered himThocyd. 1. 7, c. 31. —Xenoph. Hellen. 1. 5, c. 4, adfin. Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 14.Plin. 1. 4, c. 2. To these maybeadded the Peutinger Table,where in the road from Actiumto Corydon there are 15 milesfrom Actium to the Dioces ofLeucas, 20 from the latter toHalissus (Alyzia), and 34 fromthence to the Achelous.Cicero, £p. ad fan. 1. 16,ep. 2.*Aire a AevKoSo^ e^^c Qd-Xa€poc KoX *A\vflla r^c 'Arap-yaviaQ ir6\eii, Jr ^ 'AXv^iaTrevTiKaiBeKa air OaXdrriycluyjLi oraBiovif Rad* ijy etrriXifii^v 'lipakXiov^ depot italrdfieyog' il ov tovq 'UpaicXcovcadXovQ epya Avaiirirov iitrii^rtyKty tit ' Pw firiv rStv iycfio-vcifv rcc, iraparoiritfc K£i/icvovc^ih r?)K IprifAiay. £lr* dxpaKpidatrii koI ai 'Ex&vd^ec Roi7r6\it "AerraKO^ • , • .clr OiyiaBai Kal o *Ax€X«oc«—Strabo, p. 459.ACARNANIA.[chap.battle, and that when Timotheus refused to comeforth, Nicolochus erected a trophy on one of theneighbouring islands ^ The word iyyvTarWf bywhich Xenophon indicates the proximity of theisland to the shore, applies exactly to Kalamo, theancient name of which was Camus, as appearsfrom Scylax, confirmed by the authority of Stephensand Artemidorus^. Kalamo and Meganisibeing the two largest of the minor islands of thiscoast, and both belonging to that cluster whichStrabo distinguishes from the Echinades, and denominatesthe Islands of the Taphii, and. moreanciently of the Teleboae, it seems to follow, ifKalamo was Carbury that Meganisi was Typhus,or Typhus, as it was called, in the time ofStrabo \Alyzia being placed in the valley of Kandili, itbecomes an almost necessary consequence that theplain of Zaverdha was that of Thyrium, this havingbeen the principal city in the northern part ofAcamania, as its coins and several occurrences inancient history, concur in attesting ^, and the plain^ Xenoph. ubi sup.Mord ravra woXtc *A\v(tiaKal Kara ravTrjv yfjiroc Kdpyoi.Scylax in *Axapvayia,Kdpvoc' yijvo^ 'AKapvavla^,^ApTtfAi^titpoQ jS yeutypafovfii'duty' TO tSviKoy Kopvtoc.— Stephan.in voce.Ai ie Tuy Ta^cbiv yijffoiTportpoy It TijXe/iotSy, Jy ^vical if Td^c yvy ^e Ta^iovcKoXovfiiyji x^P^C Jjaay rovrwy(Echinadum sc) oh toIq dm-ffrrifiaai, cyyvc yap jcccvrac,Axed v^' kripoic fiy£fjL6<ri rareTa^ioic i^a^ TiyXc/Soaic*Strabo, p. 459.Polyb. 1. 17, c. 10 ; 1. 28,c. 5. Thyrium was one of thechief colonies of Corinth onthis coast, and, like Ambracia,Anactorium, and Argos contributed itspopulation to the new colonyXXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 17of Zaverdha and Bogonia being the largest andmost fertile in Acamaniay unless it be that of(EniadtiB. That Thyrium was adjacent to theouter sea, and not near the Ambracic gulf, is apparentfrom several authorities. In the year b. c.373 the Threats was invaded by Indicates, andagain by the italians in the year before the beginningof the Social War, on both which occasionsthe hostile fleet was in the outer sea ^ Again,Cicero in navigating from Alyzia to Leucas touchedat Thyrium for the sake of recommending hisbeloved Tiro to a citizen of the name of Xeno-menes, and having remained two hours, prosecutedhis route to Leucas, where he arrived on the dayfollowing that on which he had quitted Alyzia *.It is evident from this circumstance that Thyriumcould not have been far removed from this part ofthe Acamanian coast ; whether there are any remainssufficient to fix its position at Zaverdha,Bogonid, or any other position on the shore ofthat bay, I am unable to learn. When Antiochus,in the year B.C. 191, had taken Meteor, he advancedagainst Thyrium, but some Roman shipshaving arrived at Leucas, and the Thyrienseshaving determined upon resistance, the king ofSyria made no farther attempt upon that place,of Augustus at Nicopolis. — Indicates) Xenoph. Hellen.Antipater . Epic. 33. ap. An 1. 6, c. 2.thou. Jacobs. Xenophon says ' Xenoph. Hellen. ubi sup.of the Thyrienses and their — Polyb. 1. 4, c. 6. 25.district, — Qvpuvai /idXa xal * Cicero £p. ad Fam. I. 10,&.ySpdaiy oXW/ioic Kai employ £p. 2, 3, 4, 5.Kapnpoy t^ovtrw iiroXi^ui (sc.VOL. IV. C18 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.but leaving garrisons in the reduced towns, retiredfrom Acamania '. Two years afterwards,during the siege of Ambracia by the consul Fulvius,some italian envoys proceeding thither fromStratus, were intercepted by the Acamanians andsent to Thyrium*. Although these occurrencesfurnish no great illustration of the situation ofThyrium, they are at least conformable with therespective situations of the places mentioned, onthe supposition that the Threats was the valleyof Zaverdha.There were two other ancient towns on thewestern coast of Acamania between Leucas andthe (Eniadae. Their names were Pylorus andSollium. Strabo, who takes no notice of Thyrium,perhaps because it was deserted after the compulsorymigration of its inhabitants to Nicopolis,names Passers as occurring between Leucas andAlyzia'. It occupied perhaps the valley of ,situated between those of Zaverdha andKandili. Sollium was a colony of Corinth, andas such was taken in the first year of the Peloponnesianwar by the Athenians, who particularlymade choice of the Palserenses, as the people towhom they delivered the place and its territory *,from which we may perhaps infer that the peopleof Palaerus were friends of those of Sollium, butnot their next neighbours, who in Greece were notoften on friendly terms. It would seem likewise,^ Liv. 1. 36, c. 12. * irapa^idoaai HaXaiptvaipLiv, 1. 88, c. 9. — Polyb. 'Axapvdywy fidvoic n)v yipv iciI. 22, c. 12. ir6\iy vifuaOat. — Thucyd. 1. 2,• Strabo, p. 450, 459. c. 30.XXXI v.] ACARNANIA. 19that SoIIiam had a harbour, for in the Birth yearof the war, Demosthenes, proceeding with theAthenian fleet from Leucas to iBtolia, hereconferred with the Acamanians^ With thesecircumstances, there is no situation which canbetter accord than the small port of Stravolimiona,which, situated midway between the bays of Kan-dilland Tragamesti, is so placed that the districtof Alyzia was interposed between it and PaUeruSjwhile the relative position will be found equallyto agree with the circumstance of Astacus (at PortPlatia) having been besieged and taken by theAthenians in the first year of the war immediatelyafter they had occupied Sollium.In the afternoon we return to Lutrdki and Ba-limber— a delightful ride through forests of timber-treesmixed with underwood and flowering shrubs,where the beautiful scenery of the Ambracic gulf,lighted up by the clearest sky, is constantly insight,or concealed only for such short intervals,as just serve to enhance the effect of its re-appearance.On the road we receive intelligence of thethieves having advanced last night to the numberof sixty, and shot a negro who frustrated theirdesign of setting fire to the village of Balimbey.April 8. — This morning, reinforced by Kyr K.'sguard of armatoli from V6nitza, and with othersfrom Balm-bey, we proceed, between forty andfifty strong, to Ai Vashti, a village in a lofty situationon the northern slope of the mountain of Per-gandi : the ascent to which from Balm-bey isThucyd, 1. », c. 95.c220 ACARNANIA, [CHAP.through thick woods of oak : the distance one hourand a half. It happened, that when the armatolistationed at Ai Vasili first perceived our advancedAlbanians, the latter were observed to be withoutcapons, which, the morning being hot and theascent steep, they had thrown upon the horses :some were seen driving two or three lambs, whichwe had purchased for them ; others by accidentwere setting a large dog to pursue the cattle, allwhich circumstances were considered characteristicof Kleftes. Taking us for thieves, therefore, thearmatoli turned out, to the number of sixty, andwithout further ceremony fired a volley at the foremostof our escort, who, supposing it possible thatthe thieves might have got possession of Ai Vasiliin the night, proceeded to act as against an enemy.They divided and crept through the woods in verygood Eager style upon the flanks of the supposedenemy ; and the firing continued for some timebefore the two parties recognized one another : thesituation of the place was exactly calculated torender the scene interesting and picturesque, anda few wounded trees were the only casualties.Ai Vasili is at present nothing more than achurch of St. Basil, and a quadrangle of cottageswith a house for the Subashi standing on one sideof a small level, which is separated by a deepravine from the mountain of Pergandi. In theopposite direction towards the gulf is an irregularslope descending to an elevated vale, below whichare the heights lying between the capes Gheladhaand Volimi. The level at the village was the acropolisof an ancient city, the town-walls of which,XXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 21chiefly formed of polygonal masonry, are visible inmany places among the woods which cover themountain, and might probably be traced in theirentire circuit of near two miles. In the wall ofone of the houses of Ai Vasili is a stele of hardAcamanian limestone, inscribed in twenty-onelines with the names of various officers, both civiland sacred, but without the name either of thecity over which the former presided, or of thedeity to whose worship the priests were attached '.One of these, however, having been fAavng orprophet, and another avXririig or flute-player, theywould seem to have been in the service of Apollo,which accords with an inscription found by Meletiusat Aili4, or St. Elias, a monastery betweenthis place and Vonitza, and which records theerection of a statue of Hercules in the tenensof Loxia or Apollo '.•QpvrayiQ TLoXvtvKro^ Geog rac Aitay AeoyrlaKoVf Upof6pog^oVf 'Eitrrla Avtrlag Mcvoi- 4>/Xiinroc IloXvcvirrov, fidyetpogrloVf hrowpirravuc ^EwiKpdriig "SUay^pog Suirpc/rcoCt BiaKoyocAttpifiaxov, Aeiayi^ac Acwv/^a, Upwrog ArffiiiTpioVf apxoiy6\ovg^AytivifrrpaTo^ MKatriarpdrov, KaXXtTrroc IloXuevrrov, upoQv^MiyarSpog Mey^avSpov, ^uriXffQ rac KaXXiicpanyc TtfioKpdreog,'ExircXeoct Aa/iitricoc Aioyrog^ — Y. Inscription, No. 164.fides IBtii^yoc Aa£i/iov, avXiy-Toy AioQ 'AXxftiiytis re yopoy riftdltriy di^uy,Yloc Aao6evcoc arrived AyaXfta rdSe^t&yfifiijy iLddyaroy vkt(fay iraTpdg t€ kcu ahrovAa^yeoQi xkeiyf AoHov ky TEfiiyeuAp. Meet. vol. ii. p. 250. 8vo. edit. Yen.The following inscription by the same person, appearson a statue of aesculapius by from these circumstances tothe same artist, and dedicated have been discovered in the22 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.After remaining at St. Basil during the mid-dayhours we set out for Vonitza. The captain ofarmatoliy on taking leave, wishes me an atnrpovirpo<rciiirov, or white face, a compliment borrowedfrom the Turkish. He has lately lost a son, killedin battle with the robbers, and is himself still sufferingfrom a slanting gun-shot wound through thebreast. We descend the mountain through abeautiful scene of corn-fields situated amidst copsesof bay and groves of handsome oaks, and havingpassed the elevated valley above-mentioned, reenterthe forest, which here consists entirely ofoaks. We fall into the lower road, or that bywhich I approached Vonitza on the 19th June,1805, a little above the ancient foundations on thehill of St. Elias. Having again passed these, wedescend tito the valley, cross it, and arrive atVonitza in three hours from Ai Vasili.In the middle of the wood I saw the body of ahorse which had been shot last night by the robbers: the owner, a poor man of Vonitza, who wasgoing into the woods to procure some lambs fortomorrow's feast of Aa/iirpi?, or Easter-sunday, wasalso killed by them. The same party robbed somemen going to Lefkadha, but these escaped withthe loss of their baggage and of 500 piastres inmoney.It is unfortunate that neither the inscription atsame place as the preceding, the marble had been conveyed.MontfiEiucon, who published it, Aa^yifc AaaOireoc 'AvKXawifreceived his copy from Corfu aviOfiKt' Madras cirdifvc.to which place it is probableXXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 23Ai Vasili, nor that-?p'.:ted by Meletius, affordany clue to the name of the city, of which theyare the records, the ancient authors having leftthis question in great uncertainty. There is, indeed,notice of the places on the Acamanian sideof the Astrachan gulf by Scylax and Pliny \ butneither of them can implicitly be relied upon :Scylax from the corruption of his text ; Plinyin consequence of his well-known negligence ordeficient information, of which he gives a sufficientproof in representing the Acheron and Aphas(Aous) as discharging themselves into the Am-boracicGulf. Nor does either author name asmany cities as the ruins attest to have existed.The vulgar reading of the passage in Scylax is asfollows : Mcra Se 'AfijSpaiciay 'Aicapvavca €0voc itrrl jcacirpurril ironic avrodt Apyog ro A/u^iXo^ckov kui EvpcirocKai Ovpirov iv rtf 'Iicovc<^ Ka e^b» rov Avaicropacov icoX-iron, AvaKTopiov Jcac Xifitiv Aktyi koi ironic AiVKag KalXifniv, Instead of Evpciroc Kca Ovpirov iv r^ 'iKoviif,Gronovius proposed to read 'EyjlvoQ kuI Oupcoy cv r^'Why; and the emendation is strongly supportedby Pliny, whose words are, *' Acarnaniae oppidaHeraclia, Echinus et in ore ipso colonia AugustActium, cum temple ApoUinis nobile, ac civitateslibera Nicopolitana. Egress sin Ambracio inIconium except Leucadium litmus." If thereforethe emendation be correct, the two authors concurin supporting the opinion, that Tkyrium wasnear the exterior or Ionian sea, and in showing thatEchinus was either at Vonitza or Ai Vasili, in *Ajcapyayia. Plin; H. N. L 4, c. 2.24 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.posing Kervasara to have been Lmncta^ and AirsPetross Anactiynum. The order of names in Plinywould tend to place Mchwas at Vonitza, 'but I ammore disposed to believe that Ai Vasili was itssite. From Stephens and the poet Romanus,whom he quotes, it is evident that Echinus wasan Acamanian town of some importance ^ : thestory attached to it shows that it was one of theearly colonies of this coast, the ruins at Ai Vasiliindicate a remote antiquity, and their safe positionon a mountain removed from the sea is in conformitywith that which is generally found in theearly foundations of the Greeks. In this case V6-nitza is probably the site of one of the numeroustowns named Heraclea, and which has not beennoticed by any author except Pliny. There stillremains another Hellenic ruin in the northern peninsulaof Acamania for which a name is wanted —namely, that of Kekhropula. Perhaps it may havebeen Myrtuntium; for although Strabo describesonly a Xc;ivo0aXarra, or salt-water lake, situated betweenLeucas and the gulf, which exactly agreeswith the lagoon of Vulgaris ', the town which stoodupon its margin may very possibly have borne thesame name.The temple of Apollo mentioned in the inscribe'ir6\iQ 'AjcopvaWac, ftcviy. 'Air ht Aevffa&>c c^VC&0TV ravriyv clircv. — Stephan. Strabo, p. 459.in voce. ' This name and Yulko areMcrafv It AtvKaioc Kal derived from ficvpKa or fiovlsxa^Tov ^AfififtoKiKov KoXwov Xi/iKo- a word of ancient etymology,BaXarTo. ici Mvprovvrioy Xcyo- meaning mud or bog.XXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 25tion of Meletius stood perhaps on the conspicuousround summit which rises from the south-easternshore of the bay of Vonitza, where I observed foundations,this being such a situation as the Greeksoften chose for their temples, not far removed fromthe walls of the town to which it belonged, andso placed as to be seen to the greatest advantagefrom the gulf and surrounding country.April 9. — We sail this morning in one hour anda half from Vonitaa to Prevyza, and arrive at daybreak,choosing this early hour partly for the sakeof the gulf wind, which generally blows till abouteight o'clock, and is then succeeded by a calm,and about 11 a.m. by the sea-breeze, but chieflythat the boatmen may have all the day to themselves— this being Easter Sunday, the holidaywhich of all others is the most religiously keptby the Greeks, not more by their attendance atmass, than by eating, drinking, and dancing.April 20. — ^^The remains at Akri or Punta consistof the following objects. Near the ordinarylanding-place opposite to the middle of the townof Prevyza, and about half way between thenorthern extremity of the peninsula of Punta andthe kula at the entrance of the harbour of Prevyza,are the foundation and a small part of the walls ofa large quadrangular building, which seems tohave had an open square court in the centre. Oneside measures about 90 yards, and the other(parallel to the shore of the harbour) about 1 30 ;the breadth between the outer and inner walls is15 yards ; the wall is two feet thick, built of smallstones with much mortar. The stones are roughly26 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.squared, and placed in the wall . with the anglesupwards. The ground occupied by the courtwithin has been excavated in every part for thesake of the materials, which have been used innew constructions at Prevyza. When the ancientbuilding was ruined the walls seem to have falleninwards. Parallel to these foundations, about themiddle of the narrow peninsula, are the remainsof walls constructed in the same slight manneras the former, inclosing a space not less than500 yards in length, and about half as much inbreadth ; they include part of the quadrangleof the tjiftlik of Punta, together with all thesouthern side of some entrenchments attachedto that building, which the Vezir threw up acrossthe peninsula when he was at war with theRussians in Lefkidha. Between the tjiftlik andthe northern extremity of the peninsula, fragmentsof columns and wrought stones have been found,and many coins were brought to me on the spot,which had been turned up in the cultivated groundsof the farm.But the most important monument, and whichhas been brought to light since my visit to in 1805, is an inscribed marble, now lyingin an orange garden belonging to the Turkishdwelling-house of the tjiftlik where it was found.The inscription, which contains some Doric forms,is a record of Proxenia granted by the communityof the Acarnanes to Ananias son of Olympian ofPatrie, and to two Romans, Publius and LuciusAcilius, sons of Publius Acilius. It is precededby the names and titles of the principal officers ofXXlflV.]ACARNANIA.2?the Canadian jcoivov, among whom the priest ofApollo Actus takes the lead There were twoother decrees on the same stone, but of these thecommencement of each line only is preserved.In one of them, a strategic, who was of CEniadse,was named in place of the priest of Apollo. Thecharacters are at the latest of an early period ofthe Roman Empire, an't it would seem from theassociation of two Romans with a man of Patrie,that the Augustan colony of Patrse had alreadybeen established. The cities mentioned as formingpart of the Acamanian league show that theboundary of the province towards ^tolia extendedto the Achelous, or exactly as Strabo describesAcamania in the reign of Augustus. As it wasnot until that emperor had pacified and given lawsto the world that the boundaries of the provincesof Greece, were established wish any practicaleffect, or that a common council of the provincewas likely to have had much authority, I can*Viri Upair6\ov ry *Air<JX-\»yi rf 'Affray 4>cX4/iOvoc9wpoftrdporoQ Be *Ayiffa rovTwa *AKvi€ioVf mffJiv^fJLyafJL6'¥wv Zt 'Sav(yifid')(ov rov 'Apcff-TOkXeO^ 'AoTOKOVf i^lko^ivOV TOV'HpoicXe/rov <lfoiTtavoc, ypo.fi-fearing Si rj, jSovXg npo/rov rwiAioirctOeoc ^arpfyiroKlTa icovpo"Tpowov tso rg jSovXg Kalrf KOiv^ Tar ^AKapyayiav xpo^{cVovc el/jcv Kal cvepycrac rovKoiyov ray 'AKopydyuy Kararoy yofioy, *Ayatriay 'OXw/iirt«-yon Harps, UcSirXiOK, AevKioyrove IloirX/ov 'AkiXIovq 'Pw/ia/-ovCf f^o^ ttftty airroic Kal i«yo-yoic iy *AKapyavl^ derfdXnayKal ai/Toit Kal xpiifiatn ica2 Karaay Kal Kara OaXafftray Ka) woeKal elpdyac Kal yac KaoUlaQ iyKrJiviy Kal rd &XXar//iia Kal ^Xdydpwwa Bea koXrdi£ &XX01S TpoiiyoiQ Kal circusrov Koiyov t&v ^AKapyd-ykty Waxes.— V. Inscription »No. 168.28 ACARWANIA. [CHAP.hardly conceive the monument to be older thanAugustus. There can be little doubt that it wasdeposited in the temple of Apollo, where we knowthat even before the time of Augustus the peopleof the surrounding country met to celebrate acoronary contest \ and which, like the other hieraof Greece, was probably the ordinary place ofdeposit for all documents important to the generalinterests of Acamania. But doubtless its institutionshad fallen into partial neglect whenAugustus bestowed his favours upon Actium. Itis remarkable that none of the nearer cities arenamed in the inscription, but that the officers ofthe Canadian community are from Alyzia, Astacus,Phoetise, Metropolis, and (Eniadee : but thisaccords also with the date which I have attributedto the monument, the cities of the Ambracic gulfhaving been nearly, if not entirely, deserted onthe foundation of Nicopolis.The evidence of this monument would hardlyhave been required to prove the site of Actium,had not so great an authority as D'Anville placedActium at or near 'Alios Petross, where the ruinsare found which I have supposed to be those ofAnactorium. It would seem from D'Anville'smap, that he had heard of those ruins, and thathe had been told that the place was called Alio,which alone would be a strong reason to inducehim to conclude that it was the site of Actium,^ "Uycro it Kttl nporepoy rd fi6r€poy iwolfivty o Kalaop. —"Aicria Tf dtfi trnfavirtig dewy Strabo, p. 325.VKo Twy xtptolKtay' vvv ^ eyre"XXXIV.]ACARNANIA.or rather of the plain, grove, and naval arsenal ;for as Strabo states these to have been at the footof a height on which the temple stood \ D'Anvilleprobably supposed the building itself to have occupiedthe summit of the promontory of whichthe extremity is called Pavo Panaghia, and whichforms with the opposite Cape named Skara, atthe end of the peninsula of Skafidhaki, the innerentrance of the gulf. It follows also of necessity,that D'Anville excluded the irpoicoXiroc, or gulf ofPr^vyza from the Ambracic gulf, and applied thatname only to the great interior basin. It cannotbe denied, in support of these opinions, that theXo^oc, or height upon which Strabo states thetemple to have stood, seems to answer muchbetter to the summit between St. Peter's andcape Panaghia than to the low peninsula ofAkri. But in other respects the testimony ofStrabo is adverse to D'Anville's opinion, for heconfines the breadth of the strait to ' ^ a little morethan four stades," a number which we cannotconsider erroneous, as it agrees with the four ofScylax, the less than five of Poly bins, and the500 paces of Pliny * ; whereas the inner strait isconsiderably more than a mile in breadth.*Evils ^c TO arofia rov'A^fipaKiKov KoXirov* rovrov SeTov k6\tov to lev ardfia ^t-KpfTov TfrpamaZiov fulioVf 6 HkvkXoq Kal TpiaKotrlbty vradiwy'tvKifiiyoc if xac* OUoviri rotefie iy ^c{<ji ilinrXiovtri T^y'E\\riytay*\Kapyav€Q* Ktu UponTOV 'Aicr/ov *Air6XXiayoc lyravdaitrrif irXiiffioy tov irrd^aTOQj Xo-^«C Tiff i^ ^ o veiled Kol inravTf weiloy aXtroc ^Xov icalKcwpm. — Strabo, p. 325.Scylax in Kaaawirou —Polyb. 1. 4, c. 63.— Plin. H.N. 1. 4, c. 1.ACARNANIA.[chap.Every other ancient evidence entirely favoursthe opinion that St. Peter's was the site of Sanatoriumand Akri that of Actium and the same isconfirmed by the nature of the ruins at St. Peter's,which are those of a Hellenic polls or fortifiedtown ; whereas Actium, though improperly designatedas a polls by Stephens and Mela ^ wasnothing more than a upon of Apollo on a capein the territory of Anactorium ', which Augustusenlarged, and to which he added a naval arsenal '.There can be little doubt that both Thucydidesand Polybius, by the mouth of the Ambra4nc gulfintended the strait of Prevyza; nor does it appearthat the ancients had any separate appellationfor the ante-gulf of Prevyza. Scylax,indeed, speaks of the Anactoric gulf, but he appliedthis appellation to the greater gulf, by allother authors called Ambracic, and even ex-stephen.in "'Awria. — ^P.Mel. 1. 2, c. 3.■ kv 'AxTif TfJQ *AyaKroplaeySCj oi TO sepoy rov 'Air<JX\«-y6Q €<niv exl rf trrdfian tov*AfiwpaKiKov k6\vov, — Thucyd.1. 1, c. 29.. . wpoijyt Kapd XapiiBpaVfinrtvSwv hafiiiyai Toy 'A/i/3pa-KtKoy KoKoiffieyor KdXiroy Sctmydrarot ktrri hard to T^y'AKapydytay 'Itpoy, KoKavfuyot"AKrtov. *0 ydp irpoeiprffiiyo^KoXwoi: iKirlirTtt fie Ik rovXiKekiKov wtXdyovt fiiTa^v rtlg'Ilirc/pov Kol r$c ^AxapyayiacffTtiy iraireXwc (nofiarC Xetirfiyap T&y wire maSii^y. ♦ ♦ ♦Uepaiutea^ dc scarce to irpoeiptf*fUyoy aT6fAa tt^v ivyafiiy, &c.Polyb. 1. 4, c. 63.To i* 'Amor *Aw6WiityoQup6y imtf koI vpo tov OTSfiaTOcTOV TTOpdftOV TOV k6\X0V TOV*AfjL7rpaKucov kot'' dyTiiripac TwyirpoQ T^ NucottAci \ifiiytayKeTrac 6 re wopdfAOC *i(roc irrinov hia trreyov Ttiyii teal himical avroc koX to, wpo abrovwdyra ica^ eyopfJtitratrSai xaltyyavXoyiiffaffOai (cTcri^dcta). —Dion. Cass. 1. 50, c. 12.Dio, 1. 51, c. 1. Strabo,p. 325.XXXIV.]ACARNANIA.chided from hid Anactoric gulf both Sanatoriumand Acte ^ Dio describes Actium as a temple ofApollo, which fronted the mouth of the strait ofthe Ambracic gulf, over against the harbours ofNicopolis ; he adds that the strait was of an equalbreadth for a considerable distance, and that bothwithin the strait and before it there was greatconvenience for anchoring and for manoeuvringships. It is obvious that such a description cannotwith truth be applied to the inner strait, but thatit accords perfectly with the strait and harbour ofPrevyza, and that the creeks of Vathj^ correspondto the harbours of Nicopolis. The wordsof Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Pliny, and Mela ',are all better adapted to the outer than to theinner entrance, and it is impossible to conceivethat Cicero, in coasting from Patrse to Leucas andKol hill TOV 'AvOKTOpiKOVkoXkov^ ^AvaicrSpioy, Kal KifJLr^y'Acre) Kal ironic AevKdc* — Scy-lax in *AKapyayla,No certainty can be derivedon this question from the contradictorystatements given ofthe dimensions of the gulf byPolybius, Strabo, and Pliny.According to Polybius, thelength is 300 stades and thebreadth 100; where the firstnumber is too great and thelatter too small, unless in theknowest part. Pliny's lengthof 39 M. p. is still more erroneousin excess: his breadthof 15 M. P. is nearly correct.Strabo makes the circumference300 stades, much too littleeven for the interior gulf.■ "ApavTtQ Ik ahrdBiv (i, e.Decade) cat M to "Aktiovk\d6vrtQ 6pfil(oyTai rov 'Afifipa^Kucov k6\wov irpoc to dtpwrii"prov, — ^Dionys. Hal. 1. 1, c.50.In ore ipso colonia August!Actium. — Plin. H. N. 1. 4,c. 2.Ambracio sin • • • .qui augustus faucibus, et quaeminus mile passions patent,grande pelagius admitted. — P.Mel. 1. 2, c. 3.32 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.Corcyra, should have touched at Actium, if it hadbeen so far out of his route as the inner strait \As to the modern name Alio, its form betraysits Italian origin, and proves that it arose from anopinion which the Venetians, or Greco-Venetiansof Pr^vyza, Vonitza, and Santa Maura, haveadopted without inquiry, and which having beenconveyed to D'Anville, was placed by him as afact upon the map, from which it ought to beexpunged as having no real existence. The oldcharts of Greece are full of erroneous names,similarly introduced by Italian seamen or others,and which are generally unknown to the Greeknatives of the places. In the present instance theerror was the more easily propagated in consequenceof the preservation of the ruins at AirsPetross, while the greater part of those at Akriwere probably consumed in constructions at ,at an early period of its existence. Theeffect of the great naval battle fought here wasfirst to raise Actium to importance, while Sanatoriumbecame a small commercial dependency ofNicopolis", and afterwards when both were deserted,to maintain the name of Actium in all itsfame, while that of Anactorium was forgotten.It is needless to remark, that the question ofthe position of Actium is chiefly interesting in itsreference to that celebrated naval engagement,the result of which placed all the civilized worldCic. Ep. ad Fam. 1. 16, Xe^y^ioov i^pvfiivov *AKriovep. 6. 9. trKfivioVf tfAiropiioy r^c ^^^IIoXccc stiffly €v fiiy to7q tier ifs fiiviic c^* hfJi&y Niicoiro-^AKopvaffiv * AraKTitpiov n liri Xe^^c* — Strabo, p. 450.XXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 33under one monarch, and riveted its chains forages,at the same time that it diffused peace,opulence, and security, over extensive countriesfrom whence they had long been banished. Althoughno description of this event by an eyewitnessor cotemporary has reached us, the particularsof it, as well as the circumstances whichpreceded and accompanied it have been describedby a Greek author, whose long employment inthe highest offices of the Roman State gave himthe means of obtaining the best extant informationon the subject, and who appears to have beenvery cautious in admitting the facts which werereported to him *.As soon as Csesar Octavianusus (says Dio) hadcrossed over from Brundusium to the Acroceraunia,and had disembarked his land forces there, he proceededwith his fleet to Corcyra, and from thenceto port Glycys. He then advanced to the straitsof Actium, in the hope that some of the followersof Antony would join him ', but finding no appearanceof such a movement, he retired to the placewhere Nicopolis stood in the time of the historian.His anchorage therefore would seem to have beenin port Compares, now the port of Mj^tika. Here^ For example : lie doubted XeijifiivaiQ. — Dion. Cass. 1. 50,the truth of the report, that c.'12.some of the triremes of Oc ' Plutarch, in the life of M.tavianus had been transported Antonius, states that Octaviathe isthmus of Nicopolis anus appeared off the straits(Sea rod rcix^trftaroc) upon fresh at daybreak on the morninghides anointed with oil : — j3vp- after his arrival, and retiredtrain yeo^aproiQ eXaif iiraXf}- when Antony's fleet advanced.VOL. IV. D34 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.he wa joined by the land forces which hadmarched through Epirus from the Acroceraunia.He then fortified a neighbouring hill, which embraceda prospect both of the outer sea at Pari,and of the inner or Ambracic gul as well as ofthe parts between them, in which were the harboursof Nicopolis*, a description which cannotbe applied to any but the height rising immediatelyfrom Nicopolis to the northward, on thesummit of which stands Mikhalltzi. Thus placed,he had a commanding view of the enemy's position,as well as the means of blockading Actiumboth by land and sea. He fortified his positionby walls extending to port Compares, which seemto have been in the nature of long walls for thepurpose of preventing any interruption to the communicationbetween the camp and the fleet.The Antonians had built towers on either sideof the strait's mouth * ; that is to say, on the nearestpoints of Prevyza and Punta, and they occupiedthe channel itself with their ships. Their campwas on one side of the strait ^, near the temple ofApollo, on a level spacious ground ^ ; but whichwas fitter, according to the historian, for a battlerarijSaXe ro xtt^piov Tovroy re Uparvyaro Koi rdxri Airly ^ yyy ^ NtJCi$iroXi£ conc, Koi aifTOv ic Tots Xifiiya roy (l^^ royh' avr^i iir\ fAeri^pov, dey M K6fiapoy JcaO^jcc.-^Dion. Cass.v&yra hfjuUi^t r^c t€ ilia rile 1* 50, c. 12.irpoc Hafoit daXaffatie^ koi r% ' rov trrSftaroc*€irw r^c 'A/jiirpcucuf^Ci rife re iy * ro fUffoy*rf fJittr^ airrwyf kv ^ ol Xi/lickcc * wopSfiov,oi wpoQ rf NcKoiroXci tloly^ ' o/iaXfi fiiy Kal irXarci.&7roirr6y l^nv, IBpvdri' jcai ahr6XXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 35than a camp, and where they had suffered fromsickness both in summer and in winter. Antony,who was at Patrse, when he heard of the arrivalof Caesar, proceeded instantly to Actium, and aftersome delay, employed in collecting his troops, andin exercising them against the enemy, he crossedthe strait ^ (to Prevyza), and pitched his camp nearthat of Caesar, sending his cavalry at the sametime round the gulf, and thus menacing his adversaryon all sides *. Soon afterwards, however,Agrippa, chief commander of the Octavian fleet,took Leucas, overthrew Nasidicus in a naval battle,and occupied Patrie and Corinth, while MarcusTitus and Statius Taurus defeated the Utopiancavalry, and brought over Philadelphus, king ofPaphlagonia, to the cause of Caesar. Cn. Domi-thusalso, offended with Cleopatra, having desertedto the enemy, such a combination of adverse occurrencesinspired in Antony a general distrust ofhis followers, with fears for the ultimate event.The following were the circumstances which,according to Dio, led immediately to the navalbattle : — Agrippa had left L. Aruntius with afew ships in observation of the fleet of Antony,when Socius, one of the chiefs of the latter, j edgingthe opportunity favourable during the absenceof Agrippa, advanced early one morning againstthe observing squadron at a moment when a thickroy Topdfuoy cir(2u/3f|. — built certain redoubts (ipv/jiaoic 13. T191 tfiwipifiaXwy) with thePlutarch says that Antony, view of excluding the enemylearning that the enemy's posi- from the places where watertion was deficient in water, was to be obtained.d236 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.fog enabled him to conceal the superiority of hisforce. Aruntius fled, but Socius in the pursuitfalling in with Agrippa, was slain, together withTarcondimotus, king of Upper Cilicia. It happenedat the same time that Antony, returningfrom Thessaly , where he had been watching the motionsof Q. Nullius, who soon afterwards deserted hiscause for that of Octavianusus, was defeated by an outlyingbody * of CsBsar's army. These misfortunesinduced Antony to retire and join his principal campon the other (or eastern) side of the strait ', and tohold a council on the question, whether he shouldfight in his actual position, or moving elsewhere,protract the war. By the advice of Cleopatra, itwas resolved, that after having garrisoned stronglythe most important places, she and Antony shouldreturn with the remaining forces to Egypt: butthat avoiding any appearance of a retreat, in ordernot to discourage their allies, the fleet in movingshould advance as if intent on battle. The numberof Antony's seamen having been much diminishedby desertion and sickness ^, he selectedhis best ships, burnt the remainder, secretly embarkedall his most precious property, and addresseda speech to his army, in which he remindedthem of his superiority in the number,magnitude, and strength of his ships, as well asin the numbers of his land forces and seamen, ofirpo^vXaATocc. — c. 14. ' ^Oopac*— c. 15.afe\(itpiieiy iirl dana rovTTopdfiov tvSa ahrf ro TrkiovTov trrpaTOV ijwX«C«ro.XXXIV.] ACARNANIA. 37the abundance of his pecuniary supplies andother resources, not forgetting an advantageouspersonal comparison of himself with his opponent,and showing, that after having defeated the enemy'sfleet, they should be enabled to shut uphis army as it were in a small island ^ and thusstarve them into a capitulation. Octavianusus, inasimilar address, ridiculed Antony as an effeminateEgyptian preparing for flight, and manyof whose followers were well disposed to changesides * ; after which, having pointed out some ofthe advantages of his light vessels, he proceededto place on board of them a large force of infantry,as the best practical means of obviating the effectsof the greater size and weight of the adverse ships.Antony drew out his fleet a little before the entranceof the straits', formed a close line, andadvanced no farther, although Caesar made amovement in advance, with a view of either drawingthe enemy out, or obliging him to retire.Having failed in this attempt, Caesar then causedeither wing of his line to advance, as if with theintention of circumventing both the enemy's flanks*,and in this manner was successful in obliging Antonyto move forward and engage. In the Antoniofleet there were few triremes ; the greaterpart of it consisting of ships having from four to&aifip tv viioiUif. — c. 19. Antony was morally conqueredPatroclus gives a similar before he fought.testimony. Longe antequam * oKiyov cjw rwv frrtvQv, —dimicaretur exploratissima Luc 31.liaoarum partim fuit victoria. * Tctpurroixuiodai.Veil. Pater. 1. 2, c. 84.38 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.ten banks of oars, and furnished with wooden turrets,from which the troops fought as from a fortress.The only safe mode of assailing such floatingcastles was by attacking them successively, andwithout remaining long enough near any to suffermuch from the missiles, still less to allow the Antoninusto grapple, which they attempted to effect.On the part of the latter, the seamen and rowers ^were most efficient ; on the other side the troops ofembarkation K The engagement had thus continuedfor some hours without any immediate prospectof a decisive result, when Cleopatra, whoseship was at anchor in the rear, taking advantageof a favourable breeze which then happened torise ^, suddenly set sail, passed through the contendingforces *, and was followed by Antony. Onbeholding this shameful flight of their commander,many of the Antonians threw the towers, and othersimilar incumbrances, into the sea and escaped ;which they easily effected, because the enemy hadno sails on board. The remaining ships were attackedby the Assyrians with renewed vigour,both at a distance and by boarding ^ but in thelatter attempt without much effect. ^^ It was likean assault," says the historian, ^^ upon a numberof castles or islands *." After some time passed inKv^epyrJTai Kai kpirai, — * koX tKaSey koI iv XPV* —c. 32. Dio, 1. 50, c. 8.lirificLTai. • Plutarch compares it ** to• AyifAov Tivoc Kara rvxnv, a land fight (ir£(o/Jiaxla)f ort^pov avfiliavTog, — c. 33. rather to a siege" (rcixo/io-^ Cum aurea puppy, veloque x^^)*purpura. — Flor. 1. 4, c. 11.Xxxi.] ACARNANIA. 39this kind of combat, Caesar, finding the event stilldoubtful, sent to the camp for fire, which he dischargedinto the enemy's ships either by throwingtorches and burning javelins by the hand, or byplacing combustibles in vessels which were cast byengines. This measure was completely successful.The Antonians, being unable to procure a sufficiencyof water to extinguish the fire, perished ingreat numbers either on board or in the sea, in theirendeavours to escape from the flames, which at lengthwere so destructive that the Sectarians themselvesbecame anxious to extinguish the fire for the sakeof the prizes, and some of them even perished inattempting to save the enemy's ships.The battle was fought, adds Dio, on the 2d ofSeptember, from which day the reign of Octavia-nusis to be dated. After the victory he consecratedto Apollo of Actium a captured ship of eachkind, inclusively from a ship of four banks to oneoften banks K He enlarged the temple of Apollo,and promoted the celebration of the ancient gamesnamed Acta, establishing a quinquennial contest 'of music and gymnastic, with horse races, and desrpi^pil r€ ical rcrpi}pi|, rd t€ * According to Stephens,iXKa ra c{9c f*^XP^ deic^povc* — the ancient games were a tri-dio,1. 51. c. 1. ennial contest of gymnastic,Strabo (p. 325) states that horses, and ships. Cf. Statenships, from one to ten bon, p. 325. Callimachus. mplhanks, were dedicated. But Aywywy ap. Harpocrat. — Stealththese and the docks (vcoi- phan. in "Aicria,aoiicoi) near which they wereplaced had been burnt beforethe time of Strabo.40 ACARNANIA. [CHAP.daring the games sacred or accompanied with apublic feasts He founded also a city on thesite of his camp, which he called Nicopolis, inhonour of the victory, peopling it with inhabitantscollected from other places, and partly by desolatingsome of the neighbouring cities *. Theplace where his own tent stood he surrounded withsquared stones and adorned with captured beaksof ships, and built in it an edifice open to the sky,which he consecrated to Apollo.The other ancient authors who treat of the battleof Actium add little to the information conveyedby Dio. Plutarch relates that Csesar had 300 shipsopposed to 560 of Antony, of which 60 were Egyptian* ; that Antony embarked 20,000 soldiers inhis ships ; that the engagement was prevented forfour days by a heavy sea ; and that on the morningof the fifth there was a calm, and about noona sea-breeze, when the two lines being eight stadesapart, Antony and Poplicola, who commanded theright, relying upon the strength and magnitude oftheir vessels, made a movement in advance ; uponwhich Caesar retired, in order to draw the enemyfarther out, where he thought his light vesselswould have the advantage over his less manageableopponents. ' When the engagement hadvlTTieiQ, — Dio, 1. 51, c. 1. * Floras totally differs fromtrvyfKm. Plutarch as to the numbers onTong fie AKaye/pac, rove either side. He says Caesar^ dvatrriiaag rwv vXriotox^pf^v. had 400 ships, from 3 to 6According to Suetonius, banks of oars, and Antonythe place was sacred to Nep- 200, from 6 to 9 banks.tunc and Mars.XXXIV.]ACARNANIA.become general, Caesar being in the right wingand Agrippa on the left, the latter extended hisflank, and obliged Poplicola to separate himselffrom the main body, which discouraged the remainder.It was at this moment that Cleopatra,who was in the rear with the sixty Egyptian ships,taking advantage of a favourable wind, steeredthrough the combatants, followed by Antony, andproceeded in the direction of Peloponnesus. TheAntonians fought bravely until the tenth hour*,when, being much incommoded by a heavy swellahead, they gave way*. Plutarch adds, that 6000men were slain in the action, and 300 ships takenby CiBsar, and that the shore on either side waslined by the land forces as spectators of thebattle.The accompanying sketch of the harbour ofPrevyza, or entrance of the gulf of Artaa, is thebest commentary on the facts stated by the historians,and may serve to assist the reader in forminghis opinion as to the exact situation in whichthe battle was fought.The battle, according toSuetonius, ended at so late anhour, that Caesar passed thenight aboard : apud Actiumvide in serum diem, imitationprotract ut in nave victor per-noctayerit. — Seton. in August,c. 17.fiiyioToy jiXajitic vero rovKXv^ioyoc inlmiXov Kara vp^payiarafUyov, The wind, therefore,had changed since Cleopatramade sail, and had setin from the westward ; in fact,at the time of year when thebattle occurred, breezes fromthe gulf or calms prevail duringa great part of the day,and the swell and sea-breezeset in rather late in the afternoon.ACARNANIA.[chap.Olive— treesCatftp •/*AntonyMOiOOO~29ooYards.This depends chiefly upon the inference to bedrawn from the words oXcyov coi rZiv crtvCjv, employedby Dio to describe the position of Antonypreviously to the encounter, when Caesar's linewas about a mile distant It seems evident fromthe circumstances related, and the nature of theplaces, that the Antonio fleet occupied the entireharbour of Pr^vyza, which was by no means toolarge for such a number of ships, and wherethey were well sheltered fipom the weather. Ifthe towers on either side of the strait were intended,as we cannot but suppose, as a protectionto the fleet, it is not likely that any of the vesselswere on the outside of fort Punta until the firstadvance on the day of battle. The conclusion,XXXIV.] , ACARNANIA. 43therefore, will be, that the action took place withinthat enter strait, which is included between and cape Kali. It may be objected,perhaps, that the space was there inadequate to sogreat a number of ships, and the depth of water tovessels so large, though as to the latter it is to beconsidered that a great change may have occurredsince the time of the battle, in consequence of thesoil which may have accumulated here, as itcertainly has within the Ambracic Gulf, and onalmost every part of the coast of Greece exposedto the operation of alluvions and currents. If Diointended the outer entrance between Pandokratoraand Kali by the words ista twv <rr€vc^v, the battletook place quite in the open sea, for beyond thosetwo points there is no curvature of the shore,which follows an uniform line from Mj^tika to thebay of Dhemata.CHAPTER XXXV.EPIRUS.M^tika — River of Kamarina — Kastroskia — Riniassa and castleKanalaki — Fanari — Glyk^ — Rivers Acheron and CactusLake Acherusia — Glycys Linen — Cithyrus — Buchan —Pandosia — Gardhiki — Dbragomi — Mount Kunla — Paralytic— St. Donatus — Eurhcea — Veliani — Districts of Margateand Filiates — Cestriay or Ilium — Elaieia — Bathe — EliniChauni — Distance — Elefthero-kbori — Bagotzus — Dhrami-sins — Paleo-kastro — Kosmira — Rapsista — loaiHiina.April 26. — During the Easter week, from the 9thto the 16th, much rain fell, with a southerly windand a haze, since which there has been clear weatherand a regular alternation of gentle breezes fromthe gulf and the sea. The gulf wind blows (ciya^c*o icop^oc) till eight or nine in the morning : abouteleven the MaiVrrpaXt or sea-breeze sets in, and continuesuntil a little after sunset : its duration isgenerally greater or less in proportion to the distanceof the place from the outer sea. This alternationof wind is constant in fine weather, and prevailsupon the whole not less than eight months inthe year. In the winter the gulf is subject, likethe adjacent coast and islands, to a long continuanceof gales from the southward with rain.April 29. — This morning at eight I quit Prevyzafor loannina by the way of Paramythia, accompanyXXXV.]EPIRUS.need by twelve Albanian horsemen, who are to bereinforced by foot soldiers from the villages at thediscretion of the bolu-bashi, and according to thedegree of apprehension from robbers. We leaveMytika a mile on the left at 9.10, follow the ruinsof the Aqueduct of Nicopolis as far as the foot ofthe height of Mikhalitzi, and at 9.40 descend uponthe sea beach, exactly at the spot where I landedfrom H. M. brig Delight (Capt. Hatfield) in thenight of the 12th of November, 1807, and had aconference with the Vezir, which led to our peacelast summer with the Porte ^Al thought it necessaryon that occasion to conceal hiscommunication with me fromthe French consul; and withthis view, when I sent a personon shore in the morning atPrevyza to arrange an interviewwith him, he ordered oneof his secretaries to meet himon the beach, and secretly toinstruct him to pretend, whenbrought into the Vezir's presence,that peace was alreadymade, and to ask for permissionto purchase provisions.The scene thus prepared wasacted accordingly in presenceof the French consul, Al refusingthe pretended request,and haughtily adding that thetwo nations were still at war,and that all the favour he couldgrant was liberty to return onboard,on condition of ourquitting the coast In returningto the Delight's boat, myagent was again secretly informedby the secretary of theexact spot near Nicopolis wherethe Pasha would meet me inthe evening. The weather appearedso threatening from thesouth-west, that there was somedoubt whether the ship couldremain on the coast, and wedid not venture to anchor ; andthe night was so dark, that hadnot the Vezir caused a fire to belighted, and two or three musketsto be discharged, I shouldnot easily have found bin,seated as he was, under a littlecliff on the shore, with SekhriEffendi and the Greek secretaryCosta, and attended at alittle distance by a few palika-ria. He had eluded the consulby appointing a meeting withEPIRUS.[chap.The southerly winds of the two last days werefollowed yesterday evening by a heavy rain, andthis day the wind continues fresh at south-west,with a great surf upon the coast, and an air coldhim at Vonitza, towards whichplace he sailed from Preysin his yacht, then changinghis route, and landing at Vath^,rode from thence to .Vico-polls.During the two hoursour conference lasted, the surfrose considerably, but the gale,fortunately, did not reach thebay ; so that with a good wettingfrom the rain and sea, andsome difficulty in finding theship, which we should hardlyhave done without the assistanceof the lightning, our boatreturned on board, and we stoodaway from the coast.I have thought it £Edr totake the opportunity of mentioningthese circumstances,although now of little or nointerest, partly because M.Pouqueville has alluded tothem very obscurely in hisbook of travels, but chieflyfbr the purpose of contradictingan assertion of the Rev.T. S. Hughes, who seems, inseveral instances, to have giventoo much credit to the Frenchconsul's information, or to thatof other persons in Ephms notmore worthy of confidence, andwho has thought proper toassert that either in the conferenceof M;^tika, or on someother occasion, 'solemn promises— incautious promises impossibleto perform — were madeto Al^."— (Travels in Sicily,Greece, and Albania, vol. i.p. 190.) It is sufficient formeto refer to the publishedcorrespondence of Lord Col-logwood,to show that whateverAl may have found itconvenient to represent to travellersor visitors from theIonian Islands, the pretendedpromises were nothing morethan offers of co-operationagainst the French, and assurancesthat His Majesty's shipson the coast had instructionsto assist him in any attempthe might make upon the placesoccupied by the French forces.Al, however, never chose toavail himself of the assistance,not daring, however desiroushe might have been of possessingan ultimate refuge fromthe Porte in Lefkadha, to undertakean attempt upon thatisland without the concurrenceof the supreme government.XXXV,] Epirus. 47for the season. After following the sea-beach foramile and a half, our road passes along the footof the hill of Mikhalitzi, where the remains of theaqueduct of Nicopolis cross one of the ravineswhich intersect the height. We pass through ascanty wood of crooked oaks, where a thick forestis said to have existed 40 years ago, but whichbeing conveniently situated for the embarkationof the timber, has been thereby reduced to itspresent state. Leaving a collection of twenty hutscalled Kanali one mile on the right, we proceedalong a narrow plain on the sea side, partiallycultivated with com, and at 11.13 cross near thesea the rivulet of Kamarina, which is shaded bylarge plane trees, resounding with the songs ofnightingales ^ The river of Kamarina was formerlythe southern boundary of the possessionsof Hassan Aga of Mai^ariti, but the Vezlr hasremoved it beyond Riniassa, besides which he hastaken inland the half of Fanari. A little to thenorth of the mouth of the river are the magazinesof Agriapidhia, from whence, in peaceable times,Kamarina, Kastroskia, and the adjacent places,carry on some commerce with the islands. Herealso the islanders are in the habit of landing inharvest time, to work as labourers in the adjacentcountry. Our cruisers charged with the blockadeof the enemy in the Ionian islands have for thepresent cut off the communication. On a littlelevel by the river side they are ploughing forrokka, which will be sown immediately. The48 RPiRUS. [chap.situation would admit of irrigation from the river,but the spring rains are usually sufficient.After an ascent from the coast by a gradualslope through corn-fields and oaks, we arrive, at11.33 at Kastro-sykia, or Kastroskia\ a village of50 houses standing on heights above the sea,which are backed by woody slopes rising to thesummit which connects the mountain of Kamaiinawith Mount Tjekurat, in face of SuH, The manufacture narrow woollen cloths,blankets, and carpets, and in common with almostall the villages of this part of the country, makebags of goats' hair. Proceeding at 3.10, we crossthe rugged heights which project into the sea alittle to the northward of the village, and whichare covered with oaks of various kinds*, mixedwith an underwood chiefly of lentisk ^, and at 4.5halt for the night at Riniassa^, a village of 20houses with a kula, which has been ruined in thewars between A\y Pasha and Hassan Aga. Thisvillage is not visible from the sea, but the castleof the same name, which is a mile distant, is oneof the most conspicuous objects on the coast. Itstands on the summit of a very steep height risingfrom the sea-beach, on the slope of which are thevestiges of the old town of Riniassa, which as wellas the castle was of some importance before theTurkish conquest. The Ver has lately beenmaking some additions to the old walls of theKatrrpO'^vKtcLfKaarpoaKia, ' <r)^yoc,^iySpa^ fieXayiBtaiCf wovp- * 'Pfiyidatra,I'apia, apca/c*XXXV.] EPIRUS. 49castle, which were solidly constructed of roughstones, mortar, and broken tiles. He has alsobuilt three or four houses to lodge a garrison oftwenty Albanians, and another for his own usewhen he may happen to visit this place, andwhich remains in the meantime unfurnished andunoccupied. One old English six-pounder is theonly ordnance.This place is now the Vezir's frontier garrisontowards Tjami, the present boundary between himand Hassan Aga of Margariti being the smallstream already alluded to, which rises in thewoody mountains surrounding the village of ,and which flows along the northern sideof the Castle-hill into the sea. Two or three milesbeyond the river, is a small harbour below thevillage of Elia.April 30. — At 7.20 we begin to cross the mountainstowards the plain of Fanari, the road followingthe edge of a steep ravine, in which flows atorrent, one of several which contribute to form theriver of Riniassa. The slopes are covered chieflywith oak, both velani and common; of the latter thereare many fine trees, but not straight to any length :there are also many of the aria or quercus ilex oflarge dimensions : this kind of oak is supposed tofurnish the best ship-timber of any. In most placesthere is a thick underwood, consisting chiefly oflentisk and arbutus. At 8.30 we pass by the ruinsof the village of Topolia, where nothing now remainsbut a church and a few huts. On our right,beyond a small cultivated vale, belonging to theVOL. IV. E50 EPIRUS. [CHAP-villageBabatziko^ which is not in sight, risesthe mountain which from Pr^vyza makes itsappearance between the summit of Along andthat above Parma.We soon arrive at the highest point of our route,where stands a solitary church, and where a partof the southern side of the plain of Fanari presentsitself to view — then begin to descend through a woodof oaks without much underwood. In some placesthe ground has been cleared for sowing com. Thetrees, instead of having been felled, have beenmerely killed by means of an incision round thelower part of the stem ; the bark, which is serviceable,is then removed, and the tree burnt bya fire lighted at the root ; the labour is thus savedof cutting down the trees, the timber being notworth the expence of removal. We descend by aroad in some places rugged, and for the most partthrough a beautiful forest of oak and ilex, wherean abundance of nightingales are singing. At 10having reached the foot of the pass, we enter theplain of Fanari, and arrive at Kanalaki at 10.35.This is now the most considerable village of Fa-neri,and belongs to a Bey, who is related toHassan Aga, of Margariti, but who has sided withthe Vezir. It was once rivalled by Kastri, Goritza,Koroni, and Koronopulo, but all these havedwindled since Aly has got a footing in the plain.At 3 I set out for a Paleo-kastro or Hellenic ruin,very conspicuous throughout the surrounding countMirafxtraritKoc.XXXV.] EPIRUS. 51try, and which occupies a height on the southeasternside of the village of Kastri, midway betweenKanalaki and Goritza, which latter villagestands on the rise of the hills bounding the plain tothe westward. Unfortunately, the bridge over themarsh in the direct route being broken down, weareobliged to make a circuit in which we entirelylose the road among the rice-grounds, so that I amat last under the necessity of giving up the object.Having again obtained a firm footing on theedge of the mountain, we recover the direct routefrom Porto Fanari to Glykj^ and Suli, which passesthrough 'Artist, a village on the slope of the mountainopposite to Kanalaki. At 4.40 we pass underMuziakati, another village similarly situated, andabout an hour distant from Kanalaki in direct distance.The entrance of Port Splantza, otherwisecalled Porto Fanari, the ancient Glycys Limen, wasvisible from our road from a mile beyond 'Artistas far as Muziakati ; short of the former point it isconcealed from view by a projection of the mountainwhich advances into the plain south-westwardof Kanalaki. Beyond the latter village it is hidby the hills of Margariti about Koroni. Continuingto skirt the foot of the hills as before,we leave Klisura, another small place of abouttwenty houses on the slope of the mountain tothe right, at 4.50, and at 6, having crossed theriver of Suli, or Acheron arrive at Glyk^^. Thisplain of Fanari, or Frari as it is called by the Albanians,is every where so marshy, that except atKanalaki and Potassa, all the habitations of thosewho cultivate the plain are situated upon the 252 EPiRus. [chap.cent hills. Besides the Gurla, or river of Suli, andthe Vuvo, which overflow their banks in the rainyseasons, there are sources issuing from the foot ofthe mountain below 'Artist, and others still morecopious which form the marsh near Kastri. Eventhe upper part of the plain towards Glyky is stillat this advanced period of the spring in a swampystate, from the mere effect of the winter torrentsfrom the hills. The river Gurla, in its windingcourse through the plain, is distant in general fromthe eastern height about a third of the breadth ofthe plain, it then leaves the foot of the hill of Kastrion its right bank, turns towards the western heightand enters the marshes, which at the presentseason begin a little below Kastri and Kanalaki,extend to within a short distance of the sea, andoccupy all the eastern side of the plain. In summerthey are much diminished, but are neverentirely dry, and some large lakes still remain inseveral places similar to those in the marsh ofKatokhi, particularly one not far from the sea, andanother to the south-east, near the foot of themountains which there rise abruptly from the level.These lakes furnish a constant and abundant supplyof fish. The river of Soli having traversed themarsh, is joined below it by the Vuv6 about threemiles above the junction of the united river with thesea in the bay of Splantza. The Vuvo rises nearParamythia, waters the valley which extends fromthence to Fanari, and then proceeding along thefoot of the hills of Margate on the western sideof the plain of Fanari, passes between Koroni andKoronopulo. This river is dry in summer in theXXX V.J EPIRU8. 53valley of Paramythia, but in the plain of Fanarithere is water at all seasons, supplied probablyfrom sources at the foot of the western heights.The water of the Vuvo is reputed to be bad ; andthe villages on the slope of the hills near it, eithermake use of wells or fetch water from the Sulio-tito.There seems no reason to doubt that the Gurla,or river of Suli, is the Acheron the Vuvo theiJocytus of antiquity, and the great marsh or lakebelow Kastri the Acherusia. The course of theAcheron through the lake into the Glycys lumenaccords perfectly with the testimony of Thucydides,Scylax, Livy, and Strabo \ and the disagreeablewater of the Cocytus is noticed by Pausanias'.In the lower plain towards the sea are the villagesof Valonderako and Tzikuri, belonging to Turksof Margariti : the inhabitants cultivate flax, wheat,and rice, and possess extensive pastures full ofcattle. A little farther from the sea is Lykursi,near the left bank of the Vuvo, opposite to which,on the other side of that river, and distant threeor four miles direct from Porto Fanari, is a church,formerly a monastery, of St. John, standing onsome remains of Hellenic walls of polygonal masonry,indicating probably the site of Cichyrus, orthe Thesprotian Ephyre, which Strabo describesas being situated above the Glycys Limen.The water of Port Fanari is fresh, as Strabo andThucyd. 1. 1, c. 46. Scy- ' pti ht kqX Kiuicvroct v^oiplax in Oetrirpufroi. Liv. 1. 8, drEpvicrraTov, — Pausan. Attic,c. 24. Strabo, p. 324. c. 17.54 EpiRus. [chap.the ancient name attest, which is caused undoubtedlyby the great and constant supplies from theAcheron, the Cocyttis, and those subterraneoussources by which the lake is chiefly formed. Themarshy nature of the plain of Fandri renders itvery favourable to the culture of rice and kalam-bokki, which are its chief produce : flax and wheatare grown in the drier parts, and every where itfeeds sheep and cattle in great numbers. Maizegives a return of 40 to 1 ; it is sown as late asMay and June and reaped in October, its growthbeing assisted by irrigation when the dryness of theseason renders that process necessary. The rice-fieldsare divided into squares by little mounds,and at intervals there are ditches across the fieldsfor admitting the water, which is conducted fromthe river by a canal. The part of the plain nearGlykjr is less adapted to irrigation than the lowerparts towards the Acherusia. When the field is quiteinundated the rice is sown, and the ground is keptin the same state till the grain is nearly ripe, whenthe soil is allowed to dry. Care must be takenthat the water is not too cold when the seed isthrown in, which occurs in April or May, thereaping in August. The return is often 150 to 1.All the land in Fanari, which has been taken fromMargariti by the Vezir, has been divided into tjift-like, and farmed for his benefit, with the exceptionof Kanalaki. He takes one-third of the cropin rice and a quarter in kalambokki, furnishingthe labourer with nothing but his lodging. Therice of this district supplies all the adjacent country,but is chiefly sold in the first instance at theXXXV.] EPIRUS. 55market of Paramythia, where it now fetches fivepiastres the kilo of thirty-two okes. Maize sellsfor fourteen piastres the fortoma of about 110okes ; wheat 25 piastres the fortoma, of which theaverage weight is 1 20 okes. A j3otSt, or ox for theplough, is worth 100 piastres : an ayiXaSo, or cow,about half as much.The rocky height of Kastri, standing separatefrom the hills which surround the AchertLgianplains, and protected by the Acheron, the Cocytus,and the Acherusia, seems as if intended by naturefor the strong hold of this district. On the summitare the walls of an acropolis; those of thecity descend the slopes on either side towardsGoritza and Kanalaki, and others follow the foot ofthe hill opposite to Glykj^. Both the magnitudeand position of these ruins favour the opinion thatthey are those of Pandosia, a very ancient colonyof Elis', which gave name to another Pandosia inthe country of the Bretton. Alexander Colossusking of Epirus, was warned by the oracle of Dodonato avoid Pandosia and the Acherusian water,and erroneously applied it to his own Pandosiainstead of that of Italy where he received his fatalwound ^. As the Italian Pandosia was named«after that of Epirus, and stood on the bank of aDemosth. in Halonnes. p. 84. Retake.AiwciSil irpoi^v^aiiD fioiXtly ^A^tpov^iov vBwpHay^alay 0" 6dt rol Odvaro^ ireirpufAeyoc imi.Ap. Said, in Tovitv,» Liv. 1. 8, c. 24. Strabo, Paul. Gell. 1. 17, c. 21. Step.256. Justin. 1. 12, c. 2. phan. in Uavlovia.66 EPiRus. [chap.river bearing the same name as the Acheron ' ofEpirus it is probable that the Epirote Pandosiawas also on the bank of the Acheron. Kastri is theonly position on this river which preserves remainsof Hellenic antiquity, or even possesses the usualcharacteristics of an ancient site.This evening fire-flies make their appearance atGlykj^ in considerable numbers, and are the firstI have seen this spring.May 1. — ^A little beyond Glyk5^, to the left ofthe entrance of the Klisura leading to Suli, a largebody of water issues from the foot of the rocks.Below the sources are the remains of an aqueductwhich crossed the river, and of which there is afragment on each bank. Upon the Glykjr side partof an arch is still standing, ten feet thick, composedof small stones and mortar : there is a foundationalso on the bank of the river, formed of handsomesquared stones, probably that of a bridge, but neitherthis nor the arch appears to be more ancientthan the neighbouring church of Glyky, which wasdedicated to St. Donatus, and was the cathedralchurch of the bishopric of Glycys. Its destructionwas completed during the wars of Suli, and theruins were employed by Aljr Pasha to constructan adjoining kula. There still remains, however,enough to show that the building was thirty-eightyards long, with walls seven feet and a halfthick, supported by massive buttresses. Thereare several shafts of grey granite lying on theground within the ruined walls, and others ofjrupaj^^ii iroTHfiO^ 'Axcpwi".— Strabo, ubi sup. ••XXXV.] EPIRUS. 57bluish white marble, all about two feet in diameter; these formed the nave of the church :others smaller, of grey granite, supported thefront of the Gynecseum. On the outside of thechurch lies the fragment of a shaft, two feet teninches in diameter, which is of limestone, like theinner portal of the church. It is possible thatthese may have been taken from some older build .ing when the church was built. They are at leastthe only remains here which have any appearanceof Hellenic antiquity.The view of Suli from hence is very imposing.Three tiers of steep and almost precipitous rockspresent themselves in front, and behind them inthe middle, appearing through the gorge of theriver, the hill of Trypa, crowned with the castleof Kiafa between two smaller buildings at eitherend of the ridge. Above all rises the mountainof Suli, apparently double the height of Trypa,the elevation of which above Glyky, seems tobe about 1200 feet.Leaving the church of Glykjr this morning at7.30, we follow the foot of Mount Kunla, as thesummit is called which extends from Glykjr to thepass of £l^fthero-kh6ri, beyond Paramythia. Onits slope is the small village of Khoika, which wepass at 8.5, nearly opposite to Lyra, on the hillsof Margariti. The latter heights have a singularappearance from their uniformity, presenting towardsthe plain a long succession of semi-circularprecipices, convex towards the plain, and consistingof vertical strata of calcareous rock. Afew small hamlets are situated in the retiring68 EPiRus. [chap,angles or intervals of these rocks. The plain,which is five or six miles across at Glyk^, diminishesto three as we enter the valley leadingto Paramythia, and at that town is not more thanhalf as much in width. At 8.40 Gardhiki, aTurkish town of 200 houses, with a few Greekfamilies, is two miles on our right, on the sideof Mount Kurlla, occupying a large space, andhaving a beautiful appearance with its numerousgardens, watered by never-failing sources whichissue from the foot of the mountain, and sendcontributions to the river Vuvo. We pass alongthe banks of this river, over low downs resemblingthe plain of Prevyza in soil, as well as in beingovergrown with fern. These downs may be calledthe natural boundaries of Paramythia and Fanari,though at present the former district extends nearlyto Khoika. Leaving some other small hamlets onthe side of either mountain, we arrive at 9.30opposite Dhragomi, a large village two miles distant,on the last slope of Mount Kurila, whichhere rises in majestic precipices above it. likeGardhiki, it is chiefly inhabited by Mussulman,and abounds in fountains and gardens. Fromhence, as far as the termination of the mountainat the pass of Elefthero-khori, the summit isclothed with a continued forest of fir.A guard of Suliotes from Glykj^ who accompanyus on foot seem quite insensible to the heatof the morning, and without halting outward ourhorses and keep always in front, alleging thatthey have some apprehensions from the inhabitantsof Karvuniari in the Margariti hills. ContinuingXXXV.]EPIRUS.our route along the middle of the valley, we arriveat 10.35 at a ruin of the annexed form, situatedin the middle of the plain. It appears to havebeen a temple of the time of the Roman empire,which was afterwards converted into a church.It is known only by the name of ro x'^^^^f^j orthe ruin.Above it, towards the mountain, is Mariti, betweenwhich and another small village namedVeliani the ruins of the acropolis of a Greek cityare distinguishable from our road, surrounding atable summit at the foot of the cliffs of MountKurila. From the Kh41asma it takes us fortyminutes to reach the middle of the town of Paramythia.Paramythia occupies the entire side of a hillwhich rises to half the height of Mount Kurila,and is separated only by a small space from itscliffs. Like the generality of Albanian towns, itcovers a large space of ground, and is dividedinto clusters of houses, occupied by ^pm, or60 EPiRus. [chap.family alliances, which often make war upon oneanother when in want of an external quarrel.Before the reduction of the place by the Vezir,there were 600 inhabited houses, but many familieshaving fled with Islam Pronio, Aly's chiefopponent, there are now not more than 400 Musulmanand 40 Greek. The houses are built of theroughly hewn calcareous stone of the mountain,and where they stand close together, the usualAlbanian filth prevails, but nothing can be morebeautiful than the general appearance of the town.On the summit, which is surrounded with cliffs,stands a ruined castle; below, on the declivityof the hill, the picturesque houses are dispersedamong gardens, watered by plentiful streams descendingin every direction, and the spaces betweenthe clusters of houses are grown with superbplane trees, or occupied by mosques and fountains,shaded by cypresses and planes. These beautifulfeatures are admirably contrasted with the cliffs andfir-clad summits of the great mountain which risesabove the castle. As in other Albanian towns, allthe ordinary articles of Albanian or Turkish dressand furniture are manufactured here, chiefly byMusulmans. The Greeks are for the most partonly retail shopkeepers.The castle, which is surrounded by precipices,except towards the town and the south-west,formerly contained, as usual in Turkey, a greatnumber of private houses ; but these having beenruined in the war which preceded the capture ofthe place by Alj^, it now serves only to lodge anAlbanian garrison. The Vezir 's governor occupiesXXX V.J Epirus. 61the house of Pronio, who was head of the family alliance,formerly the most powerful in Paramythia ;this house, together with five or six others, whichbelonged to relatives of the same chieftain, is situatedbelow the castle, on a slope terminating inanother fortified rocky summit named Galata,which lies three quarters of a mile below thecastle, and midway between it and the extremityof the town in the valley. The Vezir has mademany repairs and additions to the fortress of Galata.The upper castle was the acropolis of anancient city, as appears by some fine piecesof Hellenic wall amidst the more modem workwhich consists of repairs of various ages. Theupper gate, which looks towards the mountainand leads to the pass of Elefthero-kh6ri, occupiesthe same position as one of the gates of the acropolis.Two portions of ancient wall continue tosupport a ramp which led up to it, and which stillserves as an approach to the modem gate ; oneach side of it are other fragments of the originalwork founded upon the cliffs, and sustaining themodem structure. On the lower side of the castle,facing Galata and the valley, are some larger remainsof the inclosure of the acropolis : here anentire bend of the wall is Hellenic, towards thenorth-west also there remains a trilithic door, fourfeet wide, which is now walled up. The masonryon either side of this door is regular, all the otherremains are of the purest kind of polygonal masonry.Some Hellenic foundations at Galata showthat summit to have been comprehended withinthe city, which was thus between two and three62 Epirus. [chap.miles in circumference. The only remains I canfind in the modem town are some squared blocksin the streets, and a fragment of an inscribedsepulchral monument of Roman times ^ Belowthe town are some remains of old olive plantations,from which it may be presumed that all thegreat valley extending from hence to the GlycysLimen would be well adapted to that valuableproduction. These olive-trees the Spaniards havethe credit of having planted, with as much truthas they are said to have constructed the Khalasmaand the Castle of Paramythia ^. There are someother very old olive trees in a valley to the northwardof the town, which is watered by one of thetributaries of the Vuvo. Here, not very long ago,stood a village named Labovo, of which a ruinedchurch and some remains of the houses still exist.Several small shafts and capitals of a bad tasteare lying here, and the adjoining fields are coveredwith stones and broken pottery. The site may possiblybe that of a pagan temple ; for it is said thathere were found those exquisite specimens of theancient toreutic art in bronze, which now belongto Mr. Hawkins and Mr. Payne Knight. The onlyrelic of antiquity decidedly Hellenic now remainingat Labovo is an ancient sepulchral stele of theusual square form lying on the side of the rivulet,Inscription, No. 169. tan nobles, conquered thisThe trees may have been country from the Albanians inplanted, however, by Italians, the middle of the fourteenthas it appears that Charles Toe century — ^Villehardouin, Hist.CO, the first Count of Cefalonia, de Constantinople sous les Emirunion with several Napoli peers Francois, 1. 8. c. 25.XXXV.] EPIRUS. 63and without any inscription, at least on the sideswhich are above ground.The upper castle of Paramythia is called by theTurks Aidhonat Kalesi, and the Kara in all officialforms bears that of Aidhonat Kalesende. Therecan be no doubt that Aidhonat is derived from AiDhonato, the vulgar pronunciation of '"Ayioc Aova-^roc, or Saint Donatus, who was the patron of thispart of Epirus, and to whom many churches werehere dedicated, particularly the episcopal churchof Glykj'^, one in the castle of Paramythia and twoat Suli, all which were ruined in the Suliote wars.I have not been able to find any mention of Paramythiain history, either ancient or Byzantine,though being a word purely Hellenic, and suggestedapparently by the beauty of the place, itmay very possibly be as old as an early period ofthe Roman Empire, when a new town may haverisen on the deserted site of the city, which probablyat the Roman conquest shared the generalffkte of the Epirote towns. The non-occurrence ofthe name of Paramythia in the Byzantine authorsmay be attributed perhaps to the superiorglory of the patron saint. We learn from Procopius,that Justinian repaired two castles of SaintDonatus : and though he ascribes them to NewEpirus, a provincial division of that time whichcontained northern Epirus and part of lUyria, itis very possible that one of them only mayhave been in New Epirus, and that the other mayhave been Paramythia. Some of the buildings inthe town seem to be nearly of the period to whichProcopius refers, particularly a church in thelower part of it dedicated to the KoifAtim^ ttiq ITava-64 spires. [chap.yiaC) and a large bath close by, which has everyappearance of being coeval with the church. Themasonry of them both resembles the Roman, consistingof a mixture of tiles with stones and mortar :the plan of the bath is exactly like that of themodem Turkish baths, thus furnishing a strongargument for believing that the Turks adoptedtheir baths, like the construction of their mosques,from the Greeks.Besides the church and bath at Paramythia,and the church and aqueduct at Glyky, there aresome other churches on the Margariti side ofFanari, particularly that of St. Dhimitri at thefoot of the hills near Potassa, which have the appearanceof being of that period of the Byzantineempire, in which all this part of Epirus flourishedunder the patronage of St. Donatus. I was informedby the papas at Glyky that some inscriptionswhich were destroyed when that church wasruined, proved it to have been built in the reign ofTheodosius the Great, in whose time Donatus wasbishop of Eurhoea, and performed his miracles \Among others he relieved the country from theravages of a drs^on which had infested the highwayat a bridge or causeway called the Chamsege-phyrse, which traversed a marsh. Here the terriblemonster devoured sheep, goats, oxen, horses,and men, until the saint killed it by merely spittingat it, making the sign of the cross, after whicheight yoke of oxen were required to drag it outof the water. At Assyria a came or subordinatetown of Eurhoea, he caused a copious fountainSozometiy 1. 7> c. 26.XXXV.] EPIRUS. 65to issue, and here he was buried at a house ofprayer which received his names This seemsplainly to allude to the church of St. Donatusat Glyky, and to the great source of water whichissues from the foot of the mountain near it ^Marcus, a successor of Donatus in the bishopricof Eurhoea, subscribed to the council of Chalcedony,in the year 451 : a century later, Procopius de *scribes Eurhoea, which is named by Herculesamong the towns of Old Epirus, as an ancientcity, so called from its abundant waters, but whichhaving fallen to decay, was, like Photice and Phoenixin the same province, renewed by Justinianon a neighbouring site : the position chosen for thenewEurhcBa was a peninsula in a lake, which, therecan be little doubt from the still existing recollectionsof Donatus in this vicinity, was the Acherusia^.But the works of Justinian, so ostentatiously describedby Procopius, were probably as insignificanthere as in most other places, and did not longprevent Eurhcea from being deserted. In less thaiehicTypiog oIkoc, dir ahrov is not Hkely that any thing lirtayvfjUav t^wy, — Observing the appellation of ahmen, 1. 7» c. 26. dtrrv stood in so low a situation;Nicephorus Callistas (1. 12, I am inclined to believe, there.35) has related the history fore, that the castle or city wasof Saint Donatus almost in Paramythia, which continuedthe exact words of Solomon, tobear the name of St. Donatusexcept that he adds koI dtrrv in the 14th century,' when it isafter thxriiptog oTcoci whence noticed by Cantacuzenus (1. 2,it might be supposed that the c. 34) together with loannina,church and the town of St. Do Parga, and some other townnatus were at the same place ; or fortresses of that period, «but although a village or town which are now extinct,may have existed at Glyk^, it ' Procop. de ^dif. 1. 4, c. !•VOL. IV. F66 Epirus. [chap.thirty years after the death of that emperor, Assyria,the burying place of Donatus, had been substitutedfor Eurhoea as the see or title of the bishopric,and soon afterwards the body of Donatus wasremoved from thence to Cassino in Corfu, withthe approbation of Pope Gregory the Great, inconsequenceof the insecurity of Epirus \ intowhich the yet unconverted Huns or Bulgariansbegan to make their destructive inroads. The renewalof the bishopric under the name of Glykjr wasprobably not earlier than the fourteenth century,when Buthrotum, one of the oldest suffragan seesin Epirus, to which Glykjr is now united, was probablyapproaching to its present desolate state.Glykj^ is an example of that change of positionin an ancient name which sometimes in Greeceholds out false lights to the geographer, though inthe present instance it can have no such effect.The descriptive epithet anciently applied to theharbour, having first become the designation ofthe whole Acher^isuin plain, was at length attachedto the place which contained the cathedral church,and hence became the title of the renewed bishopric,while Fandri, derived perhaps from some watchtoweror signal-post at the harbour, became theappellation of all the lower plain. Splautza, theother modem name of Porto Fanari, or GlycysLinens is probably only a Romaic corruption ofthe Italian Spiaggia.All the lands of Paramythia belong to Musulmans,and a great part of them are spahiliks, theRequiem, Orient Christ, vol. ii. p. 143.XXXV.] Epirus. 67proprietors of which are consequently liable to becalled to the field by the Sultan or his representative: Paramythia could thus furnish not less than2000 muskets. It was at all times the most importantmember of the Suliote league against Ayantwas generally united with Margariti, ,and Dhragomi. But here, as in every partof Albania when not united by a common danger,the same towns were often at war with one another,and when this was wanting, the parties into whicheach town was divided were seldom long withoutfighting. In these contests the Suliotes weresure to take a share, often on both sides ; so thatit was not uncommon for them to be opposed toone another, as happened also among their ownferia at home, in default of their being engaged inthe quarrels of others. Nor could they ever longagree with their neighbours. The treaties madeby the chiefs were not observed by the lowerorders, who, half starved in their mountains, werecontinually committing depredations on the adjoiningterritories. In short, rapine and war were elementsof existence to a true Suliote.When Suli became closely invested, Paramythia,like all the other places which had been united withthe Suliotes, fell off from the alliance. But this didnot save it from the vengeance or ambition of Aljr.Soon after the fall of Suli he turned all his forceagainst Pronio, who, when reduced to extremities,had the weakness to allow one of Alj^'s bolu-bdshiswith ten men to garrison the castle, merely inorder, as the Vezir stated in his usual hypocriticalmanner, that the war, of which he was heartilyf268 EPiRus. [chap*tired, should not have the appearance of ending inamanner disgraceful to him ; for nfiri and evrpownthonour and shame, two qualities the least regardedby him, are favourite words in his mouth. Uponthe first pretext of a quarrel, his guard of ten introducedhundreds, and Pronio was soon obligedto capitulate in his only remaining fortress ofGalata. By the terms he was to enjoy his landedproperty. But Aljr soon pretended to have discoveredthat he had formed an alliance <»withIbrahim Pasha of Berat, and forthwith seized uponall his lands, amounting to 800 zevgaria. Thefamily of Pronio had not been long at the head ofParamythia. Islam's father, whose ruined houseis still standing near that of his son on the heightof Galata, was the first who obtained it by purchasingfrom the Sultan the magicians of the voisof all that part of the district which doesnot consist of Ziam^ts or Tiara.It is supposed that the Vezir's income from Paramythiais now entirely spent in the maintenanceof his acquisition. Being obliged to observe thegreatest vigilance against Margariti, which he hopessome day to entrap by force or fraud, he keepsabout 800 men within the ffvyopoc, or boundary ofthe district of Paramythia, which, at 25 piastres amonth for each man, requires 500 purses a year :on the other hand, the 800 zevg4ria of Pronio, ata profit of 200 piastres a year, yield about 300purses; so that it will require some farther extortionsto meet the expence. This shows, thatalthough A15^ has immense possessions in houses,furniture, dresses, jewels, and other similar pro-xxxv.]EPIRUS. 69party, the great number of Albanian soldiers whomhis continual wars and ambitious projects obligehim to employ and to pay regularly, probablyprevent him from hoarding any great treasure inspecie.May 3. — The acropolis of the ancient city whichstood at Veliani, is not more than three miles in aright line from that of Paramythla : it is situatedat about the same height above the plain, butnearer to the perpendicular cliffs of Mount Kurlla,and not so well defended by its own cliffs towardsthe mountain. The village of Veliani, now inruins, stands considerably below the acropolis, butwithin the inclosure of the ancient city, as appearsby some foundations on the slope of the hill belowit. At a monastery of St. John, where the churchalone remains entire, I find a fragment of a columnof calcareous stone, about three feet indiameter, and another of the same description inthe village. Farther down at a ruined church aresome other fragments of Greek architecture, witha caput bevis and other ornaments of a good style,but not of a very ancient date. These are theonly remains of sculpture. The acropolis wasconsiderably larger than that of Paramythia,and its walls at the upper part of the inclosureare preserved in some places to half theirheight : in many other parts of the hill there arepieces of them also in good preservation. Theyare accurate and well-preserved specimens of thepolygonal kind, but the masses are more equal inbulk than they generally are in this kind of Greekmasonry. The main approach to the gate of theacropoliS; which was on the western side, is still70 EPiRus. [chap.visible ; besides which there are ruins of a smalldoor opposite to the mountain, but the former isthe only place, except on the south towards themonastery, by which there is now any access tothe summit. By the position of this city immediatelyopposite to the opening which leads toMargariti, it possessed the widest and most fertilepart of the upper valley of the Cocyttis. On thesouthern side of the ruins are many sources ofwater and a village which* derives from them itsSclavonic name of Voiniko.Besides the ancient cities at Paramythla andVeliani, vestiges of others are said to exist aboveDhragomi, and at a position between Karvunidriand Margaret : but unfortunately the state of hostility,or rather of mutual observation, betweenAljr Pashd and the chieftains of Mariti andFiliates, will not admit of my visiting either ofthose places, or indeed any part of their districts.Under these circumstances, I must be satisfiedwith setting down the topographical informationwhich I have obtained by inquiry, aided by someocular observations made from several commandingpoints, as well as by my former knowledge ofa part of the maritime country. Paramythia commands,at no great distance, three important passes :to the westward is the opening immediately oppositeto Voiniko and the Paleokastro of Veliani,which, branching from the valley of the Vuvo,crosses the range of hills on its western side intothat of Margariti. About midway to Margariti isKarvuniari, a village of 160 houses chiefly Turkish.The mountain to the right of the branching valley,XXXV.] Epirus. 71and which rises immediately opposite to Paralyticwestward is called Pesimo ', a small Greekvillage on it is named Sevastos '. At the foot ofit, bearing S. 47 W. by compass from the castle ofParamythia, is a place called Vuvo, where are theprincipal sources of the river of that name, which,joined by the streams from Labovo, Paramythia,and Voiniko, form the Socius.The town of Margariti is divided into two mak*alas, called Margariti and Omorfiates, containingbetween them 800 houses. Mazarakia, formerlythe chief place of this district, which is still designatedin the Turkish firman by the name ofMazare-kazasi, is two hours to the northward ofMargariti. The other towns are Kurtesi of 100houses, one hour from Mazarakia, towards Paramythia; Parga two hours and a half to the southof Margariti ; Arpitza, 3 hours from the latter onthe side of the same maritime ridge which commandsthe district of Parga ' ; and Aghia, containing200 houses, situated midway between Arpltzaand Parga, not far to the southward of Cape Var-tam,which is the western projection of the samemountain. The plain near the mouth of the Ka-lamais called Rai, and the river forms the line ofseparation between tie two subdivisions of Tjami ^,named Daghawi, or Dai, and Parakalamo. Dd-ghazi comprehends the country from the Bahamasouthward as far as the bounds of Paramy thea, and^ IlcVi/ioy. see vol. I. p. 103 ; vol. III.2e/3a<7rdc« p« 3.For the places on the * Grace ^ Ti^afiovpia,coast of this part of Epirus,72 EPiRus. [chap.Fan&ri ; Parakdlamo, that in the opposite directionto the boundaries of Vutzintro and Divino. InDdghawi are Griko-khori, Gomenitza, and Vista,situated in that order from south to north on thehills above the bay of Gomenitza : Grave in theplain near the mouth of the Kalama. BetweenGomenitza and Menlna, which stands on the leftbank of the Kalama, in the road from Paramythiato Filiates^ are several Musulman villages, ofwhich the principal are Suliasi, Varfanids, andRizanius : to these belongs the plain of the LowerKalama to the left of the river. A high cliff atJuliana, in a line between Paramythia and Filiae,forms a very conspicuous object from Corfu.The second pass leading from Paramythia is thatof Neokhori on the road to Filiates. Neokhori isa small village lying in an opening between thenorth-western end of Mount Pesimo and MountLabanitza ; the road leads directly down fromNeokhori to Menlna on the Kalamd. Betweenthe southern foot of Mount Labanitza and thenorthern end of Kurila is the pass of El^fthero-khori, the third of the passes of Paramythia.Besides the villages of the district of Paralytic,already noticed as such, there are the following:— Skupitza, situated in the valley whichlies between Mounts Pesimo and Labanitza, andthrough which leads the road to Neokhori. Niko-litzi and Grika in Pesimo, not far from Paralytic,and on the western face of that mountaintowards Kurtesi, Dhraganius. At the foot ofMount Labanitza are eight or ten others, of whichthe principal are Vlakho-khori, of 150 houses;Uzdina, where are plantations of olives ; Selani,XXXV.] Epirus. 73where is a monastery, and Plakoti ; each of thesethree has about 50 houses. I have already mentionedthe principal places at the foot of MountKuidla, besides which there are some smaller inhigher situations. Both Kurlla and Labanitzagive their name to or take it from small villagesof the same name in high situations in the respectivemountains.To the ancient sites, which are so numerous inthe great valleys watered by the lower scarron, thelower Thyamisj and their tributaries, it is a mortifyingdisappointment to the geographer to beunable to apply a single name with absolute certainty,so scanty are the notices of Epirus inancient history, — so complete and lasting seemsto have been the destruction of its cities by theRomans. Their walls remain, while their nameshave perished ; in four instances only is there anystrong probability. These are Mphyra or Ochtfrus,at the monastery of St. John, four miles from PortoFanari, near the right bank of the Cocytus ; BucJueiiumy at the harbour of St. John, a few mileseast of Parga ; Pandosia at Kastri, and Cestria atPalea Venetia. The arguments in favour of thethree former positions have already been stated,and the testimony of Thucydides is very strong asto the last. In saying that the Thyamis separatedThesprotia from the Certaine \ the historian identifiesthe latter with the present district of Filiates,which town is situated on the heights rising fromthe northern edge of the plains of the lower Ka-lama,and possesses those fertile pastures towardsthe mouth of the river which were ancientlyThucyd. 1. 1, c. 46.74 Epirus. [chap.famous for the Cestrinic oxen Milites itself,however, seems not to have been an ancient site,whereas the ruins at Palea Venetia are clearly,from their extent, those of the chief town of thevalley to the right of the lower Thyamis, and oneof the leading cities of Epirus. Cestria was saidto have been founded by Cestrinus, son of Helenusand Andromache', but though named as atown by Pliny*, there is reason to believe thatit was more usually called Ilium, or Troja, inmemory of the origin of the colony of Helenus *.Filiates may perhaps be a corruption of Ilium.Campania, another ancient name in this part ofThesprotia^f seems also to have survived in Gu-mendoza,formerly written Kammenitza.The other ruined cities, which are still to beseen in Thesproiiay are likely to remain as namelessas ^^ the brave men before Agamemnon,"unless some fortunate discovery of inscriptionsshould throw some light on the slender noticeswhich the ancient authors have left of them.Elateiaia and Baptise, according to Strabo, were inthat part of the interior above Cichyrus andBuchsetium, where Pandosia was situated ^ andthe former was probably not far from Pandosia,for the oration concerning Halonnesus, attributedto Demosthenes, informs us that Pandosia, ,and Elateiaia, were all colonies of Elis,Hesych. in KiffrpiyiKoi on this question in Chapter(ioiQ Schol. in Aristoph. Pac. XXXVII.y- 924. * Stephan. in Ka/i/iavia.• Pausan. Attic, c. 11. • Strabo, p. 324. Stephan.» Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 1- in 'EXarcfo.See some farther remarksXXXV.] EPIRUS. 75and that having been taken by Philip, son of Amyn-tas, they were delivered by him to his brother-in-law,Alexander of Epirus* As the fact of thecolonization favours the supposition that their situationwas not very far from the sea, the district ofMariti, both in this respect and its vicinity toPandasia, supposing Kastri to be the '^ locus Pantomime'/' seems best to accord with the territory ofElateiaia. It agrees also in a third circumstancementioned by the orator, namely, that all thethree places were in the Cassopaea at the time ofwhich he speaks, since it cannot be supposed thatthe Cassopsei ever obtained any part of the coastof old Thesprotia to the northward of Mai^ariti,nor much farther from the sea than that place.For the same reason we cannot with any probabilityapply the names either of Elateia^ or ofBatitBj which latter, on the good authority ofTheopompus was also in the Cassoprsa^j to theancient sites at Veliani and Paramythla, therebeing very little probability that the Cassopeei hadever advanced so near to the Thyamis, which wasthe northern boundary of Thesprotia. It is possiblethat the name Veliani is a corruption ofElini, the V representing the colic aspirate, forthat the Elini dwelt not far from the Cestreni maybeinferred from a verse of Rhianus, quoted byStephens :Karrpijvoc Xavvoc re icon av^Tievrcg EXivoi '•And if Cestria was at Palea Venetia, and Elini atPlin. H. N. I. 4, c. 1. ' Stephan. in Xavyoi.Theopomp. ap. Harpocrat.in 'Ekdrua,76 EPiRUS. [chap.Veliani, there is some ground for the conjecturethat Paramythia was the city of the Chaunij whichname in the verse of Rhianus stands between thoseof the Cestreni and Elini, as the town of does between Palea Venetia and Veliani.These are indeed very slight grounds of conjecture,but unfortunately no better are to be obtained.In Livy, a town of Titans is described as beingnear Corey ra, and 10 miles distant from the coast,but as the name does not occur in any other author,there may be some reason for believing theword to be corrupt, and that the real' name wasClayton, which, according to Epirus, was a colonysettled in Epirus by the Clazomenii^ Titans, accordingto the Latin historian, was the place whereprevious to the last Macedonia war the Romanlegates met the council of the Epirotes, and enteredinto engagements, the violation of some partof which in favor of Perseus furnished an excuseto the Romans for gratifying their army with theplunder of Epirus *.May 4. — After making a half circle round thenorthern side of the castle of St. Donatus we enterthe opening between the mountains Labanitza andKurila, and in one hour at 7.30 pass two rules, atriangular castle, and a toll-house standing in theKlisura, called that of Eleftherokhori from a villagewhich has now totally disappeared. Themountain of Syrako to the south-east of loanninanow presents itself in front. The less distant sceneEphori. ap. Stephan. in ' Liv. 1. 42, c dS; 1. 45,Xvr6y. c. 34.XXXV.] BPIRVS. 77consists entirely of narrow valleys and ruggedlimestone ridges branching from the great summitsof Labanitza to the left, and of Kurila, Suli,and Olji^zika to the right. This country once containedmany villages but they were all ruined inthe Suliote wars in which they suffered equallyfrom the troops of Alj^ Pasha, and from those ofParamythia and Suli. The pass of Eleftherokhoriwas one of the positions most frequently contested.From the pass we descend into a ravinealong which flows a branch of the Kalama comingfrom a Suliote summit on our right which is knownby the name of Vritzakha. On the eastern side ofthe opening from whence the stream issues, standsPopovo, a village of sixty houses, and one of thefew in this vicinity that are still inhabited. Wefollow the bed of the torrent among stunted planes,of which the half expanded leaves show that theclimate is much colder on this side of the mountains,than at Paramythia, although the elevationis nearly the same; for there the leaves of theplanes had almost attained their full growth. Theheights on either side of us have some small spotsof cultivation in places. At 9 we pass betweenPets and Salonlki : the former distant one mileand a half in a straight line, and standing upon acounterfeit of Mount Vritzakha ; the latter on themountain of Labanitza, at a greater distance.At 9.15, we arrive at a spot on the bank ofthe torrent, where preparations have been made fordinner, in true Albanian style, by the direction ofTahir Aga, head of the police of loannina and relatedto the Vezir, who, having had a mission to78 Epirus. [chap.Paramythia, has, by the Vezir's order, joined meon his return to the capital, together with some ofhis palikaria. Two lambs from a neighbouringflock had already been transfixed lion spits formedfrom the branches of an oak, and two of the soldierswere diligently turning them before a blazingfire, while others had just finished the constructionof a sofa made of the tender branches of a salix.At 10.55 we proceed along the valley borderedby the wild kharub and hawthorn, covered withblossoms, but not more forward than they were inthe plains of the Achates in the end of March.The torrent from Eleftherokhori now joins a largerbranch from the northern and eastern face of MountVritzakha, and forms a stream, which, flowingnorthward through some steep ridges in a directionparallel to the great summit of Labanitza, joins theKalama opposite to Leftokarya. We follow itscourse, often crossing it, sometimes by bridges, ofwhich the largest is that of Brelesis, having a singlearch of forty-five feet in the span ; this we pass at12.30.At 1.18, leaving the direct road to loannina onthe left, we ascend the slope of Mount Oljizika toBagotjus' by a steep and winding path, andarriving in that village at 2.25, lodge in the houseof the Hodjd-bashi, who is now a prisoner in thePasha's grand receptacle at loannina. Bagotzusconsists of twenty or thirty houses dispersed over alarge space of ground, and having a neat newchurch situated in a grove of linaria.XXXV.] EPIRUS. 79May 6. — Westerly wind with showers. Ourroad passes by a beautiful wood of oaks and rounda shoulder of Mount Oljrtzika to Dhramisius, onehour distant. The most projecting point of theroute between the two villages looks down upona valley watered by a considerable branch of theKalama, which, before its union with that rivernear Suli of Kurenda \ passes between two summitsof considerable elevation, of which the westernbounds to the eastward the vale of the other branchof the Kalama which we followed, and which uniteswith the main stream opposite to Leftokarya. AHthese mountains, except the bare calcareous massesforming the higher summits of Olj'tzika, Paralytic,Meg41o-Suli, and Labanitza, are clothed witha fertile soil, and have several villages situated onthe face of them. Four miles from Bagotzus, towardsSuli, is Gratian ; to the south-eastward ofDhramisius, at a distance of half a mile is Tzer-kovlsta ; at the same distance from the latterAlepu-khori, and a mile farther Filings. Allthese are pleasantly situated on the side of themountain amidst gardens well watered with rivuletsand shaded by trees, particularly towardsDhramisius, where are many large chestnut-trees.Opposite to Bagotzus, on the mountain which separatesthe two branches of the Kalama, are Elefthe-rokhori and Spina, and in a more northerly direction,on a parallel ridge, Lasting, and towards theKalama, Dhelvinakopulo. The ridge on which thetwo last villages are situated falls to the eastwardSo called to distinguish it from Great Suli or Kako Suli.80 EPiRUS. [chap.into the plain of lodnnina, on which side it assumesthe appearance of a bare calcareous rock, and thusextends all the way to Pendepig4dhia* There remainsbetween it and Mount Olj^tzika an elevatedvalley, the highest point of which is a little northof Dhramisius, as appears by the course of thewaters, which from thence take opposite directions,one part running northward to the Kalama, theother southward to the river of St. George, butpassing, as I am informed, through the mountainsby a katavothra before it reaches that river.Having passed through Dhramisius we descendto the Paleokastro in the valley ^ I havebefore hazarded the opinion that these remains donot belong to one of the JEpirote cities, but to ahierum and place of public meeting for sacred festivals,and perhaps for civil purposes also. Thesituation instead of being strong, commanding, andwell watered, the usual requisites of the fortifiedtowns of Greece, is a retired valley like those ofEpidaurus Nemea and Olympian and the remainsconsist, as in those places, of temples, adjoining toa theatre and to a domus which may have servedin the place of a stadium for gymnastic contests.The slightness of the wall below the fortress,which inclosed the two temples, shows evidentlythat it was merely a perilous of thesacred ground. No part of the works has an appearanceof remote antiquity, and the whole perhapswas founded on the site of some renownedtemple of the Molossi, with a view of pacifying andSee vol. i. p. 204i.] Epirus. 81civilizing Epirus, which, as long as it was dividedinto comae, possessed probably no such conveniencesfor large assemblies as were here providedfor them. Daring the half century between theextinction of the iEacid» and the Roman conquest,in which Epirus was republican, the theatremay have served for the general assemblies of theEpirotes, which may have still continued to meetin Molossis, this having been the original seat ofthe monarchy, and the residence of the royaldynasty.A passage in Plutarch's Life of Pyrrhus mightlead to the belief that these were the ruins of thatPassaron where the kings of Epirus and their assembledpeople were accustomed to take mutualoaths, the one to govern according to law, theother to defend the crown ' ; but Passaron was notahierum but a city, and having been one of thestrongest and most important in Molossis, we cannotsuppose it to have occupied such a situation.The capture of Passaron by L. Anicius Gallus inthe year B.C. 167 led to that of Necnon, Place,and Horrium. It was at Passaron that the Romancommander afterwards held his vdnter quarters ; itwas from the same place that L. iBmilius Paulusissued, by order of the Senate of Rome, his treacherousand atrocious decree for plundering and disBiMturay ol (iatrtkuQ iv Kara rove v6fwvc, IkiIvovq hkTiaerwtp*iyif X'^P^f ^^ Moors rife (iaviKelav iia<^vXj&iny KarariZoQf ^Aptlf Au Ovffayrecf tovq v6fiov^. — Plutarch, inopKia^OTtiv Tciig *Hirecp«racc Pjrrrh.kol 6pKi(uy, avTol fjiiy Ap^€iyVOL. IV. G82 EpiRUS. [chap.mantling all the towns of Epirus; and it wasfrom Passaron also that Anicius proceeded to embarkfor Italy as soon as the fleet which had carriedover the Roman army of Macedonia from Noricumhad returned to the coast of Epirus ^In considering some, if not all these circumstances,it is difficult not to conclude that Passaronwas nearer to the sea, and more convenientlysituated for communication with it, thanthis sequestered valley. According to Anna Com-nana, there was a harbour on the Epirote coast,called that of Passage *, which served for a placeof assembly of the combined fleets of Alexis andthe Venetians previously to two battles which theyfought with Robert the Norman in the channel ofCord*.The paleokastro of Dhramisius is but one amongmany Hellenic ruins in Epirus, of which nothing butafortunate discovery of inscriptions can furnish uswith the ancient names. Of those mentioned byLivy, all which appear to have stood in the countrybetween the Thyamis and Arachthus, Necnon wasthe only one besides Passaron that stood a siegeagainst Anicius ; nor did it yield until the fall ofits chief citizen Cephalic, at once the bravest andmost prudent of the Epirotes^ and who, thoughmore formidable than any other to the Romans,had in the beginning been their unwilling enemy *.» Liv. 1. 45, c, 26. 33, 34. * Polyb. 1, 27, c. 18 ; 1. 30,Ann. Conned. 1. 6, p. 160.Paris.XXXV.] EPIRUS. 83Gurianista, near Kurendo, about twenty miles tothe west of loannina, from whence I procured asmall bronze statue of some merit, which was foundthere, may possibly have been the site of Seamanor of Horrium.After remaining half an hour at the ruins, wecross the ridge towards loannina,. and halt atKosmira, on the eastern side of it, at 10. ' Aswe descended the ridge, Tahir Agd pointed outto me the situation of some Hellenic remains atKotzista on the side of the mountain of Syrako.The baggage came in two hours and a half by thedirect road from Bagotzus to Kosmira, which,leaving Dhramisids about a mile on the right,crosses the ridge at a pass immediately behindKosmira. At 12.15 we descend from Kosmirainto the plain of loannina, down an easy slopewatered by a torrent and sown with rye' nowcoming into ear : in the lowest part of the plain itis full-grown. At the entrance of the plain, at12.53, we pass by Rapsista, a large village, justas the inhabitants are returning in their bestclothes from celebrating the feast' of St. George,at a church of that saint, situated amidst a littlewood of linaria half a mile from the village.This fashion of building solitary churches in themidst of a clump of trees, though found in everypart of Greece is most common in Epirus, perhapson account of the greater abundance of its woodsand forests. The oak, the quercus ilex, and theprints or holly-oak, are the trees most frequentlyg284 BPIEU8. [chap .seen in these groves, but chiefly the last, thoughthe second, here called miradhi instead of aria,which is its appellation in Acarrumia and theMorea, is the best adapted to them, as it growsto a greater size than the pimari, and its evergreenleaf gives it a preference over the oak.It was undoubtedly the sacred ^iiyoc of the temple. The scenery of Epirus is muchenlivened in winter by these evergreens, nor canany thing be more grateful in the heat of summerthan the dense shade of the groves, in whichthere is generally a source of water near thechurch. Hence they are often frequented by partiesof pleasure from the towns and villages ; andon the anniversary festivals of the several saints,great numbers are generally assembled in andaround them, especially at some of the sacredgroves nearest to loannina. Many of the churchesoccupy probably the sites of ancient temples,which, on the establishment of Christianity, wereconverted to the service of the new religion, withlittle or no change of structure, although a successionof repairs may now have left in them novestiges of Hellenic antiquity that can easily berecognised. Nor is it improbable that many ofthe customs and ceremonies in honour of the protectingsaints are the same as those which onceappertained to the worship of Dione, Aphrodite,Dionysus, or Apollo. The plain of loannina hasstill a wintry appearance. We arrive in the townat 2 P.M., where I am lodged in the house whichwas built by the father of the Zosimadhes, the fourbrothers who are now opulent merchants in Christ-xxxv.]EPIRU8. 85edom: one is at Moscow, another at Leghorn.Snow fells to-night on Mount Mitzikeli, and suchrain in the town.May 10. — ^^The wea^^Ther has continued rainysince the 5th, and snow has fallen on all the higherridges. Mitzikeli, which is not one of them, wasthis morning quite covered with snow on the summit.The mornings are generally fine, but atnoon the clouds collect, which in the afternoonproduce rain and thunder.This day I was present at a presentation tothe Vezlr of some of the chiefs of his shepherdswho were admitted to the irpocricvviy/ia, andkissed the hem of his robe ^ They come topay their annual dues. Their first visit was tothe Grammatical, or Secretary, who desired allbut the chief person to withdraw. " We are allequal," they replied. They are Albanians, andare here named Karagunidhes, or black-cloaks, asadistinction from the Vlakhiotes, though elsewhere,and often even in common parlance atloannina, it is very customary to call them allKaragunidhes, which is the more natural, as theblack or white cloak is no longer a distinction, andthey all come from the same great ridge of Pindus.When the flocks are their own, they pay to thefarmer of the Sultan's dues for every sheep, maleor female, more than half a year old, 4^ piastres,a small portion of which consists of a icc^aXtanicov,or capitation on the animals, the rest is for vo/xi-Hf^QfrKvvHi a\ avaH^ yofioitri (iapliapoiai trpotnftawv,Eurip. Rest. v. 1507.86 EPiRus. [chap. xxxv.frrpovy or. pasture. These dues belong to the royalrevenue, and are farmed by the Vezir throughoutthe countries which he governs. But he is moreoverthe greatest proprietor of sheep in NorthernGreece, and owns flocks in every part of Epirusand Thessaly. His shepherds are accountable foran increase of 120 per cent, every year upon thenumber of animals, besides a certain quantity ofcheese. They pay all expences, and reckon uponan average profit to themselves of a piastre a yearfrom each ewe, from which is to be deducted asmall loss upon the males.CHAPTER XXXVI.EPIRUS.From loanoiBa to Konitza — Bisduni — Radhot6pi — Kantza —Zitza — Cascade of the Kalama — Vela — Kalbaki — Source ofthe Kalama, or Thais — Tzerovina — Lake — Dhelvinaki —District of Pogoniani — Vissiani — Lakhanokastro — ^TzaraplanaSykia — Konitza — River Viosa, or Aous — Paravaei — Aitn-takes — Melotu — Omphalium — Orestes — Return to loanninaRiver Voidhomati — Artzista — Sudhena — DovnU— Khan ofAlexis — loannina — Kastritza.June 4. — Since my arrival at loannina on the5th of May scarcely a day has passed withoutshowers in the afternoon, alway's accompaniedwith thunder clouds on the mountains, whichthree days out of four, have exploded very near,or immediately over the town. Sometimes whilerain fell on the upper summits of Pindus, continued clear, in which case there was norain iu loannina or the adjacent plain.At 5 P.M. I set out with menzll horses on thegreat northern road, which is nothing more thanawide horse-path, though the ground is so levelthat the Vezir has no difficulty in travelling in hiscarriage in this direction as far as the neighbourhoodof Dhelvinaki. We skirt the grassy levelwhich borders the marshes lying at the foot of88 EPIRU8. [chap.Mitzikeli. Here the meadows of Io4nnina arebroadest ; their entire length on both sides ofthe town is not less than twelve miles. I neverbehold this extensive tract of rich pasture-land,generally peopled as it is with flocks and cattle ^without feeling persuaded that it was the Hellopiawhich Hesiod had in view when describing thedistrict of Dodona :''E<n't rtc ElAXoirtii, iroXvX^'toc vl^ cvXct/iCiiv,At 5.40 we pass Bisdunopulo, as a few huts arenamed, with a khan on the road side, just abovethe beautiful grove of evergreen oaks which surroundsthe church of St, John. Here I saw, a fewdays ago, the copr^, or festival of the saint, attendedby a great part of the population of loan-nina.Not less than 10,000 persons were assembledat the church, or were passing along themeadows leading to it from the town. Some ofthe gayest, clothed in gorgeous dresses of Albanianlace and embroidery, were dancing the x^P^ ^^ circles on the grass, while othersassembled round low wooden tables, were tearingroasted lambs to pieces with their fingers, drinkinglong draughts of wine, and singing in theloudest tone. These festivals are always wellattended when the saint's day occurs in the courseof the delightful May, which in the Greek calendarlasts till the 12th of our June. During thatmonth there was a festival at Stavraki, a tjiftlik ofMukhtar Pasha, to the south-west of loannina ;Ap. Strabonn. p. 328.— Schol. ad Sophoc. Teach. v. 1169.• XXXVI.] EPIRU8. 89the afternoon happened to be rainy, but thisseemed to make little difference to some of themore jovial Christians, who, clothed in the mostglittering dresses were dancing with bare feet inthe mud before the feast was over. The mostexpensive parts of the Albanian dress, are anupper and under waistcoat, both without sleeves ;the former of velvet, or cloth, half-covered withlace, the latter usually of embroidered velvet,loannina and Arghyro-kastro are the places mostnoted for the manufacture of them. The sleevesof the shirt hang loose on the outside of all, andsoon present a most unseemly contrast of dirt withthe handsome waistcoats, which sometimes costfrom 200 to 400 piastres, and on the occasion ofthese festivals are often borrowed or hired for theday.At 6.2 we take shelter from the customaryafternoons rain and lightning at the Serai ofBisduni. The village belongs to two Beys, oncethe most opulent in loannina, and possessors of agreat part of the fertile districts of Luro and La-mari,but whom the Vezir has gradually deprivedof their property, leaving them nothing in exchangebut the barren downs of Bisduni, and anincome of 5000 piastres a year, out of twenty timesas much, which the family enjoyed before Alj^'sarrival at loannina. We ride in 50 minutes fromBisduni to Radhotopi, and at half way pass akhan under Djudila ^ which village stands on thehills to the left, Gardhlki, or Gardhikaki, beingT^ovmXa.90 Epirus. [chap.at a distance somewhat greater on the right Thesummit of a great round' hill which rises behindthe latter village was occupied by a came, orsmall Hellenic town, of which there remain theentire circuit of the ruined walls, with manyfoundations of buildings within the inclosure. Itis one of those positions which are generallychosen in all countries in times of insecurity, andwhich seem to have been particularly numerousin Epirus. Though it may have been of more thanusual importance in a military point of view, as situatedimmediately opposite to the passage over thenarrowest part of the marshes, thus commandingthe only direct communication from the plain ofloannina into the mountains of Zagori, a districtwhich, from its resources and strength, was probablyalways well peopled ; it was obviously nomore than a subordinate place, very inferior inimportance to the city which stood at KastHtza,and which, besides having commanded the approachto the most important pass in NorthernGreece, that of Metzovo, is shown by its remainsto have been a town of considerable extent, andwas placed in a very convenient and accessibleposition with regard to the plains.The khan of Tzudila stands in a pass betweenthe two ridges which here meet and terminate theplain of Io4nnina ; one of these is connected withthe hill of Gardhiki, and falls northward to thelake of Lapslsta; the other is a continuation ofthe hills which we have had on our left all theway from loannina. We now enter the valleycontaining the lake of Lapslsta, which extendsXXXVI.] EPIRU8. 91north-westward to Protopapa, and eastward to thefoot of Mount Mitzik^i. The soil is of a deepred colour, and produces only some poor rye andbarley. The village of Radhotopi ^ which standsat the south-western extremity of the valley, belongsto Passim Bey of loannina, who before theVeadr's time had 400 purses a year, now reducedto about 18, which he receives from his Subashlat Radhotopi, and out of it pays six purses to theVezir for the mire and other impositions. TheSubashl takes one third of the crop for his employerbesides the tithe of the whole, and theGreek peasant the remainder. Here we lodge forthe night in the Bey's pyrgo.June 5. — At 6.42 we begin to cross the hills toZitza at a slow pace. This is the most direct, butnot the ordinary or main route from lodnnina, whichfollows the plain a mile farther to the katavothraat the southern extremity of the lake of Lapsista,where a stream from the lake flowing in a westerlydirection enters a subterraneous channel, and reappearsat Velitzista From the katavothra themain road follows the foot of the hills not far fromthe western shore of the lake, ascends to Proto-papa,and from thence crosses into the valley ofthe Kalama, leaving Zitza to the left. BetweenProtopapa and Zitza there is an elevated plain,chiefly occupied by vineyards belonging to thetwo villages. In ascending towards Zitza, weleave on the left a continuation of the range ofhills which borders the western side of the plainof lodnnina, and which separates that plain from92 Epirus. [chap.the valley of the branch of the Kalama, whichrises near Dhramisius and joins the main river atSuli of Kurenda, below Raiko. At 7.50 Velitadsta,vulgarly Veltjista S is two or three miles on the left.Here the subterraneous stream from the lake ofLapslsta issues frt)m the side of the hill, and fallsdown the slope to the Kalama with great rapidity,turning several mills in its course : the place whereit emerges is about four miles from the katavothra,and exactly in the direction of the course of thecurrent as it enters the chasm.At 8.25 we pass through the village of Karitzain a lofty situation, surrounded by green fields ofrye and barley mixed with fruit-trees, and at 8.50arrive at the monastery of St. Elias of Zitza, pleasantlysituated on the highest summit of the sameheight, in the midst of a grove of oaks. The villageoccupies the slope below the convent towards theKalama : a serai of the Ver, which was builtentirely at the expence of the inhabitants, standsat one extremity of the village. Here, in the onlyapartment which is furnished with a boil and carpet,I find an agreeable lodging until the afi^emoon,having adopted the custom of the country in thisseason of dividing the long days into two : travellingtwo or three hours in the morning and asmuch in the evening.Zitza is a Kefalo-khori of 110 houses; its heightsseem admirably adapted by soil and aspect to thevine; and, accordingly, the chief production iawine, which has the reputation of being the bestin Epirus : in fact, that made by the monks of St.XXXVI.] Epirus. 93Elias is not unpleasant ; but the ordinary produce ofthe village, being pressed from grapes all gatheredat once, and therefore partly unripe, and beingthen diluted with water to increase the quantity,is already sour, notwithstanding an abundance ofresin, which has been added to give body to it.The village is at a yearly expence of five pursesfor this ingredient, which is purchased at loan-nina.The common incomes here are five, six, orseven hundred piastres a year, nearly half of whichis abstracted by the Vezlr, the bishop, and theParades, of whom there are no less than fifteenin Zitza, and as many churches, noioc to KOfAvu —who takes the trouble ? — is the reply to my inquirywhy they do not make two gatherings of theirgrapes, and irU cvpiOiiKc — so we found it — to a remarkthat they might advantageously change apapas or two, for a physician and a schoolmaster.They cannot plead that the government preventsthem, the Vezir leaving the Greeks at perfectliberty to act as they like in regard to literary instruction,and often exhorting the prelates to promoteit : as to the iatros, if the village makes hisplace a good one, the Pashd generally takes uponhimself the nomination.Zitza commands a beautiful and extensive prospect,the plain of loannina, and the fertile hillson which Zitza stands, furnishing a variety ofcultivated scenery, which is admirably contrastedwith the great barren summits around. But here,as in every other situation in Epirus, the interestis inferior to that of almost every commandingposition in Southern Greece, where the spectator94 EPiRUs. [chap.is always surrounded by objects familiar to him inhistory and poetry. Here, in the entire horizontalcircle, the Thyamis is the only object, of which wehave any certainty as to the ancient name. Tothe south-westward is seen a small plain, in whichthe streams from R4iko, Velitdsta, and Dhrami-sins, unite to form the Kalama. The first of these,or western branch, is the proper Kalama, andbears that name above its union with the river ofVelitzista, which, near Paliuri, receives the branchfrom Dhramisius. Just below the junction of thethree is Suli, a name common to a village on eitherbank : from thence an undulating country extendson either side of the river towards Paralytic,and as far as the gorges which form the divisionbetween the Upper and Lower Thyamis.On the side of a high mountain rising from theright bank of the river in face of Zitza, are the villagesof Shutista^ and Raiko^, which latter is two orthree miles above the junction of the branch fromVelitzista. Midway between that junction andRaiko is the bridge of R&iko, a place of greattraffic, as being on the ordinary road from Corfuand Parakalamo to loannina; for which reasonthe Vezir has established a toll here for cattle,passengers, and merchandize. Beyond the bridgethe road to Filiates follows the right bank of theriver and then crosses the woody mountains whichoverhang it until they open below the village ofKutzi into a wider valley or basin, interrupted withmuch broken ground, where two branches from^ ^ZuiVTiara^ 'Loxtrtma. ' Probably an abridgment of'EftpaiKoy, Hebraictim.XXXVI.] EPIRUS. 95the northward, separated by a long ridge, join theKalama. Raven, belonging to the district ofFiliates, is the principal village of these valleys.The road to Filiates then passes over a hilly countryat no great distance from the river, which in someplaces is bordered by cliffs, in others by smallplains. The principal village on these heights isKheramnitza. Before the river finally emerges intothe plains which extend to the sea coast, it passesthrough a rocky goi^e, a little below which, onthe right bank of the river, are the Hellenic remainscalled Palea Venetia, situated at the junctionof the Kalamd with one of its branches.At 5.30, descending westward through the vineyardsinto the valley of the Kalama, we pass at 6.20under Mazaraki, which stands on the slope of theridge of Zitza at a distance of a mile or two on ourleft, and soon afterwards arrive suddenly in frontof a cascade of the Kalama, which is about a miledistant, and considerably below us : the river issixty or seventy feet in width, and falls over a cliffof nearly an equal height. A thick wood on oneside and some small huts and mills on the edge ofthe opposite bank complete the beauty of the landscape.Leaving the fall to the left, we descend tothe bank of the river, which here runs clear andplacid, through a narrow verdant valley filled withevery kind of gay flower and fragrant shrub, ofwhich Greece is so prolific in this season. At6.45 a khan, situated on a little height includedbetween two bends of the river, gives us shelterfor ten minutes from the usual afternoon's thunderstorm.The valley is less than two miles in width :from the opposite bank rises the steep range aleEPIRU8. [chap.ready mentioned, which extends from Tzerkovista,near Suli of Kurenda, to the pass of Tzerovina^which separates it from the mountain of Dhelvi*nati, and leads into the valley of Xeroyalto, andfrom thence into that of the Dryno. Followingfrom the khan the foot of the same ridge ofZitza, the valley, in half an hour, opens into aplain in which different streams, rising for themost part at the foot of the hills surrounding theplain, unite to form the Kalama.We cross a large branch of the river just belowits sources at 7.55, not far from the village ofZagoriani, which stands upon the hills to ourright. The direct road to Tzerovina and Dhelvi-nati crosses the plain, but we turn to the rightunder the hills ; and a little beyond the sourcesleave to the right the Paleokastro of Veld, and halfa mile farther arrive at an ancient monastery ofthe same name in a pleasant situation on the slopeof the mountain. Hie plain which extends to theSiutista range southward, and to Tzerovina westward,is fertile, well watered by numerous tributariesof the Kalama, and produces rye, barley,wheat, and maize. The monastery possesses twoploughs and eight oxen, besides vineyards and afew sheep.Vela, which now gives title to a bishop residentat Konitza, is supposed, by the learnedof loannina, to have been anciently calledPhotice *, a name, however, which does not^ icc^aXo-/3pvacic. Photice and Bella are treatedIn the Orient Christians of as one and the same place,of Requiem, published in 1740,XXXVI.] EPIRU8. 97occur in any author more ancient than Herculesor Procopius. The latter relates that Noticestood originally in a marshy situation ; andthat having fallen to decay, it was restoredby Justinian, who built a citadel on a neighbouringheight. But the castle of Vela is probablyof later date. There are no records of thebishops of Photice later than the 6th century, norof the bishops of Vel earlier than the 13th. OfHellenic remains there is no appearance at Vela.June 6. — At 7.45 we descend from the monastery,and arrive, at 8.5, at the khan of Gralbakior Kalbaki \ which I passed on the 22d of October,1805, in the way from Premedi to lo&nnina byRaven*. The ordinary route from lo&nnina toKonitza here branches from that leading to Arghy-rokastro. We follow the latter along the hills, themarsh before mentioned having prevented ourcrossing the plain directly from Yelk. At 8.16pass one of the principal tributaries of the Kalama,just under its sources near the little hamlet ofGalba. It is a deep clear rivulet, bordered withlarge reeds and aquatic plants, and is consideredthe main source of the Kalama, being perennial,whereas the more distant branch from Lakhano-kastro is dry in summer. The reeds at the sourcesmay have given the name of Kalama to the river :the ancient appellation Thyamis seems to havebeen derived from the Ova or juniper, which, thoughnot abundant near the sources of the river, is commonin the woody hills which border the middle ofits course.KaXiraw. * See Vol. I. p. 400.VOL. IV. H98 EPiRUS. [chap;At 8.46 we pass under Dholiana, a lai^e villagebelonging to Zagori, and the only one of that sub-districtwhich is not an Eleftherokhori, the Vezirhaving made it, as well as the rest of this fineplain, his private property. In each of the villagesof Podhogoriani ' and M6shari*, both which aresituated on the slope of the Siutista range, he hasbuilt a serai : that at M ossian is large and well furnished.The part of the plain under Dholiana iscovered chiefly with revithia * (Cicero Arietinum),one of the many kinds of pulse used by the Greeks,particularly during their fasts. At 9.25 we cross alarge branch of the Kalama shaded by fine planes,at the spot where it issues from a rocky gorge ofthe mountains into the plain. This is the streamwhich rises above Lakhanokastro. Half way upone of the cliffs which border it, in a spot now inaccessible,40 or 50 feet above the valley, paintingsof saints, like those in the Greek churches,are visible, and some indications of a buildinghaving formerly been attached to that part of thecliff, probably an atriarnipiov or hermitage.At 9.40 we arrive at Tzerovina, and lodge, asat Zitza, in the Vezir's serai, which is situated inan inclosure called a Kaarpov or castle, but differ-^ing only from an ordinary garden wall in havinground towers at the angles, composed, like therest of the work, of small stones cemented with mudinstead of mortar, and which, though only twentyyears old is already falling to ruin. This kind of^ UoBoyiapiayii, * 'Pe/3(0(, from the HellenicM6aatapi, Ipi/iiv&og,XXXVI.] EPIRUS. 99masonry, however, is strong compared to that ofthe dwelling-houses, which are much slighter andlooser, and are generally constructed with thinrafters or layers of wood, which at intervals ofa few feet occupy the whole thickness of thewall.At 6 P.M. we descend from Tzerovina in tenminutes to a lake, near the opposite end of whichis a pass leading between the mountains of Dhel-vinaki and of Mossiari into the valley of Xero-valto^ so called from a marsh which has beendrained and brought into cultivation in that valley.The hills on either side of the pass are clothedwith oak and ilex. A stream flowing to theKalama issues from the lake of Tzerovina, andserves in summer to irrigate some fields of maizebelow that village, producing plentiful crops, butrendering the air unhealthy, in which it is assistedby several pools and springs, which stagnateand form a marsh in the plain below them.The lake is about half a mile in diameter, apparentlyvery deep, and is said to-abound in fish,particularly trout : there are a few springs aboutthe edges, but the great supplies seem to be at thebottom. Here begins the district of Dhelvindki orDelvindki *. A bairak of twelve Albanians haltingon the edge of the lake, seated on the grass in aring, with their baird stuck in the ground, formsa good accompaniment to the picturesque scenearound. We turn to the right of the road whichleads through the pass to Xer6valto, and ascendSSSepofiaXroQ, ' AcX/3ivaicc) NreX/Scvaicc.h2100 EPIRUS. [chap.the hills to Dh^lvinaki, where we arrive at 7.35,and alight at the Vezir's serai, a dwelling of verymoderate dimensions, standing in a valley, orrather in the bed of a torrent between two hills onthe slopes of which are the houses of the town,about 200 in number. The elevated situationrenders the air pure and healthy : some of thenearer hills produce com sufficient for the consumptionof the inhabitants, and wine, of whichthere is enough to supply some of the neighbouringdistricts. It is made, as at Zitza, from a singlegathering, and a fifth part of water is added becausewithout it the wine would not be saleable onaccount of the high price. The remaining landsof Dhelvindki afford pasture to a great number ofoxen, sheep, and goats. In the valley in whichthe serai stands are some fields of revithia andhemp, of which last there is also a considerablegrowth in other parts about the village. Narrowcotton cloths, such as are made in every part ofAlbania, are manufactured in the town ; but thegreater part of the male inhabitants, as in othermountain villages of Epirus, are employed in tradeby land, or as artisans in the towns of Turkey, inwhich capacities they are long absent from home.At Constantinople they particularly follow thetrades of gardeners and butchers.Dhelvinaki is the chief town of the district ofPogoiani, properly Pogonianl*, often called OldPogoianl, partly to distinguish it from Pogoiani,a small village near loannina, and partly withXXXVI.] Epirus. 101reference to its importance in the 14th ^ and 15thcenturies, when the town of Pogonianl, supposed tohave stood near Ostanitza, was the see of an archbishopricwhich is now extinct. Pogoniani seems tobe nearly the same district as the ancient Melotis. Itborders towards the north and north-west on Libok-bono and Argyrokastro, to the east and north-easton the Karamuratates and Konitza, and on loanninato the south, south-east, and east in which latterdirection it confines on the sub-district of Zagori.It contains forty villages, and extends from Tzero-ulna northward to Selitza on the right bank of theriver of Sukha beyond LibokhovOi which town,however, is not in Pogoiani. To the westwardPogoiani confines on Dh^lvino, from which it isseparated by a continuation of the great ridgeupon which Arghyrokastro stands. The chiefplaces are Sopiki in the mountains to the eastwardof Selitza, midway between Dheivinaki and Premedi,and Dhrymadhes one hour on this side ofSopiki. These are Eleftherokhoria. The largestof the tjiftlik villages are Vissiani, near Dhei-vinaki, on the road to Konitza, and Politicians twohours beyond Sopiki. All the inhabitants of Po*goianl are Greek except those of Vostlna, whichplace is three hours from Dhelvindki, on themountain of Libokhovo, above the right bank ofthe eastern branch of the Dryno, bearing N. 14W. by compass from Dhelvindki. The Karamu-states were anciently a part of Pogoiani ; butbeing now all Mahometanss, they are consideredas forming a separate division, and are in fact anCantacuz. 1. 8, c. 2.102 EPiRus. [chap.Albanian conquest ; for Pc^ianl is properly aGreek district, though now subject to the Albanianpower in the person of Aiy Pasha. Greek isspoken as far as Sopiki and Frastana inclusive,beyond which the Albanian is in common use.Dhelvinaki, lying near the great road leadingfrom lo^nina to Arghyrokastro, Tepeleni, andAvlona, as well as to Corfu by Dh^lyino, suffersmuch from konaks. The serai was built for theVezir by an angora, of which Dhelvin^i boreonly a proportional share. In most of the lai^evillages there are similar buildings, to which HisHighness contributes little more than cushions andcarpets when they are occasionally furnished inexpectation of his visiting them. At other timesthey are locked up and useless, unless it be in terrorem,by reminding the people that he may onany day make his appearance among them. Theyare all constructed in the same slight manner, andif left without repairs which are seldom or everthought of, soon become uninhabitable. For thesame expence, or rather with an equal quantity offorced labour and gratuitous materials the Vezirmight have made roads and bridges all over JSpt-rus and thus permanently have improved thecountry.Like most of the towns of Greece and Albania,Dhelvin4ki is divided into two inimical parties.There are five churches and fifteen priests in thevillage : no physician nor schoolmaster. The primatesassert that the people would never i^ree tothe expence of a physician and schoolmaster in additionto the heavy impositions of the Vezir ; but Iam told by others that it depends entirely uponXXXVI.] Epirus. 103the primates, who are themselves indisposed to theexpence.The foreign trade, in which the people of Dhel-vinaki and some of the other villages of Pogoianiengage, is chiefly that between Greece and theBlack Sea, where they exchange the oil of theSeven Islands, of the Mor^a, and of Crete ; thedried fruits of Smyrna, the wines of the Greekislands, or coffee and sugar purchased at Constantinopleor Smyrna, against iron, pitch, butter,caviar, and a few other productions of the countrieson the coast of the Black Sea. Furs are alsoimported by them from Russia, and gold-threadfrom Germany, for the purpose of making Albanianlace and embroidery.June 7. — At 6.30 p. m, we proceed towardsKonitza : the road passes through narrow valleysgrown with meagre rye and barley, or with vines,which succeed better in this poor soil. We thenascend a ridge which commands a prospect of theplain of Tzerovina, as well as of all the country asfar as the mountains of Kalarj'tes and Artaa. Tothe eastward are seen those beyond Konitza, andbetween the latter and the position of lodnnina thestupendous cliffs and snowy summits on the easternside of Zag6ri. After having crossed some rockyheights, preceded by a man on foot for a guide,we arrive, at 7«20, at Vishnu \ a village containingabout 100 families, and standing on the highestpart of a long ridge, which, branching from MountNem^rtzika, separates the course of the waters104 EPiRUs. [chap.flowing to the Kalamd and to the Dryno. Thevillage being built of the ordinary calcareous stoneof the Epirote mountains, but more than usuallywhite, and being roofed with irXoiccc, or irregularslabs, of the same stone, looks at a distance as ifcovered with snow. The soil of the slopes aroundis tolerably good, though very stony, producing inwheat six or seven to one. The village is a tjifUikof the Vezir, who takes two-fifths for his dhekatlaand shcffe of the crop, and pays no expences. Alai^e quantity of corn has been spoilt this year inconsequenceof the badness of his magazines, andof the impediments to its being transported by sea.In these cases it is a common practice with HisHighness to bestow it upon some of his loving subjectsin exchange for an equal quantity of soundcorn.June 8th. — Among the numerous instances ofresemblance between ancient and modem customsobservable throughout Eastern Europe and WesternAsia, there is none more remarkable, or that betterserves perhaps to mitigate the miseries of despotism,than the system of clientekiy which pervadesall ranks, and which was common even among therepublicans of Greece and Rome. It is a part orconsequence of this system, that the request of oneperson to another in favour of a third, when madeunder particular relation of consanguinity or supposedfriendship between the two former, cannoteasily be refused. Even the most despotic chiefsare in great measure bound by this custom, and itis often considered a matter of certainty that thepardon of an offender may be obtained from theXxxvi.] EPIRUS. 105Vezir Aljr, if some particular person of known influencecan be induced to petition in favour ofhim. To the traveller this is attended with greatinconvenience, as all sorts of requests are made tohim, founded upon this maxim, sometimes themost trifling and ridiculous, at others such as hewould gladly be the means of promoting, were notcompliance in any case imprudent, as it wouldproduce an endless repetition of such demands,and many inconveniences. This morning a womanof Vlssiani interests my interest with the Vezirto procure the freedom of her son, who is in prisonat loannina, and a man who has been marriedthree or four years to a woman without havingchildren, wishes by the Vezir's interference withthe Church to obtain a divorce and marry again,his wife being, as he asserts, wicked and perverse ^and resisting all his arguments to persuade her toa separation. Another request to me for an antidoteto the magic arts of an enemy, by which ahusband has become ifivoZiafUvo^, is addressed tothe medical knowledge, which every Frank issupposed to possess.From Vlssiani we diverge about two miles tothe left of the direct road, in order to visit Lakhswhere we arrive at the end of 70 minutes.A summit at half way commands a view of abeautiful valley lying between the ridges of Dhel-vinaki and Vlssiani and the foot of the steep mountainNemertzika. Sopiki is eight miles distant inadirect line, but though standing in a lofty situateEPiRUs. [chap.tion on the slope of Nemertzika is not in sightfrom our road. Frastana occupies a similar situationhalf way between Sopiki and Lakhanokastro,and above it towards the summit of Nemertzika isa plain and some fine sources of water, where theVezir has thoughts of building a village and aserai.Lakhanokastro is a village adjoining a ruinedcastle which stands on an eminence overhangingthe river. The walls of the castle are formed ofsmall rough stones and cement, and seem to beof the same date as those at Vela. The surroundingscenery is very beautiful. Slopes coveredwith corn-fields mixed with groves of oak andelm, are finely contrasted with the bare heightsand snowy summits of Nemertzika.Having crossed at 7.23 the river which rises ata short distance above Lakhanokastro, and whichis now a pure and rapid stream, though dry inthe middle of summer, we mount through a woodof oaks and chestnuts to Tjarapland^ a villagedelightfully situated near the summit of a ridgeadvancing from Mount Nemertzika, among heightsabounding in cattle and sheep, and surroundedwith vineyards, in which the labourers are breakingthe ground with a two-pronged hoe ; we thencross the summit of the ridge, and descendingthrough woods of oak, at 9 cross the direct roadfrom Premedi to loannina, and at 9.30 arrive atSykia, which contains ten or twelve houses only,and stands on a slope overhanging the junction ofT^opairXom.Xxxvi.] Epirus. 107the two great branches of the Viosa, called Knitsand Voidhomati. Here we remain until3.45. At 4.4, cross the Voidhomati about a mileabove its junction with the Konitziotiko, and traversea plain where the peasants are sowing maize,or ploughing in preparation for it ; the excessiverain having delayed these labours much beyondthe usual time. Close to the right is the steepside of a high mountain, covered on the summitwith firs, and in the middle region with holly-oaks.It is the lower part of that great summit ofthe range of Pmdusy here named Lazarii, but betterknown in more distant parts of the country as themountain of Papingo, which is the nearest village.At 6.35 we cross the bridge of Konitza, just belowthe opening where the river emerges into theplain between two woody precipices of immenseheight, above which the mountains are entirelyclothed with forests of fir. To the left of theopening the snowy peaks of Lazarii overhang theseforests ; on the opposite or eastern side the summitsare not visible. When we left Vissiani thismorning the weather was as usual perfectly clear ;towards 9 a few clouds began to appear on themountains behind Konitza, which continued toaccumulate, and ended in a deluge of rain, withmuch thunder and lightning : all of it, however,fell on the great heights above Konitza ; noneeither in that town or on our road thither fromSykia, though the hills immediately above thevalleys were loaded with the most threateningclouds.108 EPiRus. [chap.The Viosa, on issuing from the great chasmwhich gives passage to it, turns to the southwest,and leaves to the right a long declivityon which the town of Konitza is situated, occupyinga large space of ground. The Varusii, orGreek quarter, which is above the Turkish town,separated from it by a portion of the declivity, isbetween two and three miles from the bridge.Above the Varusii the ridge rises to a rocky summitwhich is connected with the great precipices overhangingthe right bank of the river. The masterof the house which is appointed for my kon&k isthe head of one of the two parties into which theGreek quarter, according to custom, is divided:he was not long since hodja-bashi, but in consequenceof some accusations of his enemies wasdeprived of his post and thrown into prison atlodnnina ; for to such complaints Al^^ is generallyready enough to listen, as he exacts money fromthe contending parties, as well when they attainpower as when they are deposed from it Norare they disagreeable to him, as strengthening hispower as a Musulman and an Albanian ; indeed,without these discords Greece could not longcontinue a part of the Ottoman empire. My hosthad a temporary alienation of mind when inprison. By a sacrifice of money he regainedhis liberty, but he can hardly be said to haverecovered his senses, as he is not yet cured ofthe ambition of being proestos. Such is the lifeof a Greek primate, struggling to attain office,contending with some other chief families of theplace, amassing money, partly by industry, partlyXXXVI.] EPIRUS. 109by plunder, deposed and stripped by the Turk,and again quarrelling and intriguing for power.Konitza contains 600 Musulman . houses, and200 Christian. A large palace of the Vezlr onthe northern side of the town, with a shatter wan,'garden, and harem, is already falling to ruin,although only twenty years old ; a small part ofthe harem is occupied by the widow of Velj^ Beyof Premedi, daughter of Vel5^ Bey of Klisura, whomarried Al Pasha's sister.In the Varusii the most conspicuous building isthe palace of the bishop of Konitza and Vela, situatednot far below the summit of the ridge. He isa suffragan of the €irap)(^ia, or metropolitan provinceof loannina, where I left him humbly attendingupon his Despot J as the metropolitan are generallycalled, even by the Turks of Greece. His palacecommands a prospect of singular beauty and magnificence.The plain of Konitza, covered withcorn-fields and vineyards, is bounded on the oppositeside by the woody ridge upon which are situatedSykia, Ostanltza, and the villages of the Kara-irritates,above which latter rise the stupendousrocks of Mount Nem^rtzika, extending as far asPremedi, and from thence in a lower ridge toKlisura and the Ai fauces. The river descendsfrom Konitza to that pass along a narrow valleyhidden from view by the ridges, which are a continuationof the heights of Konitza, and which risesteeply from the valley. In a conspicuous situationupon one of the highest parts of them, distantfour hours from Konitza to the north-west, standsthe Turkish town of Liaskoviki, containing not less110 EPIRUS. [chap:than 1 000 houses. The intermediate hills, thoughsteep and lofty, are not rocky, and are cultivablein every part. The same may be said generallyof the great mass of mountains lying betweenKonitza and Grevena, and of those also to thenorthward as far as Korytza and Bert, with theexception of the highest points, which are barerocks. It was perhaps from the scarcity of quarriesfurnishing large masses in the lower parts ofthe mountains, and from the friable nature of thestone where it occurs, that Hellenic ruins elsewhereso well preserved by their gigantic masonry, are sorare in Western Greece to the northward of the plainof loannina. To the south-east the plain of Konitza,as level as the sea, is closed by the great heightsalong the foot of which we approached the town.The lower part of this mountain has that beautifulregular concave slope which is often found in thescenery of Greece ; above it rise the dark forestsof fir, finely contrasted with the slope and plainbelow, as well as with the snowy precipices ofMount Lazarii above them.I was surprised to hear that so elevated a situationas Konitza, and particularly the Greek quarter,is not considered healthy : in the upper partof the town, according to the Greek expression,sleep is heavy V' caused, it is said, by the rockyheight, and the woody and precipitous peaks whichbeing too near create a damp and stagnant air.June. 9. — This evening, ascending the summitbehind the Varusii, I arrive, in a quarter of an hour6 virvos /3apvc thai,XXXVI.] Epirus. Illfrom the highest houses, at a fine source, whichsupplies all the fountains of the town. The summititself not only commands a more extendedview to the westward than any part of the townaffords, but opens a prospect to the east and northof the whole mountainous region for thirty or fortymiles towards Grevena and Korytza. The mostconspicuous object, bearing E.N.E., is MountSmolika, or Zmolska, one of the highest peaks ofthe Pindus range. On its eastern side standsSamara, a large Vlakhiote town ten hours fromKonitza, in the way to Grevena, but situatednorthward of a right line between these towns.Khierasovo, midway from hence to Samaria, isstill farther northward, the road making that indirectline in order to turn the northern end ofMount Smolika. All the geography within sightis well explained to me by the commandant of theVenir's troops at Konitza, a dirty Albanian ofTepeleni, but who possesses the usual intelligenceand experience of the Albanians upon these subjects.The Greek peasantry are seldom deficientin the former quality; but their information isconfined, and few, even of the armatoli, can comparewith the Albanians, whose frequent change ofservice or of quarters gives them a more extensiveknowledge of the country. The Osmanlis aregenerally as unwilling as they are incapable ofgiving any satisfactory answers to such inquiries.On these occasions great surprise is generallyexpressed when the traveller is found to be acquaintedwith the correct position of places not insight; and as the sextant or compass is generally112 EPIRUS. [chap.displayed in such cases, the whole is sometimesattributed to magic, the object of which is generallysupposed to be hidden treasure. Many,however, are somewhat more enlightened, andconsider the travels of Europeans as preparationsonly for the conquest of the country. As to inscriptions,it is difficult for them to conceive thatwe seek for them but as indications of treasure; and the opinion is by no means absurd,since coins of gold and silver are frequently foundin every part of the country, and sometimes inconsiderabledeposits. In the year 1803 a largevase was found at Kamarina (Cassope) filled withtetradrachms of Athens, Acamania, and Epirus,many of which I have procured since I have beenin Greece.Konitza, although it has long been a part ofAlbania acquisita, which for the last fifty yearsmay be said to have comprehended all JEpirtis tothe Ambracic Gulf, is, according to the limits oflanguage, exactly on the northern boundary ofGreece : the Greek being generally spoken here,while at Liaskoviki the Albanian is in common use.According to the same test of language, the districtsof Remedy and Dangle, which border uponthat of Konitza to the northward, are Albanian,though Greek until the decline of the EasternEmpire, and afterwards Servia, as many of thenames of places indicate. The Danglldhes^, touse the Greek termination of the' word, comprehendthe hilly country included between the valleyXXXVI.] EPIRUS. 113of the Uzumi, or southern branch of the Apsus^and that of the Upper Viosa or Aous. The principaltowns are Skrapari, Vithkuki, Diisnitza,Frassiari, and Zavaliani. They border eastwardupon the district of Colonia, the best part of whichis a succession of fertile valleys watered by theconfluents of the Uzumi at the western foot of thecentral ridge of Pindus. It is separated only fromthe plain of Korytza by a ridge, of which the highestpart is conspicuous from that town , and which connectsthe Pindus with Mount Tumor.The lands of Konitza produce wine, wheat, barley,kalamb6kki, and pulse. The maize, whichin the plain of loannina was already coming up, ishere hardly sown : but this makes no great differencein the time of harvest, as three days sufficeto bring it out of the ground. The wheat in goodseasons and situations gives ten to one ; upon anaverage six or seven. The produce of bread-cornis not sufficient for the consumption of Konitza,because a great part of the plain being the propertyof the Vezir, his share of the crop is transportedto loannina or into his magazines elsewhere.The remainder of the plain consists ofspahiliks in the hands of Turks of Konitza, andthe land is usually cultivated upon the conditionthat the Zcuylrtic, or farmer, shall receive the seedfrom the owner, deduct the dhekatia from thegross produce of grain, and deliver to the ownera proportion of the remainder, which varies accordingto the quality of the land from a half toa third. Sometimes the agreement is that theowner shall be at no expence, except for halfVOL. IV. 11 14 EPIRUS. [chap.the Alonistic horses \ and shall take a third ofthe crop. When the property of a farm as oftenhappens, is in shares, a fixed commutation inmoney or produce is generally made for thedhekatia or tithe.In vineyards a money commutation for thetithe is the general practice, and the produce isequally divided, the farmer paying all the expences.The wine is a poor acid liquor, soldfor four paras the oke, or less than a penny aquart. The price of daily labour varies fromthirty paras, with bread and wine, to sixty paraswith wine only, according to the season, the demandfor hands, and the severity of the labour ;fifty, with wine, is about the average in harvest.There are many situations in the mountains behindKonitza, where the plough is useless on account ofthe steepness of the ground, and where the hoealone is employed in the com lands.The daily rains, which have now lasted for amonth, have this day ceased. That which I havealready mentioned as having occurred yesterdayfell to such an excess on the mountains that thebed of the river a little below the town, where it ishalf a mile in breadth, was completely filled in thenight. This day at noon it subsided, and left thebanks strewn with fish and trunks of trees. I havehad some fine carp to-day for dinner, which wereprocured from thence. These sudden deluges,called wXfifAjAvpaiQ or wXtififAvpiUy are common atKonitza. The wood brought down by them and&\wynrnKh &\oyay from aX^i^i, threshing-floor.XXXVI.]EPIRUS.deposited in the bed of the river, is sufficient tosupply all the neighbourhood with plank andfuel.Although I have not been able to discover,either in the castle or in any other part of Konitza,any vestiges of Hellenic antiquity, the strengthand commanding situation of the place with relationto the Macedonian frontier, as well as itsplain, which is the most fertile and extensive, occurringon the whole course of the main branchof the Aou$^ between its sources and the lydianplains, may justify the confident belief, that was the site of an ancient city of some importance;whatever its particular appellation mayhave been \ it was probably the chief town of theParavfei.«As the true name of Paraveea and its etymologyare important to the question of their situation,it may not be unworthy of remark, thatParavsea is proved to be the correct form byStephens', though there can be little hesitatePeriboea, for thisis the only town named byPtolemy in the country of theUapOvatotf which word we maysafely correct, by the change of8 single letter, to UcLpavaloi,It is clear that Ptolemy couldnot have intended the people ofParthus in Illyria, as well becausehe has placed the in the midst of the Macedoniantribes, as because thepeople of Parthus were namedUapOiyolf or IlapOfivoL — Strabo,p. 326« Stephan. in Hap-oc*Hapaiaioif iOyoc BetnrpwriKdy, 'Havoc cv nrdpTf OevffaXiKUp*2vK ie Hapavaioic Kal dfivfiorac *0/i^aXi$ac»KdXovrrai de dvo tov irapa roy aZov Torafiby olKOvaOai.Stephan. in voce.I 2116 SPIRITS. [chap.iron in believing that he was in error, as he oftenis in his chorographical indications, in ascribingthe Paravaei to Thesprotia, as no part ofThesprotia extended so far inland as the riverViosa, or any of its tributaries. He confirms hisorthography of Paravsei by a verse of Rhianus,and by the remark, that the people derived theirname from inhabiting the banks of the Avec, oneof the many ancient forms of the name of theriver now called Viosa. By Plutarch it is writtenAva, or ''Apava, by Pliny, Aha, and by otherauthors Acac, which, as well as 'hwog^ its mostcommon appellation, were all modifications of thesame radical word, wherein the Au, and Aran,and Afar, and Avon of Western Europe, haveoriginated as well as the , Latin aqua, and theword for water in many modern languages. Themodem name of the river varies slightly in likemanner, in different parts of its course, being calledVuissa, or Vovussa, as well as Visa. Anciently,it would seem that Ava or Avec was used in theupper valleys, 'hC^oQ towards the middle courseof the river, about the celebrated siena, andiras in the maritime plains. The last may begathered from several authors \ but especiallyfrom Valerius Maximus, who relates that theApoUoniatse having requested assistance from theDyrrhachii, the latter replied, " Have you notAjax (Aiac) ?" Though Pliny seems not to have^ Scylax in *IXAvpu>c. — Lys who describes the Nymphaeamcophr. ▼. 1020. — Pomp. Mela, of Apollonia as beg irpoc ry1. 2, c. 3. — Vale. Max. 1. 1, c. Ac irora/i^,5. — dion. Cassius (1. 41, c. 45),XXXVI.] Epirus. 117been aware that his Aha was the same river asthe Aous or ^as, which flowed near Apologiathere cannot at least be any doubt as to its identitywith the Ava of Plutarch, both authors describingthem as rivers of Molossia, which provinceof Epirus probably was often in commonparlance understood to extend as far as the centralridge of PinduSy and thus to comprehend thesources and extreme tributaries of the Viosa.The particular part of the Aous inhabited bythe Paravaei may be gathered from their situationrelatively to that of other Epirote tribes, as indicatedby the ancient authorities, of which themost ancient and most respectable is that of Thucydides,in his narrative of the expedition ofNemus into Acamania, in the third year of thePeloponnesian wars The Lacedaemonian commander,after having been joined at Leucas by hisallies of Ambracia, Anactorium, and Leucas, proceededto the Ambracic Gulf, and there receiveda reinforcement of barbarians, as Thucydides denominatesthem. These were, first the Chains,a people not then governed by kings ', and whosent 1000 men commanded by two of their nobles ;secondly, some Atintanes and Molossi, commanded 'by Labyrinths, who was tutor to Tharypas, theyoung king of the Molossi ; thirdly, a body ofParavsei, commanded by their king Gradus, underwhose orders Antiochus, king of Orestes, hadplaced a thousand Orestse ; lastly a thousand Macedonianssent by Perdiccas, who arrived too lateThucyd, 1, 2, c. 80. * dliaclXivrot.118 EPIRU8. [chap.to be of any service. It seems evident from thesefacts, that the Atintanes and Molossi were conterminous,as well as the Paravsei and Orestes.To the southward, if the text of Scylax has beenproperly adjusted, the Atintanes extended to theDodona ; that is to say, to the northern part ofMolossis ^ The southern portion of them inhabitedthe country included between the Dryno and theupper Viosa, of which Mount Nem^rtzika is thehighest summit, and Libokhovo the principal modemtown. A transaction related by Poly bins, towhich I have before had occasion to refer, seemsto show clearly that Atinta^da comprehended thatpart of the country *. A comparison of the sameauthor with Scylax and Lycophron renders itequally evident, that the Atintanes bordered to thenorth-west upon the districts of Oricus, Amant,Byllis^ and Parthus', thus occupying to the northwardall the mountainous country included betweenthe Apsus and Lousy below the siena of thelatter river. Atintania thus placed accords perfectlywith the character given of it by Livy andStrabo, as rugged in surface, poor in soil, andrude in climate. It was entirely included in1 t'Amuriy (Apologise et ' Polyb. 1. 2, c. 5. — SeeAmantiae sc) ofwpoi ky fieao' Vol. I. p. 69.yd 'AmraVfc vwip r^c 'Opi- " Polyb. 1. 7, c. 9. — Scylax,kIqq Kol XaovlaQ I^^XP^ Aw^w- ubi sup.viae, — Scylax in.'IXXvptoc.eiC ^Afiayriav ir6kiynXftPirec, ircXac H yfjt 'Ariyrdywy fiok&y.Lycoph. v. 1043.Liv. 1. 45, c. 80 — Strabo, p. 326.XXXVI.] Epirus. 119Chaonia by Ptolemy, who takes no notice of theAtintaneB.I have before remarked that the country aroundOstanitza appears, from Livy's narrative of the retreatof Philip from the Aoi fauces, to have beenanciently named Triphylia of Melotis. Thesenames do not occur in any other author, but thatof Melotis, as indicating a sheep-feeding district,accords exactly with that elevated region of pasturesadjacent to the southern side of Mount ,which extends from thence to the plainsof Libokhovo, Tzerovina, and loannina. Melotis,therefore, was probably the appellation ancientlygiven to the pastoral highlands on the borders ofMolossis and Atintania. Such a country is naturallydivided into confederacies of small tribes ;whence perhaps the name Triphylia, which seemsto have corresponded to the district now occupiedby the people called Karamuratates, and includingOstanitza. If the relative situations of Chaonia,Atintania, Melotis, and Molossis, are thus correctlyindicated, and if the Tympheei occupied the sourcesof the Arachthus, as .Strabo attests \ the Parmiare of necessity confined to the valleys of the mainor eastern branch of the Aous, and the mountainsin which that river originates, extending from theAoi Siena, or Klisura, as far south as the bordersof Tymphea and Molossis. Of this country thedistrict of Konitza is the most central and fertilepart.Arrian, in describing the route of AlexanderStrabo, p. 325.120 EPiRus. [chap.from Elwmtis or the modem Grevena and Tjer-semba, to Pelinn<Bum in Thessaly, which stood alittle eastward of THkkala, remarks that Alexanderpassed by the highlands of Tymphosa andParaveea *. The order of these two words oughtclearly to be reversed, since Tymphsea, havinggiven rise to the Arachthus, could not have beento the northward of a district on the Aous. TheParavtaan highlands seem, therefore, to have beenLazarii and Smolika, with the adjacent mountains,beyond which Alexander passed the TymphBonsummits.As the words of Rhianus already cited show thatthe Omphalienses were near the Parades, I shouldbe disposed to place Omphalium at Premedi ; forthe valley of the Viosa, between Konitza and thestraits of Klisura, is naturally divided into two districtsby the narrow part of it below Ostanltza, andPremedi has no less the appearance of having beenthe chief place of the northern, than Konitza of thesouthern division of the valley. That Omphaliumyif its district was contiguous to that of the ParaV(B%^ lay in this direction from Konitza, is renderedevident by Ptolemy, who places Omphalium amongthe interior cities of Chaonia, or in other words,in Atintania, together with Else's and Antigone,of which the districts were those now occupied byLib6khovo or Arghyrokastro, and Tepeleni. Accordingto the same geographer, Hecatompedumwas also a city of the interior of Chaonia. Its^ Arrian. Exp. Alex. 1. l, c. 7.XXXVI.] £Pious. 121situation may possibly have been in the vale of theSukha, above Libokhovo.The Forests, who are shown by Thucydides tohave bordered on the Paravaei, and who, partlyperhaps as having originally been an Epirote tribe ^were united with the other Epirotes against Acar-nana in the Peloponnesian War, were, as it appearsfrom the historian, at that time governed bya king, who, like the king of the neighbouringLyncestffi and Elimiotse, was in a state of submissivealliance with the more powerful monarch ofMacedonia. Afterwards they became, togetherwith the two former people, provincials of theMacedonian kingdom, as the Eordsei, being nearerto the original seat of the royal power of Macedonia,had become at an earlier period.We have already seen that the Orestse possessedCeletrumj now Kastoria ; they appear,therefore, to have extended from the crest of theridge of Pindus to the mountains beyond the valleysof Kastoria and Mavrovo, which separated theOrestes from the Lyiicestta and EordcBi. The mostcentral and fertile part of this country is the plainof Anaselitza, at the foot of the mountain of grammes,a part of the great central ridge. Here, therefore,was probably situated the chief town of theOrestse, named Argos in commemoration of itshaving been founded by Orestes *. It would seemfrom the words " Argentum campus," whichLivy employs in describing a place in Orestes, thatStrabo, p. 326. Hecatseus ' Strabo, p. 326.ap. Stephan. in *Op€flrrai.122 Epirus. [chap.the people of Argos, in conformity with a favouriteMacedonian termination of the ethnic adjective,and to distinguish themselves from the natives ofother towns named Argos, called themselves Argestae.It is in describing an irruption of the Dardaninto Macedonia, which recalled Philip son of Demetriusfrom the Peloponnesus, in the year 208B. c, that Livy notices this plain. A chieftainnamed Eropus having taken Lychnidus and sometowns of the Dassaretii, the Dardan then enteredOrestes and descended into the Argestsean plain ^The words ^^ Orestes jam tenere et descending inArgentum campus," show that the plain of theArrests was towards the southern extremity, andcould not therefore be the valley of Biklista, besideswhich consideration the greater magnitudeof the plain of Anaselitza seems better suited to thecircumstances. If, therefore, Argos Oresticum wasthe same place as the Orestia of Stephens, ofwhich I have little doubt, notwithstanding hishaving placed among eleven towns of the name ofArgos one in Macedonia, without any remark as toits identity with Orestia, it might best be sought fornear the issue of the Haliactnon from the mountainof Grammes into the plain of Anaselitza ; for Stephensdescribes Orestia' as situated on ^* a mountIbi nuntii obcurrunt: rale cv oui vnpiceifiiy^ rijfcDardan in Macedonian effu- . MwceSoyiKfic yjc* U it IlroXc*sos, Orestes jam tenere ac fidioQ 6 Aayov.descending in Argentum cam " Apyoc • • . IfiiofiJii Karapun. — Liy. 1. 27, c. 33. yLaxtBoyiap, — Stephan. in voc.'Ontario, iroAc^ Ip 'Op£9- AiTian(Jud.c. 18) differs from9 uXXXVI.] EPIRUS. 123tain overlooking the Macedonian land," whichseems to imply that the mountain was at the extremefrontier of Macedonia. And this accordswith all that has already been advanced as to thecomparative chorography of this part of Greece, asthe ridge of Grammes appears to have been theboundary between Orestes and a part of Dassareiia.According to the preceding supposition, the marchof the Dardan from Lychnidus and Dcusaretia intothe plain of the Argest(B was obviously throughthe pass of Tzangon and by Biklista towards Zeeleaving KastoHa to the left.Between the countries which were occupied bythe Dcusaretiif Paravm^ and Oresta, was thedistrict near the sources of the Uzumi, orsouthern branch of the Apsus, now called Colonia,apparently a Roman name, and which mayhave been introduced by a colony of Wallachia,whose language abounds in Latin words, derivedfrom the Roman settlements in Dacia. There seemssome reason to doubt in which of the three ancientdistricts just mentioned Colonia ought to be included.I am inclined to attribute it to Orestes;for it is remarkable that Strabo, in whose time thecrest of Pindus was considered the separation betweenEpirus and Upper Macedonia, mentions theOrestffi among the tribes of either province ; andStephens as to the birth-place Stool and Patagonia, and whichof Ptolemy, whom he states to is certainly the ArgosOresticumhave been an Eordsean. Crag of Strabo, if KtXaiylBtov in theterns was from Orestes, accord vulgar text of Hercules hasing to Arrian. Hercules places been justly corrected into KiXc-an Argos in the Second Mace rpov, .donna of his time, together with1 24 EPiRus. [chap.a part of the Orestse having on this suppositiondwelt to the westward of the Pindus it would bemore easily explained how they were originallyconsidered an Epirote tribe, although the greaterpart of them having dwelt on the eastern sideof the Pindus, and all that country having byits position afforded an easy conquest to thekings of Macedonia, Orestes was in subsequenttimes considered a Macedonian district. NeitherOrestes nor Paraveea are named by Livy and Diodorusamong the countries which entered into thecomposition of the Fourth Macedonia at the Romanconquest. But they were probably both included ;Orestes, because the greater part of it at least wassituated to the eastward of the Pindus, and Para-vasa,because it was almost surrounded by countrieswhich were ascribed to that division of thetetrarchy, namely, Atintania, Tympheea, and Eli-mea.But this wide extension of Macedonia westward,derived from the conquests of the kings in thatdirection, did not probably last longer than thetetrarchy. Under Augustus, at least, when thechorography was established, which lasted throughthe empire, Atintania, Paravsea, and Tympheea,were all ascribed to Epirus ; the natural barrier ofMount Pindus having formed the line of separationbetween that province and Macedonia.June 10. — This afternoon, at 5.6, I recross thebridge of Konitza on my return to loannina, andfollow the left bank of the river, where, on eitherside of the stream, lie many hundreds of largetrunks of fir, which were brought down by theXXXVI.] EPIRUS. 125plimin5^ri or flood, besides smaller pieces of othertrees. Sawyers' frames are fixed upon the banksof the river, and some of the trees are already cutup into plank. For fifty minutes we follow thesame narrow path between the foot of the mountainand the river by which we came, then leave itto the right, and at the same time quitting theriver, continue to skirt the foot of the mountainuntil we arrive in the plain branching south-eastwardfrom that of K6nitza, and which is wateredby the great branch of the Viosa named Voidho^mati. After passing some copious sources at thefoot of the mountain, we arrive, at a quarter of anhour beyond them, at 6.55, at the bridge of ,where this river issues from the gorges ofZagori. On either side of the opening are perpendicularcliffs, and below, on the banks of the river,many fine plane-trees, which extend to a considerabledistance in the plain. The bridge is of theusual Albanian construction, very high and narrow.The stream, which is about seventy feet wide, isdeep and transparent, never fails in summer, andabounds in trout.The great summit called liu^ari above the villageof Papingo appears through the opening. Itis one of the highest points of the range of PindtiSjbut apparently not quite so high as Kakardhitza*Though it retains snow all the year, it is always barein many parts, in consequence of the extreme abruptnessof its serrated summit, which is composedentirely of white rocks.After halting a quarter of an hour we leavethe plain to the right, ascend the heights, and126 BPiRUS. [chap.soon obtain a view of the mountainous districtof Zagori, where in a hollow just below the greatsummits is the large village of Papingo, and nearerto us two others. At 8.10 we arrive at Artzista,which commands a similar view. The slopes belowthe village are sown with rye and barley ; anda long fine grass is cut in many parts of the surroundinghills, which is dried upon the roofs ofthe houses. These and the other labours of agricultureare chiefly performed by women, themen being absent the greater part of the year forthe purpose of supplying by their industry, astraders, artisans, or labourers the subsistencewhich their mountains refuse. They generallyreturn to their native villages in the summer, andremain a month or two.June 11.— Leaving Artzista at 7 a. m., we crossa ridge which separates the little territory of thatvillage from a fine vale trending southward, parallelto the plain of loannina, and stretching alongthe eastern side of Mount Mitzikeli, at a middleelevation between its summit and the level of thelake of loannina. At 8.25 Kato Sudhena is half amile on the right, and a quarter of an hour fartherApano Sudhena is on the left. Other small villagesof Zagori are in sight. After having crosseda gorge of Mount Mitzikeli, at 9.55, we enterDovra, situated in a hollow on the summit of theridge, and thus hidden from the plains to thesouthward and westward. It is remarkable howentirely the boys of these villages adopt from theirinfancy those habits of idleness which the malesof the JEpirote mountains indulge in when at home,XXXVI.] EPIRUS. 127while the girls of a similar age are busily employedin executing the household work, and even thelabours of the field. The idleness of the Greek,Albanian, and Vlakhiote mountaineer, however,is i|ot like that of the Turk ; he is assiduous, andlaborious every where but in his native mountains.From Dovra to loannina is a ride of three hoursand a half; a tedious descent leads down the sideof the mountain to the shore of the lake of Lapsista,or rather to the narrow marsh which connectsthat lake with the lake of loannina, and which ishere crossed by a bridge or causeway upon arches.At the eastern end of the bridge stands a khan,called that of Alexis, from having been built at theexpence of Kyr Alexis Nutzo of Zagori. A streamflows through the arches from left to right, showingthat the origin of the branch of the Kalama,which flows through the katavothra of the lake ofLapsista to Velit2ista, is to the southward of thecauseway. A ridge, which descending from thehighest summit of Mount Mitzikeli meets themarsh midway between the bridge and thenorthern extremity of the lake of loannina, seemsto form the line of separation between the watersflowing respectively to the lakes of loannina andLapsista.July 3. — The height which rises from thesouthern extremity of the lake of loannina, and isseparated only from it by the causeway whichleads to Dhrysko and the pass of Metzovo, andwhich on every other side is surrounded by theplain, receives the name of Kastritza from the ruinsof an ancient city, which not only covered all the128 EPiRUS. [chap.summit, but had a secondary inclosure or fortifiedsuburb on the southern side of the hill, so as tomake the whole circumference between two andthree miles. Of the suburb the remains consistchiefly of detached fragments, and of remains ofbuildings strewn upon the land, which is here cultivated.But the entire circuit of the town walls istraceable on the heights, as well as those of theacropolis on the summit. These in some placesare extant to the height of eight or ten feet. The .masonry is of the second order, or composed oftrapezoidal or polyhedral masses, which are exactlyfitted to one another without cement, and formacasing for an interior mass of rough stones andmortar. The following I found to be the dimensionsof some of the exterior stones: 5 ft. by 3 ft. 5 in. by2 ft.— 5 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 1 in. by 2 ft. 2 in.— 4 ft.3 in. by 3 ft. 11 in. by 3 ft. The walls follow theinequalities of the crest of the height, and areflanked at irregular distances with square towers,coeval apparently with the walls, as the angles onlyare of horizontal courses, the intermediate partsbeing of polygonal masonry, in the manner shownby the annexed elevation of the face of one of thetowers.Xxxvi.] EPIRUS. 129Coins and other remains of antiquity are oftenfound on the height as well as in the ploughedlands to the southward. The variety of their datesserves to show that the place has been well inhabitedduring a long succession of ages ; nor lessso the repairs, some of Roman and some even ofByzantine times, which the original masonry hasevidently undergone. Substructions equally variousin their degree of antiquity are to be seen inseveral parts of the inclosed space, and amongthem several bottle-shaped cisterns or granaries.A spacious and well-built old monastery, whichstands in the middle of the Hellenic enclosure,surrounded by a grove of linaria, bears the samename as the hi ; but although built in great partof ancient materials, it does not preserve a singleinscribed or sculptured marble, nor could I findany such relics on any part of the ancient site.As there can be no doubt that this was one ofthe leading cities of Epirus and that it flourishedabout the same period of antiquity as those others,of which the remains subsist at Kastri near Le-love,at Along, at St. John and at Kastri of Fa-neri,at Palea Venetia, at Finish, and several otherplaces, it seems a necessary consequence of identifyingthe valley of loannina with the Hellopia ofHesiod, that the ruins at Kastritza are those ofDodona though the celebrated temple may perhapshave been in a different situation.VOL. IV. KCHAPTER XXXVII.EPIRUS.Topography of the district of loannina — Lakes of loannina andLapsista, and the intermediate marsh-^Katavothra — CitadelCity — Population — Houses — Schools — Litharitza, andother palaces of Al Pasha — The island — Productions of thelake— Scenery — Climate — Population and villages of the district— On the site of Dodona — Testimony of Homer — Relativesituations of MohssiSf Thesproiiaf and the Dodona —Evidence of the site of Dodona from Dionysius, Pindar,Polybius, Hesiod, and others — Objections to other situationsin Epirus — adjustment of the Epirote tribes on the suppositionof Dodona having been near Io6nnina»>Site of the Dodo'mean temple — History of Dodona and of lo&nnina.loANNiNA, July, 1809. — Ta 'lomwtva, as the nameof this city occurs in the Byzantine history,and is still written by ecclesiastics, is corruptedin the vulgar idiom to 'lav viva, 'lavcva, Fcaviva, ormore frequently Ftawcva, from whence the Italianform Giannina. The ordinary pronunciation conformsto the vulgar spelling, and may be nearlyrepresented in English by Yawning ; but the bettereducated not only adhere to the orthography derivedfrom the name 'Iwawijc, but preserve alsothe sound of the omega in vocal utterance.The valley of loannina is twenty miles in lengthfrom north to south, with a breadth of seven in theCHAP, XXXVII.] EPIRUS. 131broadest part, which is about two miles to thesouthward of the city. It is one of those interiorbasins not uncommon in the limestone formationof Greece, which are so completely surrounded bymountains that the superfluous waters have noefflux but through the mountains themselves. Tothis obstruction we may attribute the existence ofthe two lakes of Lapsista and loannina, with theintermediate marshes which unite them. Fromthe eastern main of these waters the mountainMitzikeli^ rises with such a degree of steepness,and so near to the city, that it cannot but have apowerful influence upon the climate of loannina :the perpendicular height of the mountain abovethe lake is about 2500 feet, the summit immediatelyopposite to the citadel is not more than6000 yards in a direct line from it; and thebreadth of the lake in the same part may be computedat a fourth of that distance. A prolongationof Mitzikeli at a lower elevation, but sufficientlyseparated from it by a hollow which gives passageto the road into thessaly by Metzovo, is namedDhrysko Anglice Oakley. This ridge forms theboundary of the southern part of the basin ofloannina to the east, and separates it from thenarrow vale of the Artaa or Arachthus.To the west and south the basin of loannina isinclosed by the chain of rocky heights which Ihave before described as separated from Mount^ Bishop Meletius, who was Mcr^^iiccXi is nearer the reala native of lo&nnina, writes sound, which in vulgar utter-thename MovriovKiXi ; but once is Mitjkeli, or Mitjkel.X 2132 EPiRus. [chap.Olytzika * by a valley watered by a branch of theKalam&9 which falls into that river at Suli ofKurenda. A continuation of these hills closes thebasin of loannina to the north-westward, and embracingthe lake of Lapsista, there unites with theroots of the northern end of Mitzikeli. At thesouthern extremity the basin is inclosed by themeeting of Mount Dhrysko with some heightsconnecting it with a long, bare, and lofty ridge,which, under the names of Xerovuni in the northand Kilberini in the south, extends to the neighbourhoodof Artaa. Between this ridge and asoutherly prolongation of 015^tzika is the longpass which leads from the Ambradan Gulf intothe plain of loannina, and which is the most remarkableof the great natural communicationsleading from the western coast into the interior ofGreece.The valley of lodnnina is divided longitudinallyThis is obviously a Schouten enter into the compositionTonic name, being the same as of modem Greek words, and tzthat of more than one place in a combination unknown to thePoland. The other principal ancient Greeks, being a com-Summits around lo&inina, on mon corruption of sound inthe contrary, seem to be of countries which have been oc-greekderivation. Kakard- copied by the Sclavonic race,hist evidently so— Tjumeika Metzovo is probably a modifiesfrom Kov/upicc, a Ro cation of /ico^O'/Sovvoi^, andmaie word, signifying a place Mitzek^li may have beenof toll, which may formerly compounded from fu^a rahave existed on a pass leading accXXcTa, as having formerlyover this great ridge from the abounded in ascetic retreatsvale of the Arachthus into that belonging to a monasteryof the Achelous. As ^voy^ which still exists on the sum-themiddle, or ficVa amidst, ^ mit of the mountain.XXXVII.] EPIRUS. 133by a low ridge. The western portion consists of adry, stony, and not very fertile soil, but whichproduces wheat, barley, millet, maize, and vines.The eastern plain is occupied entirely, with theexception of a branch from the southern extremitylying between the hill of Kastrftza and MountDhrysko, by the two lakes, the intermediatemarsh, and the meadows, which border theirwhole extent, and the breadth of which is muchincreased in the summer by the retreat of thewaters. Near the city and a few villages aregardens and fields of maize ; all the remainderis an unenclosed plain of pasture.Although at first sight there is no appearanceof any efflux from the lakes, nor consequently anyoutlet whatever for the waters which descend fromthe surrounding mountains into the valley, uponminuter examination it is discovered that eachlake has a katavothra or cavity in the rocks at itsextremity, through which a subterraneous currentfinds its way. The northern lake, commonlycalled that of Lapslsta from a small village nearits margin, almost fills up the northern extremityof the plain in the rainy season, and is then threeor four miles in diameter, but in summer it isoften reduced to less than half these dimensions.The gradually desiccated ground then furnishesan excellent field for the growth of maize, and astream is traced flowing from the south-westernextremity of the lake into a channel under therocks in the direction of the copious sources whichhave been before mentioned as bursting from the134 tpiRUS. [chap.side of the hill of Velitzista, and as descendingfrom thence to the Kalama.The lake of loannina is between six and sevenmiles in length from the hill of Kastritza at thesouthern extremity to the village of Perama, nearwhich begins the narrow marshy tract, five milesin length, which connects it with the lake of Lapsista.The breadth of the lake varies from aboutthree miles at the southern extremity to less thanone opposite to the kastro or citadel of loannina ',a little to the southward of which it is divided intotwo channels by the nisi or island *. As the onlywaters which flow into this lake from the surroundingcountry are the torrents of that part of MountMitzikeli which overhangs it, together with thoseof the heights of St. George on the western side ofthe city, and a single rivulet from the plain of at the southern extremity : its principalsupplies are evidently derived from subterraneouscontributions. Many of these sources are visibleat the foot of the mountain, along the margin ofthe lake, and particularly opposite to the island,at some very copious fountains called Krionero ',or the cold water. Though the lake in calm weatherappears motionless, the course of its superficialwaters to the south is easily perceived in the channelbetween the island and the foot of the mountain,from whence it may be traced by means offloating bodies moving very slowly towards theTO Kdtrrfmv, ' Kpwyepor*TO Nrja/.XXXVII.] EPIRUS. 135foot of the hill of Kastiitza, where it enters manysmall katavothra in the rocks below the causewayon the road from loannina to Dhrysko. The existenceas well of the current in the lake as of thesubterraneous discharge, is so well known at loan-nina,that the channel to the eastward of the islandis known by the name of the Trokhotos \ and thesubterraneous channels of Kastritza, by that ofthe khoneftres' or digesters, though the commonGreek word katavothra' is also applied tothem.It would require some very exact observationsand experiments to ascertain the course and emissaryof this subterraneous stream. It may possiblyjoin the Arachthus in the neighbouring part of itscourse ; but a persuasion prevails both at Artaa andloannina that it issues at those copious sourceswhich I have described at the pass of Khanopulonear Artaa, on the road from thence to loannina ;and this opinion is confirmed by the existence inan intermediate position of a succession of deep unfailingpools of water in the southern part of theplain of loannina, which receive the torrents of thesurrounding mountains without overflowing. Theseponds, therefore, probably discharge a portion oftheir waters into the subterraneous channel whichcommences at the khoneftres.From the silence of ancient authors with regardto the two lakes of the valley of loannina, orthe single lake of fifteen miles in length, as it^ '^P^X^^^' from Tpc^w. ' ra Kara/)oOpa.136 EPiRUS. [chap.may justly be described, an opinion may possiblyarise that it had no existence in the time ofthose writers, but has been formed by th£ obstructionof the subterraneous channels, of whichthat branching from the southern lake being, if wesuppose its exit to be at Khanopulo, thirty-fivemiles in length in a direct line, seems peculiarlyliable to such an accident in a country very subjectto earthquakes. The depth of water, however, inthe lake, particularly between the citadel of loan-ninaand the island, where it is never less thanthirty feet, will hardly admit of the suppositionthat there has not always been a considerable bodyof water in the centre, maintained by the streamswhich issue from the foot of Mount Mitzikeli,added to the torrents which in this, the most rainyclimate in Greece, pour plentifully into it from thevast slope of the mountain.The two highest summits of the low longitudinalridge which separates the eastern from the westerndivision of the plain of loannina, are the hill ofPaleo-Gardhlki, near its northern extremity, onemile south of Lapsista, and that of St. Geoi^which rises immediately above loannina. Theformer is between four and five hundred feet abovethe level of the lake, the hatter much less lofty.The city occupies the eastern face of the hill of St.George, together with a narrow level lying betweenit and the edge of the lake, where a promontory ofa quadrangular form advances 500 yards into thelake, and widens to about 600 yards at its easternor exterior side, where it consists of an abrupt rockhigher at the two angles than in the intermediateXXXVII.] Epirus. 137part, and at those two points rising to about sixtyfeet above the level of the water. This promontory,which forms the Kaorpov or citadel, is insulated artificiallyby a wet ditch across the isthmus, withinwhich it is protected by a lofty rampart armed withcannon, and having a single gate in the middle.The other sides of the citadel are defended byhigh walls, in the few points which admit ofaccess from the lake ; and where the shore is mostprecipitous, by strong substructions upon whichvarious buildings are erected The entire southernshore of the peninsula is thus occupied by theharem of the great palace of Aljr Pasha, terminatingat the south-eastern cape in a mosque forthe use of his household, from whence a covereddescent leads to a kiosk built on a level with thesurface of the lake, on the eastern side of the peninsula.A long narrow court separates the haremfrom the public apartments : these form the grandfront of the palace which faces the north, and occupies,like the harem, the whole breadth of thepromontory. The front consists of a main bodywith two wings, advancing at right angles to theformer. As in Turkish palaces in general, thebuilding has two stories, of which the upper onlyis inhabited. A double flight of steps in the centreof the building leads up from the court into a widegallery which communicates with the state apartments.A great part of the remaining space in thecitadel is occupied by the Jewish quarter, whichstands near the rampart of the land front, just138 EPIRU8. [chap.within the gate ^ Of these houses the greater partexhibit a picture of misery not to be exceeded inany part of Turkey, many families living all theyear in this severe climate in apartments defendedonly on three sides from the open air. Beyondthis unclean quarter, the northern side of thecitadel is occupied by a range of official buildings,among which is the fatal prison so much the objectof horror throughout the greater part of NorthernGreece, and which contains at present 250 persons,some of whom have been two or three yearsimmured here. An irregular esplanade betweenthese buildings and the palace is terminated at thenorth-eastern angle of the citadel by the principalmosque, surrounded with cypresses, a cemetery,and a small range of buildings for the use of theimdms, with a portico in front of them. Thismosque, which is said to have been built, as wellas that of the harem at the south-eastern angle,on the site of a Greek church, is a conspicuousobject in the beautiful scenery of loannina, andcommands one of the finest panoramas in Greece,rich as this country is in the sublime and picturesque.A drawbridge leads out of the gate of thecitadel over a small esplanade, which is the ordinaryIt is not uncommon among Christian ; but they are lessthe Turks to allow Jews to oc hated because less feared, andcopy their fortresses. This is receive some favour becauseno mark of respect, because a the Greek Christians are knownJew is an object of greater to be particularly odious tocontempt among them than a them.Xxxvii.] EPIRUS. 139place of execution, into the bazar. This is an extensivequarter in the centre of the lowest part ofthe town, and consists of several narrow, intricate,dirty, ill-paved streets, occupied entirely by shops.From either end of it along the margin of the lake,branches a street occupied by the poorer classes ofGreeks, and which, though not in its appearanceof misery to be compared to that of the Jews, isthe abode of more real poverty. All the betterhouses of the town are towards the slope of thehill of St. George.loannina contains about 1000 Musulman houses,2000 Greek, and 200 Jewish. The Musulmanfamilies are not more numerous than the houses,but of Greeks there are supposed to be near 3000families, and of Jews not less than four to eachhouse upon an average. The Christians have six orseven churches served by fifty parades, or secularpriests, who attend also to the private religious observancesof the Greek families. The bishop andthe priests attached to the metropolitan church,are, as usual, of the monastic order. There aresixteen mosques, including the two in the citadel,where the Jews have two synagogues. Sinceloannina has been the residence and capital of Al jrPasha, its permanent population has been graduallyin part exchanged for that of a more transitorykind. The town is now constantly full of thenatives of other parts of Greece and Albania,attracted here by the affairs or the expenditurearising from its being the seat of government of alarge portion of Greece and Albania. Many fami-140 EPIRU8. [chap.lies from distant parts of the country are forced toreside here as a security for the fidelity of theirrelatives who may be in the Vezir's employmenteither here or in other parts of his dominions.The household establishment and troops of theVeadr and his sons, together with the Albaniansoldiery, who are constantly here in their passivefrom one part of the country to another, increasethe moveable population, but probably have notmuch augmented the whole amount beyond thatwhich loannina contained fifty years ago, as manyof the old families, both Greek and Turkish, haveremoved elsewhere to avoid the perils and extortionof the present government, and particularlythe inconvenience of lodging Albanians, fromwhich the Turkish houses are not exempt.Some of the Greek and Turkish houses in thehigher parts of the town are among the best thatare to be found in the provincial towns of EuropeanTurkey, though their external appearance giveslittle indication of it, in consequence of the customwhich prevails here, as in other parts of Turkey,of avoiding the appearance of opulence, of havingfew windows towards the street, and of guardingthem with iron bars of the rudest workmanship.The annexed plan of the house which I occupywill render the description of it more intelligible.XxxviiEPIRUS.JSfIJTITJow1. Outer coiirt»2, 2. Chambers on ^ levelwith it*8. Middle court.4. Stairs and principal gallery.5. Chamber of reception ofthe master.6, Inner court.7, 7, 7, 7. Apartments ofthe harem.8, Kitchen.9, 9, 9. Galleries of theharem.10, 10. Streets.This house was built by a Turkish bey, upon whosedemise without heirs, or at least without any whoseclaims the Vezlr thought proper to admit, it wasseized upon by his Highness. It is situated at theangle of two streets, covers a square of about 100feet the side, and consists, as usual, of two stories,of which the upper only is inhabited by the family.The house is divided into three parts, of whichthe inner was the harem : in the middle the masterreceived and entertained visitors, and the outer142 EPiRUS. [chap.served for persons in waiting and their horses, or forstrangers, who were not admitted any further intothe house. In each division is a court open to thesky. A wide gate, very near the angle of the twostreets, sufficient for the admission of wheel-carriages,but used only for horses, there being noteven a cart like those of Thessaly in the district ofloannina, leads into the outer court, at the end ofwhich are two small chambers on a level with thecourt ; these served to lodge strangers and personswho came to the Bey from the country on business.A second wide gate leads into the middle court, andopposite to it is a flight of steps, which is openlaterally to the court, but is protected by a roof andascends into the principal gallery. These steps arethe only stairs in the house, except a sort of ladder,from the third court into the gallery of the harem.The middle court is paved with stone ; i;he twoothers covered only with coarse gravel. Accordingto Turkish custom, persons of superior or equalrank to the Bey rode up to the steps across themiddle court, after which their horses were ledback to the outer ; but inferiors entered the middlecourt on foot The gallery, which is about fiftyfeet by twelve, and forms an agreeable apartmentin summer, opens at the end, to the right, into thechamber of reception, and leads, at the same extremity,by a passage at right angles to the greatgallery, into two smaller ones looking down uponthe third court and leading into the apartmentsof the harem. The pavement of the middlecourt extends under the chamber of reception ;this in summer is the only place of refuge fromXXXVII.] Epirus. 143the heat, which, when no clouds intervene, completelypenetrates, by the hour of two in the afternoon,all the upper apartments, which have nothingabove a slight ceiling but a roof of concavetiles; so that towards the evening every part ofthe house is intolerably hot, and more than halfthe night is required to restore it to the temperatureof the atmosphere. Such a flimsy constructionis of course equally incapable of keepingout the cold in winter, against which there isno complete protection in such dwellings but aclothing of fur. A shed at the end of the middlecourt, opposite to the chamber of reception, isone of the stables : the other is below the galleryof the smaller apartments of the harem;both are open towards the respective courts, andhere the horses stand on the bare stone pavementwithout any litter, and are watered only inthe evening, after which their barley is given. Insteadof the chopped straw, which is the commonfood of horses in Turkey tiring the day, hay ishere substituted, and the quantity of barley at nightis smaller.No windows in the house look to the street,except those of the two rooms on a level with theouter court, together with a single window in onecomer of the principal apartment of the harem,which is closely latticed, but projects from the wallso as to afford a view of the street in either direction.A dim light, however, is derived from thestreet in the two principal apartments by means ofsmall fixed panes of stained glass not far below the144 EPiRUs. [chap.ceiling. These, with the painted ceilings andwainscots, some parts of which are very gaudy,are the only decorations in the house. All thesewindows look into the courts, and are closed withwooden shutters within which are bars of iron.In general, the better houses of loannina havean inner window-frame behind the bars, containingsmall panes of a very bad kind of glass broughtfrom the Adriatic ; this addition, which is seldomseen in Asiatic Turkey or the warmer climates ofGreece, is here rendered necessary by the longwinter and the rudeness of the climate in everyseason.The best Greek houses differ not much in planfrom the Turkish just described; but they arerather more comfortable, partly because theGreeks, , especially the travelled merchants, haveacquired some of the feelings of civilized Europein this respect, and partly from the differencewhich is produced in the distribution and economyof the family, from the women not being so muchconcealed. There is seldom more than one court,and a small one perhaps at the back of the house ;but the court is more spacious, with a wider andmore ostentatious flight of steps leading to a largerwooden gallery into which all the principal apartmentsopen. The gallery is supported by an arcadeof stone continued perhaps along the side of theyard, in which is the gate leading into the street.A small garden sometimes occupies one side of thecourt, and at the end of the capacious gallery thereis generally a raised kiosk. The gallery and kioskxxxvi.] EPiRUS. 145are the usual residence of the family in summer ;and here some of the men generally pass the nightin that season. As usual both in Greek and Turkishhouses, the soft is the only furniture in sight, thebedding which is spread upon the sofa at nightbeing deposited in closets on the sides of thechambers and the small table with the roundmetal tray, which forms the only apparatus formeals, being put aside also when not in immediateuse. In these respects Greek customs are nearlythe same at loannina as in other parts of Turkey,though in some houses a table and chairsof European form are to be found, and Venetianor German mirrors are commonly suspended onthe walls. In one or more of the rooms hangsa picture of the Virgin, with a lamp perpetuallyburning before it ; and generally that of thesaint whose name is borne by the master of thehouse, or who, for some reason, is a favourite.Some of these pictures are covered (except theface) with silver, like those in the churches. Allthe houses of loannina are constructed in thelower story of small stones rudely squared and veryill cemented ; the upper apartments are in generalof wood. Every large house is furnished with awell, affording, at no great depth, an abundantsupply of excellent water, which is very cold evenin the midst of summer. But loannina is otherwisewell situated to afford the luxury of cool liquors —Mitzik^li and Olytzika supplying snow in the earlypart of the season, and the mountain of Syrako tothe latest period.The domestic manners of the Greeks of lodn-VOL. IV. L146 BPiRUS. [chap.nina have in general been very little affected bythe long residence of many of the merchants inforeign countries, and, as in other parts of Turkey,seem not to have undergone any great alterationsince the time of Homer. That they are almostidentical with those of the Turks, except in thosepoints in which their respective religions havedrawn a line, or given rise to a difference, may beattributed to the tincture of Oriental customs,which is traceable in the language and mannersof the Greeks of every age, arising from their positionon the borders of the eastern world. Butthough the resemblance may thus partly be tracedto a common origin, the greater part of the Turkishcustoms have probably been adopted by the Turksin the progress of their conquest of Asiatic andEuropean Greece, during which they graduallyexchanged the rude and simple habitudes of Tartaryfor the refinement and luxuries of the Byzantineempire.The Greek women of loannina are as uneducatedas the Turkish, and are held in that degreeof subserviency which is their common lot throughoutGreece, and which seems indeed to have beentheir ordinary condition among the ancients.Little respect is paid to age, especially when theparents, as often happens, are in part maintainedby their children, and live in the same house.Girls are never married without a portion ; to providefor which, and to make a suitable alliance fortheir daughters is the most anxious care of theparents, and is generally done without consultingthe girl, or even allowing her to see her futureXXXVII.] Epirus. 147lord and master. Brothers often supply theirsisters with portions ; and it is even commonamong the young Greeks to refrain from taking awife themselves until their sisters are married.Young women seldom or never go out of the housebefore marriage, except to church, which is generallyin the night. When they begin to visit, it isconsidered that themselves and parents have givenup all hope of matrimony ; but they are the moreunwilling to come to this determination, as parents,aided by the custom of seclusion, sometimes succeedin concealing the age of their daughters.From such manners naturally arise ignorance, inelegance,and an early decay of beauty. Thewalk of the women is particularly uncouth, not somuch caused by their confinement or their dress asby a persuasion prevailing among all but the peasantry,who walk as nature has taught them, thata rolling, waddling gait, is a proof of refinement ;so that it is a compliment to tell a lady that shewalks like a goose \ The common employmentof the women, besides the usual domestic occupations,are the embroidery of coarse German muslins,in imitation of those of Constantinople.This is not peculiar to Epinis. The following is anAthenian love-song : —Na \afir\Kitvav rd fiovvdfNa fiXiirw rey *A0//vav,Net fiXiiria rriy kydicriv fio*How Vop?ror€c <rdy x^^^^*Levelled be the mountains, that I may see Athens ; that Imay see my love, who walks about like a goose.l2148 EPiRus. [chap.One of the chief distinctions of lodnnina is its twocolleges for education, and the libraries belongingto them. There is a collection of books also at themetropolitan church, but the Fathers and the Byzantinehistory are almost the only works which thekalogheri have to boast of. At the head of the oldschool, the origin of which is beyond tradition, isCosmo Balano, a very respectable old man, whosefather was master before him. In this establishment,which lately has derived its chief* supportfrom the Zosimadhes, grammar and the usualHellenic authors are taught, as in many of theschools of Greece. In the other, 100 scholarsare instructed in Greek, history, geography, andphilosophy. The latter college was founded byPikrozoi, a native merchant, who bequeathed 800purses, the interest of which, together with otherdonations, affords a salary of 2000 piastres to theap^^iSiSaaicaXoc Athanasius Psalidha, besides supportingtwo assistants, and giving a small yearly donationto each scholar. The same Pikrozoi built achurch and hospital at loannina. The total ofthe Sia^puv, or annual interest of the funds of thetwo schools, is now 60 purses. Besides these areseveral small grammar schools, kept by individualsgenerally of the secular priesthood, whose acquirementsdo not extend beyond the Hellenic of theGreek Testament. In the midst of summer it is notuncommon to see one of these teachers seated undera tree in the suburbs of the town surrounded bythirty or forty scholars. They receive generally apiastre a week from the poorest of their scholars.It is said that one of the most efficient in-XXXVfl.] Epirus. 149strumpets in persuading the Greeks to establishschools as the best mode of improving the nation,was a monk of Apokuro named Kosma, who daringeight years travelled over the country as a preacher,and made this subject a principal theme of his discourses.He was in other respects also a reformer,as he succeeded in persuading the women of Zagorito lay aside a great shapeless head-dress, similarto those of some of the JEgtsan islands, for a simplekerchief. He fell a martyr to his zeal, havingbeen put to death in 1780 by Kurt Pasha.It is probably rather a consequence of theVezir's indifference to the distant consequencesof his measures, and with a view to some supposedimmediate advantage, than with any better feeling,that he has always encouraged education amongthe Greeks. He frequently recommends it to theattention of the bishops, the generality of whomthinking only of accumulation and acting exactlylike Turks in office, are too much disposed toneglect it To the old schoolmaster, Balano, heoften holds the same language, exhorting him toinstruct the youth committed to his care withdiligence, to give them a good example, andnever to entertain any doubts of receiving hiscountenance and protection. His oppression islight upon monasteries compared with that whichhe exercises upon villages and individuals, andhe has lately in particular favoured the monasteryof St. Natum, between Korytza and 'Akhrida.Not that he is ever at any personal expence onthese occasions : for example, when a rock notlong ago, fell upon the convent of St. PantsEPiRUs. [chap.delelmona, in the island of the lake of loannina,be ordered the expence of the repairs to be defrayedby an assessment upon some of the chiefGreeks of loannina ; and Kyr D. A. the mosteminent merchant here, having recently givenhim some cause of discontent, became the principalsufferer by the fall of the rock.The Greek spoken at loannina is of a morepolished kind than is usually heard in any part ofGhreece Proper ; its phrases are more Hellenic,and its construction more grammatical. This isa natural consequence of the schools long establishedhere, and of the residence of many merchants,and others who have travelled or dweltin civilized Europe. The observation applieshowever to the Greeks alone. Among the Turksand Musulman Albanians every tenth wordof the Greek which they speak is Turkish, andthis among the native Mahometanss is often allthe Turkish they know. In EfnruSj as in everyother part of Greece, some words remain in useamong the vulgar, which though not employedelsewhere, nor even entering into the more polishedlanguage of the better classes on the spot,are of pure Hellenic derivation ; they may not befound perhaps in any extant ancient author, buthave been preserved in the same manner as inevery country ancient forms are sometimes employedby rustics which have long been obsoletein cities. Among those in the district of loan-ninamay be mentioned rpoyoroqy the current, ornarrow part of the lake, acmSiov, the broad strawhat worn by the peasants in time of harvest, butXXXVII .] Epirus. 1 61which the fishermen of the lake, who wear thesame kind of covering, call from its material ica-Xa/iia. The words avrXH^j avrXia, rpOTTwrripif areemployed by the fishermen of the lake as well asby the seamen of the ^gcean. In Zag6ri, 9vpais used for door, not iropra, which is the commonword in every part of Greece ; irpoaOfiXaZwis employed in the same district when a lambis put to a ewe that is not its mother ; ra opW0ca, the fowls are disturbed, isanother Favorite expression. The long residenceof the Sclavonic race in this part of Greece hashowever left its traces in the dialect, but still moreperhaps in the names of places, and in the terminationand mode of pronouncing those whichare of Greek derivation. Many Italian wordshave also been introduced into the vernaculartongue from the neighbouring islands, and bymeans of the commerce of loannina with Italy.The appearance of loannina has been greatlyimproved, since I was here in the year 1806, bythe lai^e serai, which the Vezir has erected uponthe hill of Litharitza, according to the intentionwhich he then communicated to me. In its formand decorations it is preferable to any other of hisHighness's buildings, and though not so spaciousas the Sultan's palaces on the Bosphorus, deservesstill greater admiration in respect of the surroundingscenery. Standing upon the summit of a fortresswhich now incloses the hill of Litharitza, it formsby its light Chinese architecture a striking contrastwith the solid plainness of the basis on whichit rests. The parapets of the fortress are armed152 EPiRUs. [chap.with cannon, and the lower part of it consists ofcatenated apartments, so that it may stand asiege after all the upper structure is destroyed.Another building with which Aljr has adornedloannina, though not adding like Litharitza newembellishment to the beautiful scenery, because itis concealed by trees, is a large kiosk situated inthe midst of a rude park or garden in the northernsuburb on the slope of the hill of St. George,where he has built also a small palace, and keepssome deer, a lion, and other wild animals. TheKiosk is a circle having a diameter of about 350feet, the central half of which is paved with marble,and consists in the middle, as usual in Turkishkiosks, of a basin of water. In the centre is arude model of a fortress mounted with cannon,which when the fountain is at work spout forthwater, and are answered by a similar dischargefrom besieging cannon round the edge of the basin.If instes^l of this silly bauble in the childish tasteof the Turks, there had been some more simpleand elegant fountain, the building would havebeen as perfect a work of its kind as can be conceived.As it is, I doubt whether the Sultanhimself possesses any kiosk more elegant, ormore agreeable in the heat of summer. Thespace around the central pavement is divided intoeight parts. One of these is an entrance hall, oppositeto which, in a corresponding recess, is anarrow staircase and an exit to the garden. Thestairs lead up to a chamber having a window whichlooks down into the kiosk, but is covered with alattice painted with a landscape in such a mannerXXXVII.] Epirus 163as effectually to conceal the existence of the windowfrom those in the kiosk. It is of courseintended for any of his women whom he mayfavour by bringing them here, and who may fromthence see and hear what is passing below. Ofthe other six recesses, the two opposite ones ofwhich the axis is at right angles to the two firstmentioned, are vacant spaces paved with marble.The others are four apartments splendidly furnishedwith soft on three sides, and on the fourthopen towards the fountain.On the western side of the fortress of Litharitza,on an eminence almost equally high stands theserai of Mukhtar Pasha, and to the southward ofit, in a lower situation, that of Veljr Pasha. Theyare both on the edge of the great burying ground,on the southern side of the city, and not far fromthe shore of the lake. These houses of the twosons of Aiy resemble those of Turks of high rankinother parts of the empire, except thafc the furnitureand decorations of Veljr's are a little moreEuropean than those generally seen in Turkishpalaces. Mukhtar's, on the contrary, is correctlyin the Turkish taste. The walls display in severalplaces, both within and without, large paintingsin their hideous style, representing actions alludingto Mukhtar's several qualities of governor, landholder,and hunter ; — such as the decapitation ofa Greek, the operations of agriculture, and thesports of the field. Besides the serais of the Kastro,and Litharitza, and the garden of the northwesternsuburb, Aly has a large house near thenorthern extremity of the lake qp its eastern shore.154 EPiRus. [chap.at the village of P^rama, where, standing on arocky insulated height at the foot of Mount M ,it commands a fine view of the city, withthe mountains towards Artaa in the distance. It isparticularly agreeable in the spring, as it looksdown, in an opposite direction, upon that beautifulmeadow which extends from Perama as far as thelake of Lapsista, and which then, free from inundation,begins to be clothed with heroine, anda prolusion of gay or odoriferous herbs.The northern and western sides of the hill ofSt. George are covered with vineyards, which extendalso into the plain. Among these vineyardsare seen the remains of the entrenchments whichwere thrown up in the year 1798-9, when all theinhabitants, without exception, were forced towork with the shovel or basket. The bishop andthe Pasha's sons were required to set the example.The intrenchment was carried in a semi-circleround the hill of St. George, terminating at eitherend in the lake, so as to inclose a chapel of St.Nicolas beyond the northern suburb, as well as thewhole of the suburb on the south, which lies beyondthe burying-ground on the road to Artaa.The entire length of the entrenchment was nearfive miles.The Nisi, or Island of loannina, is half amile long and one-third as much in breadth. Itcontains a house for the Vezir, five small monasteries,and a village of 100 houses, inhabited byfishermen, who pay 15,000 piastres a year to theVezir for the monopoly of the fishery, besideswhich they are subject to the kharatj, and to aXXXVII.] EPIRU8. 155fixed contribution of fire-wood for the use of theSerai. The village is situated amidst gardens andplane-trees; and the neatness of the cottages issuch as would be sought for in vain among thelower classes of loannina^ or the villages of its district,or indeed in any part of the surroundingcountry, except among the Vlakhiotes of MountPindus. The women spin cotton, and soak andbleach the cotton cloths, which are made in thecity. There are only two or three monks in theisland, the monasteries being now used for thelodging of prisoners collected from every part ofthe Vezir's dominions. As the confinement in theisland, compared with that in the castle, is healthand liberty, it is inflicted only for offences of alighter kind, or upon those who are detained ashostages for absent relatives. The largest monasteryis now occupied by the women and children of theSuliotes, who fled to the Seven Islands when Suliwas taken. Among them is a daughter of Botzari,an interesting child about ten years of age. Thesepoor creatures are allowed only a ration of romana,and for the rest are dependent upon charity.In the monastery of St. Elias, on the highest pointof the island, the wife and children of Zafiraki ofNausea, whom I knew at Saloniki, have been confinedfor the last four years.The commonest fish in the lake are carp and eels ;but there are also pike, perch, and tench, and asmall fry called rX^iq^ supposed to be a species ofperch, which are particularly caught in the Troyin fine nets of silk made for the purpose.Water serpents are numerous, and may very com-156 EPIRU8. [chap.only be seen in calm warm weather swimming onthe surface. Their haunts are along the margin andat the foot of Mount Mitzikeli, where I have oftenwitnessed them suddenly darting upon the frogs,which equally abound there : though the frog diedinstantly, I could never perceive that the serpentswallowed it. All the shallow parts of the lake,particularly northward of the citadel and aroundthe edges, abound in tall reeds and rushes, intermixedwith the nymphs both with the yellow andwhite blossom : the first called vov^pov, the latterZafiwaKi. Among the rushes the most common isthe irairvpcov, from whence ra vavvpia is the termin common use to express the parts of the lakeovergrown with reeds and rushes. The papj^rihas a single round stem without leaves often tenfeet high, of a bright green, soft, and tapering tothe top, where it ends in a small tuft. It is full ofa honey-combed pith, and is used to make a veryuseful kind of mat which forms the ordinary carpetingof the houses of loannina, and is exportedto Corfu and other places. The reeds of the lakeare chiefly used for roofing the inferior class ofhouses, and for making the huts and sheds of theshepherds. The papj^ria shelter a few cormorantsand cranes, and an immense number of wild ducksof several varieties. Some of these furnish food tothe birds of prey of the kite and vulture kind,which build on Mount Mitzikeli, and are oftenseen soaring above its sides ; but the great bodyof the ducks are decimated by the sportsmen ofloannina, who are continually following them inmonoxyla. Passages are cut through the papyrusXXXVII.] EPIRUS. 157for this purpose, and the pursuit furnishes sportoccasionally to the Vezir, and still oftener toMukhtar Pasha, the keenest sportsman of thefamily, and who allows the public to take theirpleasure in the lower part of the lake, providedthe northern, which has the best cover, is reservedfor himself. When the Vezir goes forth on a shootingexcursion, the lake presents a most animatedscene ; every boat and monoxylo being employedin surrounding the papj^ria, and in raising thegame for him, while every gun in lodnnina isemployed in bringing down the birds.The elevation of loannina above the sea, probablynot much less than 1000 feet, its inclosureof mountains, covered for more than half the yearwith snow, the frequent showers which refresh itthroughout the spring and early summer, addedto its marshes and inundated meadows, give it anagricultural character, different from that of Greecein general. The hay harvest in particular is upona scale not to be seen in any other part of thecountry. Between the middle and end of June,a long growth of grass, covering the great levelwhich borders the marshes on either side of thecity, is mowed, dried, and carried into the town,where it is sold for five piastres a horse-load,the animal being loaded to the utmost. Thehay time is precisely the season when showersoccur almost daily, and generally fall very heavy.But it is not every day that the clouds, which arealways first collected upon the mountains, dischargetheir contents so low as loannina ; and sopowerful is the sun at that season, that a single158 EPiRUs. [chap.fine day is sufficient to render the grass dry enoughfor carrying. The mowers are chiefly from theTomaro-khoria, and are paid 100 paras a day,with wine. The harvest of barley and wheat immediatelyfollows that of hay, and is generallyfinished by the middle of July. In this fatiguingoperation, hazardous to the health, and sometimesimmediately fatal in consequence of the power ofthe sun, field labourers, generally satisfied with25 paras a day, receive 40 with wine ; manywomen are employed, whose hire is equal to thatof the strongest palikari. The tillage is negligent,the grain inferior to that of Thessaly and theMor^a, and so much mixed with weeds, that thebread made from it is often unwholesome, particularlyin consequence of the narcotic effects ofthe well-known lilium tenementum, called by theGreeks Hpa, anciently alps. At the end of thewheat harvest the western division of the valleyhas as parched an appearance as any plain inGreece. But the oi/^i/uca, or latter harvest, whichconsists of millet and maize, soon chequers theplain with green ; and by the time these arereaped in the end of September, the rains havealready refreshed the herbage. The edges of themarshes and the heights which surround the basinof loannina on every side supply constant pastureto cattle, sheep, and goats. Some of these flocksbelong to the young Pashas, others to individualsof loannina ; those of the Vezir himself, especiallyhis sheep, are so numerous as to require agreater range of pasture. The shepherd receivesfrom his employers 30 piastres for six months' careXXXVII.] EPIRUS. 159of a jcoiraSc or flock, of which the usual number is200, often belonging to several different proprietors.Those who take care of oxen have 3^ piastres forsix months for each pair, besides two okes ofbread per diem ; all the herdsmen receive also anallowance of vinegar in summer, and of wine inwinter.The climate of loannina renders it more subjectto the diseases of Northern than of Southern Europe.In consequence of the post meridian showersthe heat is seldom very oppressive until the middleof July, and the air is sensibly cooler in the beginningof September. That long continuance ofheat, therefore, which is so pernicious to northernconstitutions in many parts of Greece, and theSouth of Europe, rendering the body unable toresist the effects of the marshy exhalations, or ofthe first chilly breezes of autumn, is much abridgedat loannina, and seldom felt for more than six orseven weeks. Even in that interval it does notoften happen that the thermometer of Fahrenheitis above 85® in the shade, though sometimes forseveral days it rises about 2 p.m. to 95®, and even100®.But though the climate of loannina, notwithstandingits marshes, is not generally unhealthy,the lower part of the town forms an exception :here the action of the sun upon the stagnantborders of the lake, and the effluvia of putridmatter which quickly accumulates in the streetswhen the rains have ceased, being aided bypoverty, wretched lodgings, and unwholesome160 EPiRus. [chap.diet, dysentery prevails, as well as autumnalfevers, which if not immediately fatal, are oftenthe commencement of obstinate intermittents, andother disorders. A peculiarity of loannina, or atleast of the upper part of the town, is the absenceof gnats, at least of that kind which is so tormentingin other southern countries, and an abundanceof which is considered by Italians as a sure signof mal-aria. During two summers which I havepassed here, I have never discovered any, thoughparticularly sensible to their tormenting attacks,and have even found a mosquito curtain unnecessary.But if there is something adverse to thepropagation of the venomous gnat in the air ofthis place, it is not so with other winged insects,of which such clouds rise from the borders of thelake in the summer evenings, that unless when therain was falling, scarcely an evening has passed inwhich my candles have not been repeatedly extinguishedby the immense numbers of them attractedby the flame, particularly a small kind of gnat.Among the nuisances of vermin, are brown rats ofthe largest kind, and it is almost needless to add,bugs, since not a house in Turkey, except in someof the mountain villages, is, in summer at least,exempt from these pests, or from fleas.So strongly does a first view of the low situationof the greater part of the town on the bordersof an apparently stagnant lake, surrounded bymarshes, give the impression of unhealthiness,that it was with great difficulty I could persuadethe celebrated Roman artist Lusieri, who arrivedXXXVII.] Epirus. 161here in the latter end of June, to prolong his staybeyond a day or two, so much was he alarmed atthose which his Italian opinions led him to consideras infallible symptoms of malaria. But thepicturesque beauties of the place had such a powerfulattraction for him that he was induced to hazarda longer visit, until his fears having been calmedby my own experience, and that of the loan-notesin general, he prolonged his stay for sixweeks. The longer he remained the more he wasimpressed with the feeling, that in the great sourcesof his art, the sublime and beautiful, and in theirexquisite mixture and contrast, loannina exceedsevery place he had seen in Italy or Greece.Early every day he took a station which he hadselected, on the side of the hill of St. George,commanding a view of the lake, the citadel, thepalaces of the Vezir, and the houses of the town,mixed in the most picturesque manner, with gardens,mosques, and cypress groves; and wherethe. distance comprehends the mountains Tzu«-merka, Kakardhista, Syrako, and Mitzik^li. piehad not only made considerable progress in thisdrawing on a very large scale with his usual minuteness,although the afternoon's thunder-stormseldom allowed him to resume his labour after ourdinner hour at 2 o'clock, but had also found timebefore his departure to design the outlines of threeother views, one from the foot of Mount Mitzik^Ii,opposite to the citadel, containing Mount 015^tzikain the back-ground ; a second from the southernextremity of the lake near Kastritza, and a thirdVOL. IV. MA' !I162 Epirus. [chap.of the ruins near Dhramisius, taken on a largescale from the summit of the theatre ^The view of loannina, which formed the splendidsubject of the first-mentioned drawing, is not verydifferent from that which is presented to the travelleras he attains the crest of the ridge of St.George, in approaching the city from Filiates orParamythia, where it has the advantage of takinghim by surprise, the lake and town having beenhidden from view by the hill. The sudden displayof beautiful scenery which there presents itself isthe more remarkable, as the first view of the plainof lo^nina on that route is dreary, and with theexception of the sublime outline of the horizon,by no means agreeable. The three other approachesare, 1st. from the Artaa road, which aftertraversing a suburb consisting of a broad street,inhabited in great part by gipsies, then crossesthe great cemetery on that side, leaving the palacesof M ukhtar and Vel;^ on the right, and entersthe town between the southern end of the hill ofSt. George and that of Litharltza. Here also theview of the greater part of the town is a surpriseto the traveller, though some of the great objects,the lake, the castle, and Litharitza, being graduallybrought into view, render the impression lessforcible than on the approach from Paramythia.These and the entire col his death, were lost in H. M.lection, belonging to the Earl ship Cambrian, at Carabus, inof Elgin which remained in 1828.Lusieri's hands at the time ofXxvii.] EPIRUS. 163From the northern route leading into loanninafrom Skodra» Berat, and Premedi, the view ofthe city is also extremely beautiful, as the travellerapproaches under an abrupt cliff in the hillof St. George, where the meadows and gardensat the head of the lake are on the left, and infront the island, with the kastro and town inprofile, and the great ridges of Pindus in the background.In every view of the city and its immediatevicinity, the most remarkable object is MountMitzikeli, the gigantic proportions of which, resultingfrom its steepness and proximity, are a featurepeculiar to this city. The lofty and gracefuloutline of the mountain, the deep furrows of itstorrents, and the terrors of its precipices, are admirablycontrasted with the plain and lake on oneside, and on the other with the distant summitsof Pindus thus forming between the two an objectof intermediate distance and comparison, whichcompletes the harmony of the entire landscape.Although advanced considerably to the westwardof the central line of Pindus Mitzikeli is too nearto it to be long free from vapours, when a southerlyor westerly wind caps all the great summits,or when the regular diurnal changes in summercover the Pindtis with clouds. Mitzikeli then oftenthrows the city into shade while the plain is insunshine, and it is the cause of the frequent thunderstormto which loannina is subject, especiallyin the spring and early summer. The clouds,extending from the higher ridges, first collect onthe summit of Mitzikeli, and then gradually dem2164 EPiRUs. [chap.scent its western side, until suspended over thetown, they are dissolved in torrents of rain, generallyaccompanied with lightning, disclaimed fromso short a distance as often to cause fatal accidents,and accompanied with peals of thunder, which arereverberated from the mountain with tremendousviolence, and are not exceeded in intensity evenin the tropics. Subject as JEpirtis in general is tothose atmospheric changes which generate thunder,and which caused Jupiter Tonans to be thepresiding deity, there is no inhabited situation inthe province to be compared to loannina itself, forits rapid transitions of temperature and the frequencyof thunderstorm. These in the wintermay often be witnessed accompanying a heavy fallof snow.It is said that the side of Mount Mitzikeli inface of the city was formerly covered with trees,instead of being, as at present, totally bare, exceptin the lower parts of the ravines near the lake,where some underwood still remains ; and thissupposition is the more probable as the easternside of the mountain, and its continuation MountDhrysko, are still well wooded like all the ridgesof Pindus except where they consist of rockypinnacles, incapable of vegetation. The forestsnearest to the town were naturally the first todisappear before the demand of so large a city;as the distance from whence the fuel is to beconveyed has increased, so has the prevalence ofthe use of charcoal, made in the woods, andbrought to the town at a small expence. The courthowever still consumes a great quantity of wood ;XXXVII.] EPIRUS. 165and one of the severest oppressions to which thevillages in the district are subject is their obligationto deliver it in the city at their own expence.Every village in its turn, whether in the vicinityof a forest or not, is liable to this imposition.The kaza of Yenya (as the Turks call loannina)is divided into four nahiye, named Malakassi^Kurendo *, Tzerkovista ', and Zagori *.1. Malakassi, or Calabash, according to thevulgar pronunciation of the ending, comprehendsall the southern part of the valley of loannina,beginning from Rapsista and Katzika inclusive,extending from thence southward to the boundariesof Artaa, and eastward to those of M^tzovo andZagori. The principal places in Malakassi areKalarjrtes and Syrako, then Kotzista of 100 houseson the northern face of the mountain of Syrako ;Bozgoli, similarly situated ; Khrysovitza, on theopposite side of the M etzovo branch of the Artaa ;Klaziadhes, on the northern end of Mount Dhrysko,and Lozetzi, the largest of the Katzano-khoria. Thelatter villages, otherwise called Tomaro-khoria, are12 in number, and are situated on the mountainwhich connects Dhrysko with Xerovuni, the greaterpart of them on elevated levels or slopes above theright bank of the Artaa. The total number of villagesin Malakassi is 49, and the houses 2350.2. Kurendo contains 71 villages, and 1870houses ; it comprehends the northern part of thevalley of loannina, together with the hills whichMaXairaorori, ' Kovpevrog,TZtpxofiiara* * Zayopi.166 filius. [chap.border it on the west and north, extending westwardto the confines of Filiates and Dh^lvino, andto the north-west as far as Zagoriani and Kalb&kiincluded, where it borders on Zag6ri. Furthersouth it is separated from the same sub-district bythe ridge of Mitzikeli. The largest villages areKurenda, consisting of several makhalas containingaltogether 100 families ; Perama and Zelova,near loannina ; Zitza, already described ; Kartzu-vista, Melissa, and Granitzopula ; the three lastlying in that succession, in the direction fromloannina towards Filiates.3. Tzerkovista contains only 22 villages and460 houses ; it comprehends the villages situatedon the eastern slope of Mount Olj^tzika^ togetherwith those between its southern extremity and theboundaries of Artaa. The largest is Sylvanus, onthe left of the road from loannina to Pendepig&dhianear the latter, and containing 70 houses.4. Zag6ri occupies all the highlands of Pindusincluded between the central ridge and the crestof Mitzikeli, together with two villages which lieto the westward of the line of Mitzikeli, namely,Ravenna and Mavrovuni. Zagori extends northwardto the limits of Konitza, where Papingo isthe northernmost village, and to the south borderson Metzovo and Malakassi. It consists chiefly oftwo parallel valleys, with a separating ridge namedPaleovuni, which is intermediate between Mitzikeliand the central Pindus. In the valley next to is the northern branch of the Arachthus flowingto the south. The eastern valley is watered bythe Lousy flowing in the opposite direction, andXxvii.] EPIRUS. 167which receives a western branch partly from thenorth-eastern extremity of Mitzikeli, and partly fromPaleoTuni. I have already remarked that thislatter seems to be the mountain, which by Livy isnamed Linton. Zagori contains 3500 houses in 42villages. The largest are Laista, of 200 houses,towards the source of the Viosa and Tzopelovo ofthe same number on the northern side of MountPaleovuni. Dovra, on the northern extremity ofMount Mitzikeli, has 150 houses. The upper andlower Sudden, a little northward of Dovra, containmore than 300 between them. The chiefvillages in the valley of the northern Arachthusare Laskovetzi, Frangadhes, and Kalota, all onthe side of Mount Mitzikeli. Twelve of the villagesof Zagori are inhabited by Vlakhiotes, theremainder by Greeks, but the name of the districtand of many of the villages show that at one timeit was a great Slavonic settlement. Like theVlakhiotes and Christian mountaineers of Albania,the people derive their subsistence from trade, oras artisans in various parts of Turkey.The Vezir's agent in the government of Zagoriis Alexodhimos, son of Alexis, of Kapessovo, someof whose ancestors have held the same office. Hehas a large house also at loannina, is engaged incommerce there like several others of the principalFavorites, is put to all sorts of expence by Aljr, andin return extracts all he can from his government.With the exception of Kalarj^tes, Syrako, Matzuki,and theVlakhiote villages of Zagori, all the othersin the Kara of loannina are peopled by Greeks.Some of them are Spahiliks in the hands of168 EPiRUs. [chap.Turkish beys at lodnnina, which the Veadr losesno opportunity of obtaining possession of. Thetotal number of houses in the four districts ofloannina amounting to about 8,200, several ofwhich have more than one family living in them, therural population can scarcely be less than 50,000.In the city, where the families bear a muchlarger proportion to the number of houses than inthe villages : the population, including that of amoveable kind, is probably not short of 30,000.I have already suggested the probability that thevalley of loannina is the DodofUBaj and the ruinsatKastrltza those of the cityJDodona. Unfortunatelynothing more than an opinion can be advanced onthis subject, as Dodona has neither been describedby any ancient author, so as to be recognized bysuch description, nor have any remains or monumentsbeen yet discovered tending to supply thedeficiency. Hence Dodona is now the only Greekcity of great celebrity, the situation of which isnot exactly known by means of a comparison ofancient history with actual appearances : andhence an opinion upon the question of its site,cannot have any better basis than the negativeargument, that there is no other situation in whichDodona can be placed so as to accord with themention made of it in history, or so as to allow ofa consistent adjustment of the several tribes ofJSpirtis to the modern map. Whether the opinionthat Dodona stood at Kastritza be correct or not, areview of the authorities upon which it is founded willat least be serviceable to those further researcheswhich will probably end in leaving no doubt on theXXXVII.] Epirus. 169question : for it is not to be imagined that Epiruswith the same language, religion, and manners asthe rest of Greece, should have been destitute ofthose eloquent monuments which have frequentlythrown light on the mythology, history, and topographyof other parts of the country, or that theEpirotes were less accustomed than the otherGreeks to employ lapidary writing for public andprivate memorials. Extant specimens prove thatthe arts were carried to as great perfection inEpirus as in any part of Greece, though in consequenceof the desolation which followed the Romanconquest, very few of the productions ofthose subsequent ages, which have supplied nine-tenthsof the ancient monuments discovered inother parts of Greece are to be met with in this province.But for the same reason, they are likelyto be as valuable as they are rare, being theproductions of times when Greek art was in thegreatest perfection. Of the Dodoneean temple inparticular it is difficult to believe that some vestigesshould not still subsist, or that some remainsof the numerous dedications which had accumulatedwithin its walls during the long ages of itssacred celebrity, should not be yet preserved belowthe surface of the soil, if we knew exactly wheretoexplore, or, having that knowledge, could searchin security.As there is some ambiguity in the allusion toDodona by Homer, it may be proper to begin byreverting to the passages of his poems in whichthe name occurs. From the catalogue of the170 BP1RU8. [chap.Greek forces in the Iliad, we learn that theEngines of Dodona, and the v Perrhsebi of theriver Titaresius, accompanied Guneus of Cyprus,one of the Thessalian leaders, to the Trojan war \In the sixteenth book Achilles prays to Jupiter ofDodona', whose ministers were the Sellii, '^ menof unwashed feet, sleeping on the bare earth*In the Odyssey, Ulysses in his feigned speechesto Eumseus and Penelope, pretends that, afterhaving visited Sheldon, king of the Thesproti, heproceeded to consult the oracular oak of Jupiter atDodona '.It was the general belief of the ancient readersof Homer that there were two Dodona, one inThessaly the other in Epirus ; the former situatedin Perrbffibia, near Mount Olympus, the latter inapart of Epirus which, in the time of the Trojanwar, was dependent on the king of Thesprolia :that from the former came the Engines, who were^ Fovvevc ^ c*^ Kv^v eye 2vw Kal tiKotrt y^ac*Ty S* *^yifjy£Q ivoyro^ furiirToXfiMfi re n<pai/3o2,Oi irepl Aw^ctTKiyv Bva^i^ifiepoy oIkC tyroOe r ajKp)* i/xeproy TiTapritrioy cpy' lyifwyro,11. B. V. 748.Zev dya ^wSwyaiE IleXaoyuce, rriXiOt va/wv,^ufBwyji^ HfZiiav EvayetfiipoV dfupl ie SeXXoi2o2 yaiovff viro^^ac avi7rr(Siro^ec xafiauvyai,II. n. V. 233.^ Toy S* £c diiaSwyriy taro fififuyaif of pa Oeo7o*^K ^pvoc v-ij/iicdfioio Atom (yovXrjy IjraKovtni"OiTffwc yotrrfierjf 'I6ai:i7c ec tfioya ^fjfioy,Od. X. V. 327. T. V. 296.XXXVII.] EPIRU8. 171joined with the Perrh»bi of the Titaresius underthe command of Guneus ; and that the latter wasthe place alluded to by Ulysses in the Odyssey \As to the prayer of Achilles opinions differed;some of the ancient critics having supposed thatprayer to have been addressed to a Jupiter worshippedat Dodona in Thessaly, and who waschosen by Achilles as a yurvtiov 0<oc, or deity ofhis native country, in the same manner as Pandarusprays to Apollo AvKnyivnQ^ and Chaises toApollo ^vOevc. But in this case, as Stephenssuggests, ^' how happened Achilles to have namedthe Sellii in his prayer, who were particularly connectedwith Dodona of Epirus," as several writersshow, but particularly Hesiod, who places theEpirote Dodona in Hellopia, a country which receivedthat name from its inhabitants, the Hellor Sellii KNor are the poet s words ri|Xo0c vauav altogetherindifferent to the question. It is true that Achillesbeing at such a distance from Thessaly as Troy,might, without impropriety, apply them to theThessalian Dodona ; but it seems more consistentwith Homeric diction, to conceive that ri|Xo0c vaiwvwas a customary form of address to the particularJupiter to whom the hero was praying, and that italluded to the separation of Epirus from the restof Greece by distance and a chain of lofty mountains,which had caused it to be comparatively^ Strabonn, p. 327. 441. ~ Strabonn. p. 32S. Aristot. inStephan. in Aw^mi^i}. Meteor. 1. 1, c. 14. — straboHesiod. et Pbilochor. ap. p. 23.172 Epirus. [chap.barbarous, and to be so unaffected by the politicalinterests of the rest of Greece, that it contributedno forces to the Trojan expedition. We may remarkalso, in support of this view of the question,that proof is totally wanting of the existence of anysanctuary of Jupiter at the Thessalian Dodona. Itseems evident, therefore, that the prayer of Achilleswas addressed to the same Thesprotian Jove, whoseworship and oracle had acquired great celebrityabout that time, as the Odyssey shows, and whichappear from Herodotus to have been more ancienteven than the colonization of the Pelasgi in Epirus,having been established by some adventurers fromPhoenicia and Egypt \ who probably found thebarbarism of Epirus favourable to their superstitiouspower.The ambiguity as to the two Dodona in theIliad appears to have arisen from several coincidences.The poet applies to both of them theepithet SiMrxei/ucpoc* They were both Pelasgic settlements; Pelasgiotis was the name of the northeasternpart of Thessaly to the latest period ofantiquity ; and both the Dodona had PerrhsBbidwelling in their vicinity. But . these resemblancesare no more than natural, if Dodona ofEpirus received a colony and its name ' fromPelasgiotis of Thessaly, and if that colony wasaccompanied or followed by Perrhsebi, a peopleHerodot 1. 2, c. 52. et seq. was B»2wviy, from fiodon, aApollodorus (ap. Stephan. hero ; but in this he evidentlyin B^iwvfi) asserted, that the differed from Homer or at leastname of the Thessalian city from his earliest editors.xxxvii.] Epirus. 173of the same country. As to the common epithet,both the Dodona being situated near lofty mountains,it is not surprising that the poet, who sooften repeats his epithets, should have attachedthe same to them both.An opinion appears to have prevailed amongthe ancients, which is supported by the Odyssey,that the Dodonsea appertained first to Thesprotiaand afterwards to Molossis. This chorographicalchange is particularly noticed by Strabo, who supportshis remark by a reference to the epithet Thes-promisapplied to Dodona by Pindar and the tragicpoets ^ Among the latter may be particularly mentionedaeschylus, who, in describing the oracle ofDodona as that of the Thesprotian Jupiter on theMolossic soil', seems to allude exactly to the changewhich had taken place in the possession of the Dodonsea.It is evident, at least, that the Dodonabordered both on Thesprotia and on Molossis ; tofix, therefore, the position and extent of those twodivisions of Epirus, and to trace the changes whichtook place in their respective boundaries, is an'H Aw^wvii rolyvy ri Tpayixol Si koI Uiviapo^ Gccr*iraXfluov into Ocffirp^cMc Jjy irpiin'tia ilp^xaai rip Am2i#9^v'jcai TO opoQ 6 T6futpoc 9 T/iu* ^arepov Se vw6 MoXorroic tXi-poc (dftiforipwt yap Xeyercu) ycro. — Strabo p. des.v^* ^ ccTrac ro Up6y' mu ol'£vc2 yap j(X6€C *'poc MoXoffffd idiotsTflP alxvvfirrov r A/i^i Aw^wvijk, VivaMaria dwKot t tori Qetrwpwrov AiocTcpac r AwioToy ai irpotniyopoi ^pvc'c*iBsohyl. Promote. v. 828.174 EPiRUS. [chap.essential preliminary in resolving the question ofthe situation of the Dodonsea.Thucydides, Scylax, Strabo, and Ptolemy,concur in assigning the sea coast of Epirus tothe four tribes of Charles, Thesproti, Cassopsei,and Molossi, as well as in placing them in thatorder from north to south, though they do notagree in the extent of each portion, which couldnot indeed be expected from authors of differentages in regard to boundaries, some of the variationsof which are sufficiently explained by thehistory of Epirus.It was anciently believed, and apparently notwithout reason, that three or four centuries beforethe Trojan war two Pelasgic colonies began tocivilize the barbarians of Epirus : that which camefrom the Peloponnesus by sea, very naturally madechoice of the fertile plain near the mouth of theAcheron ; the other from the Pelasgic settlementsin the north of Thessaly crossed the Pindus andoccupied Dodona. The former brought with themseveral Peloponnesian names such as Drops,Thesproti, Ephyra, Acheron, Pandosia, and Pal-latium,of which the three last were carried forwardto Italy by colonists from Epirus, or by succeedingcolonists from the Peloponnesus : theThessalian colony introduced in like manner, intothe more inland parts of Epirus, the namesDodona, Perrhsebi, Hellopia, Sellii, and Achelous \This comparatively tardy introduction of the ,Colonies Grecques, torn. i. p. 213.Lxxvii.] EPIRU8. 175news and languish of Greece into Epirus, is stronglyconfirmed by the fact, that the two centres of Epirotecivilization just mentioned are the only two placesin this country alluded to by Homer ; from whom itappears also that after the Trojan war they formedone kingdom. Ephyra, near the Glycys Limen,was the capital of Sheldon, king of Thesprotia,and Dodona was within his dominions. But aboutthe same time a new colony was established inEpirus, Pyrrhus, or Neoptolemus son of Achilles,who was deprived of his paternal kingdom, havingmigrated to this country, accompanied by Helenusson of Priam. Buthrotum was supposed to havebeen the place which Pyrrhus occupied ', a traditionderiving some support from the name of Phoenix,a city only twelve miles distant from Buthro-tum, to which Pyrrhus may naturally have giventhat name in memory of his friend Phoenix, whowas said to have accompanied him from Troy, andto have died on the road '. Helenus inherited thepossessions of Pyrrhus ', while Colossus, son of thelatter, obtained a settlement in the southern partof Epirus ^, to which his name was ever afterwardsattached. As the Chaonian colony extended,Cestrinus son of Helenus founded a city on theright bank of the Thyamis, at a distance of twelveor fifteen miles above its mouth ; that frontier ofChaonia received the name of Certaine, and itschief town, the ruins of which, now called PaleaVirgil. Mn. 1. 3, v. 293. ' Virgil. Mn. 1. 3, v. 296.Apollodd. ap. Schol. Lys Eurip. Androm. v. 1243.copy. ▼. 904.EPIRU8.[chap.Venetia, still subsist, seems to have been namedIlium or Troja, in memory of the origin of itefounders ^^ Tpofo tariy/oc. — Stephan. in voce.The name Ilium occurs inthe Tahukr Itinerary on theinland road from Apologia toNicopolis, which in all probabilitycrossed the Kalama orThyamis exactly at Palea Venetia,this place being situated alittle below the straits of thatriver above which the crossingwould have led into the mountainouscountry to the northwardof Paramythia ; whereasPalea Venetia is opposite tothe pass of Neokhdrio, whichconducts from thence along thevale of the Coconut in a directline, and by an easy route toNicopolis. It is true that thenumbers in the Table wouldplace Ilium much nearer toHadrianopolisy assuming thelatter to have stood in the plainof the Dryno, near Libokhovo ;but as it is obvious that severalof the distances on themaritime road are misplaced,a similar error may be suspectedon the interior road;and the former is the moreprobable, as the total distancesare consistent with one another,and with the direct distanceon the map. The latteris 122 o. M. ; the inland Romanroad was 166 m. p. ; themore circuitous road by the coast1 87 Map. The following are thestations noted on each of them.On the maritime, from Apolloniato Alon, 16 Map. — Acrocerau-nia 33 — Phoenix 41 — Buthro-tum 56 — Ad Diana 8 — Gly-cys Limen 13 — Nicopolis 20.On the-inland route, fromApollonia to Amant, 30 —Indianapolis 55 — Iliiun 24 —a name wanting 12 — Nicopolis45. The former route is foundalso in the Antoine Itinerary,where it differs from that inthe Table in placing 26 insteadof 16 M. p. between Apolloniaand Alon (the truth seems tobe between the two), and 30instead of 21 between Buthro-tum and Glycys Limen, ofwhich the real distance wasnot less than 60 m. p. by theroad. The obvious error of56 M. p. from Phoenix toButhrotum, instead of about13, is the same in both Itineraries*On the inland route Iam inclined to believe thatIlium ought to stand in theplace to which no name hasbeen attached ; the distance ofXXXVII.] spires. 177In subsequent times commercial republics, colonizedor augmented, and supported by the wealthand alliance of some of the powerful states ofSouthern Ghreece, occupied the entire coast ofEpirus. Towards the Ambracic gulf, the descendantsof Colossus were confined to the mountainsby Ambracia^ this noble position havingattracted settlers from the Peloponnesus at a veryearly period, and having received, in the eighthcentury B.C., a second colony consisting of Corinthians,which people about the same timeoccupied several places in Acamania. In thePeloponnesian war, all the maritime part of Epirus,including Thesprotia and Chaonia, was republican,while the mountainous districts of theinterior, inhabited by warriors, pastors, and cultivatorsof the soil, still preserved the monarchicalform of government ^ At that time there werekings of the Agrsei, Atintanes, Paravsei, and Orestse,and we find the Athamanes governed by a king asIlium (placed at Palea Encamp of Claudius on the Gentis)from the sites of Hadrian sus, b. c. 200, this Ilium hav-pollsand Kicopolis, would then ing been evidently not very farbe tolerably near the truth, from Berat (See Vol. III. p.Concerning the situation of 326.) Stephens, besidesIndianapolis, I have already the Troja of Cestria, men-offeredsome remarks in Vol. I. tons an Ilium in Macedonp. 76. It is almost unneces- nia ; and there is an allusionsay to add, that the Ilium by Service (ap. ^n. 1. v. 242),which stood on the inland road on the authority of Sallust, tofrom Apollonia to Nioopolis a Macedonian colony of Hele*could not have been the same nus.as that taken by Apuleius in ' Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 80 ; 1. 3,his expedition against the bore 111.ders of Macedonia from theVOL. IV. NEpirus.[chap.late as the Roman campaigns in Greece. Thepoverty or patriarchal simplicity in which theiBacidfl? were living in Molo6sis about the formerperiod is strongly indicated by Thucydides, in thedescription which he has given of the reception ofThemistocles by king Admetus But it was totheir monarchical union , which never ceased amongthe Molossi, that they were at length indebted forthe preponderance which they acquired over theother tribes of Epirus.The extent and situation of the proper Molossiaare clearly described by Scylax. After havingstated that the coasts of Thesprotia and of were each half a day's sail in length, thatthe Cassopffii extended to the Anactoric, meaningthe Ambracic gulf, and that the gulf was a littleless than half a day's sail in length from the oropi,or strait of Prevyza, to thcfiv^oc, or eastern extremity; he adds, that the Molossi bordered on theCassopeei, that their sea-coast was 50 stades inlength, and that next to it was the shore of Ambracia,extending 120 stades to that of the Amphi-loch^ The latter distance is confirmed by Dicse-Thucyd. 1. 1, c. 186.Dap^irXovc Si r^c Gcmrpm-rac iifiltrv iifUpa^, Mcra BiQtmrpurlay Kaffffunr/a itrrivtByot' oUovtri Si airrol Kara kL"flag' wapoucovat Si osric cwc c2cor *AyaKTOpiKQV K6Xiroy. Ilo-p^xXovc ^ Ivrl rffi Kaaa^nrQv%«tfpac iifdtrv ^/lipact ^ucp^ Siik&rrt»y 6 'Avcucropciroc ic6\iroQiffr\y &T0 Tov 9r6fiaroc calc fittoy f^v\6y (ffraSiuy pc)* to SiffT6fia e^poc ffraditt S* McraSi Kaaaiawiay MoXottoI tiaty(tQyot' oiKovffi Si ovroi Kara cw«stat* KaOiiKovffi Si Kara fiucpoyiyravSa iwl rj)v OaXarraf, cicfieodyaiay Si iroXXp* xapavXovcf iorl r$c MoXorr/ac x^pa^0ro&a>fi. Mcfa Si MoXorr/ac'AfifipoKta waparXovcSi rfic ^AfJifipaKlas 9ra3ca pic.McraXXXVII.] Epirus. 179arches ' ; and as the entire length of the northerncoast of the gulf from the shore of Lamari, whichwas the eastern boundary of the CassojuBa^ toMakrinoro, which was the frontier of ATnhradayand Amphiloehidy agrees sufficiently with the totalof 170 stately we can have no hesitation in assigningabout three* miles of the shore on either side ofthe mouth of the river of St. George as the positionand extent of the Molossic sea coast.In the interior, the Molossi bordered to theeastward for a considerable distance upon theAmbraciotse, and beyond them upon the Atlasmanes, from whom they were separated perhapsby the river Arachthus. To the westward theyconfined upon the Cassopsei towards the sea,and further in (be interior upon the Thesproti,who occupied the valleys of the * Acheron andCocytus, with all the country as far as the leftbank of the Thy amis. Although the Molossiwidened from their narrow maritime basis, andextended in the time of Scylax, as he remarks,to a great distance in the interior, by which* wemay suppose them to have then possessed the Do-donee,the original Melons was neither large norproductive, having contained little more than themountainous region lying between the river ArtaaMere Ik *A/Lij3pafftav ^Axapyavia to be an interpolation, the sensetdvoQ neri* Kai xp^rri irdXtc being complete without them,tM, 'Apyoc ri *Afif iXoxc»$>'.— and that distance behig tooScylax in Ge^irpwrot. *A«cap- small as well as obviously in-ravia, compatible with the parables ofThe words eraiiwy pK seem Ambracia.^ ZraSit^y S* 6 rapairXovg early knaroy iiicoai.Dicaearch. r, 44.n2180 EPiRUS. [chap;and the ridges of 015i;zika and Suli^ in whichdirection it comprehended the valleys of the riverLuro and its tributaries, with those of the upperAcheron. But in process of time, the kings ofMolossis, assisted by their hardy followers, addedthe Dodona to the northward, and the Cassopaeato the westward. From Pindar indeed it wouldseem that the former acquisition was made byPyrrhus, son of Achilles, himself \ but this canhardly be reconciled with Homer, or with thesupposition of Chaonia having been the seat ofthe colony of Pyrrhus, as it would imply analmost entire conquest of Epirus. It is more easyto believe, that the extinction of the Thesprotiankingdom, the colonies of Elis in the former seatof that kingdom, and the encroachment of theCassopsei upon Thesprotia, gradually gave theMolossi, who continued to be united under a kinglygovernment such a superiority over the Thesprotias was naturally followed by their acquisition ofthe Dodonsea from the latter, though it is impossibleto say at what period this event may havehappened, Cassopeea proper, or the territory ofCassope, seems to have been added to Molossisbefore the fourth century b. c. ; for Alexander,son of Neoptolemus, obtained at that time, by theassistance of his brother-in-law Philip, son ofAmyntas, the cities of Pandosia, Buchsetium, andElateiaia', all which were more distant from theDionyBiusofHalicamassus ' Demostb. de Halonneso,(1. 1, c. 51) accords with Pin p. 84, Reiske.tar, inasmuch as he representseneas as having found Helenusat Dodona.Xxvii.] EPIRUS. 181bounds of Molossis than Cassope itself. The latter,therefore, had probably been an earlier conquestof the Molossic kingdom ^ The Dodona andCassopsea were important additions to the poorMolossic mountains, and were sufficient under afew able monarchs to lead to the acquisition of allthe other divided portions of Epirus.Tharypas, son of Admetus, was said to havebeen the first of the acids who encouragedscience and literature', but Alexander, son ofNeoptolemus, third in descent from Tharypas, wasthe prince who by his valour and talents, andnot less by his double alliance with the royalhouse of Macedonia, brought all Epirus under asingle head ^ and made it one of the leading statesof Greece. Pyrrhus, who after two short reignssucceeded him, and made Ambracia his capital,was, like several princes recorded in history, destinedby character and circumstance at once toraise his country and family to the height of theirfortune, and to originate their decline. Theacids were extinct in his fourth successor, afterwhich Epirus was only a loose federal of republicsfor about 50 years, when it fell under theRoman yoke, in the year b. c. 167.If Thesprotia and Molossis had respectively theextent and position just indicated, and if theThe union of the Molossi other, each word within aand Cassop^i is recorded on a wreath of laurel,copper coin, having no other * Plutarch in Myrrh.type than 'MloKovv&v on one ' Diodor. 1. 16, c. 72. 91. —side, and l^aacmraL^y on the Strabo, p. 280.EPIRU8.[chap.DodofUBa bordered on the inland frontier of themboth, there seems no possibility of assigning anyother situation to it than that of the district ofloannina.The journey of eneas to Dodona, as related byDionysius of Halicarnassus ^, tends entirely to favourthis opinion. After having founded Undaat the cape near Saloniki, now called Karabumd ',the Trojan hero visited Delos and Cythera, andat both places left memorials which still existedin the time of the antiquary. He then exchangedtestimonials of a common origin with the Arcadian,and sailed to Zacynthus, where he foundeda temple and established games, and where adomus was still shown, called that of .eneas andVenus. At Leucas he founded a temple of Venus,which still remained, in the time of Dionysius, ona small island between the Dioryctus and thecity \ From thence he proceeded to Actium andto Ambracia. At the former Dionysius describesa temple of Venus founded by him, and another of^ Dionys. Hal. Antic. Rom.1. 1, c. 50.I omitted to remark in theproper place (see Vol. III. p.451) that although the wordsof Dionysius seem to placei£neia in Pallene, it is evidentby what he says of the Crassus)compared with Herodotus, thatby Pallene he meant the westershore of the Chaotic Chersonese.Upoy t vvv kvTi¥ iy rf vi|-ffiit rf fura^v rov Aiopvjcrov reKal ring iroXcciic. — There is notany small island at present, butas no shore is more likely tohave undergone a change, theisland may perhaps now formpart of the promontory occupiedby the town of AmazeXXXVII.] EPIRUS. 183the Great Gods, and at Ambracia there was aheron of .eneas near the small theatre, whichcontained his statue, served with sacrifices by femaleamphipoli. From Ambracia Anchises sailedwith* the fleet to Bothrotum, while eneas travelledby land in twO' days to Dodona Here he consultedthe oracle, and presented many Trojanofferings to the god, some of which, consisting ofbrazen vases, inscribed with the names of thededicators in ancient characters, still remained atDodona in the time of Dionysius'. He then proceededto join his fleet at Buthrotum : the journeyoccupying near four days ' : from Buthrotum hesailed to the port of Anchises, the name of whichhad nndei^ne some change in the time of thehistorian ^, and from thence crossed over to Italy.It seems evident from the consistency of thisrelation, that whatever degree of confidence maybegiven to the facts, the narrative is that of aperson well acquainted with the places, and istherefore equally entitled to consideration in aquestion merely geographical. Artaa or Amhradawas exactly the place most convenient for landing,and that from whence the passage was easiestand shortest to Dodona on the supposition of theMor. — c. 51. OivTOCf yvy ^t dva^twipay• KpaHipat xaXxiloi^ iy riytQ txoyro^ iyo/xaoiay, — meaningin mpieuriyf ewiypafdiQ way Onchesmus, which was ^ifXovvrec Tout &va<- wards changed to AnchiasmuSydiyrac* and thus brought nearer toTtrr^puy fiaXurra ^fupAr 'Ayxtffov Xc/a^Vi the originaliii\66yri£ oily, name.184 EPIRUS. [CHAP.latter having been near loannina ; and if thejourney between these two principal cities by easypasses required two days, (in fact, without conemiserable exertion the journey from Artaa to loan-ninacannot be performed in one), the route fromthe latter to Buthrotumy across unfrequented districtsintersected with mountains, may very wellbe supposed to have required not much less thanfour days.That Dodona was on the eastern frontier ofEpirus is clearly shown by Pindar, who describesEpirus as beginning at Dodona, and extendingfrom thence to the Ionian sea ^ The manner inwhich aeschylus introduces the Dodonsean mountainsas a part of the territory of Pegasus, seemsto connect them with the highest ridge', buttheir vicinity to it is still more strongly indicatedby the epithets atfrvvoiroc) attached to Dodona bythe same poet ', and that of Ivtry^tifu^Q by Homer.Aristotle and Strabo confirm the supposition thatHeUopiaj or the country of the Hell or Sellii,whom Homer and Sophocles, to say nothing of^ . . . . OiriQ Bk Parti*%• NcojTTcJXc/ioc ^ *A-ireip^ Biairpvolaf6\ot Kar&KuyraiAtaiuyaSiy &.^6fieyoi vpoc'lovcov wdpov, Pindar. Nem. 4, v. 81.Tlly^v T£ T&viKeiya Ucuoywy ireXaci"Opji Tt Aw^MvoIa. • •^schyl. Sup. V. 265.V. sup. p. 173, note 2.XXXVII.] EPIRUS. 185later writers, place near Dodona ^ was in thevicinity of loannina, by stating that the Sellii livedabout the Achelous as well as Dodona', thusrendering it probable that the distance was notgreat between the city and the river. loinnina,in fact, is only about 17 geographical miles indirectdistance from the nearest part of theAches.The account which Poly bias has given of thedestruction of Dodona by the italians, in theautumn of the first year of the Social war, b. c.219, equally favours the belief, that Dodona wassituated towards the south-eastern frontier ofEpirus, and that it was exposed to iBtolia on thatside. The expedition was headed by Lysimachusimmediately after his election to the strategic. ** Hemarched," says the historian, '^ into the upper partsof Epirus ^, devastating the country, not so muchfor the sake of plunder as for that of injuring theEpirotes. Having arrived at the temple nearDodona ^, he set fire to the stone, destroyed manyof the dedications, and overthrew the sacrededifice itself." The words avia^ roirovc r^c 'Hircipov,which the historian employs in this passage, apeII. n. V. 233.*A T&v optliav Kan KafiaucoiT&y iyitSeXXwv itreXOify SXtroc ei^reypatf^d/iqvnpoc rfjc irarp^ac ical woXvyXvoaov ^pvoc*Sophoc. Teach. v. 1169.Aristot. Meteor. 1. 1, c, * UapayeyofityoQ vpoQ ro wtpl14. — Strabo, p. 28. AwJwyi/i' sepoy,iyijiaXiy etc rove Ayu ro"vovQ rfj^ 'Hircipov. — Polyb. 1.4,c. 67.186 Bpuus. [chap.pear to be a mere synonym for the more commonexpression avw ''Hvupovj or Upper Epirus, which,as in the instances of Upper Macedonia and UpperThessaly, meant the part of Epics most distantfrom the sea, or towards the central range ofmountains. Among the passages of ancient historywhich prove this meaning, may be particularlycited the remark of Strabo, that UpperThessaly contained Colonia and Histiaeotis, thatPelasgiotis constituted Lower Thessaly, and thatUpper Thessaly corresponded to and confinedupon Upper Macedonia, as Lower Thessaly uponLower Macedonia, which was the country nearthe Thermal Gulf In fact, Upper Thessaly,Upper Macedonia, and Upper Epirus, all met onthe crest of Pindus. Dodona therefore was nearthis mountain, nor can the words of Polybius furnishan argument to prove that it was in thenorthern part of Epirus. The desultory natureof the expedition of Dorimachus, and its successwithout interruption, strongly indicate that Dodonawas chiefly exposed to hostile invasion from theAchelous and iBtolia, as Aljr Pasha now is to thekleftes from the same quarter. Dorimachus probablyfollowed the valley of the Aspro fromLepenu or Stratus upwards, and having crossedthe range of Pindus about Thodhoriana, enteredthe valley of the Artaa to the northward of theAmbradan district, and followed that river untilhe was separated only by Mount Dhrysko fromthe plain of loannina. He thus avoided the hostileStrabo, pp. 430. 437.XXXVII.] Epirus. 187district of Av^aaay which city had recently beentaken by Philip and delivered to the Epirotes, aswell as the dangers of the pass of Pendepigadhia,or that still more hazardous which ascends fromArtaa by the valley of the Arajchikaz.The only author who has described the naturalpeculiarities of the Dodonsea is Hesiod, in a beautifulferment of his lost poem the Eoese, preservedby a scholiast of Sophocles, and in part by Strabo :Hellopia," says the poet, " was a country ofcorn-fields and meadows, abounding in sheep andoxen, and inhabited by numerous shepherds andkeepers of cattle, where on an extremity stoodDodona, beloved by Jupiter ; here the god establishedhis oracle in a wood of ilex, and heremen received responses, when bearing gifts andencouraged by favourable omens they interrogatedthe god '."This description is accurately applicable to thevalley of loannina, which, though producing com,is more remarkable for that which the poet evidentlyintended to insist upon, namely, its abundant1 "'£v 2* &yip€£ ycUovtri TroXv/S^iyveci voXvjdovrai,IloXXoly inreipiaiotf 0vXa BvjitQv &vdpunriay'""Eyda re Atadwyri nc c^' c^^^^P ireir6\tarai,Tiny 3e Zcvc e^/Xi|(re Kal By ypjiirHipMy elvacTlfAtoy iiyBpinroiQf rainy r' iy wvdfiiyi ^tiycv'"'Stvdty eirv)(B6yun fULyrifia irdiro i^poyrau*0c ^4 <^e^^^ fwkity deny AfifipoToy ii/Ep€€iyyA»po fipttr iXdjf navy ol^yoiQ dyaQoiviy,Hesiod. ap. Schol. ad Sophocl. Train. v. 1169,et ap. Strabonn. p. 32S.188 EPiRUS. [chap.meadows, and the numerous flocks and herdswhich feed upon its pastures.Such being a summary of the testimony whichtends to place Diodorus near loannina, it may nowbe right to notice the objections which may bemade to that opinion, as well as the arguments whichmay be adduced in favour of some other situations.The strongest objection is the silence of allantiquity as to a lake at Dodona. But when weconsider that the only description of the placewhich has reached us, is contained in the poeticalfragment of Hesiod, who may have alluded to thelake in the very next verses to those which arepreserved, the objection loses the greatest part ofits force, more especially as there is reason tobelieve that the existence of a lake in this partof Epirus was known to Pliny, who asserted thatthe Acheron flowed into the Ambracic gulf, andthat it originated in the lake Acherusia at a distanceof 36 miles from the coast \ where thedistance from the gulf accords so exactly withthat of the lake of loannina, that one can hardlydoubt of his having heard of the lake, though hehas confounded it with the Acheron. Eustathiusproves also the existence of a lake in Molossia, bymentioning a tradition, derived probably fromAmbraciufl sinus Martian Capella in like manneum deserter amnis Ache ner : Ambrosius sinus fiiucibusron, e lace Thesprotise Ache augustus sequor accipiens, inrusid profluens XXXVI. Map. ^ quod deserter amnis Acheron,inde, et mille pedum ponte infemae fiibulse error fisimosus.mirabilis. — Plin. H. N. 1. 4, — ^1. 6, cap. de tertio sin £u-c. 1. rose.XXXVII.] EPIRUS* 189some ancient author now lost, that Neoptolemus,son of Achilles, when he introduced a Thessaliancolony into Epirus, settled on the shore of thelake Pambotis in M olossia ^ As Pindar, who followedthe same legend, considered Dodona a partof the domain of Neoptolemus, it seems clear thatthe lake Pambotis was at Dodona. Pambotis,moreover, is a word in exact agreement with thedescription of Hesiod, and is particularly suited tothe pastures of the lake of loannina, which in factis the only lake in the interior of Thesprotia orMelons.But besides this strong presumption as to a lakeat Dodona, we have direct evidence of the existenceof marshes near the Dodonaean temple. Itwas supposed by some that the Hell, who werethe ministers of the oracle, were so named fromthe eXii, or marshes round the temple ', whichthough it may be etymologically erroneous, is anundeniable proof of the existence of the marsh.Again, Proteus, as quoted by a scholiast on theOdyssey, stated that the oracular oak was foundby a shepherd feeding his flock in the marshDodson \ It is not impossible that there may havebeen more of a marsh and less of a lake in ancienttimes than there is now ; the partial obstruction ofthe katav6thra, and other causes, which in manyparts of Greece have, in a long course of ages,^ Eustathius in Od. P. v. ' Proven. ap. Scbol. in Od.1S8. ubi sup.Apollodd. ap. Strabonn. p.328.190 EPIRU8. [chap.increased or diminished the quantity of stagnantor running water, may have changed what wasonce a marsh, with pools in the deepest parts, intoa continued lake. In this case the numerous sourceswhich emerge from the foot of Mount Mitzikeli,close to the margin of the lake or below its surface,would have been more conspicuous, andmore likely to have elicited the remark of Theophilusas to the hundred fountains at the rootsof the mountain Tomartis\ near which Dodonawas situated '•We may now proceed to inquire whether anyother situation in Epirus will agree with the requisitesof Dodona. One of the scholiast of Homersupposes Dodona to have been near Dryiopolis^that is to say, near Arghyrokastro, which he placesmost erroneously in the ancient Thesprotia ; anothersays that it was in the north of Thesprotia,meaning perhaps the same place ; a third fixes itnear Leucas. In like manner I have been referredfor the site of Dodona by the learned of loannina,to Vutzintr6, to Delvino, to Arghyrokastro, toVela, to Filiates, to Paramythia, and to Glyky,without ever meeting with one of them who imaginedthat it might have been at lo&nnina itsdif.Of the modem places just mentioned, we mayobserve, that although the plains of D^lvino^ Vut-intro, and the lower Kalama, have an abundance^ Molossi, apud quos Do Theopompo celebnUur.-^Plin.donaei Jovis templum, oracle H. N. 1. 4, c. 1.illustre ; Tomarus mons, cent Stnibo, p. 328.turn pontius circa radices,XXXVII.] fiPIRUS. 191oi pasture in their lakes or maritime marshes, andwere even famed in consequence for their breed ofoxen, they are too near the sea to correspond tothe evidence which has been adduced as to thesite of Dodona, and we know them to have beenoccupied by the cities of Phcenice, Buthrotum, Cestria,and others. The valley of the upper Kalama isnot liable to a similar objection, being surroundedby mountains, and containing a lake near Tzerovina,with some marshy tracts at the sources of theThyamis. Both lake and marshes however are toodiminutive for those of Dodona and the latter arenot permanent. The plain itself is too inconsiderablefor the magnificent description of Hesiod,too distant from the JEtoUan frontier of Epvnis,and can scarcely be included either in Thesprotiaor Molossis, according to their ancient boundaries.The valley of Heliopolis or Arghyrokastro, althoughnot unsuited in some respects to the pictureof Hesiod, yet being marshy only in winter,cannot in this climate possess that distinguishingcharacteristic of abundant meadows and perennialpasturage, which the Dodofuea requires. Thisplain, moreover, is so near the Anus, that thename of Dodona could hardly have escaped mentionin the history of the transactions which occurredin that part of the country, had it been sosituated. It is evident, likewise, that the valleyof the Dryno could never have been includedeither in Thesprotia or Molossis^ having been apart of Chaonia or Atintania, possessed by theArgyrini and the city of Else's.Exclusive therefore of the district of loannina,192 EPiRus. [chap.there is none but the great valley watered by theancient CocytuSi Acheron, and lake Acherusia,which can be taken for the DodofUBa. Here itmust be granted that the lofty ridge called Kurila,which stretches northward from Kako-Suli to theKalama, resembles Tomarus in the abundantsources which issue from its base, and that thename of Suli has every appearance of having beencorrupted from that of the Selliy who served theDodonsean temple and dwelt around it. Nor canit be denied that the noble plain of Fanari andGlyk^^, which extends 26 miles from Porto Fanarito Paramythia, fully deserves the description whichHesiod gives of Hellopia, especially as the bordersof the Achertisian lake admit of some perennialpasturage, and that a farther argument in favourof Dodona having been here situated, may bederived from Pausanias, who, immediately afterspeaking of CichymSy or Ephyra^ which was nearPorto Fanari, mentions Dodona in a mannernaturally leading to the presumption that it wasnot very distant from Ephyra. From these admissions,it would follow that Dodona was probablysituated at or near Glyk^^, just at the foot of themountain upon which the name of the ancientSellii is preserved in that of Suli.But there are strong objections to every partof the plains watered by the Acheron and Cactusas the Dodona. Even the most distant pointParamythia is too near the sea coast, and too farfrom the central ridge of Pindus as well as fromthe inland frontier of Epirus and the Achelous toconform to the combined testimony of Pindar,XXXVII.] EPIRU8. 193.SschyluSy Aristotle, Polybius, and Strabo. Theolive-trees of Paramythia are alone a contradictionto that climate, and that elevation above thesea which is implied by the epithets of Homer and.^Bchylus. Although the plain between the Ache-russiaand Glykj^ is marshy as late as the beginningof May, the only district of perennial pasturein these plains is around the Acherusiaj or notmore than from two or three to seven or eightmiles distant from the sea. Above all, there appearsno mode of explaining in what manner thisvalley could ever have formed a part of Molossis,being the centre of the original Thesprotia, whichcontained the cities Ephyra, Pandosia, and twoothers at Veliani and Paramythia, neither of whichhas the requisites of Dodona.As to Suli, it will hardly afford much assistancein the determination of this question. Suli is acommon name in Greece, and naturally so, if wesuppose it to be a corruption of SfXXoi, which wasno more than a dialectic form of 'EXXoc, the peoplefrom whom the whole country derived its appellationof Hellas. The name is undoubtedly themore curious in the present instance, as beingfound in a district which we know to have beeninhabited at a comparatively late period by SellBut even here it can only be regarded as an accidentalvestige of the people of Hellopia^ who onceoccupied all the country around Dodona and it isthe less to be relied on as affording any proof ofthe exact locality of Dodona, there being anotherSuli on the Kalama, ten or twelve miles to thewestward of loannina. Nor can any more preciseVOL. IV. o194 fipjRua. chap.inference be deduced from the juxtaposition ofCichyrus and Dodona in the passage of Pausanias,who there alludes to the early history of in the time of Theseus, when Ephyra wasthe capital of king Aidoneus, and the Dodona apart of his kingdom, and who introduced thenames incidentally, as those of the only places inEpirus which he thought worthy of notice.It remains to be inquired whether the positionof Dodona at loannina is consistent with the generalarrangement of the tribes of Epirus on themodem map. Theopompus of Chins reckonedfourteen of them, and Strabo has named asmany, to wit: the Charles, Thesproti, Casso-sei, Molossi, Amphilochi, Athamanes, i^tbices,Tympheei, Paraveei, Talares, Atintanes, Orestse,Pelagones, and Elimiotse^ Of the situation ofseveral of these tribes, proofs have already beengiven. Three of them, the Presto, Pelagones,and Elimiotse, were permanently united not longafter the time of Theopompus to Macedonia, towhich they naturally belonged, as being situated,the two latter entirety, and the first in great partat least, to the east of Mount Pindus. In the timeof Strabo the Athamanes, ^thices, and Talares,were united in like manner with the Thessalonians,though as all the three occupied the ridges ofPindus, and immediately bordered on the Mo-loss,they seem to have been considered by Straboas properly Epirotic.To begin from the south-eastward, where theTheopomp. i^. Strabo. p. 323. — Strabo, pp. 324, 326, 434.XXXVII.] Epirus. 195Molossi bordered upon Ambracia. Proceedingfrom thence northward, there is every reason tobelieve, from what has already been stated, thattheir next neighbours were the Athamanes, separatedfrom them either by the Arachthus or thecrest of the mountains beyond it ; then thePerrhsebi and Tymphsei at the sources of theArachthus, and the Talares of Mount Tomarus \who may be considered as a subdivision of theMolossi, as Dodona was situated at the foot ofthat mountain. Beyond the Talares and Tymphseiwere the ParaotBij whose country was the northernpart of Zag6ri and the district of K6nitza. To thewestward of these, the Molossis, considering theDodonsea as a portion of it, confined on thesouthern extremity of Atintaniaj which I ' havebefore described as comprehending in generalterms the mountainous country between theMizakia and the valleys at the sources of theDryno in one direction, and in the opposite, orfrom west to east, extending from the LowerViosa and Dryno to the Uzdmi and Upper Viosa.In the remainder of its boundary, Molossis (stillconsidering the Dodonsea as a portion of it) borderedupon the north-eastern extremity of ;that is to say, towards the Kalam& andits tributaries, which flow from the ridges ofOl^tzika and Suli. And thus Molossis^ togetherwith the surrounding Epiroiic tribes, forms aThere were two divisions an dwdewaofiaf or body sepa-of Talares according to Strabo : rated from those of Mount To-thatbelonging to Thessaly was marks. — p. 434.o2196 EPiRUS. [chap.complete and consistent system of chorography,on the supposition that the Dadoruea was identicalwith the modern district of loannina.It can hardly be doubted by any person whohas seen the country around loannina, and hasexamined the extensive remains at Kastritza, thatthe city which stood in that centrical and commandingposition was the capital of the districtduring a long succession of ages. The fortressesat Velitzista and Gardhikaki were obviously nomore than conuB, though they may very possiblyhave been enumerated among the seventycities of Epirus destroyed by order of the Romansenate. The hill of Kastritza, moreover, answersmuch better than either of those places to theitr^ariri^ or extremity upon which Hesiod statesDodona to have been built, while the adjacentMitzik^li will be found to correspond perfectlyto the mountain, below which, according toStrabo, the temple stood. This commandingridge, therefore, which in every point of viewarrests the attention of the spectator, I conceiveto have been the celebrated Tomarus. Thenumerous sources at its foot, which are thechief supplies of the lake, are in exact agreementwith the hundred fountains issuing from the baseof Tomarus, as described by Theopompus. Noris the name TomaruSj though no longer attachedto this mountain, quite obsolete, being still preservedin that of the Tomarokhoria, or villagessituated on a part of the southern extremity ofDhrysko, which is a continuation of Mitzik^li.The temple of Jupiter Dodoneeus seems net toXXXVII.] EPIRUS. 197have been within the city of Dodona. Polybiusdescribes it as mpl Aa>8b»vf?v; in such a hastyinvasion as that of Dorimachus, it could not havebeen so easily destroyed as the historian relates,had it stood within a fortress such as we cannotbut suppose Dodona, like all the towns of Epirus,to have been, nor could there well have been in afortified town, space sufficient for the temple, itscourts, porticos, and dedications, its sacred grove,and the dwellings of its servitors. Strabo, inreporting from Epirus the cruel treatment of oneof the priestesses of the temple by the Boeotianss \shows the unprotected condition of the buildingwhich Menedemon, an author cited by Stephens,describes as being surrounded with tripods insteadof walls *. But in this inability to resist an enemyit differed not from other hiera of great celebrity inAsia and Greece, such as those of Samos, Bran-chide,Sardes, Eleusis, Rhamnus, the Isthmus,Epidaurus, Olympia, Nemea, Ab8e,Ptoum, and thatof Trophies at Lebadeia. None of these were includedwithin the fortifications of the neighbouringcities but appear to have been inclosed by a simpleperilous, having been placed under the guardianshipof their sanctity, the violation of which in theinstance of Dodona, branded the iBtolians with thecharacter of men regardless of the laws whichgoverned the rest of mankind in peace and war'.If the city of Dodona was at Kastritza, and thetemple in some other part of the adjoining disStrabo, p. 402. * Polyb. 1. 4, c. 67.ap. Stephan* in Awdari^i;.VOL. IV. o 3 +-198 EPiRus. [chap.tract, there seems no place so well adapted to itas the peninsula now occupied by the citadel ofloannina. Such a situation equally accords withthe good taste which the Greeks always evincedin the position of their sacred edifices, as with theirmythology, which conceived the gods to delightin places rendered remarkable by natural causes,and with that tact which taught the priests toavail themselves of every thing which contributedto elevate the religious veneration of the peopleand to promote their own influence through itsmeans. This position is not, indeed, at the footof Mount Mitzik^Ii, as Strabo may seem to require ;but the commanding steepness and striking proximityof that mountain in face of the Peninsula,are perhaps still better adapted to his words ' . Thereis no place in all Greece more subject to thunderstorms than loannina, none more worthy ofhaving been the abode of the Thunderer, whosebolt was the type of Molossis and Epirus'. Here,therefore, in place of the dirty streets-andbazars of the modern town, we may imagine aforest, through which an avenue of primaevaloak and ilex conducted to the sacred peninsula.Within the porticos which inclosed the templewere ranges of tripods supporting cauldrons, theTO opoQ 6 TofmpoQ wft* ^ Jupiter and Dione, an eagle aKeirai to Upoy. — Strabo, p. thunderbolt, a tripod, a gardes.land of oak. The most comThe coins of Epirus have mon coin of the Molossi has areference almost exclusively to fulmen on both sides ; on onethe worship of Jupiter of Do within a garland of oak, on thedona ; they bear heads of other upon a shield.Xxxvi.] EPIRUS. 199greater part of which had been contributed by theBoeotianss in consequence of an annual custom,and which were so numerous and so closely placed,that when one of them was struck the soundvibrated through them all ; many others had beendedicated by the Athenians, whose theory orsacred embassy brought yearly offerings ; but themost remarkable of the anathemas was a statuededicated by the Corcyrsei, holding in its hand awhip with three thongs loaded with balls, whichmade a continual sound as they were agitatedby the wind against a cauldron ^ In a pictureof the temple of Dodona which has been describedby Pisistratus, the prophetic oak was seennear the temple, and lying under it the axe ofHellas, with which he struck the tree, when avoice from it ordered him to desist A goldendove, representing the bird of Egypt, whichuttered the voice, was perched upon the tree ;garlands were suspended from its branches, anda chorus from Egyptian Thebes was dancingaround it, as if rejoicing at the recognition ofthe sacred dove from their native city. TheSellii were seen employed in prayer or sacrifice,or in decorating the temple with fresh boughsand garlands, or in preparing cakes and victims,while the priestesses were remarked for theirsevere and venerable appearance *. Whether thisFor the various authorities ' Philostrat. Icon. 1. 2, c.on Dodona, see Stephens in 34.Aw^wpil) and the notes of .200 EPIRUS. Chap.be the description of a real picture, or the ideas ofPisistratus for the subject of one, it is probably afaithful portrait of the hierum of Dodona Jovein the height of its reputation, when it mayeasily be supposed that the temple, the porticos,the dedications, and the dwellings of the sacredservants, were sufficient to occupy the greater partof the peninsula ^ .In the time of Strabo the oracle was already inan expiring state ^ though it may perhaps havepartially recovered, like Greece in general, in thesecond century, as Pausanias still represents thetemple of Dodona and the sacred ilex as the objectsmost worthy of a traveller's notice in Epirus '.Long after the introduction of Christianity, Dodonamaintained its ascendancy among the towns ofEpirus by means probably of its fertile district,strong site, and important position at the entranceof the passes leading into Thessaly. The namesof several bishops of Dodona are found in the actsof the councils. The latest was in the year 516 ;and as the earliest record of a bishop of loinninaoccurs in 879, when a council was assembled atConstantinople for the restoration'' of Potius tothe patriarchal throne, it is probable that betweenthose two dates the peninsula of loannina, alreadyPolemic, the same author — Suits in UoXifmy, — Stemwrote a work on the phan. in AwMnf.Acropolis of Athens, and who ' licXiXoiirc Si w&£ koI tolived in the reign of Ptolemy ftarrtioy ro h Aw2wi^ KaB&wepEpiphany, left a description Kal AXXo. — Strabo, p. 327*also of the hierum of Dodona. ' Pausan. Attic, c. 17.XXX VII.]Epirus.cleared of its idolatrous worship, pagan edifices,and sacred grove, was chosen as a more defensibleposition than that of Kastiitza, against theincreasing invasions of the Sclavonic tribes, andthus became the capital of the JDodancBa^. Thenew fortress was named probably in honour ofthe saint under whose protection it was placed,and whose church is known to have occupiedthe site of the mosque at the N. £. angle ofthe castro. The sacred buildings of the hie-rum,if any remains of them had survived theages of Christian warfare against paganism, wereconverted undoubtedly to the construction ofbuildings in the new fortress, where the continuedexistence of habitations from that timeto the present will sufficiently account, as it doesin so many other places in Greece, for the disappearanceof all remains of Hellenic antiquity. Itis by no means impossible, however, if the kastroof loannina be really the site of the Dodanceantemple, that some relics of architecture or sculpturemay yet afford proof of this fact, and mayeven serve as a scale and elements whereby toform a judgment of the magnitude and architectureof the temple.Constantine Porphyrogen-nets mentions Dodona as thechief town of the Theme ofNicopoHs in the beginning ofthe tenth century ; but heseems to refer more to theancient than to the actual Dodona; and little confidence, asGibbon has remarked, can beplaced in the imperial authority.Both Nicopolis and Dodonahad probably been forsome time extinct."Aycofi *liiKLyyfiQ 6 IIpo^po-fjLOQt one of the most honouredsaints of the Greek Church.202 Epirus. [chap.•The history of loannina is almost as obscureas that of Dodona ; but enough remains to showthat it gradually became the chief city of Greeceto the westward of Mount PinduSy the onlyother place of importance having been Ambradafwhich, about the same period of time, under thenew name of Artaa, recovered from Nicopolis thatpopulation and importance, which, during sevenor eight centuries, had been absorbed by theAugustan colony, and became again the chiefcity of the country bordering on the AmbradcGulf.Western Greece is so separated by nature froma government ruling at Constantinople, that astrong vice-regal power is required to maintain itin submission. If the authority of the Sultan iseasily disputed here, it is not surprising that underthe weaker sway of the Greek emperors theirgovernors of Western Greece were generally independentor left to their own resources. From theseventh century to the eleventh. Northern Greecewas a field of contention to the Byzantine Greeks,the Wallachiansns, and the Sclavonians, and largecolonies of the two latter people settled in the country.To the Sclavonic tribes is to be attributedalmost all the names of places in Southern Albaniaand Western Greece which are not of Greek derivation,loannina, however, seems to have maintaineditself as a Greek city until a new race ofadventurers made their appearance. It wastaken by Bohemond, son of Robert Guiscard theNorman, in the year 1082. He intrenched hisarmy among the vineyards which still occupy theXXXVII.] Epirus. 203heights of St. George, repaired the kastro, andunder the walls of the town defeated the Greekemperor Alexius Comnenus ^ On the capture ofConstantinople in 1204, Western Greece formed anexception to the provinces partitioned among theFrank conquerors and continued, under a branchof the Comment, to be a Greek principality, calledthe Despotate of italia, or of the West, extendingat first from Dyrrhachium to the CorinthianGulf, but gradually curtailed by Franks, Albanians,and Servians, until it contained only the centralpart of Old Epirus to which condition,, or nearlyso, it was already reduced when it was conquered,about the year 1350, by Stephen Russian, king ofServia, who placed his brother Siniscian,or Simeon,in the Despotate. On the death of Stephen, afew years afterwards, Nicephorus, son of the lastGreek Despot, recovered for a short time theDespotate, but was 'defeated and slain in a battleon the AcJielaus, in which he was assisted by a bodyof Turks, against the Albanians, who had thenmade some acquisitions in Acamania and ^tolia.Simeon having found sufficient employment inServia and Thessaly, loannina was left to defenditself against the Albanians by its own resourcesfor about eight years, when Simeon being appliedto for aid, sent thither as governor, in 1367, hisson-in-law Thomas Prelubo, under whom theGreeks had a complete foretaste of Mussulmancruelty and oppression. He was succeeded byIndico de Davalos, by the Greeks named I2iaovXocor I2^aov, an Italian noble, who had been madeAnna Conn. 1. 5, p. 133. Paris.EPIRUS.[chap. XXXVII.prisoner and taken into favour by Thomas, whenthe latter was assisting Spata, the Albanian lordof Artaa, against the Franks, and who, on the deathof Thomas, in the year 1385, married his widow.Izaulo was disliked by his subjects, maintainedhimself (like Prelubo) with difficulty against theAlbanians, and when at length he formed an alliancewith Spata, lost a part of his-ffitolian possessionsto Charles Tocco, second Count of Cefaloniaof that name, Duke of Leucas, and who at lengthobtained both Artaa and Ioannina\ when to hisother titles he added those of Duke of loanninaand Despot of Western Greece. He was themost powerful of the Frank princes of the Islands,his continental possessions having comprehendeda large portion of Academia, and Italia, with somepart of Achaia. Charles died at loannina in July1429, leaving Artaa and loannina to his nephewCount Charles III., and j^tolia in possession oftwo illegitimate sons. The disputes which arosebetween the cousins rendered the whole countryan easy conquest to the Turks, to whom loanninacapitulated in October 1431 *. The name of Karl-ill,or the country of Charles, is still attached bythem to a large portion of Acamania and ^toKa.Izaulo was still at loan-ninain the reign of SultanMusa (1410—1413), to whomhe sent his son Prehulo to imploreassistance against theFranks. But Prelubo was takenby his enemies, and deprivedof his sight.For this historical sketch,see Cantacuzenus, 1. 4, c. 43. —Chalcocondylas, 1. 4, p. 112,1. 5, p. 126. — Duces, c. 20. —Phranza, 1. 2, c. 9. — DerangeFam. Dalmat 1 1 1 . 62. xv. 4.—Hist.de Constantinople,1.8,c.25,26 ; and the Meteora MS., concerningwhich see the additionalnote at the end of this volume.CHAPTER XXXVIII.EPIRUS.To Malaria — Return by Tzimovo to loannina — Omer BeyVrioni — Al Pasha — Climate — Artaa — Subdivisions and population— daly Pasha's revenue from Artaa, loannina, and otherplaces — To Petaa, Komboti, Koprena, Vlikha — Neokhori,Argos Amphilochtcum — Bailies of Olpce and Idomene — Crete,Mount Thames, Agrcea-return from Prevyza by Luro andRogus (Charadra) to loannina.July 29. — Setting out yesterday evening at sunset,I rode from loannina to the monastery ofEle6kali on Mount Drysko, on the way to ,and this morning at daybreak proceeded ason a former occasion by the Khan on the left bankof the river Artaa, and by that of Golf, on theascent to the church of St. George, where wearrived at 9.30, a. m. A wide portico round thechurch is the only accommodation for travellers.Our arrival having been announced to the townby the firing of musquets, a party of the principalinhabitants, headed by Kyr K. Torture, acting ashodjd-bashi for his brother, and accompanied bythe Subashi, or Albanian governor, preceded by agypsey band of music, arrive in an hour at thechurch. They bring with them a lamb roasted206 EPIRU8. [chap.whole, wine, bread, and salad; and soon aftertheir arrival we all sit down to dinner. A longclothis spread in the portico, the meat is partlycut and partly torn in pieces by the servants, andspread about the cloth; some sit upon carpets,and some upon the pavement. The gypsies strikeup their music, which consists of two drums, twoviolins, two tabors, a sort of oboe, with anotherwind instrument, and a fife out of which they producethe most piercing notes. The vocal performanceswith which they accompany it are equallydistressing to the ears, to make as much noise aspossible being the chief concern.After dinner we have some Klefidc songs, ofwhich the exploits of the Suliote heroes are thesubject, and those of the celebrated robber Kartz-Antonio, who slew the no less famous Bolu-b4shi\el^ Gheghe, sent against him by Aly Pash.These heroic songs' are followed by erotic*,with a chorus of Po, Po, Po'. The Albaniangovernor then rises, and leads the dance withbare feet.At 10 we descend the ridge through the woodbefore described * ; both Turks and Christiansfiring their musquets as we proceed, and causinga surprising increase of sound and echo amidstthe precipices which overhang the winding river.It is remarkable, that at the river itself the sameToXefxucd Tpayovita, does the drawing up of the airdyairriTiKd. through the lips, which DalyThis is an Albanian in- Pasha often uses in conversesof admiration. Bah, tion.shah, signify assent; and so ^ See Vol. I. p. 273.XXX VII I.] ffi^imuB. 207explosion produces no more than the ordinarysound, without any echo. After three quarters ofan hour consumed in ascending the zig-zag pathfrom the river to the town, we enter it amongcrowds of spectators. Kalarjrtes has increasedsince 1805 in riches and comfort, and is almostthe only place that reflects any credit upon Aisgovernment. Every year the return of the merchantsto their native country produces some newhouses. There are now upwards of 500 ; and620 heads of families are enrolled in the tax-hook,those of the first class are rated this year at800 piastres, the second at 400, the third at 200,and the fourth, which consists of many sub-divisions,from 100 to 5. A few of the poorest familiespay nothing. The whole amount received by theVezir is 70,000 piastres, or about 4,000Z. sterling.The town has now a public debt of 260 purses,the interest of which is to be provided for, inaddition to the sums just mentioned ; it is lowerthan in any other place, on account of the bettersecurity, and 10 per cent, from the icaaoa, orpublic chest of Kalar^tes, is considered by themonied men of loannina as preferable to ahigher gain anywhere else. The Vezir sometimeshowever, when he wishes to satisfy a favourite,sends him with a buyurdi, ordering the Salaryto take the bearer's money at 12 per cent,whether they want it or not.The lands around the village, which formerlysupplied the inhabitants with corn for a part ofthe year, have been neglected with the increaseof wealth and population, as it answers better in208 BPiRUS. [chap.general to import com and flour than to cultivatesuch a wretched soil. In the present year, however,they feel the loss of this culture, in consequenceof a dearth of com in Thessaly, which, itis reckoned, has caused an expenditure of 60,000piastres for provisions beyond that of last year.A part of the territory is destined to the pastureof oxen, for which 3 piastres a head are paidto the massa of the town : for a horse or mulefed on another common destined for them, 5piastres. The remaining pastures are destinedto sheep and goats, the charge for which is500 piastres a year for a mantua of 2000. TheEleftherokhoria of the mountains of Greece ingeneral derive their principal revenue from theirpastures, which are common property. Thisillustrates the ancient circvofcca, — a privilege whichwas often conferred, together with other rights ofcitizenship, on foreign benefactors, who then hadthe right of feeding their sheep and cattle on thesame terms as citizens. Sometimes the pasturagewas in part let for the benefit of the rafuuov, orpublic chest, or allotted as security for borrowedmoney.Building is expensive at Kalar^^tes. A womanwho brings a large stone upon her back from thequarry, which is about a mile from the extremityof the town, receives each time 6 paras, andcan make ten trips per diem ; the expence inquarrying is 2 paras more, so that by the time thestone is put into the wall it costs not less than10 paras : the smaller stones are brought by mules.Places, or rough slabs of the same kind of cal-xxxvii.]EPIRUS. 209carious stone, for roofing, are 10 piastres thehundred, great and small. Timber is cut andbrought from Pramanda and Belisarius, or froma large wood on the eastern side of the mountainsin the road to Trikkala, distant about 3 hours.A scantling of fir from the forest of Pramanda,which is generally brought on the shoulder ofthe person who shapes it there, is sold here from35 to 40 paras.According to a sumptuary custom of this republic,which has all the force of a law, the headof a family of the first class cannot give hisdaughter more than 1000 piastres dowry, herwardrobe included : the other classes in proportion.Another confines the dresses of the womento particular kinds of stuff.The Albanian Subashi who is head of the policehas only two palik4ria to assist him. He decides alltrifling differences, receiving a fee from the parties,and even dedicates in small processes for debtfor which he takes 10 per cent. ; but all the moreimportant civil questions are subject to the arbitrationof the primates, and are ultimately submittedto the Vezir. Another perquisite of theSubashi is 2 per cent, for collecting the contributions,according to a list furnished by thehodja-bashi and his assessors. The Subashi hasthe power of punishing in three modes; 1. byimprisonment; 2. by quartering his palikariaupon the house of the offender; 3. by turningout the family and sealing up the door; allwhich in the greater number of instances may beremitted for money. Without quarrels in theVOL. IV. p210 EPiRus. [chap.village the Subashi would starve, as he receivesno pay from his master. But in fact his place isso desirable for a poor Albanian soldier, that hetakes care never to exceed his powers, or to givecause for complaints against him by the primates.Matzdki has become a tjiftllk of the Vezir sincemy last visit to these mountains. Unable to paythe impositions, the poor villagers were obliged toborrow money at loannina or elsewhere, at aninterest of 20 per cent., or even at 2 per cent, permenses. Their difficulties having been of courseincreased by this measure, some of the inhabitantsfled to 'Agrafa, the rest presented themselves tothe Vezir with an offer to sell the whole villageand its territory. The price demanded was 12purses and the public debt. His Highness hadno difficulty in declaring the place his tjiftllk ;but instead of 12 purses he gave only 2, andinstead of paying the debts, referred the creditorsto the Matzukiotes who had fled to 'Agrafa.Khaliki, at the sources of the Achelous oncethe most important modern village of Pindus, andfrom whence came many of the chief families ofKalarytes, is on the point of being deserted onaccount of the excessive burthen of the taxes, andof a debt of 100 purses. When the village wasin its prosperity the inhabitants abandoned theircorn for sheep, and have now very little of either,their property consisting almost entirely of horsesand mules, with which they gain a livelihood ascarriers. Yet the annual contribution is still from400 to 700 piastres from th head of a family.Last winter an avalanche buried ten or twelveXxxvi.] Epirus. 211of the houses in the village, and filled the bedof the river. I before remarked that the nameKhalikiy a common Romaic corruption of Chapcity explains a verse of Dionysius Perseveres, inwhich he states that the Achelous rises at Chalcis,but I was not then acquainted with a passage ofStephens, which confirms it. It is in alludingto the involution of the Echinades in the mudof the Achelous that the remark of Dionysiusoccurs, in reference to which Stephens observesthat Chalcis was a city of ^tolia, from whencethe Achelous flows ^ There may be some inaccuracyin describing this country as Mtolm^ butneither Stephens nor Dionysius could possiblyhave had in view the Chalcis of ^tolia, as somecritics have supposed, for that place, of which theruins still exist on the coast opposite to Petra,was more than 20 miles distant from the nearestpart of the Achelous.The only ancient position besides Chalcis in themountainous country around Kakardhlsta that canbe stated with any confidence is that of Theodora,a place mentioned only by Livy, on the authorityof Polybius, but from whom it appears to havebeen one of the chief towns of the Athamanes.The resemblance of name seems to identify it withthe modem Thodhoriana, a village situated nearTplrri AiTiaXiag, k^ Jc o 'Ax^Xwoc pee. Atovv^coc o IXepiy-(A/vjyc dpyvpi^i 'Ax^XofVoc a^^cc cXcVcrcc.)Stephan. in XaXWi — Dionys. v. 496.p2212 EPiRus. [riiAP.Mount Tzumerka in a pass which leads fromthe Achelous to the ArachtJma. Theodora wasrecovered from the Macedonians, with the othertowns of Athamania, by the expelled king Aray-wander, with the assistance of the italians, inthe year b. c, 189, just before the siege of Ambraciaby the consul Fulvius. Argithea is mentionedby the historian on this occasion as thecapital of Athamania, and as situated amidstrocky mountains and deep valleys. Tetraphyliawas the royal treasury ; the other towns wereHeraclea and Theism, besides which were Ethiopia,near Argithea, and the fortress Athenaeum,apparently not far from Gomphi. Philip, as soonas he heard of the defection of Athamania, marchedwith all his forces from Gomphi towards Argithea,but having been repulsed at Ethopia, he was obligedto effect a retreat to Gomphi, during which he sustainedgreat loss until he had crossed a certain river,in consequence of the mountainous nature of thecountry, and the better knowledge of it possessedby his enemies, the Athamanes and ^tolians^ AsGomphi was in some part of the plain of Trikkala,it follows, if Theodora was at Thodhoriana, thatAthamania extended from the plain of Trikkala tothe crest of the Tzumerka chain, or perhaps to theriver Artaa, thus comprehending the modem ,and a part of 'Agrafa. That a largeportion of the valley of the upper Achelous wasincluded in Athamania, seems evident from thename Paracheloitis, which Livy shows to haveLiv. 1. 38, c. 1, 2.Xxxvi.] EPIRUS. 213been a part of Athamania^ The districts ofMatzuki, Kalarytes, and Syrako, which are so remarkablyseparated from the rest of the world bythe surrounding ridges, I take to have been thecountry within the narrow limits of which theonce extensive western PerrhaBbi were reduced inthe time of Strabo, for the geographer describesthem as situated to the north of ^tolia, near theAthamanes and Dolopes, and as occupying thewestern side of the summits of PindusAug. 20. — This afternoon having recrossed thebridge at the foot of the mountain of Kalarj^tes,I leave to the right the ordinary road to loannina,which crosses the ridge of St. George, and followthat which leads to Pramanda and Artaa along theeastern side of the same ridge. At the end of anhour from the bridge, we arrive at Kiepina, amonastery formed like that of Megaspilio in theMorea, by means of a wall built in front of acavern, but on a diminutive scale compared withthat building, and containing only a small churchwith two apartments, inhabited by two monks anda young laic. The cavern is very curious, as beingthe entrance of a horizontal passage into the bodyof the mountain, of which the monks affirm, thatneither they nor any other person have ever yetreached the extremity. I followed the passagefor 20 minutes by the watch, without any consAt the congress of Tempe, mania esse, nullo jure Thes*where the Powers pleaded their valorem formulae factum." —cause before the Roman Com- Liv. 1. 39, c. 26.emissaries, Philip complained, ' Strabo, pp. 61. 434. 437*'* Paracheloida, quae sub Atha- 442. 450.— £xc. I. 10.214 EPiRUS. [chap.miserable ascent or descent, over a level ground ofhard clay, and without meeting any impediment,except occasionally that of stooping under some projectionsof the roof, or of climbing over some hollowswhere a single plank would save the trouble.Not having been able to procure a sufficiency ofcandle, I was obliged to return ; the air was coldand loaded with vapour, which increased as Iadvanced. Near the entrance of the cavern, thesides are a bare calcareous rock; in the fartherparts are some large stalagmatic columns. Themonastery is situated exactly in the gorge whichgives passage to the united stream, formed by thethree branches of Matzuki, Kakardhista, and Ka-barytes,or Syrako, and not far above the junctionof this river with the Artaa, or Arcichthus. It commandsa magnificent view of mountain scenery.Below the monastery, on the side of the hill towardsthe river, are some gardens watered bysprings, which there issue from the mountain.A few years ago Kiepina was a scene of actionbetween the people of Kalarj^tes and Syrako, uponan occasion on which they ought rather to haveunited against Aljr Pasha, but which exemplifiesthe characteristic readiness of neighbours in everypart of Greece to break out into hostility. AKalarytiote was on the eve of marriage with aSyrakiote girl, whose family was connected withhis own, when the Vezir having received intimationof the beauty of the girl, by a Kalarytiote who isin his service, dispatched some men who took herout of her father's house at night. All Syrakowas instantly in arms, and intercepting the roadXxxvi.] Epirus. 215to loannina, forced the seducers to retire intoKieplna, where they were blockaded by the SymAs the monastery belongs to Kalarytes,the Vezir's agent had no great difficulty in persuadinga body of his countrymen to proceed tothe rescue of His Highness's emissaries. Somefighting ensued, when the affair appearing serious,Aly affected to consider the persons who carriedaway the girl as belonging to a band of robbers,and ordered peace to be made between the twotowns, on condition that the girl should be takenout of the monastery to Kalarytes, and from thencebe restored to her parents at Syrako ; and thusfor once the Pasha was obliged to give up hispoint.Some shepherds who are feeding their flocksaround Kieplna confirm the existence of an absurdcustom in these mountains, which I had oftenheard mentioned by the Kalarytiotes. With theview of making their sheep healthy and strong,and the flesh coarse and ill-flavoured, the first forthe sake of enabling the sheep to resist the weather,and. the latter to render it less tempting tothe wolves, they are in the habit of taking a pieceof the fibula of a dog, two inches long, and ofinserting it into the fleshy part of the thigh of thelamb when it has nearly attained its growth, afterwhich the opening is sewed up. So persuadedare they of the efficacy of this custom, that theshepherd at Kieplna expressed his belief, thatlambs born of a ram or ewe so treated have asimilar bone. Such a practice could only obtain,where the greater part of the lambs were destined216 EPIRUS. [CH A P.only to be shorn, to breed, and to make cheese.The bone, doubtless, is soon carried away bysuppuration. As education extends in Greece,this absurd custom, which is already ridiculousamong the higher class, will gradually cease, aswell as the use of charms and some other superstitiouspractices which still prevail among thecommon people, especially among the women. Itwould be difficult now to meet with an exampleof the most barbarous of all those superstitions,that of the Vrukolaka. The name being Illyria,seems to acquit the Greeks of the invention, whichwas probably introduced into the country by thebarbarians of Sclavonic race. Tournefort's descriptionis admitted to be correct. The Devil issupposed to enter the Vrukolaka, who, rising fromhis grave, torments first his nearest relations, andthen others, causing their death or loss of health*The remedy is to dig up the body, and if after ithas been exorcised by the priest, the demon stillpersists in annoying the living, to cut the body intosmall pieces, or if that be not sufficient, to bum it.The metropolitan bishop of Larissa lately informedme, that when metropolitan of Grevena, he oncereceived advice of a papas having disinterred twobodies, and thrown them into the Haliacmon^ onpretence of their being Vrukolakas. Upon beingsummoned before the bishop, the priest confessedthe fact, and asserted in justification, that a reportprevailed of a large animal having been seen toissue, accompanied with flames, out of the gravein which the two bodies had been buried. Thebishop began by obliging the priest to pay himXxxvii.] EPlRUd^ 217250 piastres: (his holiness did not add that hemade over the money to the poor). He then sentfor scissors to cut off the priest's beard, but wassatisfied with frightening him. By then publishingthroughout the diocese, that any similar offencewould be punished with double the fine and certainloss of station, the bishop effectually quietedall the vampires of his episcopal province.Aug. 21. — We pursue the road from Kalarj^testo Pramanda to the foot of the mountain, cross andrecross the river, and then ascend a beautiful woodyslope where the soil appears fertile, to the smallruined village of Mikhalitzi, distant one hour andtwenty minutes from Kiepina, and thence, in anhour and a half, through rocky passes over a baremountain which borders the left bank of the Arach-thus to Kuliaradhes, a village in a lofty situation,not far short of which is aro KaorrlXc, a place so calledfrom the foundations of a Hellenic building ofsmall dimensions, which were brought to light notmany years ago in clearing the ground of wood*Opposite to Kuliaradhes, beyond the precipitousgorges of the ArcLchthtis^ is seen the district of theTomaro-khoria, one of which, Forts, stands on theedge of the cliffs immediately opposite to Ku-charades.Four or five of these villages are situatedon an elevated, fertile, and well-cultivatedvale, lying below the northern side of the summitcalled Xero-vuni, and watered by a tributary ofthe Arachthus. The remaining villages stand onmore distant slopes of the same mountain towardsthe plain of loannina. Lozetzi, the largest of theToraaro-khoria, lies to the northward of Forts,218 £P1RC8. [chap.in a lower situation. Farther on the descentoccurs Seriana\ a small place three hours fromloannina, where are said to be some remains ofantiquity.Kuliaradhes is a tjiftlik of Mukhtar Passu Theinhabitants complain of the expence to which theyare subjected in finding fire-wood for his use, andthat of the Vezir, their lands not producing any.But none of the villages within a certain distanceof loannina are exempt from this change. Thesupply of snow to the palace is another severe an-maria; and the more burthensome to individuals, asit is required only from the places which are nearthe glaciers. In the beginning of summer the snowis furnished by the villages of Mount Mitzikeli,then by Kotzista and Boz^oli, and towards the endof the season by Syrako. On leaving Kuliaradhesour road lies for an hour along the summits, wherethe land produces com or feeds cattle. On theright of us, in a high situation, is Vestavetzi ; soonafter passing which, we begin a very steep andtedious descent to the Artaa, where the road is renderedso difficult by the loose soil and stones, thatit is only practicable on foot. We cross the riverat the ruins of a bridge where formerly stood somemills. The place is called Tjlmovo *. In buildingthe bridge advantage was taken of a greatrock in the middle of the river which served for apier. There are some remains of other piers madeof bricks and mortar, apparently of the time ofthe Roman or Byzantine empire. From hence, inXxxviii Epirus. 219three-quarter of an hour, ^e cross the heights toProdhovali \ a village of eight families, situatedat three hours' distance from Kuliaradhes, on theedge of the plain which separates Mount Dhryskofrom the hi of KastHtza. Having lodged hereunderan arbour of vines attached to one of thecottages, I proceed in two hours to loannina, onthe morning of the 22d of August.loannina, September — October, 1809. — On the1st of September, Omer Vrioni Bey, of Verghi-onde', near Berat, entered loannina with a suiteof led horses and mules, baggage, and attendants,on his return from Egypt, after eight or ten yearsspent in warring with the Mameluke and plunderingthe country. His harem and treasures havebeen sent forward to his native town. Several ofthe led horses are destined as presents to theVezir, together with a valuable Damascus blade,richly mounted, a mule which cost 8,000 piastres,and a hedjin, or saddle-camel, with its fume*ture.The Porte, having little hope of regaining itsauthority in Egypt while the Albanians remainthere, is endeavouring to detach the principalchiefs from Mehemet Al jr, in which Aljr of loanninawillingly concurs, having heard of the riches whichmany of his countrymen have accumulated in thatexcellent field of plunder, and having a goodUpoSofidXi. the Greeks translated into Brynfamily of Vrioni is ennius. The name originatesvery ancient in Albania, and is perhaps in that of the nativesupposed to be the same which place of Omer Bey.220 spires. chap.prospect of obtaining a portion of whatever mayreach Albania. A mulatto, brother of HassanAga of Margariti, who, before he went to Egypt,was a robber among the Khaitali of Thrace, andwho submitted himself to the Vezir some yearsago at Monastic, is now one of the richest AlbanianBeys in Egypt, and refuses to return, beingequally afraid of Aljr Pasha, and of his own brother,who is still in Albania, and with whom hehad never been on good terms.TovpKov ciScc ; a<nrpa 0A«, a modem proverb,meaning literally that a Greek never sees a Turkapproach without knowing that he is coming todemand money, is too applicable to the characterof the Turks in general, and especially to those inoffice, from the highest to the lowest degree.There may be a few examples of moderation inAsia Minor, but among the far greater number ofchieftains who have established an independentauthority, such as has left them at liberty topursue their own ideas of governing, the same extortionhas prevailed as under the obedient delegatesof the Sultan, nor have the countries soruled experienced any relief from the fatal influenceof the Turkish system. It is evident fromthe account of those who have lately returnedfrom Egypt, that the remark applies not less toMehemet Aly of Cairo than it does to Alj^ of loan-nina.Aly, since he has become of political importancein Europe, shows some wish that foreigners shouldivpotTKVVtltK,XXX Vil.] EPIRUS. 221have a favourable opinion of him. Nevertheless,he has little scruple in alluding to those actions ofhis life which are the least likely to obtain such favour,though he generally endeavours to give sucha colouring to them as shall make them appear lesscriminal. Sometimes he manifests a wish to perpetuatehis power in his own family, but evidentlywithout great hopes of success, betraying proofsnot only that he has little confidence in the abilityof his sons to maintain his conquests, but that heeven entertains lively fears for his own safety, asheoften inquires whether, in case of being drivenout of his native country, he should find securityfor his person and property in the British dominions.Sometimes he listens to counsel foramoment, and endeavours to amend the vicesof his government. In August, by advice of thebishop of Larissa, he summoned deputies from allthe villages of Trikkala, deposed the hodja-bashiswho had acted oppressively, and substituted others.But this is the extent of his reforms. He is perfectlyaware that his subjects detest him ; andlately in conversation with one of his ministers,remarked, that he should very much prefer thelove of his people if it answered equally well tohis treasury. He is not incapable of understandingthat it might answer better in the end ; but hishabits are now too inveterate to allow him to actupon such views, and his favourite maxim of vaufAOi Kama iyi>y which has actuated many an illustriousdespot, not so honest as Aiy in declaring it,will doubtless continue to be the rule of his conductto the end, as well as that sentiment naturally222 Epirus. [chap.arising from it, which Nero is said to have expressedin the words c/uov Oavovroc^ yaia iiiy%iirfawvpi He may perhaps find some excuse for suchshort-sighted policy in the constant state of anxietyand suspicion in which he is placed by the knowntreachery of the Supreme Government, by the hatredwhich the Osmanlis in general entertain againsthim as an Albanian, by the personal hostility of theSultan, and by the conduct of his ambitious neighboursin the Islands. It can hardly be doubtedthat he would better consult his safety by increasedefforts to strengthen himself, as well by militarypower as by cultivating an influence among thosewho constitute three fourths of his subjects, havingalready paved the way for the latter by plunderingand degrading almost all the Mahometansswithin his reach, while he favours and employsthe Christians, though in neither instance withany longer views than those of immediate advantage.In augmenting his possessions and powerin Albania, he seems to proceed upon a moresettled principle, and one which offers the betterprospects to his ambition, as the Turks havenever so completely subdued Albania as to destroyhereditary power and influence, or havebeen able to keep the country in a state of subjection,but by promoting a balance of power betweenthe principal chieftains, — the best policy,in fact, for the Sultan to adhere to, as he is sureof the mercenary services of the Albanian soldierswhenever they are wanted, and cannot reasonablyhope, even if he were to achieve such a conquestof Albania as Mahomet the Second succeeded inXXXVIIl.] EPIRUS. 223effecting, to maintain a permanent and completeauthority in the country, which neither that victoriousmonarch, nor any of his successors, whenthe military character of the Ottomans was in itsmeridian, were able to accomplish.It must be admitted that the success with whichAly has indulged his ambition in Greece andAlbania, not only in defiance of the Porte, buthitherto with a constant increase of influence overthe Supreme Government, is a proof of skill, foresight,and constancy of purpose, in which fewstatesmen or monarchs have ever excelled him,and shows that had he any enlightened and steadyviews of benefit to his country, he has the talentrequisite for pursuing them to completion. Hesometimes compares himself to Burrows, becausePyrrhus was his predecessor in Epirus, and possiblybecause Pyrrhus is the only great man ofantiquity he ever heard of except Alexander ; ofAlexander's father at least, whom A15^ most resemblesin character, I find he has no knowledge.He shows equal art and activity in the variousmeasures of force or fraud by which his advantagesare obtained, and exhibits a degree of patienceand command of temper, especially whenthe object is to gain partisans to his cause, whichin such an impetuous character is very remarkable.It is surprising to see with what apparentgood humour he listens to the interminable discoursesof every petty Albanian officer, whosemomentary importance may give him the enviableprivilege of conversing with the great chieftain.A15^ himself also probably takes some pleasure in224 EPiRUS. [chap.a mode of transacting business from which he hasderived advantage through the whole course of hiscareer, and in exercising upon these men his talentsof flattery and deception.He professes his determination not to make peacetill he has obtained Berat, but admits that he istired of the contest, which has already cost him1500 purses, though it began only in May, andthat in addition to his expenditure in Albania, heis obliged to meet the loss of credit at Constantinople,which has been the consequence of hishaving undertaken this contest against the willof the Porte. In fact, it operates as a diversionin favour of the external enemy, by preventingmany of the Albanians from recruiting the GrandVezir's army on the Danube.Though there is great difficulty in ascertainingcor-directly what passes in the Vezir's harem, it is knownthat he never had but one wife, the sister of Khotadand Morte, Beys of Ayghyrokastro, who is stillalive ; unless the widow of a rich Turk of loannina,whom he married for a day in order to obtain herproperty, may be called another. He asserts thathe has 200 women in his harem ; for these are subjectson which he has no scruples in conversing.Like most Turks, he is desirous of consultingmedical men, the great objects of such inquiriesbeing philters and poisons. His women are alleither slaves bought at Constantinople, or presentedto him by Turks, or they are Greek women,noticed for their beauty by him or some ofhis servants, and conveyed by his order to theserai. His only favourite at present is a ChristianXXXVIII.] Epirus. 225Albanian, from the neighbourhood of Tepeleni,whose father having been ordered to loannina,with his whole family, for some real or imputedoffence about ten years ago, this girl, then a child,was remarked by Aljr, and ordered to be educatedin his harem. She is still a Christian, and allowedto have her chapel, and service performedby a papas in the palace. Indeed, he nevertroubles himself to make religious converts ofeither sex ; on the contrary, it is more commonto see the boys who are brought up in the seraiin his service, reading and writing with the Greekpapas than with the Turkish hodja. Nor hasA\^ ever deprived any of the higher class ofGreeks of their daughters. With the exception ofthe favourite and two or three of her attendants,whom he often removes in a close carriage at nightfrom one palace to another, at which he intendsto pass the ensuing day, not one of the unfortunateinmates of the harem in the castle everquits her prison, unless, as a rare instance of favour,to be married to one of his servants. There,very indifferently clothed, fed, and lodged, confinedto latticed apartments, without amusementor exercise, in a situation where the air in summerand autumn is unhealthy, they cannot but soonlose their health and attractions. Indeed it may besaid that when once the palace in the castle becomestheir constant residence, they are as muchneglected as the building itself. As few women,even of the higher classes in loannina, possesseither elegance or beauty, it cannot be supposedthat these peasant girls can have much to becomeVOL. IV. Q226 EPiRus. [chap.mend them after the first glow of health is wornoff in their sickly confinement. Not many weeksago a country girl was recommended to the Vezirby his Kalarytiote secretary, who caused her to bebrought to the palace. In the course of a few dayshe resolved to have her married, and fixed uponP. a young man of Kalar^^tes for her husband,but who having obtained intimation of the honourintended him, immediately made off for Corn,accompanied by another person of the same townand family. They had nearly reached the coastwhen the emissaries of Tahir Aga overtook them,and not knowing exactly which was the destinedbridegroom, brought them both back to loannina.In the mean time, however, the Proestos ofKalarj^tes, having interceded with the Vezir, P.escaped marriage, and the girl was sent back toher parents. Scarcely any two persons agree asto the number of female children which A15^ hashad, but it is generally believed that several havebeen put to death. It is difficult to understandhis reasons for this cruelty, as he has made sogood a use of female alliances in the furtheranceof his political projects, but the practice is supposedto be not uncommon among the greatTurks, including the Sultan. They think probablythat it enhances the honour of the alliance tohave no more than the exact number of daughtersrequired. It has often been remarked, that thelife of a man is of no consideration in the East,compared to that which is attached to it amongthe nations of civilized Europe ; but it is difficultfor a native of the latter to conceive how muchXXXVIII.] EPIRUS. 227more strongly this remark applies to the femaleThe daily rains ceased at loannina towards thelatter end of June, after which the heat was excessivetill about the 10th of July; showery weatherthen followed, with a cool northerly wind tillthe 21st; the heat then increased daily till aboutthe 26th, when it arrived at its maximum, thethermometer at 2 p.m. ranging from 85^ to 95® inthe coolest parts of the house, and so continuedduring the first half of August. About the I2thof that month the cold north wind again set in,causing dysentery on board our ships off the coast.These sudden changes of temperature are one ofthe worst peculiarities of the climate of loannina.I have known the north wind blow for severaldays almost as hot as an Egyptian hamlin, andthen suddenly become cold, without any rainhaving fallen within the visible horizon. At in the middle of August, the thermometerfell below 60® ; on my return to loannina, on the22d of August, the weather for about a week wascalm, with a light north-west wind, and hot thoughvery moderate compared with the two formerperiods of heat. About the first of Septemberthe southerly winds began, and continued with anaccompaniment of violent rain and thunder for afortnight. A letter which I received from Capt.Brisbane, senior officer of the ships on the coast,dated Sept. 16, stated that he had been preventedfor many days from approaching the coast, andthat the weather at sea had been severe in theextreme. After this little monsoon there was aq2228 EPiRUS. [chap.series of the fairest and calmest days with sometimesvery light north-western in the afternoon,till the 28th September, when the southerly windsagain set in, and the rains became almost incessantuntil I departed for Artaa, on the 20th October.The wind seldom blows for .twenty fourhours from between the west and south-east withoutbringing rain.From these and other remarks which I havebefore incidentally made, it is apparent that, inrespect of climate, loannina is more northerlythan any part of Italy, except the mountains, andmay perhaps be ranked with Vienna. It is possible,however, that this year has hardly beenan average one, and that there has been morerain during the winter and spring, and lesshot and dry weather in the summer than usual.In some years the drought is said to be distressing,and in consequence of the dry gravelly soilis probably much sooner felt here than in 7%e8-mly, for Providence seems to have admirablyadapted the soils to the climates on either side ofthe PinduSy the deep rich mould of Thessalyrequiring a much smaller degree of moisture torender it productive than the light stony calcareoussoil of the greater part of Epirus, butparticularly the plain of loannina, which can onlybe rendered productive by frequent and copiousirrigation.Artaaaa, October 1809.— The district of Artaaaacontains 170 villages, in eight solis or subdivisions: — 1. Kambo, or the plain; 2. Luro;3. Lamari ; 4. Lake ; 5. Kervasara ; 6. Vrysis ;XXXVIII.] , EPiRus. 2297. Radhovlzdhi, or Radhovisi; 8. Tzamerka, orTzumemiko *.The chief villages in Kambo are Mehmetjausand Rakhi, to the westward of Artaa — Kostakius,half an hour from Artaa in the road to Salaghora,and Neokhori, 2 hours from the sea on the rightbank of the river of Artaa, which is so far navigableto small vessels. Kambo is divided by theriver of St. George from Luro, which containsthe valley of Luro as far as the mountains ofSuli. In Lamari, are Libokhovo, before described,as well as Kastro-sykia or-skin, Kama-ring,Mikhalitzi, and Mj^tika. In Lake, are LelovoPogortissa, one hour and a half from Tervit-diana, which is in the district of loannina — Filiion the river of St. George half an hourfrom Strivina — Podhogora, in the plain of Lelovoopposite to that village, and Papadhates in a loftysituation an hour and a half from Podhogora and2 hours from St. George. In Kervasara are Striving,Kometzadhes, Julian, Klisura, near ,and Akoghi. In Vrysis, Petaa isthe only considerable village. In Rhadhovisi areKomboti, Skulikarya, and Velitziko, the twolatter in the mountains. In Tzumerka are Amanda,Belisarius, Thodhoriana, Lupslsta, andVurgareli. The villages above named containabout 2000 families ; all the others in the districtof Artaa being small, have not more than 3000, soKdfitroif AovpoCf Adfiapi, 'Pa^o/9if ^t, or 'Pa^/3^(rt, Tfov-Cairo, Kcp/3aaapoc» Bpvat£, fi<p«^'a> or T(ovfupyiKOQ,230 EPIRU8. [chap.that the whole rural population of Artaa is about30,000, to whom may be added for that of thetown, 5000 Greeks, 500 Turks and as many Jews.The plain of Artaa and the sub-district of Lamaribelong entirely, with the exception of two Turkishtjiftliks, to the Vezir or his sons ; and it is computedthat the yearly revenue of their lands andflocks amounts on an average to 1400 purses.From the farmers he receives four tenths of thecrop in kind, which includes one-eighth in wheat,barley, and oats, and one-tenth in rokka, due tohim as voivoda. Wheat and kalambokki are theprincipal produce of Artaa, then wine, of whichthere are 20,000 horse-loads, but of indifferentquality, as the vineyards are in the plain ; barley,oats, cotton, flax, tobacco, rice, and pulse. Thelandlord's wheat and maize are partly consumedby the troops and household of the Pasha and hissons : the tobacco and rice are sold at loannina.The exports by sea from the district in the commoditiesabovementioned, to which are to be addedthe oranges, lemons, and hazel-nuts, of the gardensof Artaa, are reckoned to be of the annualvalue of 1000 purses. The Vezir pays to thePorte for the mukata of the voivodalik 300 purses,and receives more than that sum from the personsalone to whom he underlies the customs, and whocollect them at Artaa, Mjrtika, Luro, and .For the tithe of the lands not owned by him hereceives annually 290 purses. . A duty on wine collectedat the wine-houses, he lets for 16,000 pias-xxxviii.]EPIRU8. 231tres; the kum^rki, or excise on goods enteringthe town, together with the station, or fee onpublic weighing, for 10,000 piastres ; the monopolyof tobacco, for 16,000. About 16,000 piastresare collected by his agent for the kumerki, ortoll upon sheep and goats passing through Artaafrom the mountains of Epirus to feed in the winterin Acamania. The subashilik and voting, whichare fees paid to the Vezir as possessing the ziam^tsand tiara of Artaa, comprehending about a fourthof the district, amount to 13,000 piastres. Othercontributions of various kinds accruing to him asgovernor are reckoned at 75,000 ; so that theamount of hia revenue from his gain upon themukata added to the produce of his landed property,including that of his sons, is near 2000purses, or 60,000Z. sterling, from the kaza of Artaaalone.The customs of loannina, of the ports of theForty Saints and Vutzintro, are let by the Vezir,together with the voivodalik of loannina, and anexcise levied upon merchandize passing over thebridge of Raiko, or in entering the gates of loan-nina,for 450 purses. His estates in that districtare more extensive than in Artaa, but probably notmore productive : he possesses, however, varioussources of superior profit in the larger population,and the amount of his net revenue fromboth may be estimated at 120,000/. per annum.It is supposed by the person who gave me the particularsof his Arteno property, and who is one ofthe farmers of the revenue, that his whole net income,exclusive of payments and presents at EPiRus. [chap.stantinople, is about five millions of piastres, or300,000Z. — a sum capable of effecting twice as muchas in England, but for which he is charged, it mustbe remembered, with all the expence of the civilgovernment and military defence of the country.The djezj^e-guebran (tribute of the infidels) commonlycalled the charade, is farmed by the Vezirfrom the farmer-general of this well-known capitationtax on male non-Musulmans. It amountsto three, six, or twelve piastres, according to theperson's age, and amounts in the kaza of Artaa to35,000 piastres ; in that of loannina to nearlytwice as much. Upon this the Vezir makes someprofit. Besides this and the other imposts whichhave been mentioned, each family is assessed forthe local expences by the Priest ; the whole sumlevied under this head in the district of Artaa isabout 100,000 piastres, without taking into accountavails and forced loans, which are seldomor never repaid in toto. To these burthens mustbe added also the quartering and feeding of soldiers,Turks, and public characters of all descriptions,as well as auguries, or contributions ofhorses, personal labour, and materials, which theVezir frequently demands for public works, or moreproperly speaking, for the execution of his capricesin building palaces and castles.The old inhabitants of Artaa speak with greatrespect of Salesman, who was cut off by thePorte forty-five years ago, and in whose timethose who now pay 700 piastres in khrei were nottaxed more than 30, which, however, was equal to150 at the present day. At that time the spahiliksXXXVIII.] EPIRUS. 233of the district belonged to Turks, and the remaininglands almost entirely to Greeks, subject to atithe of about an eighth, the charade, and a fewother general or local taxes. The mode in whichA15^ has acquired all this property, and the effectsof the change upon Artaa, is exemplified in thehouse in which I am lodged : like many others inthe town it is large, and shows signs of formercomfort and opulence, but belongs to a poor widowwho can only afford to occupy a part of it, thePasha having purchased all her landed propertyat her husband's death for his own price. He wasmuch indebted to Kyr P. of Artaa for having arrangedhis finances in this district, and for having in particularmade the customs much more productivethan before. When at the close of his labours P.made an humble application for some remuneration,the only answer he received was : Turn andsit down prudently ; your father died rich, yet Inever tormented you ^Artaa supplies loannina with the greater part ofits fruits and vegetables, particularly with theorange tribe, which are in a state of maturity herenine months in the year. The blossoms only whichexpand in September and October, produce fruitthat does not ripen. The following method ofplanting slips of orange-trees is generally practisedat Artaa; the bark having been taken offround the place where the separation is to bemade, a strip of sheep-skin leather is tied tight^ 2vpc va Kar^ai import fia' 6 Traripaaaov diriSayt irXovirio^Kal iiy aag cTc/pa£a.234 EPiRUS. [chap.round the wood. A quantity of earth containedin two half pots is then placed at the ligature, andbound so as to be supported by the main body ofthe tree, in order that the branch may not be injuredby the weight. Roots soon strike into theearth from the branch, after which it may be cutoffand placed in the ground. In this manner atree may be planted with fruit upon it, and willbear a good crop in one, two, or three years, accordingto its strength, instead of ten, which theseedling requires in coming to perfection. It isfound that a tree, however good, improves in itsfruit by being grafted every three or four years :the graft is taken from a choice tree, and sometimesfrom the same tree.In the church of the cvayyeXcafioc r^c Havayia^Stands a square stele of marble or hard limestone,three feet high, adorned at the top and down theangles with a plain moulding, but broken and incompleteat the bottom. Whether this monumentwas not discovered at the time of my former visitorwhether I missed it, trusting too much to theguidance of Bishop Ignatius, I cannot assert. Itis a dedication by the community of the deaconsin the priesthood of Canopus to Serapis, Isis, Anubis,and Hippocrates ^ Both priest and deitiesseem to have been an importation from Egypt in^ Ti Koivoy rfiy hicu:6ytiy Kpdrtit 'HpoicXf/rov, 'HpaxXcc-DapaVci, "lace, ^Arovfitif 'Aptro" rog KpartipOQf *AyaBiSat KaX-Kpareif Kdviinrog 'lepevc, — Sw XiKpariog, TifidSafiOQ ^taaiarpd^Tuy KdXXtffrpdroVf Atd^ii>poc tov, J^iovvtrio^ EtXaropocy 'AyriirarpoQ Eta^i- Kkairi^ytayott Evyovc *AxoXXo^VcoC) — V- Inscription, No. 170.XXXVIII.] EPIRU8. 235the time of the Polemics, with which date theform of the characters accords.Oct. 25. — Petaa is a village of sixty houses, distantan hour's ride to the Nee. of Artaa, on theheights just above the Arachthus^ where it issuesinto the plain. On the river's bank, below thevillage, stands the monastery of Theotoki. Twohours higher, at Sarandaforo, the Artaa is joined bya large tributary flowing from Mount Tzum^rka,above the left bank of which, on the mountainfacing Tzumerka, are Vurgareli and the monasteryof Vela. Between these places and Petaa is arange of fertile heights, which are now quite uncultivated,the small villages, which formerly occupiedthem having been totally ruined by robbers.Petaa, which has lately become a tjiftlikof Mukhtar Pasha has a small territory producingoil, com, and kalambokki, all which are ofexcellent quality : its tobacco is not in such repute.Oct. 26. — From Petaa to Komboti : distance1 hour and 45 minutes, without baggage. Tothe right of the road, in the valley which is includedbetween Petro-veni, as the ancient Perth"ante or hill of Ambracia is called, and the heightsof Petaa and Komboti, we pass the ruin of a buildingapparently of the time of the Lower Empire.The territory of Komboti is a fertile slope at thefoot of the range of inferior hills which are backedby the great range, the continuation of Tzumerka.Komboti was once a large Eleftherokhori, buthaving become a tjiftlik of Mukhtar Pasha, is nowin a declining state. It still produces, however,236 EPIRU8. [chap.com, wine, maize, tobacco, and oil, and consistsof 120 houses. A river here issues from the mountains,and crossing the plain enters a lagoon whichstretches along the shore from the north-easternangle of the gulf to within a short distance of themouth of the Artaa. Formerly there was a salt-workin this lagoon. At the head of the valley,above Komboti, an hour distant from thence, aresaid to be the remains of a Hellenic town, at aplace called Kastri.After dining with the Proestos, I descend toKoprena, the name of an anchorage at the mouthof the river of Komboti, and embark at sunset in aKefaloniote boat which I had ordered from Sala-hora.Koprena is midway between the mouth ofthe river of Artaa and Menidhi, a small bay at thenorth-eastern angle of the gulf, exactly at the beginningof the pass of Makrinoro. On a heightwhich rises from the bay of Menidhi to the N.£.are the remains of a Hellenic fortress which commandedthe northern entrance of the pass. Theruins are called Paleopyrgo. In the night we sailto Vlikha, a distance of about eight miles in a rightline, but by land reckoned a march of five hours,of which the pass of Makrinoro is about the halfin distance, but greater in time, the road beingvery bad and impeded by woods.Arapi and Vlikha are small tjiftliks, each consistingof a tower and quadrangle of cottages, situated,the former at the northern, the latter at thesouthern end of a height called Mavro-vuni, whichis covered with wild olives, and projects to thewestward of the general line of the coast, thusXxxviii AMPHILOCHIA. 237forming a promontory at the head of the gulf.Between Mavrovuni and the great range of mountainswhich fall on the opposite side to the Achelousis a plain, commencing at the southern extremityof the Makrinoro, and extending to thevalley of Xerokambo, which is on a higher level.From Arapi the coast retires eastward, and formsthe bay of Katafomo, where a lagoon occupies thelower part of the plain, extending two miles from thefoot of the height of Ar4pi. Here was formerly avaluable fishery, which has been abandoned inconsequenceof the kleftic wars. Two torrentsdescend into this lagoon, one from the back ofMakrinoro, the other from the mountains on theeastern side of the plain, where are situated thevillages of Sjnidhikno and Dunstan.Beyond Vlikha, southward, the coast retires toArmyro, another lagoon, or rather shallow bay;for it has an opening of considerable breadth anddepth between a tow point and the cape of Spartanwhich forms, with cape Kendromata on theopposite side, the entrance of the bay of Kervasara.The bay or lagoon of Armyro extends eastward toXer6kambo. On the summit of the cape whichterminates the ridge of Spartovuni, are the ruinsof a small fortress called Kastriotissa, which consistspartly of Hellenic and partly of more modernwork. Below it, on the border of the bay, are afew houses named Armyro.The plain of Vlikha, although not less fertilethan that of Artaa, is now cultivated only aboutArapi, Vlikha, and a third hamlet called ,lately established by the Vezlr, and peopled238 AHPBILOCHIA. [chap.irish Prevyzans, whom be has deprived of theirproperty at Pr^vyza on pretence of their havingaided the French against him in the war. Theplain in the uncultivated parts is chiefly coveredwith fern, and there are many large plane-treeson the banks of the torrents.Oct. 27. — At Neokhori, distant three-quartersof an hour eastward of Vlikha, on the last fall ofthe mountain, are the ruins of an ancient city,the general form of which may be understood fromthe annexed sketch.Argot Aiii|i1ill«hi«in].The walls were m<H'e than a mile in circuit; find though very little of them remainsabove ground, they are traceable in every part,except in a marshy level near the village. TheXXXVIII.] AMPHILOCHIA. 239masonry, like that of ATnbracia at Artaa, is nearlyregular, and is thus unlike that of the Canadianruins, which are generally of the second order. Apeaked hill formed the citadel, the wall of whichis still traceable. Without the walls, on thesouthern side, are the foundations of a largequadrangular building, probably a temple; butnot a fragment of sculpture is anywhere to beseen, except a fluted cippus in the village church.The city was well protected by the mountain,which rises abruptly to the east, by a deep ravineto the north, and to the south by that of the riverof Ariddha, which here enters the plain, andseems recently to have taken a course to the southwardof its former direction. The ancient site isin many places overgrown with trees ; and not farfrom it inland begin the impassable woods, consistingof large oaks mixed with underwood, whichextend to the Aspro, with the interposition only ofa little cultivated land around a very few villages.Ariadha, the largest, is two hours above Neokhori,bearing east from Vlikha.Notwithstanding some objections which may bededuced from Strabo and Thucydides, I believethese to be the ruins of Argos, and that the riverof Ariadha, which flows on the southern side ofthem, is the Inachtis — a name derived, as well asthat of the city, from the Peloponnesian Argos,from whence a colony founded the AmphilochianArgos about the time of the Trojan wars TheHecatsus ap. Strabonn. p. p. 325. Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 68.271. Ephonu ap. Strabonn. Epirus represents both Acar-240 AMPHILOCHIA. [CHAP.following are the objections to this opinion. Straboreports Hecataeas to have asserted that the river ofAmphilochia, which took its name from the Ina-thusof Peloponnesian Argos, had its rise in thesame Mount Lacus in which were the sourcesof the Mas or Aous; that the former flowed toArgoSy and discharged itself into the Achelous;the latter into the Adriatic Sea ^ In some versesof Sophocles cited by the geographer, the sameorigin is ascribed to the Inachus, and the Perrhsebiare said to have occupied the country at the sourcesof the river*. If this were a correct descriptionof the InachuSy it could not possibly have flowednana and Amphilochia to have Xitrayro^' rovroy fiiv holy oir6^been colonized by Actaeon ^tjaiy eic tov *Ax^\foy cr/3dX-before the Trojan war. Accord Xeiy, roy ii Atayra etc 'Ironingto Thucydides, Amphion Xwyiay xpoc hvtriy ptiy. — Strayfounded Argos after the bo, p. 271.war. Toy Ik "Away Aiayra ranch'EjcaraioQ ici i^fftrty, dire rov'BeXriuy ^ 'Eraracoc, 6q ffftri airrov r&iroVf rov ircpi Adfr/ioy,roy ky toIq 'A/li^iX<^oic "Ivan fiaXXoy Sk rov avrov fJtvj(pVf Toyypy^ IK Tov AcLKfiov piovra^ k^ re^lyaxoy ^iiy eIq " ApyoQ irpoQov Kai 6 Aittc p€i, €r€poy elyai ydroy cat roy Aiayra vpog Itnri"TOV *ApyoXiKoVf ityofiatrOai ^ pay eig rely ^A^play. — Strabo,vfTO *AfA<^iX&)(pVf rov Koi rijy p* 316.ir6Xiy "Apyoc 'Afn^iXoxiKoy lea-petyap air aKpagnov Adicfiov r dxo Hi^aijiwy£(C *A/i^iX6xovs K *AxapyayaifMlffyii 3* vSaai role *A\£X^ov'kyBiy^ il "ApyotAid KVfia rsfiify, iJKei BijfioyToy AvpKelov.Sophocl. ap. Strabonn. p. 271.XXXVIII.] AKPHILOCHIA. 241into the Ambracic Gulf, and Argos of Amphi-lochsshould be sought for to the eastwardof the great ridge lying between the gulf andthe Ackelaus. But Argos was certainly nearor upon the shore of the gulf, as appears fromStrabo himself, who, in contradiction to the tenorof his citations from Hecataeus and Sophocles, testifiesthat the Amphilochi occupied the coast ofthe Ambracic Gulf, between Ambracia and Acar-nana, and that the Inachus flowed into the gulf ^And of this there cannot remain any question,upon a reference to the still better authority of thehistorians, Thucydides, Polybius, and Livy * ; thefirst of whom relates some transactions which absolutelyrequire a position for Argos on or very nearthe shore of the gulf; while Polybius describesArgos as 180 stades from Ambracia, towardsAcamania ; and Livy, who copies him, states thesame distance at twenty-two Roman miles. Fromthese facts it is evident, that the plain of Vlikhawas a principal part of the Ampkilockiay and thatArgos was in some part of that plain. It wouldseem, therefore, that Hecataeus was misinformed asto the course of the Inachus and the situation ofArgos, and that Strabo had not a knowledge ofthe country sufficient to correct the historian. Asto the verses of Sophocles, their weight, as a geographicaltestimony, is much diminished by theirforming part of a passage in which the poet repress"Ilyaxoy ie rdv hid rile * Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 68. 80 ;X«^pac pioyra irorafioy elc Toy 1. 3, c. 105. Polyb. 1. 22,roXirov. — Strabo, p. 326. c. 13. Liv. 1. 38, c. 10VOL. IV. RAHPHILOCHIA.[chap.Rented the laacfaus, after flowing to the Acbelous,as then crossing the sea, and re-appearing in hygeiaof Argolis, an acknowledged fable, Justlycompared by Strabo to that of the Alpheus flowingto the fountain Arethusa at Syracuse, to that ofthe Nile Sowing to the Inopus of Delos, and to thatof the orion of the Sicyonian Asopus in Phrygia '.6tfnr»it mam.The Strongest objection to Neokhon as the siteof Argot is, that Thucydides describes Argos as amaritime city *, which, it must be admitted, better■ Stnbo, p. 271.'Apyiluf inSXiuf iTiBaXaaaiat avait. — Thucyd. 1. 3. c. 15.Xxviii.] i^MPHILOCHIA. 243suits the remains at Kervasara^ the only place besidesNeokh6ri near the eastern shore of the gulf,where any remains are found deserving the characterof a polis, — all the others in this quarterbeing those of fortresses or of come. At Kervasarathere are not only the fortifications of a largetown, but they stand so near the sea as to answerperfectly to the description of emOaXaaaia.Kervasara, however, is considerably more thantwenty-two Roman miles from Artaa : there is noriver corresponding to the InachuSj and the positionseems exactly to accord with the descriptionof Limn<Baj as lying on the confines of the countryof the Agraeiy and as being the nearest harbour toStratus or that which afforded the most short andconvenient approach to that city from the AmbracicGulf*.It may be thought, perhaps, that assuming theruins at Kervasara to be those of Argos LimrKBamay be placed at Lutraki, or at Ruga, where thesituation of the ruins in a lake would be welladapted to that ancient name ; but in this caseArgos would have been exactly interposed betweenLimnsBa and the Agrsei, which is contrary to Thucydides.Nor would Limnsea in that case havebeen on the road from Argos to Stratus, as it appearsto have been upon two occasions describedby the same historian : — 1. When Nemus theSpartan, in the third year of the Peloponnesianwar, (b. c. 429,) invaded Acamania, in conjunct1. 2, c. 80 ; L 3, c. 106. Polyb. 1. 5, c. 5, 6. 14.See Vol. I. p. 144.VOL. IV. R 2244 AMPHILOCHIA. [CHAP.tion with the Epirotes and Ambraciotse ; on whichoccasion he proceeded from Ambracia throughthe Argeia, and having ravaged Limnsea %marched from thence to Stratus. 2. When in the sixth year was opposed to theAthenian allies in the Amphilochia ', to whichoccurrence I shall presently revert. It is truethat Thucydides in the former passage describesLimnsea as a small unfortified town ' ; which isbetter suited to Lutraki, where no vestiges of Hellenicantiquity are visible, than either to Ruga orKervasara. We may easily conceive, however,that the importance of the situation of Kervasardmay have caused that place to have been augmentedand fortified subsequently to the eventsrelated by the historian : nor is the name LvmuBaunsuitable to Kervasara, there being a marsh neartwo miles in length, at no great distance inlandfrom the ruins. I am still, therefore, disposed toadhere to the opinion that Kervasara was theancient Limnsea.It is no slight evidence of Argos having beennear Vlikha, that I purchased from the peasantsof that village three coins of that city in copper, ofgreat rarity, and which I had never before metwith ; for coins of cities in that metal, unlesswhere the coinage was very abundant, are seldomfound at any distance from the places themselves.As to the adjective cirt0aXacrcria applied by Thucydidesto Argos, it is to be observed, that the inletof Armyro, although very shallow, does not re-Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 80. * Kwimv drtlxiarov.■ Thucyd 1. 8, c. 106.XXXVIII.] AMPHILOCHIA. 245semble the other lagoons around the gulf of Artaa,which, like such lakes in general, are separatedfrom the sea by stripes of very low land, throughwhich there are one or two narrow entrances.Armyro, on the contrary, has a considerable depthof water at the entrance, with a breadth of threeor four hundred yards, and is still one of the Skatesor harbours of the gulf. It is very possible, therefore,that the part of the inlet nearest to Neokhori,which is now a marsh or a lagoon, according tothe season of the year, may have been renderedshallower than it was formerly by the alluvionof the rivers, or by other causes which constantlythough variously operate on the coasts of Greece,and that it may once have afforded a commodiousharbour to Argos.There may still perhaps be another conjectureas to the site of Argos, namely, that it stood atVlikha, a word having some appearance of beinga corruption of Amphilochiaj and thsit the ruins atNeokhori are not those of ArgoSy but of someother city, — for example, that of the Agrtei. Butthis would leave an insufficient space at the headof the Gulf for the Amphilochia. Nor will thisor any other situation, except that of Neokhori,perfectly accord with the mention of Argos byThucydides on the occasion already referred to,when in the winter of the sixth year of the Peloponnesianwar, the Amphilochi and Acarnanes,headed by Demosthenes the Athenian, gained acomplete victory over the Ambraciots and theirPeloponnesian allies, under Eurylochus the Spartan.Eurylochus, after having failed in an attempt246 AMPHILOCHIA. [CHAP.upon Naupactus, had marched into iBtolia, andinstead of returning into the Peloponnesus, hadremained at Proschium in that province until»thewinter, with the view of assisting the Ambraciotseagainst Argos, after which it was intended, in caseof success, to proceed against the allies of Athensin Acamania. When Eurylochus learned that3000 Ambraciot hoplitse, advancing from Ambracia,had occupied Olpse, a strong fortress upona height above the sea 25 stades from Argos,he advanced from Proschium, through the territoriesof Phoetise, Meteor, and Limnsea, intothe Agrais, which was friendly to him, and fromthence, having crossed Thames, an uncultivatedmountain, he entered the Argeia in the night,passing unperceived between Crease, where a bodyof Acamanes had been stationed to prevent him,and the city Argos, where the rest of the Acar-names were assembled with such of the Amphilochias had not been prevented by the Ambraciotoe '.Having thus effected a junction with the Ambraciotaeat Olpae, he took post with the combined force atMetropolis, soon after which Demosthenes arrivingin the Gulf, anchored near Olpse* with twentyAthenian ships, on board of which were 200Messenia hoplitae from Naupactus, and sixtyAthenian archers. Having disembarked these,and taken the command of the Acamanes and1 **iOXirac, reiyp^ ^""^ X<J^ov lipoKiwrwv (ii Karilxovro, — c.lir)(vpov vpog rp OaXaffcrjf. — 107.Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 105. • wipe rac •'OXrac rov Xo^voi yap xXe/ovc taro *A/i- ix OaXafftniQ i^mpfiovy.XXXVIIl.] AMPHILOCHIA. 247Amphilochi, he encamped near Olpae, where hewas separated only by a great ravine ^ from thearmy of Eurylochus. It was not until the sixthday that the opponents drew out their troops forbattle. Demosthenes, who was on the right withthe Messenia and the archers of Athens, opposedto Eurylochus and the Peloponnesian, findinghimself in danger of being outflanked by meansof the numerical superiority of the enemy, concealed800 Acamanians, half hoplitse and halflight armed, in a hollow way ^. The stratagem wassuccessful : Eurylochus in attempting to turn theright of his adversary was attacked in the rear bythe Acamanians, who were in ambush, and wasslain, with many of his best men. The Umbrasin his right wing, meantime, had so farprevailed over the Acamanes and Amphilochiopposed to them as to drive them towards Argos,when perceiving the defeat of the other part oftheir line, they turned, and found some difficultyin making good their retreat into Olpse. Thenext day Menedseus, who succeeded to the command,made proposals for permission to retreatswhen Demosthenes, with the concurrence of theAcamanian leaders, and with a view to bring thePeloponnesian into discredit in that part ofGreece, agreed to allow the latter to retire separately.This was soon afterwards effected ; thePeloponnesian, who went out from Olpse onpretence of gathering herbs and dried bushes for248 AMPHILOCHIA. [Chap.firewood \ were permitted to move forward andescape, while the Ambraciotee who followed them,ignorant of the secret treaty of the former withDemosthenes, were slain. There fell, however,not more than 200, because having been colonistsof Corinth, and hence resembling the Peloponnesianin armour, customs, and language, it wasdifficult for the enemy to distinguish them. Allthose who escaped took refuge with Olynthus,king of the Agrsei, whose territory confined onthe Amphilochia ^, from whence they proceededto OBniadffi'. In the mean time Demosthenes,who had received advice that all the disposableforce of the Ambraciotse was advancing throughAmphilochia towards Olpse, from whence theircomrades had sent for assistance on the first arrivalof the enemy, detached parties to beset theroads and seize the strong posts, particularly oneirp($0a0'tv M Xaxavi^/iOK well as the use of the wordsKal fpvyarwy (vWoyifv c{cX- themselves, has continued6($vrcc* — c« 111. among the Greeks to this day.The custom of collecting Aristophanes alludes to the^pvyava and Aypia Xa^ava, as custom.^Aypioiffi roiffi Xa^aFocc alrroc rfKx^cic*Thesmoph. v. 463.It is a common employment Greek or Albanian soldiers,of the women in the spring who are to be seen dispersedand early summer, when an around the halting place, em-abundanceof edible herbs and played in laohanizing for theirroots are produced on all the suppers.uncultivated grounds of Greece, ' dU^vyov ig rr^y 'Aypai^a,and the fact mentioned by Sfiopoy oiaay. — Thucyd. 1. 3,Thucydides is exemplified on c. 111.almost every halt of ^ body of ' c. 1 14.XXXVIII.] AMPHILOCHIA. 249of the summits of the mountain Immense, theother pinnacle of which, called the lesser Idomene,the Ambraciotse occupied in their advance. In theevening Demosthenes moved forward to the pass ^with half his army, sending the remainder, whichconsisted chiefly of Amphilochi, into the Amphionmountains. Before daylight the next morninghe attacked the Ambraciotae, and the surprise wasrendered more complete by the Messenia, who,advancing in front, addressed the enemy in Doric.The consequence was that the Ambraciotae wereall either slain on the spot, or that endeavouringto escape into the mountains they fell into thehands of the Amphilochi, while some, to avoidthese their most rancorous enemies, (as neighboursoften were in Greece) preferred rushing intothe sea, in order to swim to the Athenian ships,which happened at that moment to be near thecoast. Demosthenes then endeavoured to persuadethe Amphilochi and Acamanes to attack Ambracia,which might easily have been taken, so great hadbeen its loss of men, had not the Acamanes beenafraid of making the Athenians too powerful in thisquarter. Soon afterwards the Acamanes and made a treaty of peace and alliance withthe Ambraciotse for a hundred years '. ^From this interesting narrative which so wellcri rnc i<r(io\nt' — c- ^l^- ^^^ people of £Ii and Eva, oncc Toy iwiira awov^dc Kal a bronze tablet in the Britishivfiiia.'^lay iwoifiaarro ecarov Museum, which is probablyIris. — c. 114. two centuries earlier than theThe same term of 100 years treaty here mentioned by Thisfound in the treaty between chides.250 AMPHILOCHIA. [Clap.«illustrates the military system, the manners andthe politics of Greece, we learn that the mountainof which the abrupt termination at the headof the Ambrcunc gulf, in the great line of communicationbetween the northern and southernprovinces of Western Greece, causes the pass tobe one of the most important in the whole country,was named Idomene, or Immense in the plural,with reference to the two summits, both whichwere fortified posts, if not in the time of the Peloponnesianwar, at least at a subsequent date, as remainsof them still exist. Of that at the northernend there are considerable ruins, now called, as Ibefore remarked, Paleopyrgo. The £crj3oX^, throughwhich Demosthenes advanced on the eve of hissecond victory, seems clearly to have been thepass of Makrinoro itself, especially from the circumstanceof the routed Ambraciotae having endeavouredto swim to the Athenian ships. It followsthat the southern extremity of the mountainabove Kataforno was that which Demosthenesoccupied, that the northern at Menidhi was theposition in which the Ambraciotse were attackedand defeated, and that Paleopyrgo was the lesserIdomene. By taking possession of the southernsummit, Demosthenes obtained a post which bothprotected the advance and secured the retreat incaseof ill success, as well of the division which heledthrough Makrinoro as of that which marchedthrough the mountains to the right.The anchorage of the fleet of Demosthenesseems to have been in the bay of Kataforno.Arapi, or more probably a position on the ad-xxxVIII.] AMPHILOCHIA. 251jacent part of Mavrovuni, where some Hellenicremains are still said to exist, exactly at the distanceof 25 stades from Neokhori, which thehistorian gives as the interval between Olpse andArgos, I conceive to have been the site of Olim,of which name Arapi is a very natural corruption.The torrent which separated the combatants seemsto have been the northern of those which enterthe lagoon of Arapi, and Metropolis to have beena place on its right bank, at the southern extremityof Makrinoro. The hollow way whereEurylochus fell was probably a higher part of thesame ravine which separated the two armies. Aschanges have occurred on all the alluvial coastsof Greece since the time of the Peloponnesian war,in some instances by the filling up of harbours, asI conceive to have happened at ArgoSy in othersby the extension of the low coast, and the formationof lagoons within the beach, which is likelyto have been the case at the bay of Kataforno, thelagoon near Arapi may not have existed, or maynot have been of such extent as it now is, in thetime of the Peloponnesian war. Armyro I conceiveto have been the position of Cherub, wherethe Acarnanes were stationed to intercept theenemy ; for that place lying on the route fromthe southward into the AmphUochian plain, wasexactly suited to that purpose. But Eurylochussuspecting, or having intimation of their designwhen he arrived in the vale of LimncBa^ crossedMount ThyamvAy which is thus identified withSpartovuni, and descended into the plain ofVlikha, between Armyro and Neokhori.The same transactions in the fourth year of the2S2 AGRAIS. [chap.Peloponnesian war leave no doubt of the situationof the Agraisj or country of the Agrcsiy whichappears to have been separated from the districtof Lvmnma in Acarnama by Spartovuni, and fartherinland from the Medimiia by a continuationof the same ridge, thus comprehending the valeof the Kekhriniatza up to the ruined fortress of thatname, which was probably on the frontier of theAgrais and Statics. The Arm comprehendedtherefore the modem villages of Varetadha, Ferdinand,and Ariadha, and separating the Aperanti.from the Amphitochiy touched the southern bordersof the OreitcB, and the north-western frontierof JEtolia. At Xerokambo and cape they extended to the shore of the Gulf.As I learn from Captain Mitjo Kondoianni, whocommands 200 armatoil in Alto, and is thereforewell acquainted with that and the neighbouringdistricts, that the only Hellenic ruinswhich can be compared with those at Neokh6ri,Surovigli, and Prevents, are at Ferdinand, thiswas probably the position of the chief town of theAgrtei; if therefore the name Ariadha has beenformed from 'AypatSa, it is in a situation differentfrom that of the ancient city, in the same manneras Vlikha, if it be a corruption of Amphilochia.Captain Kondoianni describes another great ruin,called Syvisti, near the left bank of the Aches,about 4 hours above the monastery of Tetarna,in a part of 'Agrafa named Velaghora, but it seemsrather to be the remains of a town of the lowerEmpire, though possibly occupying the site of acity of the Eurytanes. The Achelmis, accordingto the same informant, often contains very littleXxxvii.] AGRAIS. 253water in summer above Tetarna, where it receivesa large subterraneous stream ; and a little lowerdown its principal tributary, the Megdhova, orMigdova, which is composed of three rivers. Ofthese, the western rises near the village 'Agrafa,from a range of heights, beyond which are situatedLeontito, Peril, and several other largeAgrafiote villages. The middle or main stream ofthe Megdhova, rises on the eastern side of MountKardva, flows first through an extensive valleynamed Nevropoli, and then traverses a more confinedcountry between the Dorian ridges borderingupon Thessaly, and a secondary parallel range,until it receives the Giuliano or river of Karpe-nisi ; after which, turning to the north-west, itjoins the Agrafiotiko; and at no great distancebelow that junction falls into the Aspro, at a spotto which the union of a third stream from themountain of Sj^ndekno to the westward gives thename of Tripotamo. Not far below Trip6tamo,the river is said to flow between precipices soclosely approaching, as to be crossed by a bridgeof ropes, whence the place is called Sta Kre-masts. If the Megdhova be the Campylus^ asI before suggested S the name may have beenderived from its reflex course, caused by thesoutherly projection of the mountain of Keras-svo, near the southern extremity of 'Agrafa.This remarkable peak is visible from Prevyza,a few degrees to the right of the still morestriking Kalana, which latter lies from SaintGeorge at Prevyza, exactly in a line with thetwo capes forming the entrance from the gulf ofVol. I. p. 156.254 EPiRus. [chap.Prevyza, into that of Artaa. Vienna, or PameUh-licumy opposite to Vlokho, is also visible from thesame station, as well as the northern summit ofthe same great ridge near Arakhova, in Suvalako,in the district of Karpenisi, the latter subtending15''^ with the centre of Kalana and the two capes,the former 28"*.November 9. — From Prevyza to Luro in 3^hours, the loaded horses in 5 hours. The roadpasses through the ruins of Nicopolis, and overthe height of Mikhalltzi into the plain of Lamari,which has the same rich kind of soil as that ofPrevyza, but is overgrown with small oaks andbrambles, and supplies only pasture to the Vezir'sflocks. Near Prevyza the hawthorn was in blossom,and there were lambs of a month old. Aswe advance towards the interior the season is lessforward. The castle of Luro, built only a fewyears ago, is already falling to ruin, having beenconstructed like the dwelling houses "of Epirusof loose stones and mud interposed between strataof wood. In the opening of the vale above Luro,Suli presents itself to .view in a very imposingmanner. The vale and the slopes of the adjacentmountains, as far up as Suli and Tervitziana, arecovered with oaks. These are for the most partsmall and of the velani kind ; towards the river ofSt. George are some of larger girth.In the afternoon I proceed in 3 hours to Menelaus,or Mamutjaus. At Kanza we leave the passwhich leads into the vale of Lelovo to the left,traverse soon afterwards a marsh where the watercomes up to the horses' knees, and arrive at awooden bridge across the river of St. George,XXXVIII.] Epirus. Stromwhence a winding muddy path leads througha plain of the most fertile soil, but producing onlya small quantity of maize, to Ribs. This is asmall village on the left bank of the river ofSt. George, opposite to the ruins called Rogus,which occupy an extremity of the hills. The remainsare those of a fortified town of the Byzantineempire, built upon Hellenic foundations, and composedin part of materials of ancient times. Althoughthe place has probably for ages been ruinedand deserted, the name still gives title to a suffraganbishop of the metropolitan See of Artaa. Itis found among the bishoprics of the metropolis ofNaupactus, in the tenth century ^, when Artaa wasnot yet an episcopal See, and from Cantacuzenus itappears to have been one of the chief towns or fortressesof Epirus in the fourteenth century '. TheHellenic remains seem from Polybius to have belongedto a town named Charadra, for he relatesthat Philip passed by Charades in his marchfrom Embraces to the strait of Actium that is tosay, from Fidho-kastro in the marshes of Artaa toPrevyza, from which line the marshes towards thesea would have caused a divergence to the northward.When Fulvius the Roman consul was preparingto besiege Ambracia, in the year b.c. 189,some j£tolian deputies, who had been interceptedNot. Epiflcop. Grffic. p. of any but the metropolitan894. Paris. It may have been Sees of Greece,a century older, as we know ' Cantacuz. 1. 2, c. 34, etthe bishopric of loannina to seq.have been, the first catalogue ' 4yc irapa XapdSpay, —in the Notitiae of the time of Polyb. 1. 4, c. 63.Leo, not containing the names266 EPiRUS. [chap.by the Epirotes on their way to Rome, were sentto Charadra as prisoners, and from thence transferredby the Epirotes to Buchsetium ^ The nameoccurs also in a fragment of Ennius ', which seemsto refer to the good quality of a particular kind ofshell-fish in the adjoining river or marshes. Thetown evidently took its name from the river whichforming a continued cataract from one of its chiefsources at St. George to the plain of Lelovo, wellmerited the appellation of Charadra. This stream,after emerging from the gorge between Strivinaand Rogus, follows the foot of the woody heightsto Rogus, and then turns towards Luro, receivingthat river and joining the gulf not above two orthree miles to the northward of the mazoma ofNicopolis. The marshes which intersect the plainsbelow Lamari and Luro, and around Rogus, aidedby the wild vegetation which surround them,render the maritime Molossis very unhealthy insummer, and scarcely any persons then remain inthe villages except those engaged in the harvests.Nov. 10. — The road from Mamutjaus toloannina takes the direction of Artaa, but windsvery much in order to avoid the marshes, whichseem to be chiefly formed by the river of Strivinaand by sources between that place and Rogus,added to those of Khanopulo. In the latter marshthere are two streams, one of which joins the St.George, the other finds its way separately to thesea. There is no plain in Turkey where drainagewould be attended with greater profit. Having» Polyb. 1. 22. c. 9.MytilcnaD est pecten Charadrumque apud Ambraciai.Ap. Apuleius Pol. p. 468.XXXVIIl.] EPIRUS. 257iarrived in two hours at Khalikiadhes, which isabout one hour west of Marat, the suburb of Artaa,we join, in another half hour, the paved derwent,at a point one hour distant from Artaa, and proceedingfrom thence by the beylik, or high road,through Pendipigadhia, reach lodnnina, at the endof twelve hours and twenty minutes from Mamut-jas, having halted one hour and twenty minuteson the road. This route, the only one practicableat all seasons from the coast to the plain of loan-nina,is now paved in all the difficult places, andmay be travelled in a four-wheeled carriage.VOL. IV.CHAPTER XXXIX.EPIRUS. Thes ALI A .From loannina to MetzovOi Stagus, and Tnkkala — Sub-divisionsof Trikkala district — 'Agrafa, its topography, population,and produce — Dolopia^ Athamania^ Tympkceit ^ihiceSfTalares, — River Ian — Oxyneia — College of Devises at Tnk-kala — Gardhiki, Perineum — Tzighioti — Ferry of the PeneusPhacium — ^Alifaka — Larissa — Tumavo — River TUaresiusCities of PelasgiotU — Dhamasi — Dheminikoi Crevice — Inscriptions— Mologhusta — Mallcea^ ETttwrn^ city of the Pet"rhcebif Oloosson — Vlakho-ianni — Leftherokhori — Ericiniutn —Gritziano, Pharcadon — Bridge of Tzighioti — ^Vlokho, PehresUeor Asterntm^-RiveiB EnipetUt Apidanut — Petrinoi PhyllisMount Mavrovuni — Orfana — F^rsala.Nov. 19. — From loannina to the three Khans'seven hours. From October the 20th to this daythe weather has been equally divided between fairand showery. At Pr^vyza there was a heavy rainfor five days, with very little intermission , succeededby a north-east wind for seven days, withan atmosphere perfectly serene. For the last fourdays there has been rain, with a south-west wind.This day, the wind having moved more directlywestward, has brought only light showers. MountsKakardhista and Tzumerka were permanentlytipped with snow on the first of this month.On the 10th, Kahardhlsta, the ridge of M^tzovo,CHAP. XXXIX.] Epirus. 259and the summits of Zagori, were entirely coveredwith snow, the first more extensively than theothers, while Nemertzika and Ol^^tzika had notany. AH the summits around Kalarj^tes hadbeen sprinkled two or three times during therains of October; but the snow had all disappeared,even from Kahardhlsta, on the 20th ofOctober.Our route, although it is the high road to Constantinople,and the only frequented communicationbetween Epirus and Thessaly, is in the mostneglected condition. The late autumnal rainshave left it only just passable. The ascent anddescent of the hill of Dhrysko, which divides theplain of loannina from the valley of the ArachthtiSyis in the worst possible state. After a halt at thekhan of Dhrysko, we descend from thence to theZagori branch of the Artaa, cross it by the bridgerife Ku/oac, follow up the bed of the Metzovo branchfor near an hour; and then, after passing for ashort distance along the right bank, cross to theopposite side by a bridge of one arch, follow theheights on that side, again descend into the bed,and then follow the right bank to the ThreeKhans.Nov. 20. — From Tria Khania to Metzovo twohours and a quarter. We continue to follow theriver along its bed, or over the heights on the leftbank, as far as the bridge, which is a little belowthe junction of the tributary descending from themountain of Khaliki ; then quit the river, andascend to Prosllion, or the northern Makhala ofMetzovo, where I am lodged in the house of Kyrs2260 * EPiRus. [chap.S. N., a merchant who usually resides at loanninareceive visits from the primates, the stipendiaryphysician, who is a Neapolitan ; the bolu-bashia Tepeleniote, and Captain Dehli-Ianni a nativeof Metzovo, chief of the armatoli who defend thepass, and the terror of the robbers.The fields of the Muscovites producing only asmall quantity of corn, they are now paying tenparas an oke for barley at Grevena or Trikkala,chiefly for the use of the horses of travellers.Though complaining of the Vezir*s extortions, theyadmit that he is not quite forgetful of the expencesto which their situation in this great derwent rendersthem liable ; and, like most of his subjects,they allow him the merit of defending them frominferior agents and highway robbers, though heseldom suffers any good opportunity to pass ofplundering them himself: for instance, my hostwas three months in prison this year, under thepretext of being concerned in a correspondencewith the Russians, and was obliged to pay theVezir 1000 sequins to obtain his liberty ; norwould it have been effected at this price withoutthe intercession of Omer Bey Vrioni, whose assistancewas wanted by Alj^ against Berat.The affair of Berat has already cost His Highnessso much that he is collecting money from all quarters.A tatar overtook us to-day, going to collect80 purses from fifteen villages of Aspropotamo ;only in three or four of which, as Captain I4nniinforms me, are there any inhabitants left, the resthaving fled from the robbers into the plain ofTrikkala. The most conspicuous building inXXXIX.] Thessaly. 261Anilio, the quarter of Metzovo on the opposite sideof the ravine, is a house which has been latelybuilt by Mukhtar Pasha for a favourite youth ofthat place.Nov. 21 • — A southerly gale, succeeding a singleserene day, set in last midnight with great violence,and continues all this day, ivith torrents ofrain.Nov. 22. — ^^The sou^^Therly wind of yesterday hadmelted the snow upon the ridge, but last night itfell again and covered all the woods on the summit; but by no means to such a degree as when Icrossed the Zygos a week earlier, in the year 1805,which was noted for the early severity of the weather.During the last two years there has been nopermanent snow before January. Our passage todayis not difficult ; especially as I have the assistanceof ten or twelve khamalidhes, or porters ofMetzovo, who were directed by the Vezir's commandantto accompany me, together with nine ofhis palikaria. We arrive at the khan of Malakdssiin three hours and a half. A very useful khanhas been established since my last visit, just underthe eastern side of the summit. Here the Muscovitesare responsible for having canals constantlyin attendance.Nov. 23. — A fall of snow during the night rendersthe road extremely bad ; and, together withthe effect of the late rains in swelling the Salam-via,and obliging us to follow the acres on theleft bank, lengthens the time to Kalabaka an hourand a half. In descending the heights to the riverof Kratzova or Miritza, which we cross by a high262 Thessaly. [CHAP.bridge, the view opens of the entrance into Thessalybetween the superb rocks of the M eteora onthe norths and the woody mountain opposite to themon the south, together with a part of the plains ofUpper Thessaly not far from Trikkala ; with theexception of this part of the landscape the wholeis now covered with snow. The river of Kratzovain the lower part of its course flows through athick wood of large planes. Farther up, its valleyis well cultivated, and on the heights still farther,at the distance of six or eight miles to our left, isseen the large village of Miritza. On the northernside of this valley the heights are covered withoaks, which extend also over the mountains, inclosingthe vale of the Salamvria, but where theforest is not so thick, the trees being in generalintermixed with vineyards around several villages :few of the oaks are of any considerable size.Nov. 24. — Kalabaka has suffered extremely oflate from the vexations of the last hodja-bashilanaki, who built a superb house with the produceof his plunder, and ended his days in the prison atloannina. But it is injured more permanently bythe expence of konaks, to which it is continuallysubject, in consequence of its lying at the exit ofthe most frequented pass in Greece.The master of the house in which I lodge, whoamong his other misfortunes has left an eye withthe thieves, had the honour not long since ofhaving a Bey with a party of Albanians quarteredupon him for ten or twelve days : they burnt hisfurniture and his silk frames, and finished by borrowinga valuable mule, which he saw no more.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 263To increase the misery of Kalabaka, the crop ofsilk has been bad this year, and the spinners havebeen obliged to purchase it at 30 piastres the oke,instead of 20, the usual price. The bishop rijvSrayuiv, who being an loannite * is more polishedthan the generality of callers, confirms the informationwhich I received on my former visit asto the existence of some vestiges of a Hellenic cityat the distance of two or three miles from Kala-bake,on the opposite side of the river, in thedirection of the Portes. A detached conicalheight at the foot of the mountain, sends forth alow ridge reaching to the river. Here someancient sepulchres have been observed, and thereare some remains of Hellenic walls on the heightitself. The village Niklitzi stands on the slope,but the ancient site is known by the name ofSkumbos, which might be supposed a corruptionof oTovq Fo^^ovc, and a proof of its being the positionof Gomphi; but I cannot; obtain any confirmationof this conjecture, as the Greeks follow Miletusin believing that Gomphi occupied the siteof Stagiis — an erroneous opinion, the inscriptionwhich exists here in honour of Severus and Caracallaleaving no reasonable doubt of Stagus beingthe position of j3Sginium *. It is scarcely possiblethat Gomphi, which stood near the entrance of thepasses leading by the shortest and easiest routethrough Athamania to Amhrdda^ could have beenso far to the northward as the hill of Niklitzi,which, like ^giniumj is at the entrance of the1 »Ivavvirri^. ' See Vol. I. p. 421.264 Thessaly. [CHAP.pass leading into the DodoruBa ; the main communicationbetween Upper Thessaly and the inlandparts of JEpmis^ and the most important ofall the defiles of Northern Greece. From Stagesor Kalabaka to Trikkala is a ride of threehours and twenty minutes. At 1.30 from StagusVoivoda is on the left, and an hour farther Mertzi :the brook Kumerki flows through the former andanother which rises at Aghia Mon through thelatter. Towards Stagus the soil is sandy, nearTrikkala it is a soft rich mould, now in a stateof mud.Nov. 26.— The Liva of Trikkala, in TurkishTirhala, one of the divisions of the Eyalet orprovince of Rumili, comprehends all ancient Thessaly,together with the surrounding mountains ;it is bounded northward by the Lives of Selanikand Okhri, and southward by those of Enebekhtand 'Egribos. For the last 22 years it has beengoverned by Alj^, who very soon added to it thepashalik of loannina, and notwithstanding thegreat increase of his power since that time, isstill officially no more than governor-general ofloannina and Trikkala, as he lately signed himselfin a letter addressed to the King of England \The kaza or jurisdiction of Trikkala is dividedin Alj^'s system of government into eight solis,containing altogether 180 villages, the police ofeach koli being under the direction of a captainof armatoli. The solis are, — 1. Poliana, or theplain around Trikkala, where among many othersXXXIX,] Thessaly. 265is a village of that name ; 2. Zarko, in which areZarko of 400 families, Tzighioti of 150, Grlsanoof 60 ; 3. Ardhami, or Ardham, containing Ista*gus, Turcica Malabar, which name is very commonlyused also by the Greeks though as inmany others adopted from Turks and Albanians,they add a vowel at the end. Ardhdmi is a villagestanding in the midst of the heights to thenorth of Trikkala. Voivoda, and Platina, a fewmiles to the northward of Voivoda, in a valleybranching from thence, are the two other principalvillages in Ardham. 4. Klinovo extendsto the sources of the Achelous at Urania andKhaliki, and contains Klinovo, Kastania, and Vennin the situations before described ^ on thetributaries of the Peneius. These five villageshave between two and three hundred houses each.This koli borders westward on the Nakhe of ,in the kaza of loannina. 5. In the koliof Porta are Kardhiki on the river Aspro, on theconfines of Tzum^rka, in the kaza of Artaa ; Dhesi,eastward of Kardhiki ; Pera, still farther eastward,in the midst of the fir forests of Mount AproposTina, between Pera and Nato-Porta.These are villages of from 80 to 150 families.Klinovo and Porta form the district called Aspro-potato. 6. Rico, so called as being situated atthe foot of the mountain of Kotziaka, containsLepenitza and Megarkhi. 7. Kratzova, or Krat-ziova; in this koli are Miritza, the position ofwhich has already been mentioned, and higher upSee Vol. I. p. 417.266 Thessaly. [CHAP.the river, Bozovo, near which there are ancientruins. Velimisti is two hours eastward of MiHtza,and midway between Kalabaka and Grevena, fivehours from each. At Velimisti the road fromTrikkala to Prevent, which ascends the vale ofVoivoda, falls in with that from Kalabaka to Grre-vena. 8. Khassia, as a koli, now contains onlysix small villages : Dissipate, which has 300houses, on the borders of the Macedonian plains,five hours from Grevena, as many from Servia,and ten from Trikkala, once belonged to Khassia,but now pays its contributions at Zituni. Zimi-atza in like manner, which is situated also on thenorthern side of the mountain of Khassia, on thisside of Dissipate, now belongs to Larissa. Cassia,which, as well as Aspropotamo, is an old Greekchorographical division, formerly comprised, and isstill in common parlance applied to, all the mountainousregion which extends from the Tricklingplains to the confines of Larissa, Dheminiko, Servia,and Grevena.'Agrafa (ra "Aypa^a) is another division of thecountry which existed under the Greek empire.It contains the mountains to the southward of Trik-kala, and though considered as a part of the liveof Tirhala, has enjoyed particular privileges datingperhaps from a remote period in the Byzantineempire, when the villages were " not writtendoom" in the publicans' books, and the inhabitantsof the district accounted in a body for theirtaxes. To judge from the names of places, andfrom the absence of every language but the Greek,'Agrafa had preserved itself before the TurkishXXXIX.] Thessaly. 267conquest from admixture with Bulgarians andWallachiansns in a greater degree than most otherparts of Greece. Fifteen years ago it still enjoyedthe self-government which it obtained by capitulationwith Mahomet 11. when he had conqueredAlbania ; the imperial xpuaojSovXov which hegranted to the Agrafiotes on that occasion theyassert to be still in existence in the Fan&ri at Constantinople.Every year there were chosen byballot an archon and five or six assessors, forminga council which had the power of inflicting capitalpunishment. A Christian captain with 200 menand a Mahometan Albanian with 300, kept thepolice of the district, and ensured the safety of theroads, under the direction of the archons.Of late years various circumstances have injuredthe republic, and have had the effect of diminishingin some degree its population. Internal dissensions,both in individual and between neighbouringvillages, have been a leading cause, towhich may be added the natural advantages ofthe northern or Thessalian side of 'Agrafa overthe southern or JEtolian^ giving nse to an assumptionof superiority by the former portion of thepeople, and sometimes to positive ill-usage on theirpart towards the latter. Meantime the pursuitof Greek and Albanian robbers has given Aljras Fervently a pretext for entering the countrywith his troops ; while steadily pursuing his objectof permanently establishing his own Albanians asguardians of the police of the district, in the roomof the armatoli employed by the Agrafiotes, he hasencroached on their privileges, fomented their jeanTIIESSALIA. [chap.houses, and raised contributions upon them. Oneof his first acts was to obtain possession of the personof Tjolak Ogle of Rendhina, whom he kept inprison until he bad extorted 80 purses from him.He then gave him permission to return home ; butas many of the dismissed armatoli had becomerobbers themselves, and thrown the country aroundRendhlna into a state of insecurity, the proestosdeclined the favour, and intreated permission toreside at loannina, preferring, as he told His Highness,to be cut off by the sword of a Vezir, to beingshot by a K\ifriKov iraXaiorov^cici (the rusty musketof a robber). In general it may be remarked thatcompliments and asseverations to His Highness,turn chiefly upon hanging, drowning in the lake,shooting, or beheading.'Agrafa may be described as comprehending themountains bordering on Thessaly which connectPindus with Othrys as well as with Meta ; for thetwo latter ranges, though separated from one anothertowards the sea by the vale of the Spermare united inland, Mount Veluti orTymphrestus forming the common link of connexion.In the direction of west and south,'Agrafa extends to the AchelouSj and comprehendsthe valleys and inclosing ridges of the tributariesof that river. To the northward it is separatedfrom Aspropotamo by the river of Portes, andtouches on the Upper Thessalian plain from thePortes or Gates of Trikkala', where that riverissues into the plain as far as the borders ofXXXIX.] Thessaly. 269Dhomoko ; to the southwest of which lannitzu,the easternmost village in 'Agrafa, borders uponthe Turkish kaza of Badradjik, from whence theboundary of 'Agrafa following a westerly directiontouches the kazas of Karpenlsi and Vrakhori,terminating to the Sew. at the junction of theAspro with its great eastern branch ; from thencethe boundary follows the Achelcms upwards, confiningupon the Artaa Kazasi until it arrives in thelatitude of Portes at about twelve miles above thebridge of St. Cessation, commonly called that ofK6rako or Koraki \ This bridge, which is in theroute from Tnkkala to Artaa, forms the only communicationbetween the two banks of the Apronthat part of the country when the river isswollen. It was built at the expence of the monasteryof Fusion in Kotziaka. The length of'Agrafa from S.E. to N.W. is about fifty Englishmiles direct, the breadth about thirty-five.'Agrafa contains 85 villages and 7685 houses,in which, fifteen years ago, there were more than50,000 inhabitants, but their number is now supposedto be somewhat reduced. There are fifteenlarge and many smaller monasteries, and the remainsof about eighteen Hellenic towns or fortresses.The chief town, formerly the residence ofthe archon and council is Rendhina ^, which contains450 houses : it is situated three or four hoursto the westward of lannitzu', and consequently,TO ye^vpi Tov Kopdvov, or * 'PcvJ^va.KopaKcov. * *lavyiT(ov.270 THfiBSALIA. [chap.like many other capitals, is very far from beingin a central situation. Next in importance to itare Petiilu^ and Megili Kastanid*. The formerstands near the sources of a branch of the Aspro,which joins that river above the bridge of Koraki,being collected from the valleys on the southernand western sides of Mount Karava, which is thehighest point of the range, bordering on Thessaly,and bears S.S.W. from Trikkala. Kastanid is onthe opposite side of the same ridge, in a loftysituation commanding a view of the Thessalianplains, at the foot of a peak called Itamo, probablyan ancient name. The other principal towns of'Agrafa are Fund', situated westward of Rend-ulnaon a tributary of the Megdhova or easternbranch of the Aspro ; Blazdhu ^ and Fandri ' onthe edge of the plain of Trikkala ; the latter aboutten miles south of that town. On the Italianside of 'Agrafa, where the villages are generallysmaller and poorer than on the Tliessalian^ franchise® and the neighbouring Kerassovo ^ are thelargest.The chief monasteries are : 1 . Tet4rna *, fourhours to the W. of Franghlsta, at the south westernextremity of 'Agrafa. Near it the river Apronsjoined by a great subterraneous stream calledMardhaka^. 2. Stavropighi ^^ commonly calledUcrp/Xov. • ♦payc/ffra.McyaXif Yiaaravui* ^ Kepdaaolio.^ovpvct. * Terdpya.MirXaf&w. ' Map^aca.^ampc. '* Zravpowfiyioy.XXXIX.] THBSSALIA. 271the monastery of Rendhlna, between Rendhinaand lannitzu. 3. Mukha\ above Kastania. 4.Koroni^, above Blazdhu, noted for its antiquityand for some paintings with which this monasterywas decorated by an imperial interpreter namedCuckold. 5. Petra, near Katafyghi ^ a large villagein the way from Fan&ri to Kastanid.Ecclesiastically 'Agrafa is divided among severalbishoprics. That of Thaumacus^ comprehendsRendhina and all the eastern extremity of 'Agrafa,with the exception of lannitzii, which is under themetropolitan of Cleopatra* . Farther to the N.W.on the northern side of Mount Vulgar are severalvillages, among which areThrapslmi', Lakresi^, andApidhia \ which are peculiars of the metropolitanof Clarissa. All the remainder of the northern sideof 'Agrafa is in the archbishopric of Fan&ri "• Aportion of the western frontier confining on Radho-vizdhi of Artaa forms a part of the bishopric ofRatio vizdhi ^® ; all the remainder of ^Agrafa, as wellas Karpenisi) is under the bishop of Litza and'Agrafa ", who, as well as the bishops of Thauma-cus and of Radhovizdhi, is a suffragan of the• 4Movxa. ^^ AfirCaQ Kol* Ay pti^y. ThisKop^nf. see is named together with .hovizdhi, Thaumacus, Stage,OavfiaKov, Tiiccai and several others ofN^wv IlarpJy. Thessaly, among the suffragansOpa}j/l/jLfi* of Thessaly or Larissa in a casAoucpeVi. algae of the tenth century,Arni^d, but many of them were proba-■ •^avapiov dpxuwitrKowla, ably more ancient.272 Thessaly. [CHAP.metropolitan of Larissa. 'Agrafa is the name ofa small village in a very rugged and secludedposition to the south of Peril.Of the Palea castra the greatest is said to bethat already mentioned at Syvlsti\ Higher upthe river, on the same side, are other Hellenicremains at Little Vraniana^, and at Liaskovo*,which is not far southward of the bridge Koraku.One of the most remarkable ruins is said to be atKnisovo^, a small village in the country northwardof the same bridge, and not far from Bokovitza ^These I suspect to be the ruins of Argithea^ thecapital oiAthamania. In the eastern part of 'Agrafa,the chief remains of antiquity are reported to be atRendhinaandKaitza: and those on the northern side,at or near Smokovo, Katafyghl and St. Geoi^e; ofthese, the Paleokastro at Sm6kovo is said to bethelargest. No very confident opinion, however,as to the relative importance of the ancient placescan be formed from this information, as the wallsof a small fortress in good preservation, sometimesattract more notice than mere vestiges of an extensivecity.Although 'Agrafa consists of mountainsand narrow rocky valleys, the chief exceptionsbeing the plain called Nevropoli, nearthe sources of the eastern branch of the As-pro,and the eastern declivities of the mountBpai^mva. * MiroKolHr(a.AtdffKofio,XXXIX.] Thessaly. 273pains to the southward of Megali Kastania, industry,security, and in some parts a fertile soil,had enabled the Agrafiotes to export several kindsof agricultural produce to the rich but desolate districtsaround them. The following are stated tohave been the exports : — 15,000 fortunate of wine,of 100 okes the fortoma ; 100,000 okes of butter,200,000 of cheese, 200,000 of wool, 4000 of silk,2000 of honey, 40,000 yijgoir/oojSara, or head ofsheep and goats ; 2000 of oxen and cows. Theprices at present are, butter one yp6<n or piastrethe oke ; cheese 15 paras ; honey 20 paras ; wax5 piastres ; wine 8 piastres the fortoma ; a sheep8 piastres ; a goat 5 piastres ; a cow 30 piastres ;an ox for labour 30 piastres ; wheat six paras theoke ; a hen 15 paras ; a chicken 10 paras. Thecorn produced in 'Agrafa is seldom sufficient forits consumption, but requires the addition of abouta sixth.The villages which are least favoured in respectof soil have resources in the manufacture of variousarticles of cotton and wool, such as coarse cloths,shawls for the head and girdle, and towels. It isreckoned that one-third of the inhabitants of'Agrafa gain a livelihood by weaving. There arealso many workers in gold and silver; and atPlatina is a fabric of sword-blades, gun-barrels,and locks of pistols, which last are sold at 15piastres each. A large proportion of the Agrafiotes,like the other mountaineers of Greece, gaina livelihood abroad as shopkeepers or artisans, oras carriers in the neighbouring districts. Themountains to the northward and eastward are ofVOL. IV. T274 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.dark-coloured rock, and covered with woods ofpine and oak : in the opposite direction the rocksare white, bare, and full of caverns, in some ofwhich are monasteries and remains of hermitages,particularly a convent named Stand, and anothernear Karltza. The southern and western streamsproduce trout in great number ; in those flowingtowards Thessaly the most esteemed fish is calledbrian \ There is only one lake, that of Dereli,which abounds in fish of various kinds.The people of 'Agrafa seem to be no betteracquainted with the ancient geography of theircountry than the learned in other parts of Greece.As far as their belief that the northern side of'Agrafa was anciently occupied by Hessians andDobpeSf one may agree with them ; for the citiesnear the edge of the plain probably formed a partof the jcoivov OciraaXciiv, or Thessalian community ' ;and as the Dolopes confined upon Pythias theyseem clearly to have been the inhabitants of themountains adjacent to the southern extremity ofthe Upper Thessaly plain, which extend as far asthe confines of the jEnianes, Grapes, and JEtolians.But with regard to the ancient geography of thecountry to the southward of their great ridge, theGranites seem to be in a deplorable state ofdarkness. They believe the branch of the Ache-lauswhich rises in a mountain called ZyghiastdNere, near Rendhina, to be the Peneius ; that thecountry which is traversed by this and the other^ fjLTrptidyuThe greater portion of the a date subsequent to Alexanderancient money of Thessaly, of the Great, was thus inscribed.XXXIX.] ATHAMANXA. 275eastern branches of the Achelcms was inhabited bythe Perrhaibi ; that the Mardhaka at Tetarna wasthe Titaresius flowing into the Peneus as Homerdescribes; and that this source has its origin inthe lake of loinnina, which they suppose to havebeen the Styx of Homer. To make the confusionmore complete, they acknowledge the Aspro aboveTetarna to be the Aches. In some of theseopinions they seem to have been misled by thename Kj^fu \ which is still attached to a ruinedvillage and paleokastro in or near the plain ofNevropoli,. and which by the learned of 'Agrafa issupposed to indicate the Cyprus of Guneus, leaderof die Perrhsebi, who dwelt *on the banks of theTitaresius *.As the Dolopes we a Thessalian people, andnever connected with ^tolia but by occasionalalliances ', it is highly probable that the crest ofthe ridge of 'Agrafa formed the ordinary boundarybetween j^toBa and Thessaly. In that case MountKarava was the extreme northern point of JEtolia :to the westward of a line drawn from thence toMount Kotziaka, the country, as far as theTzumerka chains composed Athanasian correspondingto the modem Aspropotamo, with theexception of its northern extremity, which was occupiedby a portion of the TympfuBiy and by a fewPerrhxebi about Chalcis and the sources of theAches. .The extent of Tymphxea may be inferredfrom the facts, that the Arajchihus had its^ Kv^v. ' Strabo, p. 434. 437. 450.■ II. B. V. 748. Liy. 1. 33, c. 34 ; 1. 38, c. 3.t2276 Thessaly. [CIIAP.origin in Mount Tyniphe^ and that JEginimn was atown of the Tymphcei ^ ; whence it appears that theTyniphcBi possessed the country from Metzovo toKalabaka, and all the great valley of the Salamvriaon the route from the one town to the other:Mount Temple would seem also from the sametestimony to have comprehended all the ridgeswhich separate the sources of the two rivers, includingthe Zygos of Metzovo, which I suppose,as before stated, to have borne the specific nameof Lacus. One of the towns of the Tympaniwas named Trample, and it was probably theircapital, as Diodorus, speaking of the same place,names it Tymphsea. It stood in a lofty position,and was noted for being the place where Herculesson of Alexander the Great, was poisoned atsupper by Polysperchon the Tymphaean*. AsPolysperchon styled himself king of the ethics,it may be presumed that the ^thices and Tympaniwere conterminous ; and the same inferencemay be drawn from Strabo, from whom it wouldfurther appear that iEthicia in general was nearerto the Thessalian plain than Tymphsea, the^thices, like the Athamanes, having been originallyan Epirotic tribe, but afterwards ascribedStrabo, p. 325. 327."O r' aiirv valtav Tpafiwva^ iiidXtorf*Ey ^ iron aZdtQ 'HparX$ ^Ivti ipdx^rTvn^tCioQ iy Oolvaiinyf AldUttr wpofiOQ,Lycoph. v. 800.Diodor. 1. 20, c. 28. — Plutarch. Lumen. et Tzetzes in Lycophr.ubi sup.^-Pausan. Boeot. c. 7.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 277to Thessaly, whereas the Tyniphaei always continuedto be Epirotic K Stephens, on the authorityof MarsyaSy places the ^thices between theAthamanes and Tymphsei, which, taking theAthamanes to have reached to the plain of Trik-kala at Portes, and the TymphcBi at Kalabaka,seems to place the Ethics exactly in the districtof Kotziaka, including Klinovo, Kastania, and theadjoining ridges, as far as the confines of Atha-mania. It is not surprising that the inhabitantsof such rugged mountains should have had thereputation of being barbarous and addicted toplunder ^. In fact, though the natives of Klinovoare not to be thus described, there is no countrymore frequently the resort of robbers than Kotziakaand the adjacent heights. One of the passages ofStrabo, from which the position of j£thicia is deducible,supports the belief that there was a townof that name bordering both upon ingenium andupon Tricca ' ; whence it is probable that theruins at Niklitzi are those of the city of the^thices, which may perhaps have borne likewisesome other name, like Trample of the TympJun.The latter city I am inclined to place in the plainof Politzia, near M^tzovo, this being the largest^ Strabo, p. 326 ,327, 434. koX (idpPapoy kqi Xritnuas cxi-ky QerraXiif S* ^kovv iv r^ eiKwc xpoerKeifieyov, — Stephan.llivB^ op£i. Mofiavac ^e fuaov in Alicia,T^Q Tv/i^aiac Koi *AOafiavlac ' Aiyiviov ^i Tv^^iwrKiladai il>ri<n rey ^upay, T6 ofiopoy AiOiKiq, Kal TplKKjf,^-*Be tdyoQ Iwuucws irapaftbXoy re, Strabo, p. 327*278 Thessaly. [CIIAP.level in the mountainous district, which ancientlyformed the Tymphsea. The town may have stoodat M^tzovo, or on the same site as the Roman orDacia settlement indicated by the modern nameImperatoriaia. Politzia, the appellation of theplain, may be derived perhaps from ii ironic, ascontaining the capital and only considerable cityof the TymphcAy except ^giniwrn.Another tribe, once Epirotic but subsequentlyThessalian, was the Talares, whom Strabo describesas an apostasy of the Talares-, who dweltnear Mount Tomarus, and as inhabiting the Pindusitself. Hence they seem to have been fartherremoved from the Trikkaline plain than theJEthiceSj having occupied perhaps the ridges onthe north-eastern side of the great TympJuBanvalley, or those now forming the koli of Kratziova, inwhich case it is probable that the unnamed tribeon the Thessalian side of Pindus, who disputedwith the Tymphsei concerning the sources of thePeneius, were the Talares ^ Possibly the stalactiteslithos ^ may have been the fountain which theTalares maintained to have been the real sourceof the Peneius. The best part of the territory ofthe Talares (thus placed) was the valley of theriver of Miritza, or great branch of the Peneuswhich joins it a little above the Meteora. ThisStrabo, p. 434. aft^^fitirovin Tvfi^loi sal olIt' ari ^ HMf,— vwo rp UM^ ecrraXo/.<-6tr»-Strabo, p. 327- bo, p. 327.Kolairod Urivnov wtiyai' thy * See Vol. I. p. 415.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 279Stream there can be little difficulty in identifyingwith the lory which, according to Strabo, was thechief tributary of the Peneius, and joined it nearingenium. And hence Oosyneia, a town situatedon the Ian \ perhaps the capital of the Talares,occupied probably the valley of M iritza. .Nov. 26. — Many of the Turkish houses inTHkkala are now in ruins, or empty : some arelet entirely to Greeks, and of many others theharems only are inhabited by the Turkish masters,the other apartments being let to Christians, whocome here in the winter from the mountain villages,some with their flocks, others to avoid therigour of the winter, and others in every season toobtain a livelihood as artisans or labourers. Lodgingsof this kind are designated at loannina by themodest appellation of fMvSpaiQ or folds ; here theyare called avXaic or halls. So numerous are thetemporary lodgers in Trikkala, that although thehouses originally Greek are not more than 200,while the Turkish are 1000, the Greek populationis greater than the Turkish. There are about 50families of Jews. In the Trikkaline plain, all theinhabitants are Greeks, with the exception of theSpahis and Subashls ; but there has lately been aconsiderable emigration of Greeks to the bettergoverned districts of Serres, Smyrna, and Per-gaius. The plain is still, however, in a tolerablestate of cultivation, producing wheat, barley, maize,^ Kol irAic *0£vveca Tapa tov koX Aiyiyioy Ka "Evpunroc Koilova •Kora^bv • . • . • at tov *'Iovoc C'C tov IIi|vct^i'irXiialov li Ka ai ^AXKontval avfifioXai, — Strabo, p. 327.280 Thessaly. [cHAP.and pulse, of excellent quality. But even the fertileThessaly is subject to bad harvests, as occurred inthe present year, in consequence of a succession offrost and snow too soon after the seed had beencommitted to the ground in the autumn. Northerlywinds bring with them the heaviest rain orsnow ; with southerly winds, fogs and mists prevail,and these, which continue through a great part ofthe winter, seem to constitute the weather mostadapted to fertilize the light rich mould of theThessalian plains. Hay is brought into the townfor the summer food of cattle. Ten to one isthe ordinary produce of wheat, which is a veryhard and durable grain, with a long beard and astrong straw of great length. Spring com is herecalled rimini, not dhiminio, as in most otherplaces : it will not bear the heat of the sun in theplains, and grows only in the mountains. Thecotton is finer than that of Serres ; they spin, dye,and weave it in the town, but the manufacture ischiefly confined to the kind of kerchiefs used for encirclingthe head and girdle. The water of Tjmavois reckoned the best for the dyeing of cottons, thatof Trikkala for woollens and silks ; but this placeis more noted for its red goats-skin leather, whichis in request in all parts of Greece for slippers andboots. The dye is a secret, but two of the ingredientsare known to be cochineal and blood fromthe butcheries.The Hodja-bashi gives me the following rate ofthe prices of provisions at the present day, and asheremembers them forty years ago : —XXXIX.] Thessaly. 281PARAS.Beef 15 parts the oke : — forty years ago 2Mutton 20 do. do. . 4Wheat, weighing 26 okesthe tagari, 7 piastres, do. . . . 20Rokka or maize 5 do. do. . . . iOandnot much in use.Barley 3^ do. 10Beef is here a common article of provision, evenamong the Turks, hut it is killed only by Greeksor Jews, who generally make use of leanoxen unfit for work. At loannina and Salonlkithe Greeks have a prejudice against beef, andnone but Jews kill the oxen. The largest Greekhouses in Trikkala pay 600 piastres a year in ordinarycontributions : those of a middling class 200.The master of the house in which I am lodged,who has another at Porta, but is established hereas a manufacturer of cotton stuffs, pays 1000 piastresa year in all. The bishop receives a piastrefrom each house in his diocese ; from the richerclasses in the town four or five piastres for a-yiaanoqor benediction, and as much as the family choosesfor Xeirovpyiaicy or domestic masses which are generallycalled for by the women. The present bishoptried to pursue the same oppressive system as hisbrother of loannina ; but the Vezir, .upon thecomplaint of the inhabitants, soon brought him toreason. It is a common sentiment among thelaity of Greece, that the bishops have been a greatcause of their present degraded state, nor have theGreeks in general any esteem for their higher282 Thessaly. [CHAP.clergy or for the monastic order from which theprelates are promoted. This, however, is in somedegree an injustice ; for although the clei^y areoften an instrument of oppression, and a bishopcan hardly avoid acting like a Turk in office, theregular clergy have kept the Greek languagealive, and have prevented, perhaps, the dissolutionof all national union.The Christian Trickling admit that A\^ Pashahas relieved them from the insolence and oppressionto which they were formerly subject from theTurkish beys. Velj^ Pasha is following the sameplan in the Morea, where the Turks were much inwant of this discipline. His Highness and hissons adopt the surest method of effecting it, by obtainingall the landed property of the Turks :Nunc piece, nunc pretio, nunc vi, nunc sorte supreme.by every possible contrivance of fraud, injustice,and oppression. At a small expence theyhave thus converted the greater part of the plainof Trikkala formerly belonging to the beysof Trikkala, or to the Elefthero-khoria of theGreeks into tjiftliks of their own. Aly andMukhtar transport their share of the crops toloannina to feed their Albanians, and that ofVeljr is sent to the Mor^a for the same purpose ;while the Porte, according to its usual practice inseveral of the most fertile districts of the empire,is supplied with a certain quantity of grain fromThessaly at its own price. Thus, in the midst ofa most productive country, the inhabitants retainno more than is barely sufficient for existence;and the price, even of the necessaries of life, isXXXIX.] Thessaly. 283beyond their means. The wars of the Porte onone Bide and those of Alj^ on the other, are thechief cause of this distressing oppression , whichthe people of Trikkala never recollect to have beenso great as it is at present ; and for this reasonalone have hopes of seeing diminished : one oftheir complaints is, that the Vezfr's Subashis, forthe purpose of irrigating his lands, draw off thewater of the river, upon which the town chieflydepends; so that in summer nothing but a littleheated muddy water remains in the bed of thePenems. Nothing can more strongly show themisery of the place than the want of this commonestof all Turkish conveniences, especially asfountains might easily be supplied by an aqueductfrom numerous sources in the hills of Khassia.One of the primates of Trikkala reads to me hisaccount of a tour through Greece, which he madeupon coming to his property upon his father'sdeath. He visited 'Agrafa, Karpenisi, Apokuro,Vrakhori, Lidhoriki, Cleopatra, as well as some ofthe Macedonian districts immediately northwardof Trikkala. The journal of a modem Greektraveller in his own country is a novelty, andmight have been expected to furnish some usefulhints for the exploring geographer ; but it containsa mere catalogue of places without a singlecriticism on ancient history, although the author 'aHellenic education had not been neglected. Thissame gentleman has lately been in prison at Ion**nina : his statement is, that he was placed therebyAly Pasha in consequence of the unfoundedcomplaints of an enemy of his, and was releasedon paying a moderate sum when the Vezir dis*284 Thessaly. [Chai.covered his innocence. In his opinion, hlBilf theoppression and cruelty of Aljr are owing to themalicious disposition of the Greeks themselves,who envy all above and trample on all belowthem, while the Pasha takes good care to turnall their quarrels to his own profit.Nov. 27. — Trikkala has lately been adorned bythe Pasha with a new Tekieh, or college of Bek-tashli dervises, on the site of a former one. Hehas not only removed several old buildings to givemore space and air to this college, but has endowedit with property in khans, shops, and houses, andhas added some fields on the banks of the LetJuBus.There are now about fifteen of these Mahometanmonks in the house with a Sheikh or Chief, whois married to an loannite woman, and as welllodged and dressed as many a Pasha. Besideshis own apartments, there are very comfortablelodgings for the dervises, and every conveniencefor the reception of strangers. The Bektashli areso called from a Cappadocia sheikh who wore astone upon his navel ; in memory of which hisfollowers wear a stone which is green and of thisform ) C suspended to the neck, and hangingupon the naked breast. The important part whichHadji Bektash played in the establishment ofthe Janissaries is well known. The Bektashli particularlyinsist like other Mahometanss on the unityof the Deity, but do not exalt Mahomet so high asother Musulman sects, and are free thinkers inthe practical part of their religion, considering thatevery thing .is given us for enjoyment, and there-xxxix.]Thessaly. 285fore they smoke and drink and live merrily. Itis their doctrine to be liberal towards all professionsand religions, and to consider all men asequal in the eyes of God. Though the sheikhdid not very clearly explain his philosophy to me,he often used the virord avOptoiro^y with some accompanyingremark or significant gesture conveyinga sentiment of the equality of mankind. TheVezir, although no practical encourager of libertyand equality, finds the religious doctrines of theBektashli exactly suited to him. At the time thatChristianity was out of favour in France, he wasin the habit of ridiculing religion and the immortalityof the soul with his French prisoners ; andhe lately remarked to me, speaking of Mahomet,ici €ya» cl/iat irpo^nfc <fTa *lo>avviva : and I tOO am aprophet at loannina. It was an observation ofthe bishop of Trikkala, that A\<^ takes from everybodyand gives only to the dervises, whom heundoubtedly finds politically useful. In fact, thereis no place in Greece where in consequence ofthis encouragement these wandering or mendicantMusulman monks are so numerous and insolentas at loannina.In a bridge which conducts over the LetluBusto the Tekieh is a marble inscribed in four elegiacverses, to the memory of a '^ godlike physiciannamed Timber, by his wife Andromache ^" It^w-a Oiolc "iK^korf ervyipdy l^ropa vovtrwrMoipjji vn' iLVpivTf Klfip€pa rvfiliot e)(ec,*^0v iriwrfj irapaKoiTis &.ytrip6y mOiovaaQdyj/ty dKoifAfiroiQ idKpvaiy ^Ay^po^dyti,y. Inscription, No. 171.TheThessaly.[chap.is curious by its apparent connection with thecelebrity of Tricca, as the resort of invalidsfor the cure of their diseases in the temple of.aesculapius ' ; and probably those attached tothe temple were physicians as well as priestsand attendants. The medical fame of Tricca,therefore, which was as ancient as the Trojanwar, seems still to have continued in the time ofthe Roman empire, which is the date of the inscription.The name of this town assumed itspresent form at some period between the sixth andeleventh centuries, Tp/icjcii being found among thetowns of Thessaly after the final division of the empire', and Anna Comnena in the beginning of thetwelfth employing the present name *• In Procopiusindeed we find the word " Tpucarrowc,"referring to the people of this place ^ ; but this is,perhaps, a textual error for TfucKaiovg. Tzetzesa little later associates TpiKKaXa with several names,some of which were undoubtedly obsolete at thattime, as if he considered Triccala the ancientThe writer of the epitaphin the word U/ropa had probablyHomer in view, whodescribes Podalirius and Ma-chain,the sons of aesculapiuswho led the Triccflei to Troy, as'Ifirfip dyaSit.—li. B. v. 732.Kal avrri S' ohx AarifAos //ironic CEir/davpoc «c.) Kal fid'Xitrra 2tc^ Try lirii^yttay rov'AaKXrfiriov Bepawiveiy yoaovgtrayToiaxa£ wtwitrrcvfUvov icalTO sepoy frXffpec iypyroc delT^y re icafiy6yT«^y koI armydvcuceifAiy^^y irivdct#v, iy olcdyayeypafAfievai rvy^d yovai yai Ocpairciai, icaOdvep iy Kf reKol TpUicj^, — Strabo, p. 374.Herod. Synecd. p. 642,Less.Anna Conn. 1. 5, p. 137.Paris,ProGop. de.£dif. 1. 4, c. 3.XXXIX.] THK8SALIA. 287form \ It is remarkable that Trikkala is the appellationof a considerable town in the Morea,standing near an ancient site ^, which, like Triccain Thessabff was celebrated for the worship of.Aesculapius, and the cure of his diseased suppliants.It is possible that some connection mayhave existed between the medical colleges at thetwo places, and that when the Thessalian Triccabecame exposed to the barbarians, a migrationmay have taken place to the securer position ofMount Cyrene.Nov. 29. — Proceeding on the route to Larissa,we arrive in one hour at Bokunista, one of theVezir's tjiftliks containing 50 houses ; a little beyondwhich we leave the direct road on the right,and arrive in 45 minutes at Kirtzini. A thick fogwhich still continues has covered all the plain forthe last three or four days, and with the late rainshas rendered the roads very heavy. Kirtzini is asmall village at the foot of the hills of KhassisLAt the church-door is a monumental stone sculpturedin low relief, in two compartments, of whichthe upper represents a figure seated in a chair, thelower a Hermes. One of the stones in the wall ofthe church is an ancient architrave, having twotriglyphs with a rose in the intervening metope.These relics of civilized Greece were brought fipomX^pav rife QtrrcLKlav hi. avvtKtiKiiv /loc v6tiyAfifirirpidBoQ 'IwXrov Kol rXa^vpiJv ica2 Bo/jSi/c*Tzetz. Child. 9, v. 280.It was called Cyrus and of Achaia. — See Travels in thewas situated in the Pellensea Morea, Vol. iii. p. 219.288 Thessaly. [CHAP.the ruins called Old Kardhiki or Gardhiki \ distantfrom Kirtzini half an hour, the road leading alongthe rocky extremity of the heights. At Gardhiki arethe remains of a large Hellenic city, which therecan be little doubt was Pelinnasum. The entirecircuit of the walls still remains, together withtraces of suburbs on either side. On the west particularly,in approaching from Kirtzini, the mainstreet of the suburb is still distinguishable, leadingto the middle of the western wall, where one of thegates probably stood. The city occupied the face ofa rocky height, together with a large quadrangularspace at the foot of it on the south. The southernwall is more than half a mile in length, and thewhole circumference near 3 miles.Kardhiki, a town of the Greek empire, fromwhich the bishop residing at Zarko takes his title,occupied the height only, and no part of the plainbelow. Its remains are two ruined churches, oneat the summit, the other at the foot of the hill ;the walls, which were built upon the ruins of theHellenic acropolis, have almost entirely disappearedwhile the ancient inclosure both of thecitadel and town is traceable in every part, andat the summit of the hill subsists to the height oftwelve or fifteen feet. The masonry is of thethird species, or that which seems to have been inuse about the age of Alexander ; and accordinglywe find mention made of Belinda at that timein the history of Arrian ^, shewing that it was aIlaXacoF KapdiJcioF, Trap ' Arrian. Exp. Alex. 1. 1 ,XXXIX.] THE8SALIA. 289Thessalian town of considerable note. In thelower church are a fragment of a fluted Doriccolumn eft. sin. in diameter, and the record of adedication by one Petrseonica, daughter of Der-dashThe characters of this inscription are ofthe best times, and it is curious as expressing thename of the lady's father by the patronymic adjectiveAfpSaia. Dorcas was probably a name notuncommon in this part of Greece, as we find aDorcas prince of the neighbouring district of Eli-meain the year 382 B.C.', a date probably notvery distant from that of the inscription.The summit of the hill of Kardhlki commandsa noble view of the widest part of the plain ofUpper Thessaly with the opposite mountains ofDolapia. At the back of the height there is adeep cavity, surrounded on all sides by rockyprecipices, and now full of water, concerningwhich the local fable is, that a town was hereswallowed up by an earthquake. A tumulus risesopposite the ruins in the plain, at a distance of amile and a half from them.From Paleo-Grardhlki to Kolokoto is a ride of1 hour 20 minutes, the latter half of the way alongthe rocky foot of the mountain, where on the rightare many sources, and a marsh named Vula, fromwhich a rivulet issues and joins the JLethasuSy nowcalled Deresi or Trickling, which nearly oppositeto the Vula unites with the Pefieius. At the endUirpaioyUa Acpjoia dvi' * Xenoph. Hellen. 1. 5, c. 2.OfiKev, — V. Inscription, No.172.VOL. IV. U290 Thessaly. [chap.of this pass we cross a plain surrounded by branchesof the Khassia mountains, leaving the villages ofNeokhorio and Baiae a mile or two on the left ;on a height above the latter, are remains ofancient walls. The road to Elasona separatesfrom that to L&rissa at the end of the pass of Vula,passes a little to the right of Neokh6rio9 and thendirectly across the plain to Gritziano. This plainis watered by a small stream from the hills ofKhassia, which after a half-circle round the footof the height of Kolokoto joins the Trickling,nearly opposite to it. Kolokoto contains 30 or 40 *houses, and has become a tjiftlik of the Vezirsince my last visits. The Hellenic ruins on theconspicuous height above the village seem to bethose of a fortress on the frontier of the territoriesof PelinruBum and Pharcadon, for to the latter cityI take the valley of Tzighioti and Zarko to havebelonged.Tzighioti, which we reach in an hour and aquarter from Kolokoto, is situated, like Zarko, neara branch of the Khassia mountain, which here approachestee Salamvria. At an hour's distanceto the north-west is Gritziano, or Grisons, andbetween them Micro Tzighioti. The plain producesexcellent grain, but cotton is the peculiarproduce both of this place and of Zarko. Theyare both now the personal property of the Vezir, andcommute with him for their rent and tithe, thetwo Tzighiotis by 35 purses, and Zarko by 70.Nov. 30. — From Great Tzighioti we turn a pointof the mountain and enter the portion of the plainSee Vol. I. p. 432.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 291occupied by Zarko, cross it diagonally towards theSalamvria, leaving Zarko on the left, and arrivein half an hour at the ferry which was formerlytwo or three miles further down, but is now immediatelyopposite to Zarko. The river is heresix feet deep, and from 250 to 300 wide. Notbeing joined below the confluence of the river of Fersalaby any great tributary except the Elassonitikoor Titaredu8j and its superfluous waters beingdischarged between Larissa and that river into thelakes Lessons and Bosbeisj the Salamvria preserveseven in the winter an uniformity of breadth anddepth in this part of its course, and seldom overflowsits banks. The stream now flows with rapidity,and is full of small vortices, which mayhave suggested to the poet the epithet of apyvpo^SmViiC} though it must be confessed that he carrieshis poetical flattery to an extreme in comparingto silver the white hue of its turbid waters, derivedentirely from the earth suspended in them. Infact the Peneius is never bright. The Thamesabove the tide is far more deserving of the Homericepithet, but it may be doubted whether Homerever saw so beautiful a river as the Thames :Though deep, yet clear, though tranquil, yet not dull.Strong without rage, without o'erflowing full.It takes us half an hour to cross the river in threetrips by a wretched ferryboat, not much worsehowever than that of the river of Catania in theChristian kingdom of Sicily; then proceedingalong a narrow level between the left bank of theriver and the hills which extend to the plains ofu2292 Thessaly. [CHAP.•Crannon and Pharmltis, we arrive in 50 minutesat a point where these heights advance nearly tothe bank of the river.Here are the remains of a Hellenic town, whichI noticed in my preceding journey, but withoutthen riding over the ground. The whole circuitof the walls is traceable, and encloses the face ofthe hill towards the river, together with a levelspace nearly a mile in circumference at the footof it. The ruins are called Tjingan^-kalesi by theTurks, and Ghyfto-kastro by the Greeks, bothmeaning Gypsey-castle, a common name in Greecefor a ruined fortress. I found some peasants ofAlifaka, a village situated in the plain to theeastward of the hill, ploughing within the ancientcity, and purchased from them several coppercoins, some of which they had just turned up.One is of Pelinnseum, another of Phalanna. Followingthe testimony of Strabo, who states thatthe Peneius in its course through the Thessalianplains, passed by the cities of Tricca, Pelinnseum,and Pharcadon, to its left, and then flowed byAtrax to Larissa \ it might be supposed that theseare the ruins of Atrax, neither the geographer norany other author having stated on which side ofthe river Atrax stood. But Atrax was only tenRoman miles from Larissa, whereas ' these ruinsare thirteen or fourteen ; and it was on the bordersof Perrhabia ^, which could scarcely have extendedAvroc 6 Iliyvecoc ^px^o,i fieri nape re "Arpaira ira)fie tK Tliviov KaOdirep ctpi}rai* Aapcaaav. — Strabo, p. 438.iv dpioT€p§, ii df€ii TpiKKTiy re ' Li v. 1. 32, c. 15 ; 1. 36,icon HiXtvvaloy ical ^apKai6pa c. 13.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 293SO far to the south ; the situation of Gunitza, indeed,as I have before stated, seems to combine allthe requisites of Atrax ^These are the ruins, therefore, of some otherThessalian town of secondary rank, perhaps Pha-chum * ; for the situation exactly agrees with thatof Phacium as occurring in the relation whichThucydides has left us of the march of Braidsthrough Thessaly and Perrhaebia to Dium in Macedonia,in the eighth year of the Peloponnesiansar : from the Apidanus on this side of Pharsalusbut not far from it, he marched to Phacium, in oneday apparently, and from thence entered Perrhas-bias. Ghyftokastro is about thirty miles fromPharsalusj and exactly in the direction of PerrJuB-bia from thence.In proceeding from the ruins to Alifaka, distanthalf an hour, we pass a tumulus situated in theplain, at one-third of the distance from the ruins.Alifaka is now a tjiftlik of Velj^ Pashd, and withthe exception of one house now occupied by an AlbanianSubashi, who superintends the Pasha's concerns,all the habitations are low huts of a singleapartment, serving both for men and cattle. TheSubashi, who is a native of Dragon near Tepeleni,is suffering from an intermittent fever ; a disorderto which the Albanians are very subject whenthey pass the summer or autumn in these plains*"This air," he observes, "devours the man."But loss of health is the common penalty paid by« See Vol. III. p. 368. * Thucyd. 1. 4, c. 78.Liv. 1. 36, c. 13. — Step rouroc b dips rpwyu revphan. in ^aKwy, avOpwiroy.294 THBSSALIA. [Clapsmountaineers and natives of northern countries,when the hardy and warlike habits natural to theirposition, have enabled them to reduce to subjectionthe more luxurious inhabitants of plains or ofa more southern climate. The Albanians are fondof hunting the hare; and few of those who arerich enough to possess a horse have not likewise agreyhound. Almost all those whom I have encounteredin Thessaly have been accompanied bytheir dogs. Finery is another favourite taste ; acoarse kind of lace made at Naples finds an excellentmarket in Albania, and velvet is muchesteemed by them; but they like it still betterwhen it is so covered over with lace and embroiderythat only just enough of the velvet appearsto give evidence of the rich material. BeyondAlifaka the plain expands on all sides to Larissa,which is about twelve miles distantDec. 1. — Abdim Bey, whom I now visit for thethird time in the course of the last four years, isstill, in his capacity of chief Haydn, the civil governorof Clarissa. By means of a Turkish workprinted at Constantinople, he has made himselfacquainted with many leading facts of history andgeography, and he has a retentive memory. Thislittle tincture of civilization, and the pleasure hetakes in showing his learning, prompts him to bemore civil to Franks than Turks usually are. Ingeneral the higher class of them at Clarissa are fanatical,ignorant, and slothful ; and the janissaries insolentand disorderly, though trembling at the sight^ wipe ircpo.XXXIX.] Thessaly. ^ 296of an Albanian. As in other Turkish cities, theythink only of following civil occupations, and ofthose few who went this summer to the war thegreater part is already returning. Nor do theGreeks of Larissa bear a good character amongtheir neighbours. It is customary for each familyto purchase the protection of some powerful Turk ;a practice which has become common likewise atSaloniki since Frank protections have been partlywithdrawn. Indeed it is now general in the greattowns of European Turkey. At L&rissa Turkishprotection is said to be most frequently and effectuallyobtained by the influence of some handsomeyouth of the protected Greek family. Greeks, Jews,and Armenians, are all more degraded here in respectof civil privileges than in the towns which arein the hands of Alj^ Pash, but have not so much tocomplain of on the score of forced contributionsand the quartering of soldiers. This is the onlyplace in Greece where I have seen camels : theyare bred in the surrounding plains, and are sometimesused here for carrying burthens ; but theyare Chiefly employed for the caravans which communicatewith Saloniki, Serres, Adrianople, andConstantinople.Dec. 2. — The road from Larissa to Tornadomight now be travelled in a wheeled carriage;and it is one of very few distances of ten miles inGreece in that condition. The Tiresias, whichat the time of my former visit about the sameseason was quite dry, is now only a shallow stream,though there has been no want of rain lately. Itseems justly, therefore, to have acquired the name296 Thessaly. [CHAP.of Xerdghiy by which it is known around Tornado.Sometimes, however, after heavy rains, or a suddendissolution of the snow on Olympus it becomeswide and impetuous ; and hence the long bridgeat the entrance of the town is essential to a facilityof communication with Orissa, which might sometimesrequire a circuit by the bridge of Venetianround the lake Karatjair, or nearly triple thedirect distance. I have already remarked, thatthe ordinary deficiency of water in the river iscaused by irrigation, and by a small canal ^ whichwaters the plantations and gardens of Clarissa onthe northern side of the Salamvria. In Homer'stime, when tobacco was not known, and maizeand cotton were less cultivated in Greece, theTitaresius probably carried its waters more constantlyto the Peneitis. At present it is not easyto find an opportunity of witnessing that commonphenomenon which Homer poetically likens to oilfloating on the surface of water, and which isnothing more than the pellucid Titaresius slowlyuniting with the turbid Peneus.Dec. 3. — Tumavo has continued to decline, warhaving narrowed the market of its manufactures inthe fairs of Rumili, while the same cause has raisedboth the price of provisions and the amount oftaxes. The people complain that their Priest havefor the last two years laid arbitrary assessmentsupon the families without giving any account tothe public ; and these complaints seem to havereached the ears of the Vezir, for a buyurti has^ See Vol. III. p. 353.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 297just arrived, requiring some of the magistrates tocarry the contributions of the present year in personto Tepeleni; which makes them fear that theirnext quarters may be the prison at loannina. Thewages of a weaver are now ten piastres a week :the finest servietta, without gold thread, sells atprime cost for about forty piastres, of which the&vXcvracov, or workmanship, costs seven piastres.Tumavo is said to enjoy one of the best climatesin Thessaly. The midsummer heats areless oppressive than at Larissa and Trikkala : foulweather is seldom experienced for many days together: and the month of January is the extent ofthe winter. The sandy soil around the town ispracticable to horses and carts in the wettestweather ; and the acclivity from the bank of theriver, small as it is, prevents any unwholesomestagnation of water in summer. Every house has itswell of the purest water, and is cool in the midstof summer. At Trikkala and Larissa the water ofthe Peneius is used for drinking, and is reckonedwholesome and light ; but it is hot and turbid,and requires filtration. At these two towns autumnalfevers are much more prevalent than atTumavo ; at Tzaritzena the overhanging rocks aresupposed to injure the air, and must undoubtedlyconcentrate the heat, as they are exposed to thesouth-west. Nevertheless Tzaritzena is the mostflourishing town in Thessaly next to Ambelakia. Bythe sacrifice of a sum of money to the Vezir, theArchons have procured an order forbidding thedancing boys from exercising their profession inthat town ; this has annoyed the people of TurnTHSBSALIA. [CHAP.navy, by causing the boys to resort more frequentlyto that town, which attracts thither manyTurks and Musulman Albanians of the worst class,whom the Greeks are moreover often obliged toentertain. The Ay&ns of Larissa will not oftenpermit the dancers to appear in that city ; as it isgenerally attended with disturbances and drunkenquarrels among the Janissaries, in which the boysthemselves stand a chance of being murdered.The weather being fair to-day, the little heightof Kastri commands a noble view of the rich Pe*lasgic plain and of the renowned mountains whichsurround it. The Magula of Tatar, which I supposeto be the site of Gyrtony is nearly in a line withthe peak of Kissavo or Ossa which bears east bythe compass : a few degrees to the left of the maculasome remains of the walls of Opium are clearlydistinguishable on a height somewhat detachedfrom the end of the ridge of Makrikhori, on itsextremity towards Larissa. In the opposite directionthis ridge extends thirty degrees to the Kli-sura, or rugged gorge through which the Penesmakes its way from the plain into the valley ofDereli or GonnuSy and thence to Tempe. In themiddle of the Klisura, on the right bank of theriver, are seen the walls of JSZa^eia, but more conspicuousthan any of these ancient sites, are theremains of Phalaena situated a little to the westwardof north, on a steep bicipital height abovethe village of Karadjoli, at the foot of Mount Titus.The hill is not only surrounded with theruins of walls, but there also appear two or morecross walls forming terraces on the slope. A tor-xxxix.]PBRRHiSBIA. 299rent descends along one side of the height into thesmall stream flowing from the lake or marsh ofMati, which I passed Dec. 10, 1806, betweenLigara and Tumavo. If to these be added thepositions of Larissa, of Atrax at Sidhero-p^liko,and of Argissa^ at the tumuli between the twolatter, the ruins or sites of no less than sevenancient cities may be distinguished from Castriitself being the situation of an eighth, or that ofMetropolis.Dec. 4. — This forenoon, proceeding south-westwardfrom Tumavo along the foot of the heights,we enter, at the end of a mile and a half, the narrowvale from whence the Xeraghi or Titaremtsissues into the plain. Here the river leaves oneither bank a narrow level between it and rockyheights just sufficient for a road. That on the leftbank, which we follow, is hard, and smooth enoughfor any carriage. The bed of the river is formedentirely of sand, in the midst of which there are deeppools of water, making the fords sometimes dangerous.At the end of an hour and five minutesfrom Tumavo, walls constructed of small stonesand mortar are traceable on both sides of the river,the remains apparently of a work for the defenceof the pass.Having crossed the river at 6.5, we follow theright bank to Dhamasi^ leaving on. the oppositeside a small ploughed valley having a reddish soil.Dhamasi is one of the tjiftliks of Vel^^ Pasha, whoseagent resides here as Subashi. It contains about300 PERRHJEBIA. [Chap.twenty houses, having a few gardens watered bya canal from the Xeraghi, and is situated at thefoot of a steep rocky hill which falls on the otherside to the river. This height is crowned with aruined caste, of which the walls are built withgreat solidity of small stones and mortar, and areflanked with square and round towers. A transversewall divided the castle in two.In the house of the Subashi is a quadrangularstone, similar to those which are inscribed at Tornado,but adorned with a moulding below insteadof above. An inscription on one of the narrowsides shows that it supported the statue of apriestess of Julia Juno Augusta, erected by thedeus of the Lareissei ^ In the same house, onthe edge of a well, is another marble without anyinscription, but representing in low relief a manwith a circular shield in his left hand ; the shieldand the nails of the fingers, which are the onlyparts well preserved, show that the sculpture wasgood. It seems evident from these remains thatDhamasi is the position of one of the PerrJuebictowns ; and I am inclined to think that the castleis in great part of Hellenic construction, althoughthe masonry is not such as the ancients generallyemployed.From Dhamasi I proceed to Dheminiko, a jour**0 iiifWQ Aapeiaalwv . . was received into the Julian. . Ac^iirirov, yvraXica ^c family with the title of Augusta4fiKlffK0Vf Tov on the death of Augustus, andv(ov, iepriTEvaairav *IovXiac was deified by Claudius. — ■'"IIpuc 2c/3a^$c> — V. Inscribe Tacit. AnnaL 1. I, c. 8. —tion, No. 173. Dion. Cass. 1. 56, c. 46, Suevivia, the wife of Augustus, ton. in Claud, c. 11.XXXIX.] PBRRH^BIA. 301ney of two hours and a half. Just without thevillage of Dhamasi, at the foot of the castle hill,we recross the river, and again proceed along theleft bank. The valley is animated by flocks ofsheep and goats, which are conducted in thisseason from the mountains near Grevena to feedon the banks of the *' pleasant Titaresius '." Theshepherds of Mount Pindus have all their particularhaunts in winter. Those of the more distantvillages of the district of Grevena migrate tothe plain of Trikkala or to the northern valleys ofPerrhabia. The flocks of Gramista are driven toArmyro and the valleys of Phthia ; the pastures ofDheminiko and the southern part of PerrhcBbiaare particularly resorted to by the Samariniotes,who find ample accommodation in the winter inthe empty houses of those who formerly cultivatedthese fertile valleys, but who have migrated fromhence since Aiy and his sons have converted thelands into tjiftliks of their own.At an hour's ride from Dhamasi, we leave, onthe summit of a peaked height on the oppositeside of the river, the vestiges of a small ancientfort, and soon afterwards enter the valley of Dhe-miniko, having Vlakho-Ianni on the left on theopposite side of the river. Our route then turnsnorthward in the direction of the valley, passesthrough Mologhusta*, a tjiftlik of the Vezir, oftwenty houses, standing on the left bank of the^ Oi ff dfi^^ ifupToy Tirapfiffiov tpy* iyifiovTo.H. B. V. 751.MoX<(yoti<rra.302 PSRRHiEBIA. [chap.river, and then ascends the heights to Dheminikoor Domenico ^ which, though consisting of near200 houses, contains not more than 80 families.About fifteen years ago it lost half its inhabitantsby the plague, since which time the robbers andtheir opponents the Dervenli troops, with the extortionsof their chief have proved so destructive tothe place that nothing at length remained for theunfortunate people but to become the meters ofAljr ; since which he has built a mosque, and anadjoining house now occupied by an Albanianbolu'bashi. The Dhomenikiotes cultivate com onthe heights, and maize, cotton, and tobacco in theplain, where irrigation from the river ensures plentifulcrops. They spin and weave their cotton intoa coarse kind of bukasid sold to the people of Tza-ritzena, who dye them. The plain below Themiscontains, besides the villages Mologhusta andVlakho-Ianni, those of Knits, Paleokastro, Sykia,Magula, Perform, arid Amurii. This fertile valleyis ten or twelve miles in length from north tosouth, and half as much in breadth. To the northwardit is separated by woody hills from thenorthern PerrJuBlnan plain, or Tripoliiis, whichlies between the mountains 'Elymbo and Marbles,and by other hills eastward from the plain whichcontains Elasona and Tzaritzena. Westward risesa continuation of Marbles, which stretches southwardtowards Trikkala : this mountain is coveredwith beeches ', and with oaks here called S/>fpviaic,a corruption apparently of Spvivai. Besides the^ Ae^yiicoc, AofurlKoc, ' opiate,^ XXXIX.] PBRRHJEBIA. 303- ^:^ . z agricultural productions of the plain, there are a- few gardens and vineyards around the villages,- - particularly at that of Amurii. At Manila, on the.^ right bank of the river near Sykia, an earth pro-during nitre in great plenty has lately been discovere : the earth is carried to loannina, where the^ nitre is extracted, and used in the manufacture ofgunpowder.~ "^ Dheminfko, which was a bishopric of the provinceof Larissa or Thessaly as early as the ninth^J^ " century, has long been joined with Elasona, as an'7 ^ archbishopric dependent on the patriarch of Constantinople.It appears to have been a place ofconsiderable importance under the Byzantine Empire;as besides the cathedral there are threechurches in the village, and four more on the outskirts.Anna Comnena describes a jcXcicrovpa, orpass, near Larissa which she terms the palace ofDomenico \ where a marshy ravine betweentwo hills terminated a woody plain. Here theFranks under Beyond, in the year 1083, wereattacked in their camp and defeated by MichaelDuces, upon which they retired to Trikkala andto Kastoria. Probably the .camp of Beyond wasabout Amurii, and the pass was one of those leadinginto the plain from Servia, Elasona, or Clarissa.The cathedral and some others of the churchesseem to be not less ancient than the eleventh century.I failed in obtaining an entrance into theepiscopal palace, the stairs, or to speak more waXarioy, Anna Comnena, L 5, p. 141. Paris.304 PBRRHABIA. [chap.directly, the ladder leading up to the door, beingso decayed as to be impassable. The bishop nowresides at Tzaritzena.Dec. 6. — ^^The church of St. George, ^^The mostdistant and largest of those without the town,contains in its walls and pavements severalinscribed marbles, two of which show that itstands on the site of CyreiuBj one of the citiesof Perrhabia mentioned by Livy. The churchstands upon a height, encircled by some inconsiderableremains of ancient walls constructedof small stones and mortar, but among whichseveral large quadrangular masses are seen.Others of the same kind are lying on the slope ofthe hill ; and the walls of the church are in partformed of similar blocks of stone, evidentlytaken from Hellenic constructions. The hill ofSt. George appears to have been the acropolis,and the city to have occupied the slope belowit, towards a valley watered by a slenderbranch of the Tiresias. In the opposite directiona hollow intervenes between the height anda steep rocky mountain composed of granite, themost elevated of the. ridges which branchingfrom Mount Kritiri separate this valley fromthat of Elasona. The road from Dheminfko toElasona passes along the hollow. Not far fromthe acropolis, towards the village of Dheminiko, isthe feature which probably influenced in greatmeasure the founders of OyreiuB in the choice ofthis situation — namely, a copious stream of waternow rushing from the side of the mountain byXXXIX.] PERRHiEBIA. 305four spout. The church of St. George containsin its walls, steps, and pavements, or on detachedblocks, many inscribed marbles. One in particularis a document of some historical interest;being a public epistle addressed to the Cyretieusesby Titus Quinctius Flamininus, when commanderof the Roman army in Greece. It is inscribed ona thick block of white marble, which now forms apart of the wall of separation between the vestibuleand the body of the church. The situation of thestone is by no means favourable to the copper asto light, and the letters are a good deal worn ; butwith the exception of only five or six, they may allbe deciphered. They are small and of the usualbeautiful formation of those times. The gentileadjective, which is Kvpcnevc in this inscription, isXv/ocriatoc in another belonging to a monumentwhich was erected by the city in honour of SepticSeverus \ This variation of the ethnicagrees exactly with the ancient authors ; forPtolemy, who lived in the latter age, writes thename Xvpmai^j of which the gentile would beXv^Mrtaioc; while Livy, following Polybius, acotemporary of the inscription, employs Cyre-thesis, of which the analogous Greek form wasKvpcrtcvc. The following is a translation of theepistle of Quinctius : —*^ Titus Quinctius supreme commander of theRomans to the tags and city of the Cyretienses,(Aovjcf) oy yvtrlov rov Avkutov, — VideXcTTi/iioy ^vn((K>y) (^ 7r6\)ic Inscription. No. 175.4 Xvpcrcaiwv, (ray6uoK)roc Aio- ' Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 13.VOL. IV. XPERRHJEBIA.[chap.health. Having on all other occasions manifestedmy own favourable intentions, as well as those ofthe Roman people towards you, we have beensincerely desirous of continuing to show, that inevery instance we prefer that which tends to ourhonour, to the end that in the present affair also suchpersons as are not guided by good counsels maynot have the power of calumniating us. All theremaining possessions, therefore, in land or houses,which had devolved to the Roman treasury, wegive to your city, that you may thus be convincedof our benevolence, and that we have not in thesmallest degree been desirous of amassing treasure,but have greatly preferred charity and honourablefame. I judge it right therefore thatthose persons who have not yet received thatwhich appertains to them, be reinstated in thepossession of it, when they shall have given youthe requisite proofs, and their demands shall appearto you conformable to my former adjudications^"Tirol Not victor, 2Srpa7Tyyoci/iraroc ^dtfiai^Vp Kvpemwvroi Tayoic <cac rp IlciXcc ^a/-p€iy, '£?rel ical iy roi Xoiiroccwaatv ^vEpay inirofiicafi€y lifeT€ i^iay Kol rov ^^fiov rodVttffialiay irpoaipEtriy fey €\ofi€yil v/xacy 6Xo(<rxep)wc fiffiovkfi''fitda K{al) iy roll l{^c eir<Jcl£aiKara vdy fUpOQ vpo€<nrfK&rECTov cv^d£ov, tya fits* iy tovtoiq€j((U(ny fifJLcic fcaraXaXciv ol obx&7r6 TOV jScXrcoTOv tlia66T€cdyaarpif^ivdau "O^ai yap xot€dftoktlvoyrai cHiffet^ iyyetoiKoi oUciai ray KaOiiKovtrSy cicro Srifioaioy ro Pw/iaiwy, TcdvacSl^ofuy rj v/icripf v6Xii, SiriusKai iy rovroiQ fiaOrire rey icaXo-Kayadiay ^fikiy koI 6ti reXea»ciy ohdeyl 0cXapyvp$0(ac) /3c-liov\ifit&(a), v€pl irXe/oToviroiovfuyoi xdpira koI 0iXo-So^ay* "Offoi fiiyroi fall kcko-fiiafAiyoieialy ruin iinfiaXK.6yTiayahrdiCi Hy vfidc ^i^^fatiriy Kal^lytfyrai ihyywfwya Xiyovreciffroxa^ofiivtfv v/iimk lie rwv vtr*.] PERRHiEBIA. 307As to the exact date of this epistle, or to whichof the four years of the command of Quinctius inGreece it is to be ascribed, we may observe thatit could not have been that of his consulship, b.c.198, because after having defeated Philip on theAous, and marched through Epirus and Thessaly,he was arrested in his farther progress in thisquarter by the resistance of Atrax, and instead ofentering Perrhsebia, turned southward into Phocis^ In the year of his consulship, moreover, hewould undoubtedly have assumed that title, whichin Greek was simply viroroc, whereas trrparriyoqvirago has uo reference to civil authority, butrepresented in Greek the Latin word Imperator,as appears by a comparison of the Greek versionof the celebrated edict for the liberation of theGreeks, promulgated by Quinctius at the Isthmusgames, in the spring of the year 196', with acopy of the same proclamation, given in Latin byLivy ', who constantly styles Quinctius Imperatorduring his command in Greece after the expirationof his consulship. The general tenor of the epistleaccords with the conduct of Quinctius, when inhis winter quarters at Athens, after the battle ofCynoscephalse in the year 197, he showed clemencyto those who had taken part with Philip against him,e/uov yeypa/jifUyiav iyKpifftuy^ viroroct &c« — Polyb. 1. 18,Kpivta ^Uatov elyai diroKaOlara" c. 29.trSai airroic. eppuoBe. Vide et Plutarch, in Flaming.V. Inscription, No. 174. ' Senatus Romanus et TitusLiv. 1. 32, c. 18. Quinctius Imperator, &c. —'U 2^yKXi|roc i^ Piafia/wv Liv. 1. 33, c. 32.Koi Tirol KoivKrioc Srpanyyocx2308 PERRH^BIA. [chap.because the apprehensions which were alreadyentertained of Antiochus rendered it expedient toconciliate the favour of the cities of Greece ^, — amotive in fact which had its share in producingthe edict of Corinth very soon afterwards. Thereference in the beginning of the epistle to thefavours conferred upon the Cyretienses by Quintusand the Roman people, alludes probably tothe self-government and liberation from tribute toPhilip, which the Perrheebi among other peopleobtained by that edict. The epistle therefore wasprobably written either in 196 or 196 b. c.It appears that Cyretise, like the generality ofGreek cities, had been divided into two parties,one opposed and the other favourable to Rome,that the lands and houses of the opponents hadbeen confiscated by Quinctius to the Republic ofRome, that some claims had been made on thisconfiscated property, by individuals who had beeneither favourable to the Romans, or at least hadtaken no part against them : that Quinctius hadalready adjusted some of those claims, and thathe now directed the settlement of the remainderupon the principle of his former adjudications;after which the residue of the confiscated landsand houses was to become the property of thecity.The Thessalian custom of entitling the chiefmagistrates of their cities Tayoi ^, which is known^ quia, Antioch rage jam ' Tayoc is probably the Thes-suspect,favor conciliandas salic form of dyo^, the wordnomine Romano apud civitates used by Homer for leader,erat. — Liv. 1. 33, c. 27. TdpKiav, the reputed leaderXXXIX.] PERRU^BIA. 309from Xenophon and other authors, is exemplifiedby several inscriptions still existing in Thessalyand among others by two beginning with the wordrnyEuovToc, in the church of St. George at Dhe-minlko, one in the pavement, the other in thewall of the church. From one of these it appearsthat the tagus was the first, and the hipparchus,or commander of the cavalry, the second personin rank in the city ; so that the tagus probablywas commander of the infantry as well as civilgovernor. A third officer was the tamias, or treasurer^ It would seem that they were all, incommon parlance, called tags, in the same manneras the word archon was employed at Athens, andin other parts of Greece, not only to signify asingle magistrate, but all those who composed theexecutive power, in which manner the word isstill used in Greece. We may thus reconcile theplural form of the word in the letter of Quinctiuswith the single tagus indicated by the roycuovrocof the two other inscriptions. The two latterdocuments, as well as two other fragments in thesame church', were records of the manumissionof slaves, who seem to have paid on this occasion22 denaria to the city, being exactly thesum which two similar inscriptions at Elasonaof the colony which founded lasgi of Thessaly. — Strabo, p.Tarcynia, by the Romans cal 219. — Justin. 1. 20, c. 1.led Tarquin, in Italy, is ^ V. Inscriptions, Nos. 176,perhaps nothing more than 177.^PX^^> in a similar form, ' V. Inscriptions, Nos. 178,for the colony of Tarcon is 179.said to have consisted of PegPERRHJSBIA. [Chapshow to have been paid by the freedmen ofOloossan. Among the inscribed stones at St.George is a simple and affecting form, of epitaph ',more commonly found on Roman than on Greekmonuments, and in the wall behind the altar ofthe church, I find a ferment which appears to haverecorded the dedication to aesculapius and Hygeiaof the statue of a son of one ApoUodorus, bythe son of an Asclepiodorus, in token of his gratitudeto the former. The artist was an Athenian '.The native town of the son of ApoUodorus, indicatedby the word beginning EPH, may perhaps havebeen the same place named Eritium by Livy, fromwhom it appears to have been near Cyretioe '.The repeated occurrence of the name of Cyretiaein the history of the Roman wars in Greece, showsits importance in those times. In the year b. c.200 it was plundered by the italians, who werethen allies of Rome against Philip *. In the firstcampaign of the Persia war, in the year 171,Cyretise was occupied by the king in his way fromMacedonia into Thessaly, after which he besiegedand took Mylee, and marched to Phalanna andGyrton *.Having passed the forenoon at St. George, Iset out at 6, Turkish, and return in one hour to^iXoKpareia rixyf ^(Xiifia ^yul^ dviO(fiK€)rnc liynii^m X^P*''* — ^* Inscribe ov ^AdtivaioQ iiroifia{e)» — V.tion, No. 181. Inscription, No. ISO.■ . . . . 6it^poc 'AiroXXo- • Liv. 1. 36, c. 13.Utpov *Epic oipov * Liv. 1. 31, c. 41.AffKXtfirio^kfpov roy kavrov • Liv. 1. 42, c. 53.XXXIX.] PERRHiEBIA. ^ 311Mologhusta, and there crossing the TitaremUyproceed for a mile through kalainb6kki fields andgardens to Vlakho-ianni. Mologhusta may perhapsbe a corruption of MaUcBa, with the additionof Augusta f for that-mallet was a town of southernPerrhsebia, and not far from Cyretiae, seemsevident from its being mentioned in conjunctionwith that town on two of the three occasions onwhich Livy names the latter city. At the congressof Tempe, in the year 186 b. c, the Per-rhsebi claimed Mallet from Philip, who hadretained it after having recovered it from Antiochusin the year 19 1, and an assent to thedemand was implicated in the award of the Romancommissaries, who declared that Macedoniashould be confined to its ancient limits'. Per-rhsebia was again forcibly occupied by the Macedoniansunder Perseus, not long before the declarationof war against him by the Romans',but it seems not to have been until he marchedinto Thessaly, at the beginning of the first campaignof that war, that he received the submissionof the city of the Perrhaebi, and took the twoprincipal fortresses, Cyretiae and Mylae'. Thelatter being described as a very strong place, notfar frt)m Cyretiee, thus corresponds to Dhamasi,which is not only strong in itself, but very important,as commanding the pass of the Titarmtis,leading into PerrJuBhia from the Pelasgiotis, As tothe city of the Perrhaebi, which is mentioned onlyLiv. 1. 39, cc. 25, 26. ' Li v. 1. 42, c. 54, ^» Liv. 1. 42, c. 36.312 PERRUiEBIA. [chaponthis occasion, I believe it to have been the dameplace as Oloosson, which name, although it hasbeen preserved with little change from the time ofHomer to the present, is not found in history,probably because its strong and commodious situationnear the centre of Perrhsebia had raised it tothe dignity of the capital of that country, and itmay therefore have been better known in the timeof the historians as the chief city of the Perrhaebi.It was here probably that the beautiful coins inscribedwith the name of that people were struck.Sallee is again mentioned by the Latin historianas having been taken by the Romans at theend of the first campaign of the Persia war, whenPerseus had retired into Macedonia. The consulLicinius, after having vainly attempted Gonnus,turned into Perrhsebia, took Mallet at the firstassault, and after having received the submissionof Perrheebia, including the Tripolitis, returnedto Clarissa Although Mologhusta may be therepresentative of Malice in name, its situation inthe plain not being such as the ancients generallychose, nor preserving any remains of antiquity,I conceive Malta to have occupied a height onthe opposite side of the river and rather nearer toVlakho-ianni than to Mologhusta. Here some vestigesof ancient walls surround a table summit whichis the ioyarifiy OX lowest fall of the western mountain ;^ Quum et loco et praesidio capt et directs, Tripoli alid-valid inexpugnabilis res esse que Perrhaebia recept, sc.) abstitit inception. rissam redit. — Liv. 1. 42,In Perrhaebiam alexis itineri- c. 67.bus, Mallaesi primo impetusXXXIX.] PERRHJEBIA. 313a torrent separates the height from another similarhill on the north, where other walls are traced, allbelonging probably to the same city.Paleokastro, a village above Sykia, on the leftbank of the Vulgaris, or river of TripoUtiSy wouldseem from the name to be the site of anotherPerrJuBhian town, situated about midway betweenCyreticB at Dheminiko and Azores at Vuvala.Perhaps it was the Eritium already alluded to,which was taken, together with Cyretiae, by Babies,in the year 191 b. c. ^; having garrisonedthese and some other captured places, Eusebius returnedto assist Philip in taking Mallet; afterwhich, the combined forces proceeded against^ginium, Tricca, and the other neighbouringtowns occupied by the Athamanes.Vlakhoidnni contains twenty permanent families,and many houses now occupied by SamariaThe village paid ten purses a year beforeit became a tjiftlik of A\y Pasha, who now takes athird of the harvest without supplying any thing tothe farmer, and receives from the village a thousandpiastres a year for contributions. His share of thecom is collected by his agent at Dheminiko, andsent wherever he happens to want it. Last yearit was embarked at Volo for Prevyza : this yearit is destined for Korytza.All these villages were formerly Kefalokhoria,and the lands were in possession of the Greek inhabitants,but these having been reduced by theirnecessities, caused in great measure by the freeLiv. L 36, c. 13.314 PJBRRHABIA. [chap.quest demands of Alj^ and his Albanian soldiers,to contract debts at high interest, have been underthe necessity of becoming his cultivators on conditionof his acquitting their debts. This part ofthe bargain he generally discovers some mode ofeffecting not very burthensome to himself, unlesswhen some creditor intervenes from his own nativemountains of Catania or Atintania^ when he cannotso easily avoid opening his purse. The air ofthe PerrluBbian valleys is said to be unhealthy insummer, and so excessively hot that none butthose born here can endure it ; but the soil is veryproductive, and in wheat, which is the principalproduce, generally gives a return of eleven ortwelve to one.In the ruins near Vlakhoianni, as well as inthose at Dheminiko, Dhamasi, Tumovo, Alifaka,and Sidhero-peliko, the masonry, though moremassy than the inhabitants of this country havebeen in the habit of employing since the time ofthe Roman empire, is principally of rough stonesand mortar, and has no large portion of it constructedof those great quadrangular or polygonalmasses nicely fitted together without cement, whichare characteristic of Greek masonry to the southwardof Mount (Eta. It would seem, therefore, thatin Perrhffibia and other parts of Thessaly, as wellas among the tribes of northern Epirus, that kindof masonry was not always employed, which wasalmost universal in Southern Greece, and which,notwithstanding the examples to the contrary maybeconsidered one of the peculiarities of the Hellenicrace..] THBS8ALIA. 315From Vlakhoianni to Gritziano is a ride of threehours ; for the first two miles we traverse riggedheights covered with dwarf holly-oak, and thencross some open downs of a good soil, but quite uncultivated.The village of Lefthero-khdri, situatedat a little less than halfway, though large, containsfew inhabitants, and who cultivate only some vineyardsand corn-fields near the village ; but possesssheep, for which all the surrounding downs are wellsuited, though none are to be seen at present, as theshepherds prefer lower situations, and particularlythe mild climate of the coast, to these heights,which are subject sometimes to severe cold inwinter, and a long continuance of snow. AlthoughLefcherokhori preserves no remains of antiquity,its territory was probably that of anotherof the PerrJuebian towns, perhaps Ericinium, whichappears from Livy to have been reclaimed by thePerrheebi from Philip at the congress of Tempe,in the year 185 b. c. ^ ; the same historian, bynaming it together with ^ginium and Triccaamong the towns which were taken from theAthamanes by Beebius and Philip, after the surrenderof Mallflea ', seems to indicate its directionfrom the latter place, and that it stood on thefrontier of Perrhabia towards Histueotis.The last half hour to Gritzi&no is a descent,from which an extensive view is opened of theplains around Sofadhes, Kardhitza, and Fanari,backed by the mountains of 'Agraia. Four remarkableinsulated heights present themselves inthese plains, all probably the positions of HelpLiv. 1. 39, c. 25. ' Liv. 1. 36, c. 13.3)6 Thessaly. [CHAP.lenic cities or fortresses : 1 . Kolokoto ; 2. Kortikhi,which is the most extensive, though not high ; itlies at the same distance from the right bank ofthe Peneitis that the hill of Kolokoto does from theleft. 3. The rock of Ylokho on the same side ofthe river, conspicuous by its height and steepness,and by the ruins of Hellenic walls on its side andsummit. It rises from the left bank of the riverFersaliti, and is separated only by that river fromthe ridge of hills which extends from thence alongthe right side of the Penems to Alifaka, and in asouth-easterly direction to the Pannonia andPharsalian plains : 4. the fourth insulated hill isa long low eminence near Mataranga in the middleof the plain beyond the hill of Ylokho, andsituated about midway between that height andthe mountains of 'Agrafa.Dec. 6. — Two slight earthquakes occur thismorning a little before daylight. Aristotle speaksof opOpioi acur^i as if earthquakes often happenedat the break of day, and he adds that it is generallya vrivffua or calm when they take place ' ; this isthe third time it has occurred to me to verify theobservations of the Greek philosopher. On allthese occasions there have been two shocks, withan interval between them of not less than half aminute. The slope of the rocky height aboveGritziano is entirely inclosed by the ruined wallsof a town about two miles in circumference. Atthe summit of the hill they still exist to half theiroriginal height : towards the bottom, where theyare not so well preserved, are the remains of aAristot. Meteor. 1. 2, c. 8.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 317transverse wall or interior inclosure, and the vestigesof many buildings within it. The masonryresembles that of the later Roman or early Byzantineempire, being formed of irregular stones of nogreat dimensions, and which are united with mortar,mixed with fragments of large tiles. Nevertheless,I believe the whole to be Hellenic with theexception perhaps of a few repairs. The absence ofall remains of churches which are invariably foundin ruins of the Lower Empire, coincides with theextent of the inclosure, and the manner in whichthe ground is occupied, to show that it was one ofthe cities of ancient Thessaly. In confirmation ofthis opinion there exist on the spot a few monumentsindisputably Hellenic. Of these, the mostremarkable is a gigantic sorts of white marble atthe principal fountain of the village of Gritziano,measuring on the outside 9 ft. 3 in. in length, 3 ft.6 in. in breadth, 1^^ ft. in height, with sides 3 in.thick. In the wall of the enclosure of a newchurch a sepulchral stone has been inserted,bearing a relief, below which an inscription signifiesthat Hippo erected the memorial ^^ toher beloved husband Gleintus, a man who hadbeen a minister of many gods" Two hideousbusts seen in front represent this loving couple ;and to the right of the man's bust there is a three-fourthsfigure of a boy standing, between whomand Gleintus is seen an ox's head upon an altar.Upon the whole, I entertain no doubt that here"InTTW roy yXvKvraroy ^f)«c xpii^i x^'P^* — V. In-&vZpa TX^ivrov iroXXoIc Btoi^ scription, No. 183.3 ] 8 Thessaly A . [CHAP.Stood PharcadoUf that city being placed by Straboto the left of the Peneius, between Linnaeus andAtraXy in the division of Thessaly called ^ It is not impossible that the name of theneighbouring village Zarko may be a corruption ofCharlatan. In the lower part of the ruins copioussources issue from the mountain, and watersome gardens of pomegranates and a few otherfruit-trees which surround a small monastery.Gritziano was almost deserted before the Vezirmade it a tjiftlik, and sent here some cultivators.It now contains between forty and fifty families.Quitting it at 4.50, Turkish time, we pass throughthe villages of little and great Tzighioti, the latterat 5.35, traverse the plain from thence towardsthe Salamvria: at 5.55 cross a bridge over thestream which issues from the sources and marshesat the foot of the height of Kolokoto, and at6.10 cross the Salamvria by a bridge of threearches, called the bridge of Tzighioti. This is thelowest point in the plains of Upper Thessaly, asappears from the singular fact, that all the watersdescending from the mountains of 'Agrafa, and asfar as that of Gura or the ancient Othrys inclusive,here join the Salamvria within a very small space :it is not surprising, therefore, that the surroundingplain should now be in a marshy state. After ahalt of ten minutes at the Gumruk, a hut near thebridge where a toll is levied for the benefit ofMukhtar Pasha who rents it of the Sultan, we crossbetween the bridge of Tzighioti and Vlokho, twoStrabo, p. 438.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 319rivers running from right to left ; one at tenminutes beyond the Salamvria, the other at aquarter of an hour. They unite with one anotherand then with the Peneus not far below the placewhere we crossed them. The second river is thelaisser, and is about a third of the breadth of theSalamvria. We follow its right bank to Vlokho,where we arrive at 7.15. On the opposite side ofthe river stands another hamlet of the same nameat the foot of the lofty insulated hill already noticed,upon which are the ruined walls of a Helleniccity. A triple inclosure occupies the summitof the height, on the steep rocky descent ofwhich, on the southern and western sides, areremains of the town walls, not so much preservedas those above, but equally conspicuous at adistance. They have no towers, the flank defencebeing furnished entirely by a broken line.On the southern side of the hill the wall are traceablequite to the plain ; so that the city was betweentwo and three miles in circumference, thoughprobably a great part of the rugged space betweenthe walls was not inhabited. The masonry, particularlythat of the walls on the summit, is of the earliestkind, consisting of large irregular blocks, butnot exactly fitted to one another, as in the secondspecies. This remarkable height is separatedonly as I before stated by the river from the hillswhich extend along the right bank of the Peneitisto the paleokastro of Alifaka. In every other directionthe plains expand from hence to Fersala, Dho-moko, and the mountains of 'Agrafa. The river ofVlokho consists of two branches, which unite not far320 Thessaly. [CHAP.above the rocky height. They are usually knownby the names of FersaKti and Sofadhitiko, F^rsalaand Sofadhes being respectively the two principalplaces on or near them. The Soiadhitikois sub-divided into two streams, the confluence ofwhich is not more than two or three miles abovetheir junction with the Fersaliti. The easternbranch has its origin in several sources beforedescribed ', at the foot of the mountains, betweenFersala and Dhomoko, the largest of which is atVrysia. The western branch rises in the mountainsof 'Agrafa above Smokovo, and flows throughSofadhes.As the river Enipeus had its origin in MountOthrySy and flowed by PharsahiSy we may beassured that it was the Fersaliti, which exactlyanswers to that description : and as it was joinedby the Apidanus before it fell into the Penems \there is an equal certainty that the Apidanus waseither the united stream of Sofadhes and Vrysia,or that which we crossed between the Salamvriaand the river of Vlokho. But the latter riveroriginates in the western extremity of 'Agrafa, ornot far from the frontiers of A tasmania ; whereasthe Apidanus^ according to undoubted testimony,was a river of Phthisis and appears to have hadSee Vol. I. p. 454. tig tov *Awiiavoy irapafidWii''O ^6 *'Eyiirevs dire r§c o it tic toy Ufiyetoy, — Strabo,fOdpvoQ papa ^dptrakoy pvelc p. 432*It g^orgite raptApidanus, nunquamque celer nisi sixtus Enipeus.Lucan. Pears. 1. 6, ▼. 374.Apollodd. Rod. I. 1, v. 35, v. infra.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 321its sources in that district near Pharsalus Itseems evident, therefore, not only that the Sofasbelow the confluence of the two branchesis the Apidaniis^ but that properly this namebelonged not to the branch of Sofadhes, but tothat of Vrysia and Dhomoko, all the sources ofthat stream being at the foot of the mountainsof Phthuij and therefore in agreement with theconcurrent testimony of Herodotus, Euripides,and Strabo ; whereas the Sofadhes branch flowsfrom a part of Colonia. The latter is moreovera torrent often dry in summer, whereas thesources of the eastern branch being permanent, ^are alone adapted to the assertion of Herodotus,that the Apidanus was the only river in AchaiaPhthisis, which was not consumed by the host ofXerxes. As the historian informs us also thsrt thearmy marched in three days through Thessalyinto Melts, it is not probable that they deviatedso far from the direct route as the river of So-fades*.*H ^dtdBoQt ida roy KaWiv-ruv v^aruy irarepaifkatny 'AiriEavoyinSia\iiraly£ty, Euripides. Hec. v. 451.6 Ewxevc for the route of the Persiansriv ^ iy r^ OirraXl^ ^Eyitria through Thessaly, since we areypd^vtrty oq duro r^c "OdpvoQ told hy the historian that Xerxes^ikty ii^eTfu roy *AiriSayoy marched to Hales, from whenceKareyexOiyra Ik ^apadXov, — undoubtedly he proceeded alongStrabo, p. 356. Herodot. 1. 7» the Euboic faith by Larissa,c. 196. Cremaste, and Echinus, to theIt may be thought, per- Maliac plain. But Xerxes chosehaps, that even the sources at this road for the sake of com-Yrysia are too far to the west mutilating with his fleet, devi-vol.IV. YThessaly.[chap.Such being the situation of the Apidanus andJEnipeuSj there is every reason to believe that theruins at Vlokho are those of Peiresice ; for this cityis described by Apollonius as placed on the banksof the Apidanus, near its junction with the £ni-pens\ and by the author of the Orphica as nearthe confluence of the Apidanus and Peneius *.Both these descriptions may be applied to the hillof Vlokho, which is situated between the junctionof the Apidanus with the JEnipeuSy and that ofthe united stream with the Peneus and at noacting from the direct route, ashehad before done at Acanthus.The Persians were muchtoo numerous not to employall the roads leading withoutany very inconvenient deviationto the point at which theywere soon afterwards assembled,namely, the plains beforethe entrance of the pass ofThermopylae. The direct roadby Pharsalus and Lamia wasdoubtless one of their routes ;but perhaps that which leadsalong the foot of the mountainsfrom Fersala to Dho-moko, although not so directas the former, was followed bya still larger portion of thearmy, for the sake of the copioussources between those twoplaces, which form the Eridanus.If these were almost exhaustedby the multitude, it isnot surprising that no others inPhthisis should have sufficed.Teiyaro Siriityro^ e^* v^aviy ^AwiBavotoIlcipcffcac opcoc ^vXXi^cov iiyj(6di vaiaii^,"Eva fiiy *AiriSay6£ re /icyac Kal Slog *£i^iirevc"A/i^iii avfi^pioyrai dvdirpodi witty idyreQ,Apollon. 1. 1, V. 85»'AoTiplwy S' iiripri<re irdic xXtyciio Kofi^rov,Ueipetrlriy hg tyaiiy ty* *Aircdavo(o ^liOpoisIIj^vccoc filffywy fytyoy ^6oy dc &\a irifiirti.Orphic. Argon, v. 164.XXXIX.] Thessaly. 323great distance from either confluence* We learnfrom the same authorities that the stream formedby the union of the Ripens and Apidanus wasknown by the latter name, though this river is notlarger than the Enipeus, and is much shorter inits course. Tiresias was believed to be the sameplace as the Homeric Asterium, and to have receivedthis appellation from its situation on a highhill, as conspicuous as a star ^ Nothing can bemore apposite to this etymology than the mountainof Vlokho, which, by its abruptness, insulatedsituation, and white rocks, attracts the spectator'snotice from every part of the surrounding country.If the more ancient parts of the ruins of Vlokho arethose of the Homeric Asterium, the words TiravoioT6 Xfuica jcapifva, which the poet couples with 'Aorl-piovy were intended doubtless for the conspicuoussummit occupied by the acropolis of that city,and the white calcareous rocks of which arewell suited to the name Titans. The heightswhich are separated by the river from the hill ofVlokho, may perhaps be the Mount Phylleium ofApologies, near which Strabo states that therewas a city Phyllus, noted for a temple of Apollo1 •Oi i* troy 'Atrripiov TtTdyoi6 re \iVKa Kciptiva.II. B. V. 735.i) vvy Utpetria' ova ydp Ka Eustathius on the same diei ro Xa/iirpoy, on t<f sage of Homer uses nearly thevi//f}Xov opov^ KEifiivri role iron' same words.pwOev wc doTfip (^IweraC i) aVo'Aorep/ov rivoc* — Stephan. invoce.y2324 THRSSALIA. [CHAP.Phylleius^ The hill of Kortikhi, which standsabout three miles to the westward of that ofVIokho, is the site of another ancient town.On leaving the eastern VIokho, we cross theheights which we had before skirted, and descendinto a valley branching northward from the plain,and surrounded on three sides by the hills whichextend to the Peneius and to the Pannonia plain.Having passed at the end of twenty minutesthrough the small village of Aios Dhimitrios, weagain enter the great plain, which contains onlya few uninclosed patches of corn now just aboveground.Poland remains at a distance of two orthree miles on the rights near the Fersaliti, whichbetween Panama and VIokho is joined by thebranch formed by the junction of the Vrysia,or proper ApidanuSy with the tributary whichissues from the mountains of 'Agrafa below Smo-novo, and flows by Sofadhes. In an hour, mensispace, from VIokho we arrive at Petro, a villagebelonging to Mehemet Bey of Larissa, who suppliesthe seed-corn, and takes half the crop afterthe deduction of the dhekatia. The peasants sayhere that the labourers on Aljr Pasha's tjiftliks arein better condition than those on the farms of theBeys of Larissa : it is nevertheless observable, thatthe cottages of the latter have a greater appearanceof neatness and comfort. The Vezir mayhave been obliged to offer some advantages inorder to attract cultivators. But Mac i\a\aot n'AX/3avifria — ** Albania has ruined us" — is the cryhere as in other parts of Thessaly. So many of^ Strabo, p. 435.XXXIX.] TIIESSAL1A. 325its hungry plunderers have been introduced intothese plains by A\^ and his sons, that few placesare so sequestered as to be beyond the reach oftheir visits ; and they devour at least the provisionsof the poor peasantry, if they carry their extortionno farther.Honey is one of the chief productions of Petro,as in many of the Thessalian villages; but theseasons of late are said to have been unpropitiousto it. The usual crop is three new hives' fromeach old one. The bees are lodged in a squareinclosure of the ordinary masonry of the Tressilianplains : that is to say, bricks baked in thesun. Upon the interior walls of this inclosurethree stories of square niches are formed, withinwhich the bees form their combs exposed on oneside to the air. In the winter the hives fromwhich the honey is not taken are protected fromthe weather by a small piece of woollen cloth hungbefore them.The master of the house in which I lodge, whoasserts that he is, and is believed by his neigh*hours to be, 100 years of age, learned from hisfather that in the younger days of the latter, therewas no church in any village for many miles roundPetro ; and that on a Sunday the Greek womenwere in the habit of coming in arabas (waggons)to an ancient church at this place which still exists ;there is no appearance of a mosque having everbeen built here ; whereas in many of the neighbouringvillages, some of which have now churches,rroXtr^/atf.326 Thessaly. [CHAP.the minarets are still standing, though the mosquesare ruined, the only inhabitants of those villagesat present being Greek labourers.Petro was the site of a large ancient town, asappears by the traces of walls which include aspace of near two miles in circumference, boundedon three sides by rocky eminences, the lowest ofthe heights before mentioned, which extend to thePharsaliaj the Pannonia and the Peneus. Onthe fourth side the walls crossed the plain alongthe edge of some low marshy ground. Herecolumns have been found and inscribed stones :one of the latter, which is said to have existed afew years ago in the wall of the church, is nolonger to be seen there, but some of the columnsare still preserved in the portico ; they are small,and bear no marks of the more flourishing periodsof Greece, nor in the remains of the ancient wallsis there any appearance of the beautiful masonryof those ages. Behind the church there is a smallruin with a vault and arched entrance which lookslike Roman work. It is not improbable that Petrois the site of Phyllus, noted for its temple ofApollo Phyllis.Dec. 7. — From Petro to Fersala, a distance ofsix hours. We begin by following the foot of theheights of Petro for an hour to Misalari, leavingKutzolari in the plain three miles to the right beyondthe Fersaliti : from Misalari we cross a partof the plain to the south-western point of the hillcalled Mavro-vuni, where we arrive at the end oftwo hours, having left Tekeli at the foot of theheights two miles on the left. Mavrovuni is theXXXIX.] THEdSALIA. 327highest point of the range of hills which stretchfrom the Peneius to the Crannonia7i plain, and terminatesthose hills to the S.E. It is connectedwith them only by a low ridge on the northwesternside, and in every other direction risessteep and rocky from the plain. Its broad roundsummit is surrounded by remains of Hellenic wallsof a rough kind. All the most remarkable heightsof Thessaly appear to have been similarly occupiedat a period when the country Was doubtless in thesame state of insecurity as when the hills of Englandwere fortified in a manner, differing only fromthese in the greater barbarism of the plan and con •destruction. Such probably continued to be thestate of Thessaly until after the Trojan war ; forHomer makes no mention of Pharsalus, Crannon,Arne, Scotussasa, PelinnaBiim, and many othertowns which became afterwards the leading citiesof this province, attracted the inhabitants of theconuB into their walls, and helped to civilize thecountry.We halt at noon in the small village of Orfaua,situated half an hour beyond the extreme southernfoot of Mavrovuni. Orfana, Misalari, Tekeli,Hadjo-bashi, and several other neighbouring villages,were formerly inhabited by Koniaridhes,whose ruined mosques still remain in many ofthem, though no Turks now remain ; the landshave become Turkish tjiftliks, and the villagesare inhabited by Greek meters, or labourers.Many of them belong to the Mollalik, a part ofthe district of Larissa, so called because the titheis assigned to the support of the Mora of Larissa.328 THB8SALIA. [CHAP. XXXIXProceeding iTomOrfana, we leave Laspo-khori (madvillage), around which are rice-grounds, a mile onthe right, and crossing the JSnipeiis pass along thefoot of a rocky height, rising from the left bankof the river opposite to Hadjo-bashi. A fewquadrangular blocks of Hellenic fabric are stillpreserved amidst the ruins; and these, with theposition on the bank of the river, on a heightrising like an island out of the plain, are sufficientto mark it for the site of one of the ancient Thessaliantowns. Having passed between one extremityof the ruined walls and the bank of the river, wecross the plain to Fersala, passing by Bidjildr andsome smaller villages. Except in the vicinity ofthese the plain is all in pasture, where numeroussheep are now feeding, marked with the initials ofthe owners' names in Greek letters.CHAPTER XL.Phthisis, MAGNESIA.From Fenala to Armyro— Tjaterli— Ghid6k— Payee— CroctMCampus — skirting, or Armyro — Kefalosi, jilts — Siurpi —District of Kokus — Fteli6» Pteleum — Khamdko — ClarissaCremaste — Fan, Antron — Cape Solanum — Isthmian — Oreus^or Histicea — Return to Kefalosi — River Kholo, Curalius —Ak-ketjel, Thence Phthwtic€e — Kokkina, Pyrrhasus^ Templeof Cere — Cape Anghistri, Pyrrha — Ruins of Palace — Amchance,Dec. 10. — The road from Fersala to Armyroascends the Zygos, or neck on the south-easternside of Fersala, which unites the hill of thecitadel with the neighbouring heights, and thenenters an elevated valley lying between thoseheights and the parallel lower ridges borderingthe plain, of which the citadel is one, and aremarkable rocky projection to the eastward ofthe ruins of Pharsalus another. At the end of aquarter of an hour from Fersala vestiges of Hellenicwalls occur, surrounding a height whichdeclines towards that rocky mountain. Theseremains, which are of a more ancient style of-masonrythan the greater part of those of Phar-salus belonged evidently to a fortress, placed inadvance of the acropolis for its better defence on330 Phthisis. [chap.the side of the pass leading to it from the eastward.Fifty minutes farther we pass lower Tja-terli, a small Turkish village in the midst of theelevated valley which we have been following.To the right are the mountains, into which Caesartells us that the defeated Pompeians fled after thebattle of Pharsalus, and which extend from henceto Mount OthrySj Zituni, and Dhomoko. To theleft the heights fall rapidly to the vale of the JEni-peuSj where that river is joined by a small tributarywhich crosses our road a little westward of lowerTjaterli. On its right bank, where it issues fromthe mountain, about three miles to the right ofour road, stands upper Tjaterli, and two milesbeyond it in the same direction, a Turkish tekieh,or college of dervises, adorned with cypresses andgardens. To the left, in the valley of the Enipeus^is seen the village of Azerbu not far to the rightof the road from F^rsala to Larissa. Proceedingover a fertile level, in some parts uncultivated andin others under the plough, we cross the Enipeusin 55 minutes from lower Tjaterli. On the adjacentheight is Koklobashi, above which villagethe river flows rapidly through narrow ravinesfrom its sources \ which are around Gura *, a largevillage in a very lofty situation on the westernside of the summit of Othrys.On the heights just before we descended to theriver, the fields for a considerable space wereThis part of the liver alone rect than Lucan's "nunquamjustifies Oxides " irrequietus ccler nisi mists Enipeus."Enipeus," which is more cor • Ficovpo.XL.] Phthisis. 331strewn with the remains of ancient constructions,and other indications of the site of an ancienttown. After crossing the JEnipeuSy our road ascendsbetween two hills, and leaves, at a distanceof about five miles to the right, a lofty insulatedheight rising from the left bank of the river, andcommanding to the eastward a prospect of the plainof Armyro and the gulf of Volo. The summit ofthe hill is surrounded by remains of Hellenic walls,and at the foot of it, is the small village of Keuzlaron the river's bank. At the end of an hour anda quarter from the crossing of the JSnipeuSj wearrive at Gride, a small Turkish village situatedexactly at the summit of the pass, between the twohills abovementioned. At the foot of that to the left,on the edge of the great valley through which theSnipes flows to the PJiarsalian plain, is Ineli, andon the height above it, the remains of an ancientfortress. The rocks hereabout are a soft sandystone, of the same dark colour as the soil, butveined with white marble. Sunday being market-dayat Armyro, the men are almost all absentfrom Ghidek, and the women therefore shut themselvesup as we approach ; we are obliged howeverto halt for the sake of our cattle, and then continuein two hours and a half to Armyro by abrisk walk, our horses being of the menzll and theroad good, leading first by a gentle slope from thepass down into the plain, and then across the levelby a notable track. At 40 minutes from Ghidek,on the beginning of the descent from the pass, wetraverse the site of an ancient town, marked not332 pHTiifOTis. [chap.only by many stones and fragments of potteryscattered among the cornfields but by the vestigesalso of the walls of a citadel surrounding a circularheight in the centre of the other remains.The masonry consists of large blocks put togetherwithout mortar, but not in regular courses, nor arethey exactly joined, as in finished specimens ofthe second order. The situation near the entranceof a pass is well suited to the name of Phylojce^which town having stood between Pharsalus andPhthiotic Thebes seems to have been nearly in theline of our road, and having been one of theplaces whose people followed Protesilaus to Troy,was probably. on the eastern side of the mountains,being that on which the other towns of Protesilauswere situated \ The position commands a fineview of the plain anciently named Crocus *, orCrocotum ^, and which is well described by Straboas lying at the foot of Mount Othrys. Beyond theplain is seen the Pagasetic gulf, with the snowysummit of Mount Pelium on the left.At the end of two hours from Ghidek we crossa bridge near Karadanli, a village situated on aheight above the left bank of a large stream whichhas its origin near Gura and receives the watersof the northern side of Mount Othrys. It isHomer II. B. v. 695 ; Od. ' to Kpoiriov ictZlov irpoQ TfA. V. 289. — Pindar Isti. 1, icaraXZ/yovri rfjc "OOpvoc BC ovV. 84.— Apollon. Argon. 1. 1, "A/i^pv^oc pel iroraftdQ, — Straw.45. — Strabo, pp. 433. 435. bo, p. 435.Stephan. in ^vXakti, — Plin. * Stephan. in Ai^/i^rpioK.H. N. 1. 4, c. 9.XL.] Phthisis. 333called Kholo, or Kholo-rema ^ In ite coursethrough the plain it is shaded in many places byplane-trees. Our road had touched upon its banksduring the last half hour preceding our arrival atthe bridge by which we crossed it. Near the townof Armyro the road passes through a wood ofhawthorns and oaks, of which latter there aremany also beyond the town towards the sea.Almyro, or Armyro', called Elmer by the Turks,is the name of a district which comprehends fifteenor twenty villages, situated in the Crocian plain,or on the adjacent heights to the north and westas far as Ghidek. Mount Othrys itself is comprehendedin another sub-district of Trikkala, namedKokus, which, however, does not include Gura,the largest place on the mountain. The Crocianplain, which consists of a dark red soil, producescom in the upper parts, and tobacco and cotton inthe lower where the necessary irrigation is easilyobtained from the rivers. Kirt^ni ', the chief placeof Armyro, more commonly known by the nameof the district, contains 300 houses, and is situatedin the plain three miles from the sea, near the leftbank of a small stream which originates on thenorthern side of the mountain of Gura. The townis dispersed over a large space, great part of whichis occupied by plantations of tobacco. All the housesand adjacent lands are the property of Turks, butfifty of the houses are let to Greek cpyaracc, whobesides cultivating the lands, breed silk-worms,XoXo-^fv/ia — angry tor * *AX/iwpoc, 'Ap/ivpoc.rent. ' Kiprfi/fiy.334 PHTHioTis. [chap.spin cotton, and weave it into coarse bukhasias.Most of these Greeks are strangers, who upon theruin of their villages have here sought a livelihood,the land being productive, and the contributionsnot particularly heavy. Some of them hire thetobacco fields and cultivate the plants on theirown account, the women being chiefly employedin this labour. Fifty piastres is a common rentfor a house, or rather a hut of a single story,floored with earth and open to the tiles. Thewoman of the house in which I am lodged hasthis year paid the kharatj of the four male adultsof the family, amounting to 40 piastres, from theproduce of about an acre of tobacco. In the cultivationof com the Greeks find every thing butthe seed, and take half the crop, after the deductionof a tenth for the mire. The Turks of Armyrodepend upon the Trikeriotes for the fish theyconsume, which costs them from 15 to 30 parasthe oke. Mutton is 24 paras ; beef is not used,both Turks and Greeks here having a dislike toit.The Turks say the ox ought not to be killed,because he works the ground and furnishes uswith bread. Wood costs only 15 paras an ass-load.Wheat is 45 piastres the kilo of 150 okes,which is the ordinary measure of Thessaly, and isin Turkish called kara kilo. Its subdivisions areasfollow : — a vidura, 9 okes ; a litjek, 2 figures ;a modi, 4 litres ; a kara kilo, 2 modis.Dhiminio, or spring corn, is grown in the landsof the mountain villages, Gura, Kufus, and Ko-lotus;it is sown in March and April. In theplain two sorts of wheat are grown called Deve-XL.] Phthisis. 335des (earners tooth) and Amant (Albanian), whichlatter is the same kind of hard com general inLarissa and Trikkala, and weighs 23 or 24 okesthe Stambul kilo, of which 22 okes is consideredthe average capacity. Cattle are fed in the winterwith straw, with the kind of vetch called r6vi ^and with bambako-sporo, or cotton seed. Thesegrains are supposed to be nourishing because theyare sweet and make the cattle drink plentifully.Velj^ Pasha has bought the mukata of Armyrofor five years ; the district pays him 150 pursesa year, and 50 purses a year to A\^ Pasha,besides accounting to Veljr for the kharatj, andsupporting some local expences. The gumruk,or custom-house of Armyro, and of all the otherplaces on the gulf is dependent on that of Volo.The imports are chiefly iron, copper, cloth, andvarious articles of furniture, dress, and householdutensils, made at Constantinople. The purchaseof com is a monopoly of the Porte and none can,according to its decrees, be embarked from Thessalywithout an especial permission : the traffichowever has always been carried on clandestinely,and Aljr has even made it legitimate, by establishing,of his own authority, collectors at Armyro,Zituni, Salon, Toland, and other principal placeson the coast, who not only give permission to exportbut levy on his account 30 paras the kilo uponcom, and 2 paras the oke upon other exportedproduce, such as tobacco, pulse, 8cc. He haslately attempted by means of an agent at Volo tofollow the same practice there, but the Turkish.^ In Hellenic, opo/3oci Ervum ervilia.336 PHTHioTis. [chap.collector, supported from Constantinople, has asyet been able to resist him.Dec. 11. — At a distance of 50 minutes to thesouth of Kirtzini, the north-eastern extremity ofMount Othrys is separated only by a portion of theCretan plain, about two miles in breadth, froma bay in the middle of the western side of thegulf of Volo, which is sheltered by a promontoryou every side but the north. The mountain terminatesin a projection of calcareous Took, at thefoot of which issues a source of water in suchabundance as to turn a mill, and irrigate a largeextent of cotton plantations before it arrives at thesea. The place is called Kefalosi. A Helleniccitadel occupied the summit of the projectingheight and remains of walls are seen also on thenorthern slope of the hill, having short flanks atintervals, and formed of masonry which althoughmassive is not so accurately united as we generallyfind it in the southern provinces of Greece. Thewalls may be traced also on the descent to thesouth-east, and seem to have been united at thefoot of the hill to a quadrangular inclosure situatedentirely in the plain, and of which the northernside followed the course of the stream, and thewestern the foot of the height. The walls of thislower inclosure are nine feet and a half thick,are flanked with towers, and their masonry,wherever traceable, is of the most accurate andregular kind ; two or three courses of it still existin some places. The inclosed space, althoughthickly strewn with stones, the foundations ofbuildings and broken pottery, is now sown withXL.] Phthisis. 337com. The ruins are probably those of Alus, orHales, for Strabo describes Alus as being near thesea, which is confirmed by other authorities, andas situated at the extremity of Mount Othrys,above the plain Crocium\ of which the partaround Alus was called Athamantium ', fromAthamaSy the founder of Alus. It follows thatthe river on the northern side of the ruins was thecelebrated Amphrysus ^ Strabo having described^ 'O ^e ^OnifTiKoc "AXoc vero rov KpoWov ire^/ov* sci de ironwipari Kilrai rflc'*06pvoc • • rafwc" Afit^pvtroc wpoQ rf rcip^ci^Airix^i it 'Ir&Pov well *ApT€fiiiiopocIfflKovra ffraiiovc 6 "AXoCf ^ ^ ^e rely "AXof ev rfj wapaXi^"AXoci Xiyerai yap dfi^oripia^' r/O^d^iv.— strabo p. 433.fKifft It 6 'AOa/iac nev 'AXov, Herodot. 1. 7, c. 173. — H ovv^Kitn most. de false. legat. p. 392,\p6yoi^ ioTtpoy' wripKtirai ii Reiske.*AfiiriSioy ^Oific 'AOa/mvrcov dfii^i r' epv/iv^v"Odpvy Kol Torafiov Upoy ^6oy 'Ainiayoio.Apollon. Aig. 1. 2, V. 514.Schol. ibid.^£tymol. M. in I believe to furnish the right'AOa/iavrioK weiloy^ explanation in the Trojan ques-apologiesseems to have con tion, of the difficulty concern-foundedthe Apidanus with the ing the Salamander and Similis.Enipeus, a very common kind ' Apollon. 1. 1, v. 54. —of inaccuracy among the an Vir. George. 1. 3, v. 2. — Ovid,dents, in the case of a river Metal. 1. 1, v. 580. — Lucan.having two branches. It may 1. 6, v. 368.even, be suspected that Thu If the "A^poviroc of Lyco-chides and Herodotus, on oc chron was the same as thenations already referred to (see Amphrysus, there was a peoplethe last chapter, p. 293. 321) in this neighbourhood namedreally intended by the Apidanus the Palauthri, and a townthat branch of the river which Euryampus. — Lycophr. v. 899,Strabo distinctly describes as the et Tzetz. ibid. — Stephan. inEnipeus. The same common Evpvofiiroc* But perhaps theseand natural kind of ambiguity places were in Magnesia.VOL. IV, Z338 Phthisis. [chap.that river as flowing along the walls of Alus. Itdoes not indeed so well accord with his remark inanother place, that the Amphrysus flows throughthe Cretan plain ', the sources of the river beingvery near the walls, as well as near the extremityof the plain, and the whole course of the riverbeing only two or three miles in length. Butthese may be no more than the natural inaccuraciesof a geographer who writes from the informationof others. It may be thought, perhaps,a greater objection to so famous a river, that thesources at Kefalosi are said sometimes to failentirely in summer. Beyond the ruins the valleyof Siurpi branches from the plain of Armyr6 tothe south-east, being included between MountOthrys and a range of hills which border thewestern side of the entrance into the gulf of Volo.Siurpi, distant an hour and a quarter from Kegstands at the foot of these hills, to thenorthward of the highest summit, which is ofa conical shape, and called Khlimo. A smallstream waters the valley, which bears com, cotton,and mulberry trees, for silk. On the sideof OthrySy opposite to Siurpi, stands a monasteryof St. Nicolas, beautifully situated amidst treesand running water, and a little higher up is anothermore ancient, dedicated to the Panaghia,summed ^ivia (the hospitable) and celebrated forapainting of the Virgin by St. Luke. Siurpi belongsto the voivodalik of Kokus, which comprehendsthe Christian towns of Platano, containingStrabo, p. 435, v. supra, p. 332. n. 2^XL.] Phthisis. 339650 families, Kufus 120, Siurpi 120, Kokotus 60,Ftelio 60, and several other smaller villages, allon or near Mount Othrys. Sesklo and Portia,near Volo, are also comprised in the same Mu-kate.Plano has lately increased in size, and Portia,being situated on Mount PeUum^ shares thesecurity of that retired position ; all the rest havedeclined rapidly of late years, so as to leave afourth of the houses empty or ruined. The revenuesof the district of Kokus are farmed by AlPasha for 120 purses a year. Tahir Bey, son ofKhotad Bey of Arghyro-kastro, is his deputy, andresides at Platano, which is situated three milesto the south-west of Kirtzini, on the foot of MountOthrys. . Tahir receives 1 5 purses a year fromthat village, which is at a farther expence of about12 purses a year for the expences of his household.Kufiis and Kokotus are on the eastern side of themountain above the valley of Siurpi, but were notin sight from any part of our road.Siurpi furnishes an example of the ordinaryprocess by which Greek villages are in a few yearsreduced from a comparatively flourishing state tomisery, and often to complete desertion or are convertedfrom £leftherokh6ria into Turkish tjiftliks.Having formerly had the same population as Platano,Siurpi continues to be rated in some articlesto the same proportion of the contributions of Kokusas Platano, though the latter now contains five orsix times as many families as Siurpi. The Habitof Siurpi, an Arghyrokastrite, and deputy of TahirAga has just received his chief's order, to carryz 2340 piiTHioTis. [chap.this day to Platano 6,000 piastres for the \piri ofthe village, but has been unable to collect, withallhis diligence, more than 2,000. The khardtjin particular is most onerous to such a diminishedpopulation, though upon this sub-district and thekaza of Zituni, it is light compared with thatof the districts of Clarissa and Trikkala, shewingthat the non-Musulman population of the twolatter has undergone great diminution since thecapitation was established. Siurpi has alreadycontracted a debt of 300 purses, the greater partof it bearing an interest of 12 per cent. In suchcases the creditors are usually Albanians, or Turksof Larissa, who when they come to receive theiryearly interest, quarter upon the village until themoney is forthcoming ; and as it seldom, is ready,the produce of the people's labour is thus consumed,and their misery increased without anydiminution of the debt. The persons sent tocollect the taxes, devour the villages in thesame manner. Hence families retire, leaving theremainder in increased difficulty, which at lastforces them to commute with their creditors inkind. At Siurpi the next step will probably be,that Aly or one of his sons will take the debt ofthe village upon himself, on condition of its becominghis tjiftlik, and will then compound withthe creditors at an easy rate to himself. Mostof the Greeks who retire from this part of thecountry settle in the districts of Pergamus^ Smymajor Magnesia under the mild government of thefamily of Kara Osman Ogle.A church at Siurpi contains a sepulchral stele,XL,] Phthisis. 34]'representing in a very rudely sculptured relief, aman and woman joining their right hands ; overthe man's head is engraved his name Dubious,and in a higher compartment of the stone, that ofAristotle, daughter of Menandrus," followed bythe formula xpvfrrri x'^^V^y shewing that to her themonument was constructed, while the figures inrelief indicate that she was the wife of Dubious.The stele terminates above in the very commonform of a pediment, within which is the name ofNicarcha, daughter of Dubious, which seems tohave been a subsequent addition to the memorial.Dec. 12. — Pteleo, or Ftelio*, which is an hourand a half distant from Siurpi, is in a state equallydeplorable ; the debt of the village amounts to 1()0purses, and this year, not having been able to paythe interest at all, the people are become merelabourers for their creditors. In addition to othercauses of poverty the season has been unfavourable.The village stands on the southern side of MountKhlimo, among the rugged but fertile falls of themountain which terminates below in the bay ofFtelio, a beautiful inlet sheltered from all windsand having a sandy bottom, shelving sides, anda depth in the middle of thirty orgies. It wasformerly frequented by French ships, and afterwardsby the Greek islanders, chiefly for firewood,which was carried from hence to Alexandria,but the adjacent mountains are now almost exhausted.As Pliny notices Pteleum only as aV. Inscription, No. 184. ' UrtXioVj OrcXtoF.342 PHTHioTis. [chap.forest ^ the town seems never to have recoveredits destruction by the consul Licinius in the year171 B.C*.The lands of Ftelio, on the shore of the bay,and adjacent heights, produce com, wine, andmulberry trees, with a little cotton. There arealso a few tobacco plantations attached to thehouses of the village. A brook descends on oneside of it from Mount Khlimo, and joins the seanear a lai^e marsh, eastward of which a highpeaked hill is crowned by the remains of a townand castle of the middle ages, called Old Ftelio '.There can be little doubt that it stands on thesite of the ancient Pteleum, though I search invain among the ruins for any decisive marks ofHellenic antiquity. In the more flourishing ages ofGreece, the marsh was probably (at least at certaintimes of the year) a rich and productive meadow,and hence the epithet which Homer has appliedto Peleus ^. The summit of the castle commandsa view of the entrance into the gulf of Volo.At three-fifths of the distance from Old Ftelioto Khamako, which is a ride of two hours, wearrive at the inner extremity of the Bay of Ftelio,where, among the ruins of a church situated in alittle grove of trees, are several fragments of small^ nemus Pelion. — Plin. oppidanorum, circuit a fundsN. 1. 4, c. 8. mentis. — Liv. 1. 42, c. 67.Pteleum, deserted fiigd ' IlaXacdv steady,*Ay\ia\6v r* 'AvrpQva He UrtXtoy Xextwoliiym11. B. V. 697.XL.] Phthisis. 343columns and stones of ancient workmanship, someof which are of white marble. An adjacent peninsulaformed by the sea on two sides, and a marshon the third, is covered with ruins of the samekind as those at Pale Ftelio. The peninsula isknown by the name of Panaghia, from the ruins ofa church in which I find a large sepulchral stonein memory of Physical, the daughter of Dubious ^the patronymic £v|3cor«a being employed insteadof the ordinary form Ev/Biorov, or that in which thesame name occurs on the monument at Siurpi,which appears by the style of sculpture as well asby the form of the letters to be not earlier than theAntoninus. As the use of the patronymic appearsfrom a variety of examples in Thessaly to haveaccompanied the iEolic dialect, which ceased probablyat the Roman conquest, there is in this casea difference of three or four centuries between thetwo monuments ; and they furnish a curious instanceof that locality of names which is observableas well in the ancient authors as in lapidaryinscriptions.From the isthmus of Panaghia th road ascendsthe heights for two or three miles over uncultivatedground covered with mastic prinokokki, and smallolive-leaved ilex, here called thalia (female) :exactly at the summit stands Khamako, now containingonly thirty or forty families who live inpoor cottages ; while the larger houses are emptyand falling to ruin. Khamako belongs to theElmer kazasi, or Turkish district of Armyro.V. Inscription, No. so.344 Phthisis. [ChapLike the villages of Kokiis, it is an eleftherokhori,or village inhabited by Greeks who cultivate theirown lands ; but it has declined of late years moreeven than the greater part of those villages, havingsuffered more than any of them from the robbers,who frequent Mount Othrys^ or from their opponents.The soil around Khamako consists chieflyof that mould of a deep red colour which both inGreece and Asia Minor is considered poor. Thepeople seem to have given up all hope of anamendment in their situation, and despair of beingable to avoid the necessity of abandoning the village.The places which are at present in the bestcondition in this part of Greece are Gardhlki, thenext village to Khamako westward, and Xerokhoriin EuhcBQ. The latter produces com, cotton, andsilk, and fabricates shirts and drawers made of amixture of silk and cotton, which are as fine butnot so lasting as those of the Islands. It is aneleftherokhori, and being included in the districtof Livadhia, enjoys some protection as being animperial appanage, though, like Livadhia, it partiallyacknowledges the authority of k\if Pashd,and makes him an annual present. In generalthe Christians of Evbcea re-echo the exclamationof €^aXacr0^ica/ifv arrow rrjfv 'Ap/3avf|riav, though Albanianencroachment has not proceeded exactly inthe same manner in that island as in Thessaly.The Albanians of whom they complain, are theSubashls of the villages, who are often from partsof Albania opposed in politics to A\if.Having raised a little money in the service ofsome great Turk in Barbary, Egypt, Syria, orXL.] Phthisis. 345perhaps in the service of the Pasha himself, theAlbanian offers to some Turk of 'Egripo to farmthe revenue of one or more of his villages, — if aSpahis, entitling him to the tithe, so much j;hebetter. The Shkipetar^ then resides at the village,lends money at a high rate of interest to thepeasants ; and if these, as generally happens, areunable to pay it regularly, he takes their share ofthe produce at a low valuation, and reduces themat length to the condition of mere slaves. Sometimesan Albanian will set out upon this speculationwithout any capital, by borrowing money fromJew Serfs of L&rissa, Livadhia, or 'Egripo ; andso well have the Albanians established their characterfor fidelity to their pecuniary engagements,that they seldom meet with difficulty in raisingmoney in this way at the ordinary interest of oneper cent, per menses.The Greek peasantry are fully sensible howruinous it is to borrow in this manner; ^^biitwhat can we do," they say *, " when we areloaded with so many demands." As a last resourcethey may retire to some other part ofGreece or to Asia Minor, and leave their creditorsto obtain what they can out of the remaining inhabitants: in fact, this power of migration operatesas some slight check to the cupidity of the Albanianwho has embarked his capital in this mansThe Albanians call them ^ lac pv\yovv XP^^* ''^ ^^selves Shkipetars, their conn Kdfivofi€y;try Shkiperiy and their Ian*gage Ship.346 PHTHioTis. [chap.ner, by leaving him sometimes without cultivators.The Albanians and Turks of Euhcsa aremuch complained of by the Greeks for obligingthem when they land in the island to take a khancertificate at two piastres and a half, whetherthey have paid the year's poll-tax elsewhere ornot.Dec. 13. — The heights behind Khamdko, andparticularly a point between two or three miles to thewestward of this village, command a beautiful viewof thereto JSuboicuMf and of all the northern sideof the island, as well as of the strait of Trikeri andpart of the gulf of Volo. The bay of Toland andMount Homo behind that town are seen over thenarrow isthmus which connects the peninsula ofCefUBumj now called Lith&dha, with the rest ofMuboBa.Immediately to the westward of the heights ofKhamako are the broad valley and bay of ,beyond which appears the point of Akhino,(the ancient Echinus,) and to the left all thesouthern side of the Maliac Gulf, the mouth ofthe SpercheiuSy Thermopylae Mounts (Eta andChemist and the entire promontory of Cefusum.No prospect in Greece can give a more strikingimpression of that diversity of varied surface andwinding shores which is so marked a characteristicof this country. Between the mountains (7a/-lidromus and the proper (Eta the site of the citadelof Heraclea Tracking is particularly conspicuous,a precipitous rock overhanging the Asopuseastward, and the plain of Trachis northward, andin which arc the catacombs noticed on the 28th ofXL.] Potions. 347November, 1805. The adjacent smaller summitalso is distinguishable, similar to that on whichthe citadel stood, and of equal altitude ^ Here itwas that a body of the Romans under the consulAcilius, in the year b. c. 191, having effected anascent and gained possession of the summit, forcedthe italians in the citadel to a capitulation.In the valley of Gardhiki, at a direct distanceof five or six miles from Khamako, a height whichadvances in front of Mount OthrySj and overlooksthe valley, was the site of Larissa Foretaste ', thewalls of which are very conspicuous on the westernside, where several courses of the masonry remain.The tom occupied the slope of the hill facing thesea, whence its epithet Foretaste as hanging on theside of Mount OthrySj and thus well distinguishedfrom the great LarisMj situated in the midst ofa plain. A torrent flows on either side of theancient site; that to the west passes through ahamlet called the Mills', from some mills nowabandoned, and then through the village of Guardswhere are the mills in present use, and towhich the people of Khamako, having no runningstream, carry their com to be ground. In sinnerthe water of the torrent is said to be only just sufficientto turn the mills. But there is no want offountains in the valley of Gardhiki, which producescom, cotton, and vines ; so that Strabo's descriesLiv. L 36, c. 24. See Seylax in 'AxbuoL Stephan.Vol. II. p. 28. in Adptffffa,Strabo, pp. 435, 440. ' orovc M/\ov£.348 PHTHioTis. [chap*tion of Larissa Creates as cvvSpoc Kat a/tiiriXo^vroc 'applies perfectly to that place, nor less so its situationto the eastward (more accurately to the S.E.)of Othrys, and its distance of twenty stades fromthe sea ^. Larissa was still a town of importancein the second century b. c« It was occupied,together with Pteleum and Antron, in the year302 B. cay by Demetrius Poliorcetes, when he wasat war with Cassander ' ; it was taken by Apuleiusin the first war between Philip and the Romans %200 B. c, and was again besieged by the Romansin the first year of the Persia war, b. c. 171, whenthe Consul Publius Licinius Crassus occupied it,after it had been abandoned by the inhabit*antsIn the coast below Khamako are two smallbays, ofi* the westernmost of which is the littleisland named Myonnesus by Strabo, who, by addingthat it was situated between Larissa Cremasteand Antron, furnishes us a good guidance to thelatter place, which is now called Fan. The roadleading thither from Khamako descends a ravine,included between the heights on which Khamakois situated and the southern side of Stravovuni, ahigh barren mountain which separates the bay of^ Strabo, p. 440. ical "AXoc ^c koXElO* l^fic tropawXcv^avrt A&ptirira 1i Kpifiavri^ Kal • «araSioiQ kxaToy 6 'E^c'^oc iratrai wpog'^ta r^cviripictirah Trie 2* USc irapo- "OOpvoe. — Strabo, p. 435.Xiac iy fuffoyalijf, tmlv ii Kf>£- ' Diodor. 1. 20, c, 110*fiatrril /iapurtra^ eirod^c ffra^iovc * Liv. 1. 31, c. 46.avrijc lu)(pvffa * Liv. L 42, c. 56. 67*XL.J Phthisis. 349Fteli6 from the channel ofSubcea. The ravine terminatesat the sea in a small uninhabited valley,from which rises a quadrangular height half a milein circumference, bordered on the side adjacent tothe sea by cliffs, and surrounded by foundations ofHellenic walls constructed of regular masonry. Asmall tract of ploughed land around the height,covered with stones and broken pottery, seems topoint out the extent of the town, to which the heightserved as a citadel. On the eastern side is a wellof ancient workmanship, which is said never to bedeficient in summer. The slopes of the mountainon every side are covered with shrubs, chiefly thewild olive and the myrtle.Anthony though it could scarcely ever have beena place of importance, is not unnoticed in history.Its purchase by Philip son of Amyntas suppliedone of the numerous arguments employed byDemosthenes to alarm the Athenians * ; and ittwice shared the fate of the two towns betweenwhich it was situated, having been taken togetherwith them by Demetrius Poliorcetas, and again bythe Consul Licinius.The hymn to Ceres, attributed to Homer, showsthat deity to have been the protectress of Antron ',and the epithet ircrp^ccc, there applied to Antron,is not less appropriate than that of ay-j^UikoQ in the1 Demosth. Philip 4. p. 133. Reiske."AXX* &y\ *Ekiv&iyoc QvoiamiQ iiifioy txavvaKal Hiipoy hfM/^ifvrriy *Ayrp«ayd re irerpi^cyra.Hymn, ad Cere. v. 489.360 Phthisis. [chap.Iliad. They were perhaps more so than the poetimagined ; for Antron seems to have been indebtedfor its long existence in so poor a territoryto its maritime situation and the compositionof its rocks : the latter having been noted forsupplying excellent mill-stones ^ of which thetraffic was promoted by the position of the placeat the entrance of one of the most commodiouspoints of communication on the Eastern coast ofGreece.Fan lies exactly opposite to the cape in Mubcsawhich forms the western side of the bay of Ores ',and is between three and four miles distant fromFan. Off that cape is a small island surmountedby a ruined church of Tlavayla vmnwiaaa^ betweenwhich and Fan, at one-third of the distance fromthe former, is the Ipfxa v^Xov, or sunken rock whichwas called the'^Ovoc 'Avrpoivoc ', in times when theseseas were much better known than they are at present.One of the primates of Khamako, who accompaniedme to Fan, was upon the Ones thissummer in a boat, and describes it as a small rockupon which there were three (rirtda/uoScc^ or palms ofwater, below the bottom of the boat. ''Ovoc 'Aveis not to be interpreted the ass, but the*Avrptf vic oro' V. et Hesych. in MvXif etil wapoifila, cir^ve7c yap frpoc Estate in II. B. v. 697.fivXuvac ixei Xtdovg, — Step 'Opc($c*phan. in *AyKuy, * Hard Si rot 'ArrpAyaIn 'AKTpwK the same author ep/xa v^Xoy ty rf wpog Ehfloi^remarks that the place was so harl w6p^ KoKovfieyoy "Orocalled from its caverns, 3ia r6 *AjTp6yoc«— Strabo, p. 435.rove roTovQ ayrputStig elyai —XL. J Phthisis. 351mill-Stone of Antron, in allusion to the staple productionof that town ; and assuredly, if the rock iscorrectly described by Strabo, and my Khamakioteguide, it is admirably placed for catching an unfortunateship and grinding it to pieces.The description which Strabo has given ofAntron, Myonnesus, and the sunken rock, is aremarkable example of the occasional accuracy ofhis information on the coasts of Greece ; and whichis often a contrast to that regarding the interior ofthe country. The difference is to be attributedundoubtedly to the authorities which he followed ;for although he was an extensive traveller, heseems not to have examined any country much indetail, and least of all Greece, where he generallyrefers to the information of others. There wereprobably many accurate peril extant in his timefor the use of navigation, but scarcely any perfectdescriptions of the interior of this country.The eastern extremity of Mount Stravovuni,which forms one of the promontories at the entranceinto the Gulf of Volo, appears to be theElysium of Livy, where the ships of Attacks andthe Rhodii were stationed to intercept the Macedonianfleet at Demerits, in the case of its attemptingto sail out of the Gulf for the purpose of relievingthe garrison of Oreus, which was then besiegedby Attacks himself and by the Romans underApustius\ The district in which Elysium wassituated was called Isthmian — a name well adaptedto the peninsula on the southern side of the GulfLiv. 1. 31, c. 46.362 Phthisis. . [ChaffFtelio, which terminates westward in the peakof Stravovuni. The allied fleet was stationed perhapsbehind the island of Ai^hyronlsi, which isnear Cape Stairs ; and it is not unlikely thatthere was a town or fortress on that part of thecoast called Zehmumf as it seldom happened thata remarkable promontory or harbour had not alsoa fortress of the same name near it.The plain of IlistuBa or JEubasaj which adjoinsthe bay of Ores, is perfectly seen from Fan, extendingseveral miles inland. Towards the easternextremity of the plain is the lai^e village of Xero-khoriy and nearer the sea, at the western end ofthe bay, that of Ores, where a paleokastro surroundinga hill marks the site of the ancientOreus or Histieea ^We return from Fan to Ftelio, leaving Khanon the left, and crossing its ploughed landsupon the south-western side of Stravovuni. Thewheat and barley are just springing up : the soilis of a deep red colour like that adjacent to thevillage. The plough is not at all different fromthat of Acamania, and the denominations of theseveral parts of it are the same*. After havingpassed Khamako we descend directly upon thepeninsula of Panaghia, at the head of the bay ofPteleufiiy and return to Ftelio.The contests between the thieves and the D^r-vent-Aga have contributed greatly to the ruin ofthis formerly flourishing angle of Thessaly. Kufus,which occupies a lofty situation in Mount OthrySy^ Strabo, p. 445. ' See Vol. III. p. 548.XL.] Phthisis. 353and subsists only by its vineyards, and the agoghior employment of its inhabitants and cattle in carryingmen and merchandise about the country, is atonce the most exposed to the robbers, and theleast able by its resources to support the damage.When the thieves intend to attack a village, theyusually take up a commanding position near it,from whence they send a letter to the Hodja-bashi,beginning probably with' " My dear President**and inviting him to come and settle accounts withthem. His answer most commonly is flight, inwhich he is followed by the principal inhabitants ;when the robbers, no longer fearing any resistance,enter the village, burn a few houses, massacrethe cattle, and carry off some of the womenand children who have not had time to escape,making choice of those whose release promises thehighest ransom. The consequence is, that thevillages in the neighbourhood of the haunts of therobbers generally find themselves under the necessityof satisfying their demands, and keeping ongood terms with them. This, on the other hand,subjects them to the vengeance of the Derwentwho imprisons their primates at loannina,and sends Albanians to quarter upon them. Thegreater part of the armatoli employed against thethieves by the districts adjoining Mount Othrys,namely, Zituni, Kokus and Armyro, and the samemay be said of every other part of Greece infestedby robbers, have themselves followed the sametrade. If they irpoaicvvouv, or voluntarily makedyairri^eve fio Upwetrri,VOL. IV. A a354 Phthisis. [chap.their submission, they are always favourably receivedat the time, though perhaps marked outfor future destruction ; and unless they have givenparticular reason to the Vezir to suspect them, theyare then employed as derventlidhes. As many ofthem have brothers or cousins among the thieves,there is generally a secret correspondence betweenthe two parties ; and the best mode of attacking avillage is often pointed out to the robbers by oneof their opponents, who, entering a village for theostensible purpose of watching the motions of thethieves, lodges in a particular house for the soleobject of examining his host's property, and of devisingthe best mode of plundering him. He theninforms the robbers when and where to lie in waitfor their victim, whose pleas of inability to payransom are met by evidences of a perfect knowledgeon the part of the robbers of all the particularsof his possessions. These instances of treacherywere more common before the extension of Aljr*spower, who, by obtaining the government of alarge part of Greece, has greatly narrowed thefield of Kleftic ingenuity. In such a mountainouscountry, however, and on the borders of the districtsgoverned by him, it is impossible entirely tosuppress the robbers. Nor is he perhaps very desirousof this result. Security and tranquillitymight be in excess if the benefit of his own servicesas guardian of the roads and passes were notsufficiently manifest to the Porte. Whether it bewith a secret view of this kind, or as stating a realfact, he admits his inability to reduce the Greekmountains by his own troops alone, or to keepXL.] Phthisis. 355them in a State of tranquillity but with the assistanceof the inhabitants themselves.Dec. 14. — Having recrossed the ridge fromFtelioy we leave, at the descent into the valley ofSiiirpi, at a mile on the left, a height surroundedon three sides by a winding brook which descendsfrom Mount Othrys by Siurpi into the Gulf. Thesituation of this height, and some appearance ofart in the form of it, may warrant the belief that itwas the station of an ancient town, perhaps Diumor Orchomenus, the inhabitants of which were preventedby Demetrius from retiring into ThebsB, asCassander had ordered, when the former, proceedingfrom Athens, landed at Larissa andtook Antron and Pteleum. ^ Riding throughSiurpi we proceed to Kefalosi, and passing alongthe ancient wall halt to dine at the springs.The distance from Old Ftelio is about fourteenmiles, sufficiently answering to the 110 stadesplaced by Artemidorus between Pteleum andAlus ', and confirming, therefore, the position ofthe latter at Kefalosi. From the springs we continueour route through the vineyards of Kirt^ui,leaving the town on the left, and in fifty minutesarrive at Tzingheli, called by the Turks Kedjel orGkedjel, which is the skaloma or harbour ofArmyro, and about three miles distant from Kirt-zinc. It consists only of a house for the superintendentof the Gumruk and a few cottages;but for a considerable space around, the land isstrewn with stones and pottery, among which areDiodor, 1. 20, c. 110. ' Strabo, p. 433.Aa356 Phthisis. [chap.vestiges of walls built of small rude stones mixedwith Roman tiles. Other ruins of the same kindare still standing upon foundations of large quadrangularblocks, the remains apparently of fttemple or other building, about thirty feet long bytwenty broad. At a Turkish fountain and well alittle beyond the custom-house, are some othersquared stones. Leaving this place at 9.15 Turkish,we cross the plain of Armyr6 in a northerlydirection, but gradually receding from the coast.The peasants are ploughing for wheat, but a greatpart of the land is uncultivated, and now servesfor pasture to the flocks of some Vlakhiotes fromMount Pindus. At 10.20 we recross the Kholo.This river, after descending through the ravinesof OthrySj enters the plain in a line with the steepinsulated hill of Keuzlar, on the left bank of the£nipeti8j mentioned on the 10th of December.Like many of the rivers of Greece, the Kholo hasaconstant stream only in the upper part of itscourse. Here it consists only of some stagnantpools of water, though even as low as the bridgeof Karadanli, three or four miles higher up, wherewe crossed it on the 10th, there was still a respectablecurrent, showing that in the interval the principalderivations are made for watering the fieldsof cotton and tobacco.Assuming the paleokastro at Kefalosi to havebeen His, and the river at that place the Amphrysus^ the Kholo was probably the Curious ; forit would seem from Strabo that Itonus, which wassixty stades distant from Alus, stood upon a riverXL.J Phthisis. 357named Curious ' ; and that interval corresponds tothe general distance of the Kholo from the river ofKefalosi. As Itonus, according to the geographer,was situated above the Crocian plain, it stood probablynear the spot where the river issues from themountains. In the enumeration of the towns of Pi*o-tesilaus, Iron is associated with Phylace and Pyrrhus*j both which were assuredly in the plain ofArmyro or on its borders ; the situation just assignedto Itonus accords, therefore, with Homer : and asIron was in that case possessed of a portion of thepastoral highlands of Othrys, the epithet " motherof flocks" appears to have been well adapted to it.From the Kholo-rema we ascend along analmost imperceptible slope towards the hills onthe northern side of the plain ; and not far fromthe foot of them, arrive, at 11, at Ak (or white)Ketjel, in Greek KcrS^cXi, having ten minutes beforeleft Aidin a quarter of a mile on the left. Thesetwo villages were formerly inhabited by Koni-arches, as the names, and ruined mosques, andrules indicate : the lands and houses now belongto Turks of Armyro, but the villages are inhabitedentirely by Greeks who are tenants of the fields andhouses, or mere day labourers. Of the two, has the greater appearance of decline : the'AWjfci ^e 'Irwvov irepi sc.) viripK€irai 6 'IrwKOc oirovcs^JL'oira trraBiove 6 "AXoc V V to rrJQ 'Irwviac Upon a^' ov koI"AXoc TO ly TJ B'uciiiri^ koI 6 KovapiOQStrabo, p. 433. Trora/ioi;. — p. 435.TovTov (tov KpoKtov vi^LovOi tlypy ^vXuKfiv k'ac Hvppaooy tivOefioiyraAiifiriTpoc rifiiyoQf "iTutyd r£ /if|rcpa fiffXiay,II. B. V. 095.358 PHTHioTis. [chap.cottages are dispersed at large distances amongthe ruined towers, and contain only six familiesof meters. These are owners of the oxen,ploughs, and other agricultural stock, and inreturn for the seed supply the Turk proprietorwith half the crop the tithe being first deducted.They are already preparing to abandonthe place, being too few in number to bearthe expences of the frequent konaks to whichthey are exposed by lying in the road fromVelestino to Armyro, which is one of the directroutes from the plains of Thessaly to Zituni and'Egripo. In the midst of the houses Vlakhioteshepherds are building mandates or folds for theirsheep with branches of trees.Such is the miserable representative of a citywhich, during the most civilized ages of Greece,rivalled the leading members of the Thessaliancommunity. A height half a mile to the north-eastof Ak-Ketjel, is surrounded with the ruined wallsof Phthiotic Thebes for of the identity there seemsno doubt, on considering the data left to us byPolybius and Strabo. From the former we learnthat the district of Thebes confined upon those ofDemerits, PhersB, and Pharsalus, that it was nearthe sea, and 300 stades from Larissa ^ and inStrabo, whose pericles of this coast I have beforeshewn some reason for trusting, we find the maritimeplaces of Phthia mentioned in the followingorder, beginning from Phalara^ near Lamia orZituni : first Echinus (Akhino), then Larissa Cree1. 5, c. 09. •XL.] Phthisis. 359master (Gardhiki), the islet Myormessus^ Antron(Fan), Pteleum (Fteli6), Alus (Kefalosi), then atemple of Ceres, which was two stades distantfrom the ruins of Pyrasus, and 20 stades belowThebes ; then the promontory Pyrrha, which wasthe boundary of Phthisis, and near which weretwo islets, called Pyrrha and Deucalion. Thesame author shows that the Crocian plain laybetween Alus and Thebae ', whence it seems evident,assuming Kefalosi to have been Alus^ thatThehiB was towards the northern side of the plain,at a distance of about three miles from the sea,which exactly agrees with the Paleokastro at .The direct distance of this point fromLarissa being about 26 o. m., accords perfectlywith the 300 stades of Polybius.In the burying ground of a ruined mosque atAk-tetzel lies an inscribed sorts, entire with itscover*, and in the village church are severalother inscribed stones. Two of these were dedicationsto Artemis'; another was in memory ofone Leon of Eretria ^, which we know from Straboto have been a town in Phthisis ^ The rest arcsepulchral with names only ^. One of these, whichseems to have been originally erected for a man4 "AXoc vjcipKtiTai * V. Inscription, No. 186.ik Tov KpoKiov weSiov" ' Y. Inscriptions, Nos. 187>• • • 'Yiro ^c r^ KpoKi^ 9^- 188.fiat eiaiy al ^diutrih^. — Straw V. Inscription, No. 189.bo, p. 433. * Strabo, p. 434.Qril^iiy 3* iv rjj fitaoyaig. to ' V. Inscriptions, Nos. 190,KpoK'ioy vision irpog r^ Kara 191, 192, 193, 194.\tfyoyri r^i;''O0pwo(;. — p. 435.360 Phthisis. [chap.named Diomedes and his wife Hellanocrateia, wasafterwards reversed and inscribed with two namesof men, aliens undoubtedly to the former family ^which may perhaps have been extinct. Nothingwas more common than such conversions, orviolations of tombs or sepulchral monuments asmany epitaphs prove, containing imprecationsagainst the violators, or stating the amount of thefines which the public chest had a right to demandfrom them ^. Derivatives of Sum seem to have beencommon at Phthiotic Thebes among the names offemales, three of whom were AticotJi, AucacpcVa, andAficato/3ovXa '.Dec. 16. — The ruins of Them occupy the slopeof a height crowned by cliffs, which faces the eastand looks down upon the northern angle of thebay of Armyro, from whence the coast turns eastwardto Cape Angkistri, the ancient Pyrrha, whichseparates the bay of Armyro from that of Volo.The entire circuit of the walls and towers, both ofthe town and citadel, still exist, . though in someplaces the foundations only are seen ; in othersthere are a few courses of masonry. The circumferenceis between two and three miles. On thenorthern slope, a brow which overlooks a torrentflowing in narrow gorges from the hills towards Celestina,furnished an advantageous line for thewalls of that front. On the south the ground wasalmost equally favourable to the ancient engineers,y. Inscription, No. 190. I have not met with any simiamany examples in Asia lar instance in Greece.Minor one third of the fine is ' Y. Inscriptions, Nos. 187«promised to the informer, but 188, 191.XL.] , Phthisis. 361and on the lower or eastern side there is still asteep descent from the walls into the plain. Theacropolis occupied a level above the rocky brow.The masonry is of the third kind, and in manyparts quite regular ; the thickness of the walls, aswell as the form and size of the towers, are such asare generally found in that species. A little belowthe citadel, where the ground is very rocky, somelarge irregular masses were fitted to the rock as abasis to the superstructure. A few foundations ofbuildings are seen within the ancient inclosure,and the ground is every where strewn with stones,broken pottery, and fragments of inscribed marbles,in most of which the letters are of the formused under the Roman empire, or not much earlier.Among them was a monument lying on the groundso complete and at the same time so portable, thatI was tempted to carry it away with me. It is arepresentation in relief of two platted locks of longhair, suspended to an entablature which is supportedby two pilasters. On the architrave aninscription shows that the monument commemoratedthe dedication of their hair to Neptune, byPhilombrotus and Aphthonetus, sons of Deino-marius, who were probably about to encounter,or had escaped from some peril by sea. Thename Aphthonetus occurs again in one of theinscriptions in the church of Ak-Ketjel ^ andaffords another example of the local prevalenceof particular names, which is indeed observable inall countries.^ V. Inscription, No. 187t362 PHTHioTis. [chap.About the centre of the city stood the theatre,looking towards the sea. Its remains consist onlyof a small part of the exterior circular wall of theoavea. This, however, together with the shape ofthe ground, are sufficient to give an idea of thedimensions of the entire structure, the diameterof which appears to have been about 180 feetFrom the citadel I remarked, in a deep gorge ofthe hills, a mile and a half to the northward, theruins of an ancient Hellenic wall, probably adefence to that approach towards the city.The existing remains of Thebae are of that degreeof apparent antiquity, which accords with the noticeof this city occurring in history. Like severalof the leading states of Thessaly, it seems not tohave existed in the Trojan war ; its territory wasthen occupied by another town named Pyrrhus,and even at the time of the Persian invasion itwas probably an inconsiderable place, if existingat all; for Ais, which contained a celebratedtemple of Jupiter Laphystius, and the antiquity ofwhich is shown by its connection with the legendof Athamas, was then the chief town in the vicinityof the bay of Armyro, as we may infer from Herodotus,who describes the Greek army sent todefend Tempe as having landed at Alus, andXerxes to have marched across Thessaly to thesame place, in order to communicate with hisfleet, which had arrived at AphetsB. Alus, infact, possessed in the neighbouring bay the mostsheltered anchorage on the western side of thegulf. At a subsequent time when maritime commercewas on a larger and more opulent scale,XL.] Phthisis. 363ThebsB was the chief emporium of Thessaly, andowed its importance to this advantage. It socontinued until Magnesia having become a dependencyof Macedonia S Demerits, which wasfounded by Demetrius Poliorcetes^ about the year290 B. c, soon became, by the favour of the kingsof Macedonia, the chief maritime city of the Thessalians.The most flourishing period of Thebesappears, therefore, to have been in the fifth andfourth centuries, at which time the Thessalian citiesformed an independent confederacy, and commercewas active in every part of Greece ; we findaccordingly that in the style and construction of itsremains Thebae resembles PelinnsBum and Pharsalus,which may be supposed from the tenor ofhistory to have been in their meridian about thesame time. It resembles also Mantinea and Messene,as well as Erchomenus, in the less ancientparts of its ruins, of all which the dates are stillbetter ascertained. We first find Phthiotic Thebesmentioned in the history of the Lamia war, b. c.323, in which it was the only Thessalian state,except Pelinnseum, that remained neuter *. WhenDemetrius Poliorcetes, in the year 302 b. c, occupiedLarissa Cremaste, Antron, and Pteleum, inhis war with Cassander, the latter strengthenedThebes and Pherse, and it appears to have beenin the Crocian plain that Cassander drew outhis army, consisting of 29,000 infantry, againstthe 56,000 of Demetrius, who derived no otherLiv. 1. 39, c. 25. ' Diodor. 1. 18, c. 11.Suabo, p. 436, 437.364 Phthisis. [Chap.advantage from his superiority of numbers thanthat of liberating Pherae from Cassander, havingdeclined a general action, and made an armisticewith his opponent, in order that he might moveto the assistance of his father Antigonus in Asia '.When the italians extended their power to theEastern coast of Greece, Thebse was their mostdistant and most valuable possession. It was takenfrom them in the year b. c. 217, after an obstinatesiege by Philip, son of Demetrius, who changed itsname to Philippopolis ', and placed in it a Macedoniangarrison, which made a successful resistanceto the consul Flamininus previously to thebattle of Cynoscephalae '. The name of Philippopoliswas probably not much in use after thatevent, though we find both names employed byLivy, in relating the transactions at the congressof Tempe, in the year 185 b. c *. The historianin his own narrative names it Philippopolis, butinciting the terms of the complaints of the Thessaliansagainst Philip, Tljiebee is the appellationemployed, the complainants naturally avoidingthat which attested the former subjection of theplace to Macedonia.Strabo, in a passage wherein he observes thatPhylace and Alus, two of the cities of Phthisisunder Protesilaus, were near the borders of theMalienses, leaves us in doubt as to which of theseplaces he intended to apply a farther remark,Diodor. 1. 20, c. 110. * Liv. 1. 33, c. 5.Polyb. 1. 5, cc.Oa, 100.— * Liv. 1. 39, c. 25.Diodor. £xc. 1. 26.XL.] Phthisis. 365namely, that it was midway between Pharsalusand the Phthiotse, meaning undoubtedly ThebsB ;iron which latter he adds that it was 100 stadesdistant ^ There can be little question, if Aluswas at Kefalosi, that Phylace was the place intendedby him, the former position being very farfrom a line between the sites of Pharsalus andThebtBf and not so much as 100 stades from thelatter. The ancient site near Ghidek, on theother hand, which I suppose to be that of Phylace^is about 100 stades distant from the ruins ofThereby and nearly in a line with Fersala, as well asnear the middle distance between these two points.Standing also at the debauch of the pass leadingfrom Pharsalus into the Phthiotic plain, it wasnaturally a post desirable to both people, andlikely to be conferred by Philip upon the partywhom he wished to favour.From the lower extremity of TliehiB PhthiotioBto Kokkina, at the north-western angle of the bayof Armyro, is a distance of 45 minutes, the roadleading through plantations of vines and figsbelonging to Ak-ketje1^ and then crossing somecharades strewn with rounded masses of blackporous stone, and others of a blue and of a greencast, exactly resembling some of the lavas ofMount iBtna. Among them are fragments alsoof white marble. On the southern side of theVTO UpiMn-KnXdf iris ^OiwriioQ ^Oitirrtiiy' ^IXimros fiiyroi sap"core, r^c irpoir)((upov role Ma <ra\lotc irpoffiyeifuy dfeXofieyotXuviriyf ovTk>Kal iVAXoc* ^cex^i rcJv ^diwTwv, — Strabo, p. 433.dc QfffiAy xci iKaroy frraSiove'366 Potions. [chap.plain of Armyr6 the hills are chiefly of schistouslimestone, in which are veins of white marble.At the end of 20 minutes we pass through someTurkish sepulchres, where many of the stones areof ancient workmanship ; one of them has formedpart of a decorated ceiling of some large edifice,in which are figures of two doves joining theirbeaks; the execution not of the best. It mayhave been brought perhaps from the temple ofCeres, noticed by Homer in the same line withPyrrhasus, and placed by Strabo at a distance oftwo stades from the site of that town, which was20 stades below Thebes ^ The exact site of thetemple I take to have been at a spot where existmany stones and some hewn blocks, at 5 minutesshort of Kokkina, at which latter place are vestigesof an ancient town, consisting of wroughtquadrangular blocks, together with many smallerfragments, and an oblong height with a flat summit,partly if not wholly artificial. I observedanother similar to it, rising from the plain on theright bank of the Kholo, distant one mile from thesea. At Kokkina a circular basin full of water,near the shore, was once probably a small harbour; for not far from it are the traces of a mole.These ruins, both in their distance from the supposedtemple of Ceres and from ThehtBj agree^ To hk ^rififiTpioy A^/iijrpoc arailovQ i^iKoaC vwipKtiyrai lecipijjce rifievos rat iKciXeire OiJ- Uvpaaov Ofjfiai, — Strabo p.paaoy, 'Hv ^e ironic lifXlficvo^ 435.ff Uvpatros Iv oval ara^toig Stephan. in IIvpo^oc, Ai|/i//-i\ov<ra A/z/Kiyrpoc &\<to£ Kat rpiov.iepov &yi0Vf ^lixovtra QfjflwyXL.] Phthisis. 367with the position of the Homeric Pyrrhasus, whichname was afterwards superseded by that of De-medium,derived from the adjacent temple ofCeres ^ As to the remains at Tzingheli, or thescala of Armyro, they belonged perhaps to someestablishment of commerce or maritime communicationwhich may have arisen here after the declineof J'helxB and Demetrium^ and when themore central situations of Armyro and Tzinghelimay have been found preferable. I have alreadyremarked, the propriety of the epithetsapplied by Homer to Pteleum, Antron, andItonus; that of avdsfiouQ which he attaches toPyrrhasus, seems equally appropriate. This maritimevalley seldom feels much of the rigour ofwinter, and the meadows of Pyrasus are doubtlessadorned with flowers long before the interiorplains, though separated from them only bythe heights which shelter Pyrasus from thenorth, have equally felt the effects of the vernalseason.The level beach of the bay of Armyro endsat Kokkina; upon quitting it, at 7.10 Turkish,we immediately enter the hills which extendto Cape Angkistri ' : the road for the most partpasses along the edge of cliffs bordering the shore ;it then crosses a small valley with a sandy beach,where stands the tomb of one Hall Aga, who is saidto have made himself so obnoxious to the peopleof Kokus, of which place he had been Voivoda,Strabo et Stephan. ubi ' 'Ayifiarpi, hook,sup. — Scylax in *A\aioL —Liv. 1. 28, c. 6.368 MAGNESIA . [chap.that at their instigation he was way-laid andkilled here by some thieves.At 8. 15 we halt to buy fish from a boat whichhad just hauled its net, and having roasted them,dine upon the sea-beach. A neighbouring heightis occupied by one of the colonies of Vlakhioteshepherds, who at this season fill all the maritimevalleys of Thessaly with their flocks. There is ahouse for the chief and several kalj^via around it.At 8.40 we continue our route across heights andnarrow valleys near the sea, where the wild oliveis the most common shrub, and might be made valuableby the mere labour of engrafting. At 9.35,in crossing a height which terminates in Cape ,we arrive in sight of Volo and the adjacentcountry, and descend into a plain which is separatedonly from that of Volo by a high rockyprojection of the hills, which are a continuationof those on the northern side of the Phthiotic orCrocian plain. A mile to our right, on the summitabove cape Angkistri, are the remains of an ancientfortress. At 10 some very large Greek letters ofantique form are engraved on the side of a rockto the left ; at 10.8 occur the walls of an ancientcity, crossing the valley from some rocky hills onthe left to lower heights on the right of the road,the crest of which they follow towards the sea,making many angles to meet the varieties of theground. At the southern extremity they terminatedin a projection of the coast, betweenwhich and another farther to the south, is aV. Inscription, No. 198.XL.] MAGNESIA. 369plain called Furna, where many ancient tombsare found. In a bay between this second projectionand Cape Angkistri are some salt-pans, andbuildings belonging to them, which have givento the place the name of Tuzla, or Alike.On the northern side of the plain which formedthe central part of the city, the walls are again tobe seen following the summit of a chain of rockyheights which terminate in the lofty precipitoussummit before mentioned, the eastern extremityof which meets the north-western angle of thebeach of the bay of Volo. Here at the foot ofthe rocks are many copious sources of water, butrather saline to the taste, for which reason theancient city was provided also with water fromsprings higher in the mountain. The ruined piersof an aqueduct of Roman times are a conspicuousobject among the ruins, crossing the level in themiddle of the city in a direction nearly parallel tothe sea beach. The northern extremity of thearches rested upon a height in which the form ofan ancient theatre is sufficiently preserved, butwithout any remains of masonry. Behind this spotare the ruins of a building of the same age as theaqueduct. On the highest summit of the rocks,above the saline sources, are two Hellenic towers,one of which preserves six courses of masonry.A little beyond it to the northward is a small level,the occupation of which was essential to the safetyof the town, and it was accordingly inclosed, so asto form a citadel or outwork : several courses bothof its walls and towers still subsist.Just above the springs steps are cut in the rock,VOL. IV. B b "^370 MAGNESIA. [chap.and a little farther its slope has been levelledeither for a road or for the foundation of a wall,more probably for the latter, in which case itwould seem that a space on the northern slope ofthis hill was included within the city, or at leastformed a walled suburb, for the form of the groundexhibits some further traces of buildings, and ofan inclosure, towards the end of which there isa tumulus. Except on the mountain, foundationsof walls only remain ; the masonry is of thesame regular order as at Phthiofic Thebes andthe two cities were nearly equal in circuit. Thesources of water correspond so well to the irnyainoWal Roi Sa^cXctc, which Strabo believed to havegiven name to Pagasae, (contrary to those whoderived it from the building of the ship Argo *,) thatthere can be little or no doubt that these are theruins of PagascB.The extent of the city in the times of independentThessaly, as indicated by the walls ofthose ages, corresponds perfectly to that whichmight have been expected of a city which occupiedsuch an important point of the sea coast: norare the aqueducts and other vestiges of the RomanEmpire less in agreement with the remark ofStrabo, that Pagasae was the navale of Pherae inhis time, having undoubtedly owed that distinctionwhen Demerits had lost the benefits of royalfavour, to the more sheltered position of this 'Awo ^c iris vavTrrtyla^ rrjc T6wf redPivai rovro oVo rwv*Apyovc Kal HayaaaQ XiyetrSai vriytaVf at iroWai r£ koI ^a^^c-fivdevoviri Toy tottov' oi ii t«- Xc/f pivvffi, — Strabo, p. 436.Oayurepov iiyovyrai rovyofxa TfXL.] MAGNESIA. 371tree angle of the Gulf, as well as to its being thenearest point of the coast to PhertBj the chief cityin this quarter of Thessaly, and to its general convenienceas a sea-port to the Pharsalia^ LarissceajPercha, and part of Magnesia. Strabo mentionsPagans as one of the places which contributed itsinhabitants to people Demerits at the time of thefoundation of the latter ^ ; so that it was probablyextremely reduced, if not quite abandoned, betweenthat time and the Roman conquest.Cape Angklstri is identified with the promontoryPyrrha by the two adjacent rocks, which werenamed Pyrrha and Deucalion *. The fortressabove the cape I take to have been AmpkaruBjfor a comparison of Stephens and Scylax showsAmpharuB to have been a small place betweenDemetrium or Pyrasus and Pagas(B '.Strabo, p. 436. \/<tfy icaXcIrat. ^Evravda Si Kale. ai 6$/3ai* clara &cpa ^ ^OcwWc «"«€ reXcvr^. — StrayKol Bvo ytffftiia wXtitrloy^ bo, p. 435.Jy TO fiiv ILvppa^ to ie ^evKe^linifiilTpuiVy G$/3ai Mora it *A;(acovcBcrroX/a • koX tlvX 8erraX/aciriiXcic aise iirl OaXcdrp 'A/i^vac, Hayaoai' iv it fitaoyti^^tpaLScylax in ^Axatol^ OeTraXla,*A/i^vol . cffTi Kol xuploy BerraX/ac* — Stephen.in voce.Bb2CHAPTER XLI.MAGNESIA. THE8SALIA.Volo, lolcus — Demerits — river Taurus — Ancient towns ofMagnesia — Cave of Achilles — Modern state of Mount PeliumTiikeri, jEanteium — Mount Bardzoia, Tisaum — Aphet<e —Sesklo, jEsonia — Ghereli — Kastri, ruins, inscriptions — DuganDhesiani — Aghia — Melibopa, EurymetuXf Homolium^ Thau-tnaciaf Myrce,The view of Mount Pelium from PagascB affords ascene of culture, population, and apparent prosperity,which would give a traveller entering Greeceby the Gulf of Volo a most erroneous impression asto the condition of this country. The oppositemountains are covered with the houses and gardensof Makrinitza, Volo, and Portaria, eachdivided into several makhalas or portions, separatedfrom one another by vineyards or plantationsof mulberry and fioiit-trees. To the right of thesea continuation of the same heights exhibits asimilar scene around the towns of Lekhonia, St.Lawrence, and St. George. Between three andfour thousand houses are in sight, proving thecapabilities of Greek industry and enterprize whenonly a little relieved from Turkish oppression andmisrule. The contrast between 'Agrafa and UpperCHAP. XLI.] . MAGNESIA. 373Thessaly is an example sufficiently striking of theeffects of Turkish government in causing theGreeks to cultivate and inhabit the mountains,while the fertile plains remain desolate; but thedisproportion between the population of the mountainsand plains is trifling there compared to thatwhich is found in Magnesia and Lower Thessaly.Turkish Volo affords a good contrast to theGreek towns on Mount Pelium, and is well calculatedto remove any too favourable opinion, whicha recently-arrived traveller may have conceivedfrom the flourishing appearance of the mountain.There the custom-house, the narrow streets, almostimpassable from stagnant pools and putrid filth,the ruinous and wretched habitations, a squarewhitened inclosure called the Castle, but consistingonly of a slight low wall, surmounted withbattlements, and including a mosque with a fewTurkish houses, are all highly characteristic of thegoverning people. This small town, called Kastroby the Greeks and Gold by the Turks, stands at adistance of seventeen minutes from the springs ofPagasiBj from whence it is a walk of thirty-sevenminutes across a plantation of vineyards and mulberryplantations to Perivolia \ where the Turksof Kastro have their summer habitations, situatedamidst gardens at the foot of Mount Pelium. Aperennial torrent flows through the gardens ; butthe place is said to be hot and unhealthy in summer,and infested with gnats to an extreme degree.Ta Utptfiokui — the gardens.374 Magnesia. [ClapsWith two or three exceptions the houses are in aruinous state.From Perivolia an ascent of near twenty minutesconducts me to the middle of the Greek town ofVolo S under which name are comprehended alsoPerivolia^ Kastro, and a detached suburb of Voloto the southward, called Vlakho Makhala. Thehouses of this town, so striking and attractive at adistance, hardly support, on a nearer view, the preconceivedestimation of them. This is partly to beattributed to the general state of the arts in Turkeyand partly to the insecurity even of this favoureddistrict. Defence against hostile attack has beenmore considered than domestic comfort ; not onlyagainst the robber, the pirate, the lawless Albanian,or Turkish soldier, or the extortion of neighbouringgovernors, but with a view also to intestine disputes,often ending in violence and open war,when the mountain is most secure against externalenemies. Hence the houses are lofty and built inthe form of towers. Glass windows are almostunknown ; nor in other respects are the houses tobe compared to those of the Vlakhi6tes of MountPinduSy or to those of some of the Greek towns ofMacedonia. As an apology, the people of Voloremark, that being in the most exposed situationof the mountain, they have been less able to attendto luxuries than the securer inhabitants of Mari*nitza or Zagora.The flourishing condition of this comer ofXU.] Magnesia. 375Greece, although it could hardly have occurredin any but such a peninsular and defensible position,is in great measure owing to the circumstanceof many of its villages having been vakufsof the principal mosques at Constantinople, whichhas given them a more than ordinary protectionfrom the Porte, and has caused the permission towear arms for defence against robbers to havebeen extended to them all. Since the conquestof Thessaly by the Albanians, and the reductionof the kleftes by A\^ Pasha, the power and well-knowncharacter of the latter has excited amongthe Magnesian a lively alarm for their liberties,attended with one good consequence, that theyhave never been more free from domestic quarrels.Dec. 16. — The ancient Demerits occupied thesouthern or maritime face of a height now calledGoritza ^, which projects from the coast of Magnesiabetween two and three miles to the southwardof the middle of Volo. Though little morethan foundations remains, the inclosure of the city,which was less than two miles in circumference,is traceable in almost every part. On three sidesthe walls followed the crest of a declivity whichfalls steeply to the east and west, as well as towardsthe sea. To the north the summit of thehill, together with an oblong space below it,formed a small citadel, of which the foundationsstill subsist. A level space in the middle elevationof the height was conveniently placed for the376 JCAONB8IA. [chap.central part of the city. The acropolis containeda large cistern cut in the rock, which is now partlyfilled with earth. On one side of it is a modemsemicircular inclosure, of rude construction, atwhich a miracle is exhibited on Easter Sunday.An aperture under the semicircle, which is dryall the rest of the year, then becomes full of waterand remains so for 24 hours, whatever quantitymay be taken out by the numerous spectatorsassembled to witness the miracle. Here also is achurch of the Panaghia, and around it are thefoundations of some ancient building, within whichis a bottle-shaped cistern hewn in the rock, andlined with stucco ; it is now half full of water, andis reported never to be dry even in the middle ofsummer. To the westward of this place, on thehighest summit of the ridge, are the foundationsof a round tower of modem constriction, similarto those which are seen in many parts of theadjacent coasts. From this spot many of theancient streets of the town are traceable in thelevel which lies midway to the sea, and even thefoundations of private houses : the space betweenone street and the next, parallel to it, is little morethan 15 feet. About the centre of the town is ahollow, now called the lagune or mine, where a longrectangular excavation in the rock, 2 feet wide,7 deep, and covered with flat stones, show bymarks of the action of water in the interior of thechannel that it was part of an aqueduct, probablyfor the purpose of conducting some source in theheight upon which stood the citadel, into themiddle of the city.XLI.] MAGNESIA. 377I have mentioned a similar construction on thesite of Pharsalus ; indeed, it appears from severalexamples, but particularly from the aqueduct ofSyracuse, the longest and best preserved of anyI have had an opportunity of observing, that arectangular channel excavated in the rocks, orconstructed where no rock existed, and followingall the variations of the ground in preserving itslevel with a fall just sufficient for the current, wasthe ordinary mode of conveying water among theautonomous Greeks. The Roman method of carryingthe conduit across valleys upon arches wasan improvement, as admitting of more direct lines,and by shortening distances allowing a greaterchoice of springs ; it might even, notwithstandingthe arches and piers required for it, be an abridgmentof labour, but like all the works of theRomans compared with those of the Greeks, itwas less lasting, and more frequently in need ofrepair.According to vulgar belief, the lagune formerlycommunicated with a cavern on the seaside,but on visiting the latter I found nothing torender the supposition probable. Boats are sometimesdrawn up into the cavern through a narrowcleft in the rock, and it contains an altar sacred tothe Panaghia cvriKiintaca.In importance of situation Demerits was consideredequal to Chalcis and Corinth, and thethree were denominated by Philip, son of Deme-tries,the fetters of Greece *. To the great .1. 17, c. 11.— Liv. 1. 32, c. 37.378 MAGNESIA. [chap.father of Philip, the celebrated Poliorcetes, demeritsowed its name and foundation. It becamea favourite residence of the kings of Macedonia,to whom it may have been recommended not morefor its convenience as a military and naval stationin the centre of Greece than for many naturaladvantages, in some of which it seems to havebeen very preferable to Fella. The surroundingseas and fertile districts of Thessaly supplied anabundance of the necessaries and luxuries of life :in summer* the position is cool and salubrious, inwinter mild, even when the interior of Thessalyis involved in snow or fog. The cape on whichthe town stood commands a beautiful view of thegulf, which appears like an extensive lake surroundedby rich and varied scenery ; the neighbouringwoods supply an abundance of delightfulretreats, embellished by prospects of the ^g<Bansea, and of its islands, while Mount Pelium mightat once have afforded a park, an ice-house, and apreserve of game for the chace. The only partsof the gulf concealed from Goritza are the northeasternbay beyond St. George, another at theeastern end of the peninsula of Trikeri and thenorthern extremity of the bay of Armyro, nearKokkina. To the left the view extends over anarrow plain and winding shore, which stretchesalong the foot of the mountain for four miles toLekhonia, the only Turkish town in the peninsula,but which is inhabited also by Greeks in equalnumber, who are for the most part labourers forthe Turkish proprietors. Above Lekhonia are theremains of a small Hellenic town, which was pro-xu.]MAON£8XA.bably Nelia, Demerits having been situated betweenNea and lolcus K Beyond Lekhonia areseen the modem villages of Argalasti and Lafko,situated upon the lower part of the Magnesianpeninsula, near the isthmus which connects it withthe smaller peninsula of Trikeri.The description given by Strabo of the situationof lolcus is involved in some difficulty, as he placesit at a distance of 20 stades from Pagasee, and of7 from Demerits', whereas the real distance be-^tween these two cities was scarcely less than 50stades. There seems but one mode of reconcilingthis contradiction, supposing no textual error.Although lolcus itself in the time of the geographerwas only a roiroc, or site famed in ancienthistory, it appears that the name was still employedas descriptive of a portion of the sea coastof the district of Demerits. If we suppose, therefore,this coast to have extended from Peri vol ia toVlakho-makhala, which is about a mile distantfrom Demerits, the distance of one extremity ofthe coast of lolcus from Paga8(By and of the otherfrom Demerits, will be tolerably correct as statedby Strabo, and the aiyiaXoc 'IcdXicoc will then comprehendall the space occupied by Volo, includingStrabo, p. 436.'EircVciOK de rMv^epiJK Ila-010 vc a{rrcJvy 'lofXicov Zi iiKom*'H Zk 'Ia»\roc KaTitrKavrai fxiyeK iraXacov* T^c2c ^fififfrpiaioQ kite trraZiovQvirtpKeiTai rfj^ dakavatit 'IaiX-k6£ HXficriov oe riycAii/ii/rpid&C o "Ayavpo^ pec*KoXjEtTtu ii Koi 6 tTvy€\T^i Gtyc-oXoc lwXic<5c. — Strabo, p. 436.icci/icFoc (ad Ingenium sc.) r^cAtjfxriTpiaBoQ kara oraBiovc ,— Strabo, p. 438.380 MAGNESIA. [chap.Vlako-makhala. The only part of this spacehaving any appearance of an ancient site is a steepeminence which rises from the shore between thesouthernmost houses of Volo and Vlakho-makhala,and upon which stands a church with a few monasticcells adjoining to it. The church is calledEpiskopi, as being the cathedral of the bishop ofDemetriaSy one of the suffragans of the metropolitanof Larissa. In the walls of the church aresome marbles representing in low relief subjectstaken from the Gospels, a kind of decoration veryuncommon in Greek churches where painting,gilding, and framing in gold or silver, are generallythe only arts employed. Some large squaredblocks of stone, forming part of a wall, are saidto have formerly existed at the foot of this height,and to have been broken to pieces, and carriedaway in boats for the construction of new buildingson the shore of the gulf. Possibly Episkopimay have been the acropolis of locus and thetown may have been dispersed, like Volo, over theentire site, which is well suited to the descriptionof locus as lying at the foot of Mount Peliunijand as fertile in grapes ^ That lotus stood onsome part of Greek Volo is the more credible, asatorrent, flowing through Vlakho-makhala besHaXlov Bi vap iroBi Xa-Today 'lawXxoy.Pindar. Nem. 4, v. 88."Oc Sovpl iraiTac vUaoi yiovg,£nva£trra flaXify" Avavpov vrripUoXvfiorpvoi e£ 'IwXicov.Simonides ap. Athen. 1. 4, c. 21.XLI.] MAGNESIA. 381tween Episkopi and Goritza, corresponds to thatAnaurtiSy in which Jason was said to have lost oneof his sandals \ and which was near Demerits.There are said to be several Hellenic sites stillapparent in the lower peninsula or isthmus, whichstretching southward from Mount Pelium separatesthe gulf from the JEgcBan sea, particularly nearArgalasti, and to the eastward of Ephori, thetwo towns which possess the best districts andmost level lands in the peninsula. The former Itake to have been the district of Magnesia or thecity of the Magnates where the coins of thatpeople were struck ; for although this place isscarcely ever mentioned in history, its existence isproved from Demosthenes, from whom we learnthat it was taken and fortified by Philip, butafterwards restored to the Thessalians ^ From ascholiast of Apologies, supported by an ancientauthor named Cleon, it appears to have beensituated in the lower part of the peninsula, nearthe gulf, and not near the rugged exteriorcoast ^. A rCiin named Khorto-kastro, on thecoast near Argalasti, may possibly occupy theAiypov ^ ov fxiriireira Otrly Kara fl&^iy 'I^ffAivXtifitploio piiBpa Kiiity Sta iroa&iy *Ayavpov"AXXo fiiy iinvakHTty vir 2Xvoc» &XXo ^ iytpQgKaSXiirey ali iriSikoy iyiffx6fi€voy vpoxo^aiy.Apollon. 1. 1, V. 8.Strabo, p. 436. V. sup. p. 379. n. 2,Demosth. Olynth. 1, p .12, 15. Olynth. 2, p. 21. Philip. 2,p. 71. Reiske.AifUKa f ^^pltf woXvXifiot aha HtXaayuiyAvcTO, UfiXca^ac ^c wape^iifuifioy iplwyacAlly382 MAGNESIA. [chap.exact site of Mcupiesui. That it stood in thatpart of the peninsula, may be inferred from Herodotus,who evidently alludes to the cape of St.George or Promiri on the eastern shore, not farfrom Argalasti, and opposite to the island ofSkiatho, when he speaks of the promontory ofMagnesia \ which by later authors was denominatedCape Sepiass. As to the lines of Apologiesto which the Scholiast refers, nothing can be madeof them in illustration of the ancient positions inMagnesia ; for although the poet appears to describea succession of objects along the coast after theArgonauts had begun their voyage, he was obviouslyignorant or totally negligent of their orderwhen he named Sepiass before Magnesia, and placedPoetae the last of all, which appears evidentlyAicv lirnrpodioyn^' eSvve Si Simon &rpi|,^a/vero 8* iivaXlri J^icSo^, ^ivovro ^ dimfOivIlcipeo'cal, Mayvfi&d 0* hirevSio^ ^velpoto*AKTfi Kol TVfxjioQ AoXoir^ioc tyO* dpa roiye'E^ripioc iivifwio naXtfiTrvoijftriv txeXfray. . ' . . • drop rptrarf wpoiiiKarNina, rawfftrafityoi irepwffioy vi//<$Oc Xac^^,T^K 2* dKTTJy *Aera£ 'Apyovc en KucXiierKovtny,Apollon. 1. 1, V. 580.yiayyriffaa Si x^pa xal ir6\tt If this was the same Cleonofibtyvfwc irapdXioc Kal ivSioq of Sicily, cited by Somnus ofHyovy oh rpaxeia. — Schol. ibid. Chins, he lived before 100 B.C.'O Si A($\oi// v(oc ^y *Epfiov ' Oi Si fidpfiapoi ra/i-Sc iy Mayyiitreri ry rrdXti rid' }j/ayr€c Si rijv Axprfy rfjc 'Aral ra^oc lirriy aifrov yqaim IQdav hrKiOv ec roy tfcSX-irapa r|j> alyuiKf ilrc l^Xitav ky my roy girl Haya^vy ^povra,a roy ^ApyoyavriK^y linopti, — — Herodot. 1. 7, c. 198.Schol. ibid.XLI.] MAGNESIA. 383from Herodotus to have been within, or at leastin the entrance of the Gulf, and nearly opposite toArtemisium in Eub(Ba^ The ancient existence,however, of a Peiresiae in this quarter seems confirmedby Stephanas, who distinguishes it fromthe Persia or Asterium of Thessaly *.In the description given by Herodotus of thewreck of the fleet of Xerxes on the coast of Magnesia,he describes Sepiass only as an clkt^ or shore*.This agrees with the nature of the coast, whichpresents neither cape nor shelter to the north ofPromiri, except at a small port named Tamuk-hard, near some ruins which seem to indicate thesite of CasthancBay a town from which the chestnut,a tree still abounding on the eastern side ofMount Peliumy derived its appellation in Greekand the modem languages of Europe ^. Ipnibeing described by the historian as iv HnXc^, orat the foot of the mountain itself, was possibly atthe little Scala of Zagora. The ruins to the eastwardof Nekh6ri, may be those of Rhesus; for thisplace was one of the circumjacent towns whichcontributed their population to Demerits on itsfoundation ', and according to Scylax, Rhesus-wasnot in the gulf but on the exterior shore *. FromHerodot 1. 7> c. 193 ; I. ' Stephan. in Ileipao'ca, 'Airs,c. 4. 6. ripioy,» Herodot 1. 7. c. 183. 188.j^vaireXioQ KapvoiOf to Kavraylc trpii^ey aha.Nicand. Alexipharm. v. 271*Etymon. Mag. in Kaorravca.• The others were Nelia, Pa * "EOvoc ^e Mayyiinitv papagasae, Ormenium, Sepiass, Olim OdXarrav jcal iroXetc aide* *lta\*son, Boebe, and lolcus. — Stray koch MoSofi^i}, KopaKal^ Strabo,p. 436. XaOpa, 'OXiZwy Ka Xifilir. "£{01384 MAGNESIA. [chap.the same authority we may infer, that there was atown Sepiass near the Cape. The district of therugged Alison having been opposite to Artemisiumin Euhcea \ seems to be thus identified with thepeninsula of Tiikhiri ; and the town itself mayperhaps have been situated upon the isthmusconnecting that peninsula with the rest of Magnesia^^and having on either side a harbour answeringto the Xi^riv of Scylax. The numerousancient names in a small compass of territory,proves this angle of Thessaly to have been denselypopulated, as it is at the present day ; nor isit surprising that the fine shelter of the Gulfcompared with the rugged and inhospitable natureof the iucTa aX/ficvoc IIiiXcou' on the eastern side,which proved so fatal to the fleet of Xerxes, shouldhave caused the inhabitants to prefer to the exteriorshore, the vicinity of the Gulf, where it wouldseem that Motion, Coracle and Spalathra weresituated.Mount Pelium has two summits connected by aridge below which is a deep ravine. The northwesternsummit, called Plessidhi, rises immediatelyabove Portaria ; to the southward of which, onehour and a half above Dhrakia, which lies betweenhk Tcv kSXkov Uayatrrirucovt Mvpac. — Scylax in Mayv^Kol *OXeffa)i'a rpi^clav.II. /3. V. 717.dyrireivei S" ahrf (Artemis *0\iZwy. — Plutarch, in thesissc.) fidXttrra r^c vko mist. c. 8.^iXoKriiT^ X^paq yeyofjiivriQ • Eurip. Alcest. v. 595.XLI.] MAGNESIA. 385the two tops, there is a fine cavern, commonlyknown by the name of the Cave of Achilles ' : it issupposed to have been the place where Achilleswas instructed by the Centaur Chiron ; and infact the situation accords exactly with the dataof Homer and Diceearchus *y the latter of whomstates, that in the same place there was a templeof Jupiter Actress, to which it was the custom formany of the sons of the principal citizens selectedby the priest to ascend at the rising of the dog-star,clothed with skins on account of the cold.Dicaearchus mentions also two rivers of MountPelium called Crausindon and Brecon. One ofthese is now named Zervokhia, and falls into theGulf between Ephori and St. George.The coincidence of modem opinion and ancientauthority in the instance of the Cave of Achilles,led me to hope that I should find in this civilizedcorner of Thessaly some more sound learning andgeographical criticism than is generally to be metwith in Greece, but I was quickly undeceived onreceiving a visit from some of the Archons of Volo,the leading personage of whom proceeded immediatelyin a manner not uncommon among learnedTurks as well as Greeks, to pour forth his whole^ tnriiXauiy rov ^A^iXXita^,ni^Xia^a fiiXlriVf ri^y irarpi ^/X^ wopi \etpiavnifXi'ov Ik Kopv^^c ^6yoy tfifiivai. fipinatrir,II. n. V. 148.'Heir* &Kpat ie r^c rov ipovt 'Arragon i€p6y, — Dicsearch. aiHiXatSy iariy ro ica- script. Montis Pelii.Xovfuvoy Xiip&ytoy irai AcocVOL. IV. C C386 Magnesia. [Clap.Stock of knowledge without order or connection.He knew that the gulf was the ancient IlcXcurycocicoXtoc ; but the greater part of his information onthe antiquities of this interesting angle of Greecewas not a little at variance with received opinions :as coming from a native of locus however, it maybeworth mentioning. The ship Argo, he assuredme, conveyed Agamemnon from hence to theTrojan war, in company with Achilles, a famousgiant of this neighbourhood, whose armour weighed500 okes ; and who, after having introduced thewooden horse into Troy, was murdered in a bath.The ruins which I supposed to be those of Pagascsyare the remains of Demetrion, a city built by theGenoese, and so named from an ancient monasteryof St. Demetrius no longer existing. Theruined building near the theatre was a mill, andthe Sovrca, or teeth, which I took for the piers of aRoman aqueduct, were for the purpose of conveyingwater to the mill, though the declivity is inthe contrary direction. On hearing this strangeeffusion, I began to suspect that Kyr — < hadbeen maliciously put forward by his companions,that he might make himself ridiculous ; but theirgravity showed that they placed implicit confidencein his erudition. The same learned gentlemanafterwards conducted me to see an ancient sepulchralstone, which his zeal for the fine arts andveneration for the works of his ancestors has inducedhim to preserve by fixing it in the wall ofthe church, and then blackening the letters andornamenting the stone with some figures in themodem Greek taste. The inscription on it isXU.] Magnesia. 387*Apiar%0 KXcoirorpacS of which Cleopatra he knewnothing more than that he was a /Sao'cXcvc t-oiv'EkXrivfMiv, or king of the Greeks. This certainlyid not a happy specimen of modern Magnesianlearning. Bat in truth the people of this favouredpeninsula, although not inferior to the other Greeksin natural talent, have been slow in the encouragementof education, and have derived littleadvantage in this respect from their secure andretired situation. The priests Gregorian and Daniel,of Milies, authors of a work in Romaic called*S Fcoiypai^ia Ncurcpijcii," or Modem Geography;and a third Militate, named Anthems Tatiig,who has lately edited Meletius, having in vainattempted to make their countrymen sensibleof the importance of education, were obliged toseek a subsistence in civilized Europe which theywere unable to obtain in their native peninsula.One of their projects was to establish a college oracademy on the mountain, which would quicklyhave attracted the youth of every part of Greece.They had even procured a firman from SultanSelim, had obtained 800 purses, chiefly fromsome rich merchants settled in Europe, and hadprovided books and mathematical instruments, inall which they were greatly assisted by the Greekprinces Ypsilanti and Demetrius Morus, the enlightenedsupporters of learning at Constantinople;This inscription, V. No. instead of the father's ; it was,200, is an example of the Ma therefore, brought probablycaledonian custom of describing from the ruins of Demerits,a person in some particular which was a Macedonian city.cases by the mother's namec C 2388 Magnesia. [chap.but a dispute having arisen in Magnet respectingthe town in which the academy was to be establushed Makrinitza having claimed a right of preferencewhich others contested, the principal personson the mountain giving no encouragement tothe measure, and the two Greek princes fallinginto disgrace at Constantinople, the project fell tothe ground, soon after which the promoters of itretired into Christendom. There are now fiveschools on the mountain for teaching Hellenic ; atMakrinitza, Dhrakia, Portaria, Zagora, and Milies.That of Makrinitza has generally about thirtyscholars, a few of whom advance as far as Thucydidesand Homer, the rest not beyond M^p.When a little more instruction is thought desirable,the young men are sent to Constantinople.It is to be lamented that education has not metwith better encouragement in this privileged andsequestered point in the centre of Greece ; as itwould soon have attracted many educated men asteachers or residents, and would have improvedthe native manners of the Magnesian peninsula,rendering it a centre of civilization and instructionfor the Greeks, and ultimately for the other Christiansof European Turkey. The Turkish governmentis no obstacle to such a proceeding, being too blindor too careless of distant consequences to opposethe education of its Christian subjects, and ratherpleased perhaps to see them engaged in suchpeaceful pursuits, though in the end they maybethe most formidable of any to the Ottomanpower.Mukhtar Pash has purchased the customs ofXLl.] MAGNESIA. 389Volo this year for 200 passes. In favourableyears it is supposed that they yield twice asmuch ; for the collectors, under one pretext oranother, raise the duty from five per cent, to ten,and are great gainers by the clandestine exportationof grain, which is forbidden to all but theagents of the Porte, who only pay a fee of fiftypiastres upon the lading of a ship. Rice fromEgypt and Zituni, and alum from the mines nearMari in Asia Minor, for the use of the dyers ofThessaly and Macedonia are exempt from duty onimportation.Of the twenty-four villages of Mount Peliuniynone but Argalasti,.Nekh6ri, and Lekhonia, growcom sufficient for their consumption ; but all thelower part of the peninsula abounds in wine, silk,oil, cotton, pulse, oranges, fruits, and all the variedproductions of the maritime climate of Greece.Those of the higher villages are almost confined tosilk, wine, honey, and horticultural produce : noneof them have many flocks or cattle. Volo and owning a part of the plain at the head of theGulf, possess com land in that situation ; and thesame towns, together with Portaria and Lekhonia,have some olive-trees on the heights. The landsof Makrinitza and Portaria produce a sufficiency ofoil to admit of the sale of a small quantity in thealternate years. In all the higher villages silk isthe staff of life ; with this they procure provisionsfrom Thessaly enjoying plenty when there is agood crop of silk, and the reverse when the seasonis unfavourable. It is reckoned that landed propertypays a fourth of its produce in taxes ;390 Magnesia. [chap.hind in case of dearth, as in the present year,there are many examples of severe distress onthe mountain. Still they consider themselvesfortunate in their privileges, in the protectionwhich they enjoy from the unchecked extortionof provincial governors, and particularly intheir exemption from the quartering of soldiersand the visits of Albanians. But they make afoolish nse of their advantages. Internal discorddivides every village into parties ; a similar jealousyprevails between the principal towns, andeach of them strives by bribery, intrigue, and theinterest of their patrons at Constantinople, to injureits particular rival or adversary. The Turksare of course enriched, and the Greeks impoverishedby these quarrels.Capital crimes are rare ; when they occur, thecognizance of them is referred to Constantinopleif the parties concerned belong to the Vakufs.Among the others all causes not settled by theelders are tried by the Kadjr of the kaza in whichthe village is inscribed, and at which it is assessedfor the imperial taxes.There are six or eight hundred looms in themountain for the manufacture of narrow silken ormixed stuffs or towels; but the greater part ofthese fabrics belong to strangers from Aghia,Ambelakia, or Tumavo. Silken articles of asmaller kind, such as cords, girdles, and purses,are made by the women in some of the towns,particularly Volo, Makrinitza, and Portaria. Themen work in leather, and make shoes, sacks,and valises. A weaver may earn 50 or 60 paras a12XLI.] . MAGNESIA. 391day : a day labourer in the vineyards, olive andmulberry plantations, 30 paris, with bread, wine,and meat. The reapers in time of harvest in theplain receive 50 paras, with provision. Last yearthe deficiency of wheat was supplied at the rate of16 piastres for the kara-kilo of 150 okes, forwhich they now pay 45 piastres. Goat's flesh isthe meat chiefly in use, and is commonly 20 parasthe oke ; beef 8 pards ; buffalo 6 paras ; wine from5 to 7 paras. The MagnesiafiSy like the inhabitantsof the coasts of Greece in general, derivelittle resource from the fish with which their seasabound. The women wear a cloth jacket, with ahead-dress the most ungraceful that can well beimagined.I shall here subjoin an enumeration of the villagesof the Magnesian peninsula, assisted by thework of Daniel and Gregory, to which I beforealluded. Beginning from the southern extremity,or isthmus of Trikeri, the first village that occursis Lafko ', then Promiri *, and Argalasti '. Promirireceived its name probably from its proximityto the Magnesian promontory now Cape St.George ; Argalasti is at no great distance from abay of the Pagasetic gulf. The territory of thelatter extends quite across the peninsula and thetown was formerly the chief place of the fourteenvillages which are Vakufia, but has beensuperseded in this dignity by Makrinitza. Itcontains between four and five hundred houses.Lafko and Promiri are also enrolled among theAavicoc* ' ripo^ipi. 'ApyaXavrt/a392 MAGNESIA. [chap.Vakufia. Nekhori^ another town of the lowerpeninsula, four hours distant from Argalasti, tothe N.W., has, like that town, a district stretchingfrom sea to sea. It contains, with an outlyingmakhala, 280 houses. Three hours to the N.W.of it is Milies', a town of 300 houses, which,although standing on the southern extremity ofthe mountain towards the gulf, has lands extendingto the outer sea, near which it has also alarge makhala called Pr6pando\ Nekh6ri, Miles,and Portaria, are the principal khasia, or villageswhich not being vakufs belong to one or other ofthe kazas of Thessaly, of which the imperial revenueis sold every year at Constantinople, generallyto some bey of Larissa. Above Milies isVyzitza, then farther westward Pinakates and St.George ^ ; the lands of the latter reach to the gulf,and border upon those of St. Laurence ^ beyondwhich stand Dhrakia, Portarid, and Makrinitza ^,in that order, encircling the summit of the mountainon the western side.Lekhonia is below St. Laurence, and possessesthe largest plain in the peninsula : Volo lies justbelow Portaria and Makrinitza. The latter, withits makhaladhes, contains about 1200 houses,Volo 700, Portarid 700, Dhiukia 600, St. George,St. Laurence, and Lekhonia, about 400 each,Vyzitza and Pinak&tes 100 each. Of the towns^ Ne^^pi. * "Aycoc AavpivrtocmMti\ialc» * Paria, Ibprapca, Macfu-• Tlp&irayroc, ylr(a,Bv(iriay IlivaKaraiCi "Ayi-oc rcwpytoc*XLI.] MAGNESIA. 393on the eastern face of the mountain, the chief isZagora, from which the whole peninsula is oftencalled Zagora, and its inhabitants Zagorei ^Zagor4 stands immediately below the summitof Plum on the eastern side, and contains600 houses divided into four makhalas, situatedamidst gardens, and dispersed in a forest ofchestnut trees, mixed with some oaks and planes,above which, towards the summit of the mountainis a forest of beeches '. On the shorebelow the town is a small port named Kho-reft6\ Zagora produces no com, and only asmall quantity of oil and figs, but has some gardensof oranges and other iVuits near the sea. Itsubsists almost entirely by foreign trade, by silkZayopa, Zayopaioi> valence of the beech, and hasBesides these trees the also made mention of theHiiXtoy elyoalfvWoy produces sycamore, the cypress, thethe elm and pine. The latter juniper, and a tree named (v^has been noticed by Ennius, yla. Valerius Flaccid speaksOvid, and Dicseaichus. The of the ashes, of which I havelast author remarks the pre not seen many :Utinam ne in tenore Pelion securibusCassa ceddisset aliena ad terram tribes.Penn. Medea, v. 1.Pelion Harmonise mons est obverse in Austria,Summa virent pina, caetera quercus habet.Ovid. Fast 1. 5, v. 381.UXilaniy ^ o^viyv ixei aral KiSpoy, — Dicaearch. de Mont.iXdrtiy, tr^ySafxydy t€ koI fv- Pel.ylay^ in ii Kvirdpwooy KalNamque fires summa sequitur Pelion amos.Val. Flac. I. 2, v. 0.» * Xop€vr6y»394 Magnesia. [Chai.which is made in every house and by the manafacere of skutia, or cloth for capons : 2000 okesof raw silk are the annual produce, and 50,000peeks of skutia, which sell for 5 piastres the peek ;and after the operation of fulling, or washing,quadruple the value of the raw material. Thefulling is performed, as in Mount Pindus, bysimply placing the cloth for several days undera torrent of water falling perpendicularly, whichmakes the cloth shrink and become thick. Almostall the male inhabitants reside abroad duringsome part of their lives, in the pursuit of commerce,and such is the effect of this industry, thatZagora without any natural means has becomethe richest of all the villages of the mountain, asthe superior comfort of its houses testifies. Theprincipal makhala, which is called St. Saviour ^from a large church which it contains, has aschool, the oldest in the peninsula, and a libraryfounded by a native named John Prinko, whomade his fortune as a merchant in Holland. Theother towns on the eastern side of the mountainstand in the following order to the southward ofZagora : — Makriarakhi, Anilio, Kisses, Miirisi,Tzangaradha *, next to which is Propando,. thebefore mentioned makhala of Miles. To thenorth of Zagora is *Pori. All these towns arevakufia, and to this advantage the development oftheir industry is in great measure to be ascribed.They are all employed in the manufacture of"Ayioc ^wrijpaQ.MnKpiapd\if 'Ai'//Xioi', Kiirvoci MowpcTc, Tfttyyapa'^o.XLI.] MAGNESIA. 395skutia. It appears from the authors of die ^^ Geography,"that there are not less than 7000 housesin the twenty-four villages of the mountain, and asmany of these are inhabited by more than onefamily, and Greek families are seldom small, thewhole population of the mountain cannot be computedat less than 45,000.Trikeri, called Bulbulje by the Turks, containsthree or four hundred houses, constructed in thesame manner as those of the district of Volo, andsituated on the summit of a high hill at the east*em entrance of the gulf* The people live entirelyby the sea ; some of the poorer classes, as well asmany of those in the southern villages of theMagnesian peninsula, cut sponges and catch starfish.The others are sailors, ship or boat-builders,and traders. The highest rank are ship-owners,or captains of ships. The richest lend money ata high interest upon maritime traffic, or make advancesupon bills drawn upon Constantinople, wherethe cargoes which are chiefly of com are generallysold. The Trikeri6tes usually fit out their venturesin the same manner as the people of Ydhra,Spetzia, Port, and many other maritime towns;that is to say, the owner, captain, and sailors, allhave shares in the ship and cargo, the sailorsgenerally sharing a half among them, which is inlieu of all other demands. During the scarcity ofcom in France at the beginning of the Revolutiona sailor's share for the voyage amounted sometimesto three purses, which at that time was equivalentto 150/. sterling.396 MAGNESIA. [chap.The peninsula of Trikeri produces nothing butwood ; this is brought to town by the women,who perform all the household work ; while themen are employed entirely in maritime concerns.The women of some of the other towns of Magnesiaare equally laborious, but it is said that none areto be compared with the Trikeriotes'for strength,and for the enormous burthens of wood which theybring into the town spinning cotton all the way.Tiikeri, although on the main land, is includedin the Capitan Pasha's government of the islands,and White Sea, as the Turks call the JEgman^and receives its orders from his interpreter, one ofthe four great Greek officers of the Porte. Thisarose from the circumstance of the old town havingbeen on the island of Trikeri, the ancient Cicyn-nethus\ from whence they were driven by thepirates.In the south-eastern angle of the gulf, whichwas probably the harbour of the city of the Magnatesis a long narrow island named Plata, whichproduces olives, com, and vines. To the westwardof it is a smaller island bearing olives, named Pras-sudha. On each of them is a monastery. The loftysummit now called Bardjoia ', which occupies allthe eastern portion of the peninsula of Tiikeri, wasprobably the Mount TisoBum of Magnesia^^ on whichstood a temple of Diana ', and from which, in theScylax in OcrroXia. — ^Ar- * Msraprfwym.temidorus ap. Strabonn. p. 436. ' Apollon. Rod. 1. 1, v.Pomp. Mel. 1. 2, c. 7. — 568. Orphic, v. 462. Vale.Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 12. Fl. 1. 2, v. 6.XLl.] MAGNESIA. 397year 207 B.C., Philip, son of Demetrius, communicatedby torches with other stations in Phocis,Euboea, and Peparethus, for the purpose ofobtaining immediate knowledge of the movementsof the Bbman fleet ^ The western portion of theTisaan peninsula, on which the town of Trikeri issituated,* appears to have been known as the promontoryJEanteiumy and Ptolemy gives reason tobelieve that there was a town of the same name *.Either the modem harbour of Trikeri, or that betweenthe island of Palea Trikeri and the mainwas the ancient Appease, so called as having beenthe place from whence Jason took his departure forColchis. There seems at least no other situationin which Apheta can be placed, so as to accordwith the narrative of Herodotus in describingthe transactions which preceded or accompaniedthe battle of Artemisium, when the Greeks occupiedthe latter bay, and the Persians that ofAppease '.Dec. 19. — ^^The sou^^Therly winds, which haveprevailed since I left lo&nnina, with the exceptionof two or three days at Fersala, and again twobetween Ftelio and Volo, when it blew from thenorth-east, have had the effect of covering theinterior plains with fog or a light rain more free1. 10, c. 42. — Liv. question, see a memoir on the1. 28, c. 5. Demi of Attica, in the trans-ptolemy.1. 8, c. 18. actions of the R. S. of LiteHerodot 1. 7, c. 198 ; 1. rature, vol. i. p. 244.8, c. 4. — In illustration of this398 MAGNESIA. [chap.gently than with a heavy rain. On the coastthe same kind of mist or fine rain has occurredoccasionally, but without any fog, which has beenconfined to the basin of Thessaly. So marked isthis difference between the sea-coast and the interior,that a fog has been visible from Volo forthe last three days (and I am assured it is a commonoccurrence in winter) resting upon the heightsof St Gewge, which separate the maritime plainof Volo from that of Velestino, and giving to thecountry beyond that ridge the appearance of aboundless lake* The coast meantime has generallyenjoyed a bright sky, with the temperatureof a fine English April. The difference of climatebetween Magnesia and inner Thessaly is shown bythe ove, which abounds in the former, but in thelatter exists only in one or two very shelteredplaces ; fbr instance, under tete great naturalsouth-wall of Kalabaka^From Volo I proceed to Sesklo in an hour and30 minutes, leaving to the left in succession thecastle of Volo, the rocky mountain on which arethe northern walls of Paga8(By and at the foot ofthe same range a small village called die Kalj^viaof Volo, beyond which we ascend some heightsconnected with the north-western side of the mountainof PagasiB to Sesklo ^ This village containsfifty houses, and the ruins of many others. Theinhabitants complain bitterly of the continual passageof Albanians, which they feel the more, both£cVffXoc, 2tfVi:Xoci vulgarly pronounced Shesklo.Xli.] Magnesia. 399positively and comparatively in consequence ofthe exemption of their neighbours of Mount Pelmntfrom this most tormenting of all the oppressions towhich the Christians of this empire are subject.An loannite Greek, on a mission from Aljf Pasha,is now residing at Sesklo, not venturing to remainamong the Turks of Kastro, whose hatred andjealousy of Aljr might easily tempt them to ill-treata Christian agent of his, especially as theyare countenanced at this moment by the Istiradji,or officer of the Porte, who is charged with thecollection and export of Thespian com, and whois specially instructed to counteract Aljr's encroachmentsin this angle of Rumill, and tosupply the government with accurate reports ofbis proceedings.A little below Sesklo is an eminence coveredwith stones, which has much the appearance of anancient site, though without any actual traces ofwalls. It may possibly be the site of ^jonc, orJEsoniaj which was evidently in this vicinity, havingbeen so called from .son, who was father ofJason of lolcus, and whose name is coupled in theOdyssey with that of Spheres the founder of Pherae.Nor could it have been much farther than this placefrom Mount Pelmnij as it was considered a Magnesiantown, and is named by Apologies in thesame verse with Pagans, which was also a Magnesiancity ^^ Ai0ova r' iii ^iptfr 'AfivOdord ff Imnoxdpfiriy,Od. A, V. 258.RXv0t400 Thessaly. [CHAP.Dec. 20. — FromSesklo toGhereli 3 hours 50 nip.The morning was clear and warm, with a breezefrom the sea ; but in less than half an hour after enteringthe foggy region the air became cold, and sodamp that our clothes were soon covered with dropsof water; In 1 hour 20 min. we arrive at St. George,a considerable village, situated on the range ofheights which connect those near the sea coastwith the mountain of Velestino. There is a copioussource of water in the village. The lands producecom and silk. The women manufacture ropesand bs of goat's hair, and spin cotton as in allthe ThessaKan villages. From thence we descendinto the plain of Velestino, and in less thanhalf an hour leave that town two miles onthe left, passing at the same time close to anartificial height which is low with a broad base,and is situated between two others having theusual side and shape of barrows. They formadirect line across the narrowest part of the plainKXvOi &yai Hayaadc re x<$Xiv r* AiataalSa vaitdv'Hfieripoto roic^c Iitmkv/iov (Jason loquitur).Apollon. 1. 1, y. 411.Alaaylc H ir6\tc Mayny^/ac Poc, ^c fool Tliyiapoc i^ropci.—-dire At^MKOC rov rarpoc lamii- Schol. ibid.ipsa wgp dxralKXihyrai Uayiiffal Mayyi^rcJcc*Apollon. 1. 1, ▼ 237.StephanuB distinguishes Ai too.) but this seems to be an(iowa of Magnesia from Airy error arising fit>m the situationof Thessaly, which received its of ^sonia, on the extremename from the other of Jason, borders of Magnesia, towardsin which he is supported by the Pheraea of Thessaliotis.the Etymological (in iisdemXLI.] Thessaly. 401between Velestino and the last heights of thePelian range. A little farther we pass a risingground, and beyond it another, both strewed withnumerous fragments of marble and stones, the remainsof ancient habitations. At the end of anhour and a quarter from St. Geoi^e, we pass closeto the right of the village of Rizomylo (rice mill)by the Turks called Dingle, and at an equal distancefrom thence arrive at There'll ; midwayHadjimes, a Turkish tjiftlik of fifty Greek houses,is a mile to the right ; the whole interval betweenthese villages is an uninclosed plain of nascentcom. The soil resembles that around Larissa,being light and easily wrought with the plough :in good seasons it yields ten or twelve to one inwheat, but is said to require more moisture thanUpper Thessaly or the Larisstjean plain.There'll belongs to the family of Mustafa Pashaof Larissa, whom I remember as Pasha of theMorea, and who died in Bosnia, of which he latterlyhad the government. The Sult^, whoaccording to the Turkish laws was heir to his property,gave it up to the family without any deduction.Many squared stones of ancient fabric are observableat Ghereli, and some sori, roughly formedout of a single block of stone. They have all beenbrought from a macula or height covered withremains of ancient buildings, a mile or two to thewestward, at the foot of the ridge of hills calledKaradigh, or Mavrovuni, whither it has been thecustom from time immemorial for the neighbouringVOL. IV. D d409 THfiSSALIA. [chap.villagers to resort for building materials. Wroughtstones and sori brought from thence are to beseen in many parts of the surrounding plain, theformer encircling the wells, and the latter servingas water troughs.An old Hadji, who is master of my konak atGhereli, and Subashl of the village, which is inhabitedby Greek labourers, remembers manysepulchres to have been opened at the Magula;and once, a small coin to have been taken frombetween the teeth of a skeleton. An inscribed marble,which is now at Ghereli, was brought probablyfrom the same place ; the letters are unfortunatelyso much obliterated as to be quite illegible.Dec. 21. — From Ghereli to Aghia five hours;Kastri, a place mentioned on my second Tressiliantour is exactly half way. Quitting Ghereliat 4.25, Turkish, we leave, in fifteen minutes,Kilil^r at the foot of the hills one mile and a halfon the left: at 5.5 pass between the two small villagesof Buragan and Alufadk, the latter to theright ; then passing a little to the right of Hadj6-bashi, leave, at 5.30, on the same side, Sakalar, alittle beyond which is a large tumulus, with someother small artificial heights near it. So far,this fertile plain is well cultivated ; but at 6 theland becomes marshy, and a quarter of an hourfarther covered with water. This inundationfollows the western foot of the Pelian range. Inspring, when the Salamvrfa is swollen by theSee Vol. III. p. 878.XLl.] THE8SALIA. 403melted snow of the mountains surrounding Thesesahfy a channel situated at a short distance belowLarissa conducts the superfluous waters intothe Kara^air or MavpoXi/ivYTi the ancient Lessons.,As soon as this basin is filled, the Asmak(in Greek Asmaki) conveys the waters to thelake of Karla, which, with the exception of sometorrents falling into it from the northern andwestern sides of Mount Peliuniy is entirely thusformed. The river not having overflowed lastyear, the Karla is now low, and there is notmuch water in the intermediate marsh, comparedwith its state in ordinary seasons. But theAsm4k always contains some deep pools nearKaral4r, as I witnessed when crossing it on the17th of December, 1806. The vulgar assert thatit has no bottom ; and that the fish of the lake ofKarla, which are very numerous in favourable seasons,are all bred in the Asmak, and are carried intothe lake by the mra/Scuna, or descent of the Salam*via. This may be partly true ; but the Asmak isso inconsiderable in very dry seasons, that thelake NessoTM and the river itself are probably thechief breeding places. At 6.30, having crossedthe marsh, we arrive at the foot of the Planrange, about two miles to the northward of a largeGreek village called Kukurava, and follow thefoot of the hills, which consist for the most part ofa bare calcareous rock, to Kastri. This is a belonging to Veljr Pasha, and derivesits name from the walls of an ancient city inclosingthe fiice of the hill at the foot of which the villageDd2404 Thessaly. [CHAP.stands. The position is such as the ancient Greeksfrequently chose, being a rocky height on theedge of a plain, with a copious source of water atits foot, separated by a hollow from the main bodyof the mountain, defended on one side by precipicesand on the other by a ravine and torrent.The spring at Kastri recommended the situationthe more from its vicinity to a thirsty plain,where the only supply of water in summer isfrom wells. It issues from the foot of a rockwhich forms the foundation of a large tower.This tower and all the remaining walls, althoughconsisting of small rude stones and mortar, mixedwith broken tiles, are of very solid construction.They are remarkable for having many square perforationsthrough the entire thickness. The planof the fortification is similar to that at Gritziano,excepting that here the flank defence is obtainedby semi-circular towers and retains, whereas atGritzi&no the towers are rectangular, like thosecommonly used in Hellenic works. The lowerfront of Kastri, being the weakest side, was protectedby an outer wall or counterscarp. Not avestige of any building remains within the inclosureexcept an ancient church. In some partsthe walls are almost complete, in others they areruined to the foundations. The circumference isabout a mile.The Proestos of Kastri has preserved a sepulchralinscription which he found on the outside ofthe ancient walls. The characters are evidentlyof the best times, but too much defaced for copy-xli.]Thessaly. 405ing. Among the rains of a small building insome vineyards on the southern side of the village,lies another inscribed stone in characters of a muchlater date, and remarkable for having the sigmaturned in a direction opposite to the accustomed —a fashion which seems to mark the period whenMagnesia, comprehending all Pelium and Ossa,was a province of Macedonia, and Demerits itschief town This inscription is complete, andsignifies that Hellenocrates, who had held theoffice of purveyor of corn, had erected the stoneas a boundary in a road called Hecatompedus '.Ancient coins are said to be very commonly foundwithin the paleokastro and in the adjacent fields,but none of the villagers have any at present.When they happen to find a coin of silver, theytake the first opportunity of disposing of it to someXpvacicoc, or goldsmith, at Aghia or Larissa, whomay perhaps melt it, if he has not an opportunityof disposing of it to advantage to some itinerantFrank, or of sending it to a correspondent at Constantinople.In Thessaly, as in Macedonia, coinsof copper are found in abundance on the ancientsites, and are generally sold by the peasants,when a sufficient number of them has been collected,to the workers in that metal, who mostfrequently convert them into cooking utensils.The occurrence of inscriptions and coins atKastri is deserving of notice, as proving that therains, although the masonry bears no resentStrabo, p. 436. sac o^f 'Eicaro/iirc^ ripfioya.'£XXayoicpari}c ourorafiitV' — V. Inscription, No. 204.406 Thessaly. [chap.balance to the soothe Hellenic, are really of thosetimes, and thus con6rn]iiig the opinion which Iformed of the similar constructions at Dhamasi,Gritziano, and several other places in Thessaly,where, as at Kastri, few if any wrought masses ofstone are to be seen ; but where the position, themode o£ occupying the ground, and the generalconstruction sufficiently resemble the undoubtedHellenic to show that they are works of the samepeople. Indeed, since the time of the earlyRoman Empire, Thessaly has never been sufficientlytranquil, opulent, or populous, to require orto execute fortifications so extensive and so numerous.From Kastri we follow for upwards of a milealong the foot of the mountain the vestiges of anancient wall, obviously intended as a protection tothe road from the encroachments of the marsh : itwas constructed of solid masonry, and is probablythe soc cjcaro/LnrcSoc, or road of a hundred feet,mentioned in the inscription.In thirty-five minutes we pass through Plessis,a small tjiftlik-village, and then turn the angle ofthe hills which form the southern side of theentrance into the valley which branches eastwardfrom the great Lariss^Ban plain, and extends toDugan, Dhesiani, and Aghia. An insulated eminencewhich rises from the plain between Plessisand the foot of Mount Ossa, but nearer to thelatter, has apparently been the site of an ancientcome as well from the form of the ground as fromnumerous vestiges of walls on the slope and aroundthe brow of the height. The valley into which weXLI.] THS8SAUA. 407now enter presents a pleasant contrast to the immensenaked plains which we have left, andwhich, although as well cultivated as any inGreece, are less remarkable for beauty than forthe grandeur derived from their great extent andtheir noble horizon of mountains. Scarcely a treeis to be met with between Fersala or Velestino andLarissa. The valley of Dhesiani, on the contrary,is enlivened by a rivulet which flows to the As-make,and is shaded in some places by majesticplane-trees, in others by the oleander, lentisk, andagnes castes. The villages on the includingheights of Ossa and Pelium^ as well as those inthe valley, are surrounded by mulberry plantations,vineyards, and fields of corn, which is justabove ground : in the lowest levels the land isprepared for maize. To the left the snowy peakof Kissavo surmounts lower heights well coveredwith a variety of trees : on the right the northernsummit of Mount Pelitm^ less elevated, but havinga small quantity of snow upon it, is clothed in thispart almost entirely with oaks. The only modernname I can learn for this northern extremity of thePelian ridges is Mavroviini, which is hardly a distinction,being, as I before mentioned, attached tothe heights north-west of Velestino, as well as toanother mountain near Petro.At the end of thirty-five minutes from Plessis,having followed generally the left bank of therivulet, we cross it and pass through Dugan,which contains one mosque, a few Turkish houses,and about 100 Greek. A height on the oppositeside of the stream seems by its appearance of art408 MAOVB8IA. [chap.to indicate an ancient site. Twenty^five minutesfarther is Dhesiani, of the same size as Dugan,and consisting entirely of Greek houses, with theexception of a serai belonging to Velj^ Pasha, whohas lately converted this formerly free village intoa tjiftlik. The serai has a garden, in which is alarge square tank with a kiosk in the centre, surroundedby a square inclosure regularly plantedwith young fruit-trees. Besides this house, Vel^^possesses two others in Thessaly, one at Tiikkala,the other at Misdani in the Trikkaline plain ; butthey are now both neglected, while this is intolerableorder. Some fine groves of planes borderthe rivulet a little beyond Dhesiani. Soon afterwardswe arrive in sight of Aghia, which standson the foot of Mount Ossa and half an hour beforesunset arrive in the middle of the tom at the endof a fifty minutes' ride from Dhesiani.Soon after my arrival, a formal visit from theTags of Aghia, now entitled the Hpovrcc or elders,is interrupted by the chimney catching fire— anaccident that seemed alarming, as the house ischiefly of wood, and the fire burnt for some timewith great fury ; my visitors, however, consideringit a matter of no consequence, or rather as a convenientsubstitute for sweeping, our discourse proceedsuninterrupted by the roaring flames. Aghi4,which has now about 500 families, is said to havebeen considerably more populous before it fell intothe hands of A\^ Pashd. It was then governed bya voivoda appointed by the Sultana, to whom itsrevenue is assigned ; and it enjoyed, as well asseveral other places in this neighbourhood simili.]MAGNESIA. 409early protected, among which the principal areThanet, Kaiitza, and Rapsiani, all now in thehands of A\f Pasha, the same advantages as thetowns in the southern part of Magnesia. Theupper classes at Aghia live upon the produceof their corn-fields and vineyards, or the cultureof silk, and the manufacture of stuffs made ofsilk, called sicilia, or of silk and cotton mixed,named aladja, and of cotton towels. Out of100 workshops, some of which have two looms,the cotton towels employ twenty. The siciliaare about twenty-five feet long ; those calledkaftanlik for making kaftans rather longer. Thewidth is two feet, which is the usual breadthof a Thessalian loom. The measures in use atAghia for their stuffs are a rupi, which is thebreadth of the hand including the thumb : eightrupia make an endizia. A weaver earns fortyparts a day. Labourers in the vineyards andmulberry grounds, and in the fields of com andkalambokki receive twenty-five paras, and in thesummer forty with provision ; in the plain of Larissasixty.Aghia had begun to share in the commerce ofdyed cotton thread with Germany, by which and Rapsiani have arisen to eminence, butthe interruption caused by the war between Russiaand the Porte, which has so much injured thosetwo towns, has at Aghia almost annihilated thetraffic with Germany. Enjoying a better soil andricher territory than Ambel&kia and Rapsiani, itwould have had a great advantage over thoseplaces had it not been more exposed by its situateMagnesia. [chap.tion to Albanian extortion. It is now 22 yearssince Alj^ first entered it as Derwent Aga; but itwas not till a few years ago that he bought themalikhiane or farm for life from the Porte. Hehas been greatly assisted in his avaricious projectsby the factious spirit of the inhabitants. By alternatelyencouraging each of the tar&fia, or partiesinto which the place is divided, and by readilylistening to their mutual accusations, he derivesprofit from every new complaint, and renders hispower more secure in this quarter. At presentthe town is divided between the parties of twobrothers, Alexis and George. The latter hadheld the post of hodja-bashi, and having beenregular in his half-yearly visits to loannina withthe aladjak, or collective payments from the town,accompanied by a present from himself, he hadenjoyed for many years the undisturbed possessionof a great part of his private property, togetherwith the chief municipal power. In 1807 MukhtarPasha coming into Thessaly in pursuit of the rebelPapa Evtlmios, listened to the persuasions ofAlexis, who finding all other modes insufficient,openly accused his brother of having been inleague with an Albanian Bolu-bashi, who is theDerwent Aga's agent at Aghia, to favour the flightof the bishop's niece, who had run away with oneof the deacons ; and of having received a bribe toconnive at the elopement. In consequence of thisaccusation, both brothers were sent for to loannina,and have not yet been allowed to return home,though they have made great pecuniary sacrifices,both to the Vezir and to Mukhtar Pasha, andXLI.] Magnesia. 411though A15^ has at length declared himself satisfiedthat George had no share in the elopement.George's son, who had been at Vienna for hiseducation, had not been twelve days in Aghiabefore the opposite tarafi accused him of havingtaken upon himself to act as a Gherondas, andof having raised money in that capacity withoutauthority. He was forthwith sent for to lo&nnina,where he still remains. Besides the brothers,some other branches of the family, to the amountof twelve or fourteen, are now there. The headsof the other chief houses are in Germany, so thatthe wife of Kyr Ghiorghi seems now to be consideredthe chief person at Aghia.Dec. 23. — ^^The houses of Aghia are pleasantlydispersed among beeches, walnut-trees, oaks,planes, cypresses, mulberry plantations, vineyards,and gardens. The part of Ossa which rises immediatelyto the northward is chiefly coveredwith beeches. Chestnut, oak, and ilex, are thetrees most common on the opposite slopes ofPeHum. The only deficiency in this beautifulsituation is that of a view of the sea, of which,although only a few miles distant, it is deprivedby a ridge, noticed by Herodotus, whichcloses the valley of Dhesiani, and unites thelast falls of OsM and Pelium ^ To the eastwardthis ridge falls to another valley, terminating inawide jcoXiroc, or gulf, bounded to the northward^ Ta yLty yap airr^c (Oeo^* dirocXi^ifc, mffifilayoyra ragaaXinjc) irpoc t^k ^J cxoito, vx«p€40c iXX//Xotffi. — Hexodot.t6 Tt Ili/Xtoy oSpoc Koi 4 "Offa 1. 7> c. 129.412 MAGNESIA. [chap.by Cape Kissavo, on the coast of Ossa and to thesouthward by a projection of the Plan range,between Fori and Zagor4, Although the retreatof the coast is so small, compared with its extent,that it has not at present any specific name as agulf, there can be no doubt of its identity withthat which Strabo names the gulf of Meliboea,since besides his clear description of it, as lyingbetween Pelium and Ossa, he has accurately assignedto it a length of 200 stades, and to the seacoastof either mountain 80 stades \Between Aghia and the sea, a central positionin the connecting heights, at the western extremityof the maritime valley, was occupied byan ancient fortress, or small fortified town. Thewalls are constructed, like those at Kastri, ofbroken tiles and small stones, with a large proportionof mortar ; and they are of the same thickness,or about nine feet, but their state of preservationis very different. On the north in particular,they are scarcely traceable; but the hillis here so precipitous, that a slight defence wasperhaps thought sufficient. All this end of theheight is surrounded by the bed of a torrent,which descends from Kissavo, and having beenjoined just below the Paleokastro by another fromMavroviini, or PeUum^ flows through the valleyabove mentioned to the MeUbasan gulf. The ruined^ Tpaxvc ^ ^0TiK 6 iropa- off, Mera{v it Kokwoc irXct-irXovc ira o rov IIi|Xiov, 6<ror 6ywv j iiaKwritiy oraiimy^ kvcrahiiav dyZoiiKovra* roaovroc ^ ii McXi/ioca. — Strabo, p. 443.ii fc«i roufvrOQ koc 6 r^c "Off-xli.]Magnesia. 413walls are chiefly preserved towards the lattermountain, upon which, at the distance of a mile,is a small village named Askiti. The walls onthis side cross a ridge which connects the heightwith that mountain; and here stands the onlyremaining tower, which is not semi-circular likethose at Kastri, hut quadrangular. Within theruined inclosure are the remains of a large cistern,and heaps of stones collected from the ruinsof ancient habitations, together with some foundationscomposed of lai^e irregular masses.This position commands a fine view of Aghia,of the valley which extends to the Melibtsangulf, and in the opposite direction, of that whichcontains Dugdn, Dhesiani, and many smallervillages, as well as of the including mountains,Ossa and Pelium^ and of the Pelasgic plain, beyondwhich rise the hills of Khassia and MountPindus. On the side of Ossa is seen Nevolianf,in a lofty situation above Aghia, and Selitzani,similarly situated above Aidinli, which last is twoor three miles north-west of Aghia on a root of themountain. At Aidinli, Alj^ Pasha is now buildinga Tekieh for his favourite Bektashlis. To thesouthward the view of the land is terminated bya steep bluff of Mount Pelium, between Pori andZagora, already mentioned as the southern extremityof the Melibasan gulf; beyond which, tothe eastward, the view extends over the open seabetween the cluster of islands to the north-eastof Skopelo and the western shore of the peninsulaof Parent which is twelve leagues distant.Behind the latter rises the highest part of the414 Magnesia. [chap.ToTonMc peninsula, and bejroiid it Mount Athos.To the northward of these appear the mountainsof the Chalcidicey which terminate near Saloniki.Returning from the Paleokastro, I visited a laiancient monastery, pleasantly situated in a woodof oaks a mile to the eastward of Aghi4, andcommanding a partial view of the sea, but foundno remains there of Hellenic antiquity.A comparison of Livy and Strabo, the formerof whom describes Meliboea as standing on theroots of Mount Ossa, and the latter as situated inthe gulf between Ossa and Pelium ', leave nodoubt that it was near Aghia. As Herodotus,Scylax, and Apollonius, describe it as a maritimetown, and as the historian mentions it among thosenear which the ships of Xerxes were wrecked, itcan hardly have been so far from the sea as thepaleokastro of Askiti, which is three miles distantfrom the shore. These ruins moreover arenot those of a town of sufficient importance forthe capital of Philoctetes. Meliboea therefore Itake to have stood at a place called Kastri, notfar beyond Demand, where now exists only amonastery of St. John Theology. Above thatsituation, amidst a wood of beeches on the sideof Mount Ossa, is Thanet, a village of 400houses, on the road from Aghia to Karitza, producingchiefly wine and silk. Between Thaliain radicibus Ossse Strabo, p. 443, v. sup. not.montis, qua parte in Thessaly p. 412.lias vergit, opportune inuni-news super Demetriadem. —Lir. 1. 44, e. 13.XLI.] MAGNESIA. 415Datu and Karitza there are said to be indicationsof another ancient site, at a spot whereseveral large quadrangular blocks of stone areseen in the fields, below which is a ruin, vulgarlynamed the Persona, or mint, and another witharches, called o iraXmoc Xovrpoc, or the ancientbath.Karitza stands in a steep and rugged position,a mile or two above the sea ; it contains 150families, who live chiefly by supplying Salonikiwith wood. The land produces little but figs andgrapes. Fteri, the port of Karitza, and the mostfrequented on this coast, is situated an hour to thenorth of Karitza, midway between Karitza and themouth of the Salamvria on the edge of the maritimelevels which with slight interruptions is continuedas far as the great Macedonian plains at the headof the Thermal gulf. Above Fteri on the lowerpart of Mount Kissavo, is a convent of St. Deme-tries,noted for its magnitude and antiquity. Itstands perhaps on the site of HomoUum. As tothe ancient remains between Thanet and Karitza,I am inclined to think they are those of JEury-mefMB, which we know from several authorities tohave been a town of the Magnesian coast ^ Apologies,indeed, seems opposed to this particularsite, by naming Eurymenae as if it were the nearestplace to Tempe *, but as he has evidently not beenparticular in introducing the names of the placesScylax in Mayrfrec- — * Apollon. 1. 1, v. 597, Tit.Strabo, p. 443.-*Plin. H. N. \sd. p. 44S.1. 4, c. 9. — Hecatseua ap. Stephen.in El^pv/icva^.416 MAGNESIA. [chaponthis coast in their exact order, his testimony isof little weight.On the coast between Askiti and PoH, on theeastern face of Mount Peliunij are the followingvillages in succession , all situated about twomiles above the sea shore, and about two hoursasunder, with the exception of the first, which isonly about half that distance from Askiti : theirnames are Polydhendhri, Sklithro, Keramidhi, Ve-nato, and Mintzeles, above which last is Persia,and beyond it Pori. If MeUbcm was near Aghastbecomes not improbable that the paleokastroof Askiti, or one of the villages just named,may have been the site of Thaumaday one ofthe four cities whose ships in the Trojan warwere commanded by Philoctetes ', for Methodand Alison were, according to Scylax, as beforeremarked, in the Pagasetic Gulf; Thaumacia,therefore, it is natural to suppose, was nearthe intermediate shore between those places andMeliboea. It is proper to observe that this Thau-maria is not to be confounded with the Thaumaciof Phthisis, a place which either did not exist atthe time of the Trojan expedition, or was includedby Homer among the other unnamed towns of thedominions of Peleus. Myra, according to Scylax,was another ancient town on the eastern shore ofMagnesia *. Three ancient sepulchral inscriptionsO! ^ Papa Mi|6mvi|v koI QavfiaKirfv cvi/iovro,Kal MeX//3ocay ex^^ "^^^ *OXi{dya rptix^lay,11. B. V. 716.Scylax in Mayv^cc.XLI.] MAGNESIA. 417are preserved in the churches of Aghid, broughtprobably from the site of Melibcea ; one of these isa fragment, giving notice of a fine of 5000 denariato be paid by any violator of the tomb to the or public chest of the city' — a number solarge that we may infer a great depreciation ofthe denarius at the time of the inscription ; thetwo others bear names only ' : as to one of these,the remark occurs, that although it is evidentlyof a date when the Thessalians employed thepatronymic adjective, the father's name is hereexpressed as generally in Greece by the secondcase'. Probably the Magnetes did not acknowledgethemselves to be Thessalians.V. Inscription, No. 207* ' ^^parlg KcpWuiKOc*V. Inscriptions Nos. 205,206.VOL. IV. E eCHAPTER Xli.Thessaly.Return to Kastri — KanaUa — Fishery of the lake of Xarla, orBabeii — Babe — Sapiens, Glaphyra — Primum — ^Veles^no,Pera — Mount Chalcodanhtm — Petra — Lacereia — Amyrus —Dorian and Amyric plains — Cercinnnn — Arwienium — GheremiSupli — Scotus — Battle of CynetcepkaUt — Duvlatfin —Tjangli, Eretria Prioris — Ghenitaaro-khori — Bier EmpemMeliitsea — Coroneia — Perineum — amount Narihacntm — Pra$'^Thetidium.Dec. 24. — Dh^siani, to which I return this afternoonfrom Aghia, was once evidently of moreimportance than it is at present, as it contains fourancient churches, two of which are large. In allof them are many squared blocks, brought fromsome neighbouring Hellenic site. One of these isthe tomb-stone of a woman named Heroines Inthe pavement of the principal church are two handsomeslabs of verd-antique, or at least of a speciesof green marble of which I observed two similarpieces at Aghia, one of them lying at a fountain.Dec. 25. — Having returned by the same route toKastH, we follow the foot of the hills instead of recrossingthe marsh, and in 35 minutes from KastHleave Kukur&va a mile and a half on the left, upony. Inscription, No. 208.CHAP. XLTI.] THB8SAUA. 419the side of the mountain. Its mukata being in thehands of Hall Bey of Zituni, it is now consideredas belonging to the district of Zituni. Hall is theintended son-in-law of Vel^^ Pasha. In 35 minutesmore we halt at Abufaklar, a Koniaric villagedivided into two makhal&s, and bearing the usualTurkish signs of poverty and ruin, though theinhabitants enjoy the double advantage of cultivatingtheir own lands in a situation not to bemolested by travellers or soldiers. But like theirbrethren of Asia Minor, these Turks seem to besatisfied with the bare necessaries of life, and tothink that all beyond is unworthy of the labourof procuring it.The calcareous rocky hills at the back of Abu&k«lar produce nothing but the prinokokki or shrubbyholly-leaved oak. Towards the plain are somegroves of large oaks and plane-trees near the villagewhich give it a pleasant appearance, but the marshis too near to be agreeable or wholesome. At 8,(Turkish time,) we prosecute our route over somerich com land, and at 9.10 arrive at a projectionof the mountain, beyond which it retires and formsthe great bay or retreats the Plan range, whichembraces the lake of Karl a. To the right, or west,beyond the marsh, and opposite to the projectingpoint of the mountain, a very remarkable heightrises like an island out of the plain. This hill,the foot of which is touched by the marsh whenthe inundation reaches its maximum, is aboutfour miles in circumference, rocky in many parts,but no where lofty, and having two summits connectedby a ridge : the southern is pointed, thatEe2420 Thessaly. [CHAP.to the northward is more low and even. Betweentheniy on the northern slope of the ridge, stands aKoniaric village named Petra : around the heightsome rocks rise out of the level, and two or threemiles south-eastward is another detached height,smaller and lower than that of Petra, but similarto it, and forming at present an island in the lakeof Karla. I have been the more particular in describingthe hill of Petra, because it answers mostremarkably to a position in the plain Dotium^described by Hesiod in a fragment of the Eoese ofthat poet preserved by Strabo ^Having turned the projection, our route leadseastward along the foot of the hills, which consistof a bare rock, so rugged that it must be very difficultfor any cattle to pass over the points when theinundation reaches to the rocks. These seem tobe the Bo(/3ta8oc Kprifivoi alluded to by Pindar'.At present there is a wide level, covered in someplaces with rushes, between the rocks and theedge of the water, which, as the lake is now reducedto a small compass, is at the distance of amile to our right. In various places on the foot ofthe hills there are stone huts for the use of theagents of the person who farms the fishery of thelake from the Sultan. Opposite to each hut is arough quay or jetty, made of loose stones, for theconvenience of those who drag the nets. ApproachingCandia, I observe the villagers plough.Strabonn. pp. 442. " Pindar Pith. 8, v. 60, —64", et Schol. Pindar. Pith. 3, Vide infra, p. 446.V. 14. — vide infra, p.XLII.] Thessaly. 421in^the borders of the lake, attended, as Id Egypt,by the Gherondes or elders, who at seed-time, onthe subsidence of the inundation, superintend theadjustment of the boundaries of the fields. Theiraward admits of no appeal. The soil is excellent ;but if the water rises beyond the usual extent, thepeasant may lose his seed-corn, or may be obligedto look for a harvest of fish instead of grain.At 1 1 we arrive at Kanalia. This village, whichcontains 200 houses, is situated on the foot ofMount Peliumy shut in on either side by the lowerdeclivities of that mountain, and open only to aview of the eastern end of the lake, of the hills tothe south of it, and of a part of Velestlno. Sucha position cannot be very healthy or agreeable insummer. In fact, the heat and glare of light reflectedfrom the bare white rocks which inclosethe lake and adjacent plain are described as intolerable,and not less so the clouds of gnats andflies which infest all the borders of che lake. Thevillage stands nearly on the edge of the highest inundation,where begin vineyards and mulberryplantations, which occupy all the lower part of afertile valley, extending for three miles to theeastward, with a breadth half as great, and terminatingat the northern foot of Mount Plessidhi.The fertile soil and valuable fishery of Kanaliamake it the richest village in the district of Celestina,and would have caused it to prosper stillmore, had not intestine quarrels checked improvement,and at one time almost ruined the place.They have lately adopted the plan of placing abridle upon themselves in the shape of a Bostanji422 TBE86ALIA. [CHAP.of Constantinople, whom they pay as governor orrepresentative of the Sultan, to whose Haste thevillage and fishery belong : from this measure theyhope also to derive some protection against Alj^Pasha. A party, nevertheless, at the head ofwhich is my host the Hodja-bashi, has beenalready gained over to assist the Pash in hisdesign of forcing the Sultan to compound withhim by giving him the life farm of the districtas at AghiL The Hodja-bashi justifies his inclinationto the Veadr^s projects, by the remark,that although the Albanian does not yet commandthe place, he walks over it, and treadsit down ', meaning that the Albanians quarterupon them. The Mukata comprises, togetherwith the fishery of the lake, the dhekatia of Kana->lia, of Miserly on the western side of Mount Ossaof Miles on Mount Pelium, of Degrades in thedistrict of Elassona, of Vlakhoianni in that ofDheminiko, of Megarkhi near Kalabaka, and ofApidhid in 'Agrafa. It has been for several yearsin the hands of a Greek of Milies, who continuesto pay eighty purses a year for it to the Sultan,though from two of the villages he has little prospectof obtaining his dues, as they have becometjiftliks of Mukhtar Pasha and his father. Aljr'sprincipal object at present seems to be that of layinghold of the person of this mukatesl, who, whenthe Vezir had introduced some of his Albaniansinto the castle of Volo, under shadow of the rebellionof Papa Evtimio, found it prudent to re-dyxaXa Op to 6p((it 6 'Ap/Sav^riif, to war.Xli.] THftSaALIA. 423tire to Constantinople ; and though he returned toMili^, oa ascertaining that the Albanians hadbeen withdrawn from Volo in consequence of thecapture of Evtimio in the JEgcBan sea, he dares notvisit Kanalia, but entrusts his interests here . to adeputy. He is entitled to a third of the produceof the fishery, the Kanali6tes enjoying the soleright of fishing, which in plentiful seasons theyrelax in favour of some of the neighbouring villages.The only fish are carp \ a small flat fish *,and eels ^. They are caught with seines and hand-nets,but chiefly in inclosures made of reeds whichgrow in the lake, and are called /lavSpaicia, becausethe fish follow the leader into them like sheep into afold, the entrance, of course, being so constructedthat they cannot return. When the fishing takesplace, KipartiZtQ, or carriers, attend on the shorewith their irpay/uara, or things Nor moyri^y by whichis here meant either horses or asses ^, and havingpaid for the fish, transport them forthwith to thesurrounding markets. In summer fish caught inthe evening are thus sold at daybreak in Clarissa,Aghi4, Armyro, or F6rsala : in winter, Katerfna,Trikkala, and even M^zovo, are supplied fromhence. The agents of the Habit, as the farmer ofthe Sultan's share is styled, attend at the landingplaces to take an account of the-sums received bythe Kanaliote fishermen, and receive the third at1 oa^avi^ a Turkish word. the iBgaean, where horses arexXarvr^Qic* rare, xpdy/iara generally meany(iKia, asses.^ In the smaller islands of424 Thessaly. [CHAP.their houses in Kanalia. At present there are nocarp in the lake, as they all come through theAsmaki on the overflowing of the Peneius into theNessoniSj and thence into the Bcsbds ; and thisyear, according to the local expression, ^^ themother has not come down ^ :" nor was there anyconsiderable inundation last year, so that few fishwere caught in the summer, and none have beentaken this winter. A deficient inundation is oftenfollowed by the farther calamity, that the fish remainingin the reduced lake are killed by thesun, as happened last summer, when the heat anddrought were excessive. The wind too is sometimesfatal to them, by raising the water on thelee-side of the lake, and then suddenly abatingby which the fish are stranded or left in smallpools, where the heat of the sun soon kills them.The Etesian winds in particular have this effect,as they occur in the hottest season, and when thelake is generally at the lowest.To make amends for the want of fish this year,there has been a plentiful crop of com from thebanks of the lake, which, as the harvest was indifferentin other parts of Thessaly, and in someplaces failed entirely, has borne a good price ; andhence the Kanaliotes have been induced thiswinter to sow the borders of the lake to a greatextent, and with the more confidence, as after ascanty inundation, a more than usually plentifulone is required to restore the lake to its averagelimits, and consequently they have a good chanceXLII.] Thessaly. 425that their crop of com will not be injured by thewater. Sometimes, though very rarely, the lakeis quite dry, as it will be next winter if thereshould be no inundation in the course of the year.Indeed, they say that it would now be dry but forthe torrents which have pourec]^ into it from themountain. The inundation generally takes placefrom the middle of February to the middle ofApril of the Roman calendar, and brings with itfish full of roe, which is soon afterwards convertedinto young fish. In the middle of summer theseweigh about ten to the oke, towards the end of theyear three or four to the oke, at the end of thesecond year an oke each, and of the third year twoekes. When the seasons are favourable for twoor three successive years, the quantity caught isimmense, and the fish are sold at six or eightparas the oke, at other times from ten to twenty.The fishing times are not regulated by naturalcauses, but by the calendar, the principal objectbeing to supply the market with fish during theGreek fasts, and to those who fast strictly on thedays of apyia or suspension, when there is an i)^9vocicaraAvffic ; that is to say, when instead of avaifiara,such as shell-fish, star*fish, and botargo, fish havingblood is allowed, as well as eggs, milk, andcheese, and which days are therefore in realityfeasts. The fasts which chiefly affect the fisheryof Karla are in August, before the icoifiifmc r^cIlavaytac, the twenty-five days preceding thefeast of St. Demetrius, which occurs on the26th of October (old style), and the fast ofAdvent before Christmas. On all these occa-426 THJE80ALIA. [Chapftions, Wednesdays and Fridays are excepted fromthe suspension of the fast. The sale is most extensivein December, as the fish may be carriedfarther. In good years the Zal^t gains from twentyto forty purses, but this year will be a considerableloser by his mukata.The Kanaliotes estimate the degree of or plenty, by the number of pitham4dheaor palms in the lake. The depth of water in thecentre at present is five palms: when it is fullthere are twenty*five palms.Dec. 26. — ^^The obstinacy and violence of ^^TheEtesian winds in July and August, to which Ihave just alluded, are well known to those whohave had to struggle with them in the Aegean inthat season. As a contrast for this sometimes disagreeable,though probably always salutary characteristicof the climate of Greece, nothing can bemore delightful than the general tranquillity of theautumn and early winter throughout the easternside of the Grecian continent, beginning generallyabout the middle of November, and sometimeslasting the greater part of the month of January,between which and April is generally the truewinter in Greece. The wind, since I have beenin this province, has generally been light, whetherwith or without rain, and during the last monththere have been only two violent gales; one ofthese occurred yesterday, the other at Aghia, andneither of them lasted more than twelve hours.Turkish words, of which among the Greeks of Hies-thisis one, are common sale.XLII.] Thessaly. 427Eastern Greece, however, is subject to greater ertrees of temperature than the country to thewestward of Pindus where southerly and westerlywinds are so prevalent during the winter, that thecold IS seldom very durable or very severe, exceptin the parts near the central ridge. Daniel andGregory of Milies state in their ^^ Geography'*that the olive trees of Magnesia^^ where the climateis milder than in any other part of Thessaly, werelulled by the frost in 1782. In 1779 the hikeBabes which was then so full as to extend toKastri, was frozen entirely over, so that personspassed from Kanalia to the opposite side. Theflocks perished, and many a Vlakhiote shepherdreturned to his mountains without a single sheep.The authors confirm the truth of their account bydescribing the peculiar sound caused by the crackingof the ice from one end of the lake to theother, a phenomenon remarkable to them fromits rare occurrence in so southern a latitude. Ihave met with many similar testimonies as to theoccasional severity of the winter, particularly inUpper Thessaly y where only two years ago thesheep perished in great numbers, and where theplains are covered sometimes for a fortnight withsnow to the depth of eight or ten palms; thismay be seen also in Epirus in the interior plainsof loannina, Arghyr6kastro, K6nitza, and in theintermediate valleys, but seldom nearer to thesea.The lake Bcebeis derives its modern name ofKarla from a village which stood a mile to the428 Thessaly. [chap.south-east of Kanalia, but of which no traces nowremain, except scattered stones and a large ancientchurch, dedicated to St. Nicolas, in the middleof the valley, near the high-water mark of thelake. Kanalia, which has supplied its place, wasformerly situated in the upper part of the mountain,but when robbers and the other vexationsperpetually occurring in Turkey had depopulatedKarla, the prospect of gain induced the people ofKanalia to descend from their healthy situation.The ruins of the houses and churches of oldKanalia are still to be seen on the mountain.The ancient Base, which as well as the lake issufficiently identified by the words of Strabo \ occupieda height advanced in front of the mountain,sloping gradually towards the plain, anddefended by a steep fall at the back of the hill.It appears to have been constructed of Hellenicmasonry properly so called. The acropolis maybetraced on the summit, where several largequadrangular blocks of stone are still in theirplaces, among more considerable ruins formed ofsmall stones and mortar. Of the town walls thereare some remains at a small church dedicated toSt. Athanasius at the foot of the hill, where areseveral large masses of stone showing by theirdistance from the acropolis that the city was notless than two miles in circumference. The hill'H ^£ Boi/3i/ic XlfJiyfi TrXfi' Xiv iripairi jcai r^c Maynj^iac*ffiafcc /icv raie septic* ffvi^ccirrci Boi/3i| ^e xupioy iirl r^ XlfAyjfii Kal role awoXhyovei rod Dips jcc//icvov. — Strabo, p. 436.XLII.] Thessaly. 429on which it stood is rocky and covered with linaria: at the back of it are some sepulchres,formed of quadrangular slabs placed vertically inthe earth. At the foot of the height to the northwest,without the walls of the town, there is anever-failing source of water in a deep cavity ; inwinter it generally fills up the cavern to themouth : it is now however very low, but the wateris excellent, and contributed probably to recommendthis site to the original settlers. It mayhave been perhaps to protect their fountain as wellas to command a view to the westward over thelake and plain, that the ancients built a smallcastle on the peak of a rock, about half way in aright line between the Paleokastro and Kanalia.Its masonry is of the same kind as that of theruins at Kastri and Gritziano ; that is to say, thewalls are thick, formed of small irregular stonesand mortar, and pierced with many square holes.At a distance of five or six hundred yards to thesouth-east of the site of Bcebe are the remains ofa small ancient building, composed of a coarsespecies of white marble which splits easily intothin slabs. It was apparently a detached temple ;the length within is fourteen, and the breadth tenfeet, with walls 3-|- feet thick, having an entrancein the middle of one end 3 feet 7 inches wide.One of the long sides is still six feet high abovethe soil, in five courses of regular masonry,forming the whole thickness of the wall, andof which the two upper courses project overeach other within ; thus showing that they formeda part of the roof of the building, and that430 THB8SALIA. [Chap.it was contracted in a manner very commonlyfound in Greek doors and roose of small span.A small quantity of cement mixed with brokentiles has been employed in this masonry. Thebuilding is on the slope of a rocky height, a littleabove the foot of it.At the church of St. Nicolas, on the site ofKarla, are some fragments of fluted Doric columns1 foot 9 inches in diameter, with 20 flemings, andseveral masses of white marble, of which stone theadjacent mountain seems to be chiefly composed.From the church of St. Nicolas I cross the mountainwhich borders the vale of Bcehe on the southto K&prena. In various parts of the mountainhuts have been built by the people of K4prena forthe Vlakhi, who come into this part of Thessalywith their sheep in the winter, and hire bothpasture and huts. By the Greeks of Thessalythese people are commonly called Karagunidhes \or black cloaks. With the extension of AljrPasha's landed property in Northern Greece, hisflocks also have increased, and the greater partof those which winter in the plains of Thessalynow belong to him or his sons. Each of the threeTepeleniote Pashas has a tjoban-bashi, or head-xlii.]THCS8AUA. 431shepherd, who appoints iJie winter-quarters, correspondswith the subordinate leaders, and reportsto his master. Not only these persons, but thoselikewise who conduct the flocks of others or theirown into Thessaly, and who were formerly exposedto the extortions of the Koniaiidhes, now enjoy theVezir's protection, as coming from places subjectto his government. Hence the Vlakhi6tes arebetter disposed towards A\<f than his other subjects,except those immediately in his employment.In like manner the Vlakhiote shopkeepers, tailors,day-labourers, and itinerant venders of capons,enjoy in the towns a greater degree of securitythan formerly.The numerous flocks on the heights aroundKaprena and Candia illustrate the epithet iroAv-fnfAoram bestowed upon Bcebe by a dramatic poetwho was a careful observer of manners and topography^ The fish of the Bcebeis, on the contrary,are not noticed in any of the ancient authors,unless Boi/3it should be substituted for BoA/3iy, in afragment by a poet often quoted by Theseus',though as Bole was a lake in Macedonia, suchan alteration is by no means necessary. As to thecereal capabilities of Bcebe^ it is not surprising thatthey should have been unnoticed so near to thePheraeany America and Laris&cean plains.Kaprena is a village of 50 houses situated onTocydp wokvuJiiKoTdTav'Etfr/av oircTc (Admete sc.) irapd KoXKlvtiovBoifilay Xi/ivav.Eurip. Albeit. T. 568.ArehestratuB ap. Athen. 1. 7> c. 17.432 Thessaly. [CHAP;an elevated level among the hills which lie betweenthe lake of Karla and the plains extendingto Volo. Above the village, on one of the highestpoints of these hills are the ruins of an ancienttown with a citadel on the summit, of which theentire circuit is traceable. On its lower side apart of the wall is still standing, built of rudemasses of stone, the interstices of which are filledwith smaller rough stones without mortar. Thoughthe masonry resembles the Cyclopian of Tiryns,the rude blocks are so much smaller than at thatplace, that the HeUenism of these ruins mightperhaps be doubted did not the extent, the natureof the position, the general construction, the citadelon the summit, and the body of the place onthe slope to the southward all furnish a strongtestimony of their origin. Within the inclosurethe ground is covered with small stones, and thefoundations of the buildings are so preserved thatthe streets might be planned. The place is defendedon the east and south by steep cliffs, whichin the latter direction overhang Kaprena.The acropolis commands a vie of Volo, Demetrios, great part of the Pagasetic gulf, and in theopposite direction of the lake BcebeiSy and of theplains as far as Larissa and Tornado. If we maysuppose Homer in his catalogue to have namedthe towns of Greece as nearly in their order ashis versification would allow, these should be theremains of GlaphyrdB^ which he places betweenBoebe and Iolcus\ As Glaphyrse is not menu.B. ▼.712.Xli.]Thessaly.toned in subsequent history, it may perhaps haveceased to have any importance at an early period,which in some measure agrees with the appearanceof the ruins.The fields of Kaprena produce only corn, andare not very fertile : the soil is of that red colourso often met with in the hilly districts of Greece.The situation is healthy, but cold in winter, andthe inhabitants are often annoyed by the wolvesof Mount Pelium. These animals are equallytroublesome at Zagora, on the opposite side of themountain, and more or less to all the villagernear the forests, in which abound also the deer,the roe, and the wild hog.It would appear iron Strabo that there was atown of Orminium at the foot of Mount Peliumbetween Kaprena and Volo, for he describes it assituated vwo or at the foot of that mountain, nearthe lake Bcebeis, at a distance of 27 stades fromDemerits, the road passing through lolcus ; andthis he confirms by the remark, that lolcus was7 stades from Demerits, and 20 from Orminium '.The geographer conceived this place to have beenthe same as the Ormenium of the Iliad, but we^ To fjLEv olv *Op/icyiov xa-Xcirac vvp *OpfjLlpioy' Itrrl ^e vworf UriXl^ KWfJLjf Kara rov Ilaya-affTvcov k6\'kov t&v trvv^Kifffu-'yiay etc r^v Ai^/ii^rpidda ir6\€iay,fvC cipijrat. *AvdyKri ^c xal r^vBoi/3i|ida Xifiyfiy elvai irXtifflop^cirec^i) jcal 4 "Bolfifi rev vcpioi-kI^v Jfy ri|c ^ff/Jnirpidio^ KalVOL. IV.thro TO *Opfiiytoy. To fiiy oZy*Opfiiyioy airi\€i r^c tSirifirfrpi'aBoc ^^C^ trrailovQ erra icaleiKoffC 6 Bi rfjg ^IuXkov t6tociy oSf KtifieyoQ rfjg fJtiy ^rj^ri'rptdSos eTTTa (ttiiBIovq hiiarriKe^Tov ^ *OpfJL€ylov rove Xotirowc€iKOffi ffraSiovQ. -^ Strabo, p.438.Ff434 thbssalia. [chap.may be permitted to doubt whether he was rightin this opinion, or in supposing that the fountainHypereia, mentioned in the same verse of theCatalogue, is that which at a later time was celebratedas a source in the town of Pierce \ for thewarriors from the country around PhersB, BcBbe^and lolcus, followed Humerus *, whereas those fromOrmenium and Hypereia were under Eurypylus,whose third town was Asterium^^ which I havealready shewn to have stood at Vlokh6y near thejunction of the Atlantis and £lnipeusj forty milesto the north-westward of Pierces ; whence it seemsclear that Eurypylus ruled over the plains ofThessaliotis^ which are watered by the Apidanusand EnipeuSy and which bordered south-eastwardupon Phthia, to the south and south-west uponColonia, and north-westward on the Tripolitis ofthe Asclepiadse. Ormenium, therefore, probablystood in some part of these plains. It was saidto have been founded by Omens, grandsonof solus, and to have descended to Eurypylusin preference to his first cousin Phoenix, althoughMentor, father of Phoenix, was the elder sonof Omens, because Phoenix had quitted his^ Strabo, p. 439.Oi dc ^epac ivifWVTO irapal Botfifitia \Liivriy^Bolfiriy oral FXa^vpac, ra evKTl^ivriv 'laoiXr^v*T&y 2p)^* *A2/A//roio ^l\ot whig lySexa ni&yTS,viJLri\oQ. II. B. V. 711.Ot r cxov *Opfiiyioyf ot re Kpiiyijy *Yxcpciav,Ot T i')(py 'Atrripioy^ Tirdyoid re Xevica xdpitiyUfT&y ^px' EirptnrvXocy "EifoifwyoQ dyXw^ vi<^*n. B. V. 734.XUI.] THBS8ALIA. 435family \ That the native place of Phoenix wasnot near Mount Pelium is evident from his speechto Achilles, wherein he describes his quarrel withMentor, and relates, that when he fled from hispaternal house, he crossed the ^* broad Hellas" beforehe arrived in Phthia, where Peleus cherishedhim like a son, and at length made him kingover the Dolopes'. The Orminium of MountPelium, or Magnesia, seems therefore to havebeen different from the Ormenium of Thessaliotis.Similar considerations tend to the belief, that theHypereia of the poet was not the fountain atPheriBj but possibly the source below Dhomoko,or that near Ghynekokastro, or at Vrysia *.Our road from Kaprena to Velestino follows avalley which branches westward from the littleplain of Kaprena, and then descends by a gentleslope to an opening just opposite to Velestino,where the plain is narrowest, and is crossed bythree tumuli, noticed on the 20th. They form adirect line, and are nearly equidistant respectively,as well as with reference to the heights on eitherside. The distance of Kanalia from Velestino isthe same as that of Kaprena, which occupied twohours and a half at the usual pace. The roadfrom Kanalia leads between the southern side ofthe lake and the mountain of Glapkyrce^ andenters the plain at Delikali, a small valley situatedat the foot of those heights.Dec. 27 to 31.— The vilayeti of Velestino* for-demeter.Seems, ap. Straw See Vol. I. p. 454.bon. p. 438. ^ BcXcorivocII. I. V. 474.Ff 2436 Thessaly. [CHAP.merely contained 72 villages, and included the districtof Volo, but by the effects of discord amongthe chief Turks who seem to have caught theinfection from Mount Pelium^ without acquiringthe industry and economy of their Christian neighbours; their possessions in the plain graduallybecame the property of beys of Larissa, and therevenues of the khasia of the mountain, whichwere before fanned by them, fell into the handsof Turks of Larissa, Fersala, or Trikkala; eventhe spahis of Rizomylo, which is only three orfour miles distant from Celestina now belongs toa Larisseean, and there are only twelve villages inthe district, none of which except Kdprena, Ka-alia,St. George, and Sesklo, contain more thanfrom fifteen to twenty-five houses. In the townthere are about 2^0 Turkish families, but theTurkish houses are much more numerous : suchof the remainder as are tenantable are occupiedby Greeks of 'Agrafe, or by Vlakhi of MountPindus. The chief profit of the Turks is derivedfrom their gardens and mills, a sort of propertythey prefer, as it gives a good return withoutmuch trouble. The Turkish houses are builtamidst gardens, which extend also beyond thehouses to a considerable distance in the plain, thestream which flows from the fountain ancientlycalled Hypereia furnishing an abundant irrigation,as well as the means of working numerous mills.All the surrounding villagers bring their com heretobe ground, and supply themselves with vegetablesfrom a weekly market on Fridays. TheTurks who possess com land depend upon theXLII.] Thessaly. 437Greeks for its cultivation. The former supply theseed, and a house for the icoXXnyac, or farmer, whofurnishes cattle and implements of agriculture,and takes half the crop after the deduction of thedhekatia; sometimes every thing belongs to thelandlord, and the farmer is only an cpyaViic, orlabourer, who receives a third of the nett producefor his own wages and the daily labour he may employ.The lower classes of Turks are shoemakers,tailors, barbers, butchers, bakers, cooks, menialservants, and labourers in the gardens but not inthe fields. The Varusii, or Greek quarter, whichonce contained as many families as the presentTurkish, now consists for the greater part of ruinsor uninhabited houses, and a part of its site isconverted into gardens or cornfields. The declineof the Greeks has been caused, like that of theTurks, as much by their foolish contentions as bythe oppression of the government. The ^piaic orpapa fia into which they were divided, persecutedone another, intriguing with the Beys for thispurpose, and lodging complaints against theirrivals in the Turkish Mehemet ; while the Turksfound their interest in fomenting these disputes,and as at Larissa, each Bey patronized some oneor other of the principal Greek families.Velestino was long noted for the savage dispositionof its Turkish inhabitants, and for itslawless government, and it would then have beenimpossible for a traveller to make such a journeyin Thessaly as I have done. Affairs are nowaltered. The Turks still retain their barbarous438 Thessaly. [CHAP.manners, and their hatred of Christians, but theyare kept within bounds by the fear of Al Pasha,whose authority is unquestioned here, though hehas not yet introduced one of his vesicular bolusto complete the humiliation of these insolentOsmanlis. On the fall of the nizam deditand the elevation of Mustafa Bairakt^ they flatteredthemselves that Alj^'s influence at the Portewas at an end, and that they could resist hisencroachments in Thessaly : he soon however senttwenty of his Fervently horsemen from Aghia toquarter upon the town, and did not withdrawthem until their expences, with the addition of apresent had cost the community eighty purses.Since that lesson his mandates have met with noresistance, and according to the lively expressionof the Greeks, a dirty buyurti from loannina halfthe size of one's hand is of more effect than afirman of the Porte three feet in length. Bymeans of these 'impressions of the lion's paw'-the people of Velestino are robbed of 20 pursesevery year, without being saved thereby fromsimilar imposts from the Porte when required bythe necessities of war, or other causes. All suchextraordinary contributions, which are entirelyseparate from the ordinary imposts paid to theMukatesi, are called avayet, in Greek oiicoSofua,because they are raised by a classified house tax.The yearly amount paid by each principal Turkof Velestino styling himself Bey, is from 250 to300 piastres. The mukata is in the hands of SaidAga of Armyro, who is now in prison at loanninaXLII.] Thessaly. 439on the pretence of his having insulted one of theVezir's tatars, for which he will probably atone bya heavy fine before he is allowed to return home.The walls of PhercSj although apparent only inplaces, still preserve enough of their foundationsto give an accurate idea of the limits of the cityon every side, except towards the plain, where noremains are traceable. When Velestino was inthe height of its prosperity, it occupied two thirdsof the same ground. On the northern side, theancient walls followed the brow of two tabular summits,the sides of which seem to have been partlyindebted to art for their present shape, and tohave had the effect of two great bastions protectingthe entrance into the city from the northward.Vestiges of the northern or Larisssean gate, andsome foundations of the adjacent walls still remainon the neck between the two heights. The approachmust have been very imposing to thestranger who arrived at Pherse on that side, theground being so formed that nothing but thewalls could have been visible until the gate waspassed, when the whole city was laid before him.Even now this entrance into the Varusii has astriking appearance, although little but the ruinsof Greek houses form the foreground of the picture.The ancient walls are principally preservedat the back of a church in the highest part of theVarusii, where stood a tower which has latelyfallen, and has been restored by some modernmasonry. To the north the two heights are defendedby a deep torrent bed, in the steep banksof which many sepulchres have been found. In440 Thessaly. [chap.the corn-fields beyond the torrent to the north-eastare several large squared blocks, which belongedapparently to some temple standing without thecity. Very little of the foundation now remains,many squared masses having lately been takenfrom thence and applied to the building of a newbridge. The mason who was employed in thiswork asserts that some of those which he foundthere he buried again, because they were coveredwith figures and ornaments. Not far from thenceon the road to Larissa are still lying some fragmentsof fluted Doric shafts of two feet in diameterand very tapering, formerly perhaps columns ofthe same temple.Below the easternmost of the two heights aninferior level, but considerably higher than theplain, was included within the city, as appears bya few straggling blocks indicating the directionof the ancient walls. At the foot of this heighton the southern side is the fountain Hypereia^jsurrounded by handsome plane trees, in the midstof the Turkish quarter, on one side of an openspace, another side of which is occupied by amosque. The water rushes from several openingsin the rock, and immediately forms a stream,^ iy^yvc /icv ^cpi;Ci Kpdyay 'Yirepifiia \iirwy.Pindar. Pith. Od. 4, ▼. 221.^d yij ^€p€ua X^^P^* <n/yyov6y ff i^wp'Xirepda nrpZ/vi;, varia Oeo^iXitrraroy.Sophocl. ap. Schol. Pindar, ibid.'H i* 'Yiripiia Kpriyti iffrly iy fJtittri rpf riiy ^epaltay irciXec. —Strabo, p. 439.XLTI.] THB9SALIA. 441which is conveyed in a channel lined with wroughtstones, once belonging to Hellenic buildings ; afterturning several mills it is joined by another streamflowing from a pond to the southward of the principalfountain, and thus augmented pursues a courseof three miles to Rizomylo, through gardens offruit-trees, melons, and pot-herbs, mixed withoaks, elms, and poplars, — the successors of theplantations near Pherse, which are noticed byPolybius*. Near Rizomylo are some groves oflarge oaks which are said to have been muchthinned of late years. From Rizomylo the Hyperaemiacrosses the plain to the lake of Karla. Thewater is bright and pure, cold in summer, andgenerally issues in greater quantity in that seasonthan in the winter. Nevertheless, the Greeks ofthe Varusii prefer the water of their wells fordrinking, nor do they make much use of theHypereia for other purposes, as the ascent of thehill with full vessels is laborious, and the womenare afraid of insult from the Turks. Just abovethe principal source are the remains of a curvedwall concave towards the water. The stones arelaid together without cement, and the courses arenarrower in proportion to the length of the stonesthan was usual in Hellenic masonry. Near these,which are the remains perhaps of a small circulartemple, lies a fragment of a Doric shaft 3 ft. 3 in.in diameter.The ancient inclosure of the city is not so easilytraceable on the western and southern sides as onPolyb. 1. 18, c. 3.442 THB88ALIA. [CHAP.the northern. A little beyond the north-westernangle a wall is visible, crossing the hollow whichseparates the two heights above noticed fromanother parallel ridge, upon the summit of which,in two or three places, the ancient masonry may bedistinguished among the remains of modern walls.From this hollow and the upper part of the Varusiirises a peaked hill, upon which are some quarries,and on the summit the remains of a small castleof very massy Hellenic workmanship. The lineof wall beyond these points is not evident; noris it very certain whether the peak was in theacropolis, or only an outwork to cover it. Itseems not impossible that this height, whetherit was the acropolis or the site of an exterior fortress,may have been the Mount ChcUcodoniumybelow which Apologies represents Pherse to havebeen situated ^ ; as we sometimes find that an acropolisbore a specific name. But Chaicadonmmmay also be applied on the same authority tothe southern and highest summit of Mount ,which is only about five miles to theSew. of this point ; and as that remarkable summithas not been described in ancient history so asto be recognized by any other name, it will be convenientat least, if not certainly correct, to attachMifivev into aKoiriily opeog XaXiroidovioto.Apollon. 1. 1, v« 49.To Sc \a\KiM>i6yioy opog ^(friy virepdyta sepoy,Scbol. ibid.XLII.] THBSSALIA. 443to it the name of Ghalcodoniam. In general themasonry of the walls was of a regular kind, likethat of Pkarsalusy but there is a piece approachingto the polygonal kind in the cellar of a house nearthe JLarisstean gate. At the church, a pedestalwhich has three holes on the upper surface of itappears from the inscription to have supported astatue of Augustus ^ : there is also a sepulchralmonument at the same place erected by oneAnglais, daughter of Hippolytus, where the father'sname is expressed according to the elegant Thessaliancustom by the adjective *IiriroXvr€ia '. As allthe inscriptions which I have seen in this form arein letters of the best times of antiquity, and as themonuments on which they are found bear a smallproportion to those in which the ordinary Hellenicform of the genitive prevails, we may infer thatthe custom became obsolete in this province, togetherwith the disuse of the Thessalo-.£olic dialect.Although it is impossible to assign an exact periodto this change, which probably was gradual, somestates having preserved their ancient dialects foralonger time, or in greater purity than others,we can hardly suppose that dialectic distinctionslong survived the Roman conquest; as by thatevent the country, already depopulated and impoverishedby wars and calamities of every kind,was completely humiliated, and little was left inGreece of that pride of antiquity and spirit ofemulation by which the use of the dialects hadbeen retained in public documents after theyy. Inscription, No. 210. ' V. Inscription, No. 211.444 Thessaly. [CHAP.had ceased in the spoken language. The latterchange was probably complete in the age ofAlexander ; but we have a proof in an inscriptionof Orchomenus, of the Boeotia having been employedon public monuments after his time \ anda few colic or Doric forms were even retainedin that of Augustus.Dec. 29. — This day I made a tour in the plainof Velestino by Rizomylo and Hadjimes to Petra,returning from thence by the macula of Ghereli,and along the roots of Mount Karadagh, to Celestina.This plain is considered more productivethan the Pharsalian, and equal in fertility to theLarisscsan. Even this year, when the harvest wasgenerally deficient in Thessaly, the lands of Had-times,Rizomylo, and Ghereli, gave a tolerablereturn. The plough, which is of the same formas in other parts of Greece, and yoked to a singlepair of oxen, makes only a slight impression onthe surface, and manuring is never practised.The hill of Petra is two miles beyond Hadjimes.The village, which is inhabited by Poniard Turksand a few families of Greek labourers, stands, asI before remarked, on the northern side of thelong ridge, which I described as uniting the twosummits of the height. Several Turks of the vil*lise followed us to the top of the hill, curious toknow the object of my visit, and murmuring thatit was some riyvTit or contrivance of Aly Pasha portendingno good to them. They were too muchafraid of my Albanian servant, although a Christ-seeVol. II. p. 152.XLII.] Thessaly. 445ian, to offer any incivility ; but sufficiently showedthat it would have been difficult to visit the placein safety under other circumstances.The sides of the hill of Petra are steep and insome places precipitous, but on the summit thereis an undulating space, which, where not rocky, iscovered with grass, and from whence there is a fineview of Velestino, Larissa, Tumavo, and the mountainsOlympus OssOy PeRum^ and Othrys. Thewaters of the lake, which are now at the distanceof two miles, advance, when the inundation is atits height, quite to the foot of the hill on the easternand northern sides. The larger, or north-easternsummit of the hill, is surrounded by foundations ofHellenic walls of remote antiquity, and other remains,similar in their apparent antiquity, areseen at the foot of the same height to the north, aswell as quite to the edge of the marshy ground,which, in times of inundation, becomes a part ofthe Bceheis. The only other monument of antiquityI can find is a sepulchral stele now used asastep in the stair of a Turkish house, and whichis inscribed, in letters of the best times, with thename of Attila, daughter of Eurystheus, the nameof the father being expressed by the adjectiveEvpviroOeta \ The walls on the hill were of greatthickness, constructed of large irregular masses,and when complete resembled probably in contV. Inscription, No. 209. say I purchased a silver ringAttila seems to have been not for the finger, inscribed ATTY-uncommonin this province as Aa in letters of gold beautywoman's name. On the site fully formed,of Metropolis of Upper THB8SAUA. [CHAP.destruction those of Tiryns or Mycenae. The southwestern,or smaller of the two hills, seems not tohave been included in the ancient acropolis, thoughit has some appearance of having been fortified,which, as it is the steeper and higher of the two,was necessary to the safety of the place : it risesabout 200 feet above the plain and ends in apeak. I have already suggested that the heightof Petra is that double hill near the lake Boebeissaid to have been the dwelling-place of Colonies,daughter of Phlegyas and mother of aesculapiusby Apollo, who, on the information of a busycrow, punished her with death for having intriguedwith Ischys son of Eilatus^We learn from Pindar that these twin hills werethe site of a town called Lacereia, which, from^ *H oifi itivfWVQ lipoid raiovva KoKurov^N/tfwiro Boi/3ia^oc XifxyriQ ir6^a irapOiyoQ dSfiiis• • • • • •T^ fie Ap* ayycXog IjXOe xSpcii Upfje dire MacrosIIv9w cc ^yadifiy tea f>* ii^paaey tpy* atiifXa^olfif dK€paeK6fijif or op'^Icrp^vc tyi|/ie Kjop^yly"ElXarlStf^j ^Xcy^ao Bwyyiiroio Ovyarpa*Frag. Hesiod. ap. Strabonn. pp. 442. 647* tap. Schol. Pindar.Pith. 8, V. 14. 48.^Ka< rare yyovt (Apollo BC.yi^xyoc 'ElXariSaXeiyiay Koiray adE/xly re ioXoy^n^/tx^/cv KatnyyfiTay fiiyiiOvoiaay a/iac/ioxiry*£c Aaifcpccav* cruelPapa Boi/3id2ocKpriiiyoiiriy fKti wapBiyoc*Pindar. Pith. 8» v. 55.*Iijr9paXLII.] Thessaly. 447other authors \ seems to have been also knownby the name of Dotium, though this appellationwas more generally applied to the surroundingplain. As Hesiod describes the twin-hills to havebeen situated ^' in the Dotian plain opposite tothe vine-bearing Amyrus ;" a natural consequenceof placing Lojcereia at Petra, will be that the ruinsat Kastri are those of Artis, Kastri being onthe opposite side of the marshes of the Bceheis.The hills at the foot of which Kastri is situated,are well adapted to the vine ; and the plainaround it will be found perfectly to accord withthat Amyric plain mentioned by Polybius in relatingthe last transactions of the Social War,when the italians, by means of their possessionof Thence Phthioticse, were enabled to causedamage not only to the people of Demerits andPharsalus, but even to those of Larissa, bymaking incursions as far as the Amyric plain \As the words of Hesiod indicate that the AmericanDotian plains were contiguous, we may infer,from the two authorities, that the Amyric plainlay between the Dotian and Lariss^Ban^ or exactlyopposite to Kastri, between that place and the'Ii^^pa v6a»v 'A^KXiprcov &PX^H^* &e/2ecvYl6v *Aw6XSMyogt rov ky^lvaro 2ca Kopiiiyic^mrtf iv ittiif Kovpri ^Xcyuov /Sa^iX^oc*- Horn. H3rinn. in iEsculap.V. et Anti. frag. 34. Apollodor. 1. S, c. 10.^ v. Stephan. in Awriov* €k»Q liri r6 kolKoviuvov 'A/ivpc-pXAxrioBai kov xtSiov* — Polyb. 1. 5, c.in 2c Aapiavalovg' itoXKAkiq 99.yap iwQwvrrQ toq KoraSpofiaQ448 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.north-eastern extremity of the ridges of Kara-dash.At the same time it must be admitted,that as tumuli are commonly unerring evidencesof an ancient site, the artificial heights near Sa-alarmay possibly indicate the site of AmyruSjthey being moreover still more central than to the Amyric plain. Apologies alludes to ariver Amyrus near Lacereia, which thus accordswith the Asmdki. The same poet, however, inanother passage, seems to describe the riverAmyrus as that which joins the sea in the Gulfof Melibcea; but this would identify Lacereiawith the paleokastro of Askiti, and would removeit too far from the lake Bcehm^ to whichit was certainly contiguous. Upon this questionthere can be little hesitation in preferringthe testimony of two native poets to that of anAlexandrian of later times, who, from the passagejust referred to, as well as other examples,appears to have been more anxious for the harmonyof his verses than for an accurate preservationof an order of names agreeing with that of> Tov iv Xcirap^ AoKepilgAha Kopwyle iriKTiy iirl irpoxofJQ *Afivpoio,Apollon. 1. 4, V, 616."EvOcK Si xporipwae irapefcOeov McX/jSocaK,*Aicriiv T alyia\6y re Zvoiivtuov kxytvoavriQ'*HwOcv 2* '0/i<(Xi|K aWov^tibv tlvopwavriQTi6vTf KeKXifJiivriy wapefiirpeoy^ oh en ifipbyMcXXov Week irorafwio fiaXeiy 'Ajivpoio ^ifBpa.KeiOev ^ Eirpv/uevag rt xoXvrXvorovc re ^apayyac"Offering OvXv/iiro«5 r* eeridpoKoy* avrap eireiraKXlrea IlaXXZ/vaia, &c.Apollon. L 1, V. 592.XLTI.] Thessaly. 449positions. There is greater reason to doubt whetherApologies was right in placing a river Amy-ruson the coast near Mount Ossa, as a differentname or word occurs in the corresponding passageof the Orphica *.Livy relates that a town named Cercinium wasbesieged by the italians and the Athamanes underAmynander, when they joined the Romans againstPhilip in the year 200 b. c. Cercinium, thoughgarrisoned by Macedonians, was speedily takenand burnt, and its inhabitants were either slaughteredor carried away as slaves, which so alarmedall the people around the lake Boebeis, that theyfled to the mountains. The italians being chieflyintent on plunder, and hopeless of obtaining it inthis quarter, proceeded into PerrhsBbia, where,having taken Cyretise, they sacked it withoutmercy, and then received the submission of Mal-last.At the instance of Amynander, who thoughtthe moment favourable for attacking Gomphi,which was important to him from its proximity tothe Athanasian frontier, the allied forces proceededfrom Perrhsebia towards Upper Thessaly ;but no sooner had they entered the plains belowTiaairi ^ diriKpw^dey aKpri koL 2i;iriac dicr^,*AY)(la\6Q 0* '0/i<$Xi|, fiii0p6v 0* AXi/ivpec 'Avavpov (a).cKavXov.) Orphic. Argon, v. 462.Valerius factus, however, of the Greeks, names the Amy-whois more correct in his nis (Argon. 1. 2, v. 11.)order of places than eitherVOL. IV. a g450 Thessaly. [CHAP.Pharcadon, than the italians began to spread overthem for the sake of plunder, and encamped in aninsecure situation. Here they were surprised byPhilip and forced to retire within their camp,which they abandoned as soon as it was attackedby the king, retreating into that of Amynander,who, disapproving their proceedings and fearful ofthe event, had established his followers on a heightnear Pharcadon, half a mile in the rear of theitalian camp. Night prevented Philip from pursuinghis advantage, and gave facility to the retreatof the italians, who, conducted by the Atha-manes through the mountains by roads unknownto their pursuers, arrived, without much fartherloss, in ^tolia\ As Magnesia and the easternpart of Thessaly were the countries chiefly dependenton Macedonia under the successors ofDemetrius, we may infer from this circumstance,coupled with the mention made by the historian ofthe lake Boebeis, that Cercmkan was near MountPetitio, possibly at Kastri ; or it the ruins at thatplace were those of AmyruSj in some part of thevale of Dhesiani, perhaps at the spot which I remarkedas retaining some remains of antiquity nearDugan. The situations of CyreticB, MaUcsa^ Pharca-don and Gomphij having already been stated, thereremains no difficulty in understanding the entiremovement of the italians as described by Livy.In retreating from near Pharcadon they probablycrossed the hills of Khassia towards Kalabaka.» Liv. 1. 31, c. 41, 42.Lit.] THBSSALIA. 451The breadth of the Dotian plain from the fool ofthe hill of Petra to Qhereli, which is situated atthe first acclivity of the height of Karadagh, isthree miles and a half ; a mile and a half farther,in a direction a little more southerly, is the Manila,a circular eminence three quarters of a milein circumference, which has some appearance ofhaving been surrounded with walls ; and wherethough little is observable at present except brokenstones and fragments of ancient pottery, these arein such an abundance as leaves no doubt of its havingbeen a Hellenic site : this, indeed, is amplyconfirmed by the surrounding villagers, particularlyby those of Ghereli, who have always been inthe habit of resorting to the site for building materials,and sori, which they use for water-troughs.Following the testimony of Strabo, Magula shouldbe the site of Armenvunij for he twice states thattown to have been situated between Pherse andLarissa, near the lake Bcebeis ^ ; and there is nopoint on a line drawn from Velestlno to Larissanearer to the lake of Karla than the Magula.From the Magula of Ghereli to the foot ofMount Karadagh is a distance of two miles ;three miles beyond which near the crest of thatpart of the ridge which connects the northernToy ii "Apfuroy el vat e£ OtrraXucfic, 4 ireirac /urafv ^c-^K^ivov iroXcii)c> t&v ircpl r^v pwv koX AaplairriQ girl rpf Bo/jS^,Boi/^fyc^a XifiyriVf /ueralv ifepQy KaOawBp ccpifrac. ^-Strabo, p.Kui Aapiaarft. — Strabo, p. 503. 530."ApfuyoQ iVApfneploVf woKeutQog2452 Thessaly. [CHAP.summit above Kilil^r with the southern or Choir*codoniunij stands the Turkish village of Dederianl.Here are copious sources of water, which form asmall stream crossing the road from Velestino toLarissa between the Magula and Kilil^r. Thereis another kefalovrysi at Hadji Bark, a smallvillage in the mountain above Killer. Thesestreams join the Asmaki opposite to Abufaklar.Two others which rise on the western side ofthe heights join the Asmdki towards Kastri andPlessis.Dec. 31. — Having sent my baggage to Fersalaby the direct road, which traverses a pass on thesouthern side of Mount Chalcodonium and fromthence enters the valley of the Snipes I crossthe ridge by Gheremi and Supli, leaving thesummit on the left. The pass just mentionedseparates this mountain from that which bordersthe Crocian plain to the north, and which iscommonly known by the name Tjiraghiotiko, froma small village on it named Tlipayi. In the passis the small village Ondoklari, beyond which theroad to Fersala follows a valley between the tworidges to Magula, two hours distant from Fersala,and crosses the JSnipetis by the bridge of the Pashdon the road to Larissa. Between the pass of On-dollarsand the hill of Sesklo, is a plain crossedby the road from Armyro to Velestino, coincidingnearly with that which led from Phthiotic Thebesto Pierce. In this plain, at a distance of fiftystades from Pherse, T. Q. Flamininus, comingfrom Thebse, was encamped previously to theXLII.] THBS8ALIA. 453battle of Cynoscephalee, when Philip, advancingfrom Larissa, placed his army at thirty stadesfrom PhersBi in the opposite direction \ or aboutRizomylo.Mount Chalcodofiium is covered with dwarflinaria, which, being evergreen and of a darkcolour, may have given the name Karadagh orMavrovuni to the whole ridge which stretchesfrom it to the northward notwithstanding that thesummits towards that extremity are conspicuouslywhite. Although Ckalcodoniumj the highest point,is diminutive compared with the mountains whichsurround the basin of Thessaly the whole ridgeis one of the most remarkable of the Thessalianhills, from its insulated position in the midst ofthe eastern plains of this province. The higherparts of the ridge furnish an excellent pasture tosheep, and justify the epithet ivptivug, whichApologies applies to Pheree^. Gheremi, whichvillage we pass through at the end of two hours,is now reduced to three or four Greek families.It stands amidst bare calcareous rocks, exactlyon the crest of the ridge, and commands to thewestward a view of the plains of Pharsalus andCrannanj with the heights beyond them whichrise, from the plain on the right side of the £near Hadjobashi and Orfana.At a quarter of an hour beyond Gheremi wecross the road leading from Larissa to Armyro,1 Polyb. 1. 18, c. 2. Liv. * Apollon. 1. 1, v. 49.— V.1. 83, c. 6. sup. p. 442.454 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.and in one hour from Gheremi arrive at Sophiatjiftlik of ten or twelve families. The westernface of Karadagh, on either side of the road fromGheremi to Supli, consists of easy slopes of pastureland,diversified with small levels of corn-fieldsmixed with groves of oaks and copses of underwood.At Supli the waters from the elevatedcountry which we have passed collect into onebed, and taking a course first to the west andthen to the north-west, form at Kusbasan a streamsufficiently large to turn some mills. From thencethey flow by Moimiili round the northern end ofthe Karadigh to Saridjilar, which is an hour to thesouthward of Karalar, and at length join theAsm^i opposite to Plessis, the tjiftlik which Ipassed on the road from Kastri to Dhesiani.Supli is about three miles distant from thenorthern point of the ridge of Karadagh, and justbelow the south-western extremity of that summit.On the peak was situated an ancient fortress,the walls of which inclosed it together with a greatpart of the slope towards Supli. With the telescopeirregular masses are perceivable among the bushesin several places, and the general direction of thewalls is indicated by heaps of stone : the masonryseems to have been of a rude kind, like that uponthe height above Oifana, at Kaprena and otherplaces. In front of the remains, towards Surprisesanother summit composed entirely of a verywhite bare rock.A mile from Supli, in the opposite direction, ortowards Fersala, are the ruined walls of a HellenicXUI.] Thessaly. 455city of much larger dimensions, and evidently oneof the principal members of the Thessalian community.The inclosure, which was between twoand three miles in circumference, follows on thelower or northern side the bank of the torrentalready mentioned, and to the south inclosessome heights which were defended by the ravineof another torrent joining the former a little belowthe western extremity of the city. At the southwesternend of the site stood the acropolis, belowwhich, on the east and north, the ground iscovered with foundations of buildings, heaps ofstones, and fragments of tiles and pottery. Butnot a single sculptured marble is to be seen, or afragment of an inscription. The walls, which inno part have preserved more than a few courses ofmasonry, are best preserved on the eastern front.Here the modern road from Suppl to Fersala passesthrough the foundations of a gate which was defendedby towers and flanked within bowshot by aheight on the left which formed the south-easternangle of the city. Just without the gate, oti oneside of the modem road, are the foundations of alarge building, probably a temple : I have beforehad occasion to notice instances of ancient templessimilarly situated. The masonry of the townwalls is of the same elaborate and almost regularkind seen in the ruins of Pharsalus and PhercB^showing that the city was contemporary withthose two places, and flourished about the sametime ; there can be little doubt, therefore, thatit was Scotussa^ the situation agreeing with all456 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.that history has left us as to the position of thatplace relatively to the other chief cities in thispart of Thessaly namely, Clarissa Cranny Par*salus and PhertB.From the account given by Xenophon of themarch of Agesilaus through Thessaly into Boeotiaprevious to the battle of Coroneia ', we learn thatthe Scotusssea as well as the Pannonia lay in adirection from Larissa to Pharsalus and the mountainsof Achsea Phthisis; in fact, the site of Cran-nonis about the same distance to the right of theroad from Larissa to Fersala that these ruins are tothe left. That Scotussasa was not far from Pierceseems evident, as well from the manner in which itwas treacherously occupied by Alexander, tyrantof Pherse ', as from a transaction in the Antiochuswar, when a body of troops from Larissa, endeavouringto relieve Pherse, retired into Scotussasaupon finding that the approaches to PhersB wereoccupied by Antiochus '. Soon afterwards theconsul Acili'us having marched from Larissa toCrannon received the submission of Pharsalus,Scotussasa, and Pherse, and thence proceeded toProemaa and to Thaumaci ^. With all these transactionsthe position of these ruins seems perfectlyto agree. It remains to be seen whether their situationwill equally accord with the circumstances» B.C. 394.— Xenoph. Hel ' B.C. 191. — Liv. I. 36,len. I. 4, c. 3. c. 9.» B.C. 367 Diodor. 1. 15, * Liv. 1. 36, c. 14.c. 75.XLII.] Thessaly. 457attending the greatest event in history, of whichthe ScotQSSsea was the scene, namely, the battleof Cynoscephalse.It was in the spring of the year b. c. 197 thatT. Quinctius Flamininus, who had been consul inthe preceding year, and was now charged as Imperatorwith the prosecution of the war againstPhilip, son of Demetrius, marched from Elateiaia inPhocis to Heraclea Trachinia, where he concertedmeasures with the iBtolians, and then encampingnear Xynise on the borders of the .dSnianes andThessalians, was there joined by 2000 italianinfantry and 500 horse. From thence he movedinto Phthisis, where he received a further reinforcementof 2000 infantry consisting of Atha-manes under Amynander, together with someCretan and Apolloniatse. After an unsuccessfulattempt to take Thebse Phthioticse he marchedtowards Pherse, having previously directed eachsoldier to provide himself with the usual materialsfor constructing the x^P^^y ^^ vallum, with whichit was customary among the Greeks and Romansto protect their camps in presence of an enemy.When Quinctius had encamped at a distance of50 stades from Pleas, Philip advanced fromLarissa, and pitched his camp at a distance of30 stades* from the same city in the opposite direction.Philip's phalanx of Macedonian infantry^ Polyb. 1. 18, c. 2. * Quatuor millia fere.— Liv.Sex fence millia. — Liy. 1. ibid.33, c. 6*458 Thessaly. [CHAP.amounted to 16^000, besides which there were5000 other troops and 2000 cavalry ; the Romanshad an equal number of infantry, but a superiorityof about 400 horse. On the day after the arrivalof the two armies in the Persia, parties from eachmet on the hills above the city, but were recalledwithout coming to an engagement. Onthe following day there was an action of cavalrynear the city, on the heights towards Larissa, inwhich the italians had some advantage over theMacedonians.On the third day, both the commanders havingfound the plantations, gardens, and inclosures, inthe suburbs of Pherae inconvenient to their operations,quitted their positions, Philip directing hisroute to Scotussasa for the purpose of obtaining suppliesfrom that city, and Quinctius, who suspectedhis object, advancing towards the same point bya different route, with a view of destroying thecom of the Scotusssea '. A high ridge separatedthem during this day's march, at the end of whichthe Romans encamped at Eretria of Phthisis, andPhilip on the river Onchestus. On the followingday the camp of Quinctius was placed near Themin the Pharsalia, that of Philip at Melam-bum in the Scotusseea, each party continuingcairo n)v Topical utc iirl ri^y viroirrevcac ro /liXXoK, eriVeiSicorovffay, tnrtv^t^y tK ravrifc ri^y Bvyafuy 6.fid rf ^cXtmy,riyc ir((Xc«c e^icaotiaOai* /lera orMtay wpoxaraipOel^i roy iy5c ravra ytyofuyoQ ehrpetri^^, rp Xicorovaai^ <rTror»— Polyb.Xafitiy rotrovc &pfi6(oyTac rang 1. 18, c. 3.XLII.] Thessaly. 459ignorant of the adversary's position. On the thirdmorning Philip moved forward towards Scotussasa \but a thick fog having followed a tempest of rainand thunder, he had not proceeded far before hefound himself under the necessity of halting, whenforming the charms, he sent forward a detachmentto occupy the heights . of Cynoscephalse. Thesetroops fell in with ten turns of horse, and 1000light infantry, who had been ordered out by Quintusto obtain information of the enemy's movements.After a short pause, caused by mutualsurprise, an engagement commenced. At firstthe Romans were hard pressed, but Quinctiussending a reinforcement of 2000 Roman infantry,with 500 italian horsemen, and Philip not beingable so readily to succour his men, because, notexpecting an engagement, he had directed a greatpart of his army to collect fodder *, the Romansforced the Macedonians to retreat to thehighest part of the hill just as the fog clearedaway. The king then sent to their assistance allthe cavalry and the greater part of the mercenaryinfantry, which gave them such a superiority, thatthe Romans were driven from the heights, andwere only saved from a disorderly flight by theiBtolians. Quinctius, finding his whole army inconsternation in consequence of this repulse,thought it expedient to advance with all hisforces to the foot of the heights, while Philip,though he disapproved of the position, and wasI i— J€Jri TO wpoKiifuvov* * iii \opTo\oyiay,-'~c. 5.460 Thessaly. [CHAP.not inclined to engage, was at length inducedby some of his officers, who represented theenemy as routed, and the opportunity as favourable,to draw out his phalanx from the clara,and to advance to the ridge. But on reachingthe summit he was met by his troops retreatingbefore the enemy's legions and though the rightwing only of the phalanx accompanied him, hefound himself under the necessity of immediatelyengaging. Placing therefore on his right thosewho had just been retreating, and doubling thedepth of the phalanges and peltastse, he commandedthe former to charge with their sarissse,while the latter covered the flanks of the phalanx^ Quinctius, who had ordered his rightwing to remain unmoved with the elephants infront, placed himself at the head of the left, inopposition to Philip. The encounter was accompaniedby a tremendous shout on both sides. TheRomans were unable to resist the shock of thephalanx, which Quinctius perceiving, instantlyformed the design of counteracting the effect bytaking advantage of the disunited state of theMacedonians, whose centre was unemployed, andwhose left wing had only just attained the summit ofCynoscephalae. Quitting therefore the left of hisTocc fay ^Xayycraic e Jo writes, " Caetratos et MacedoniaxapayyeX/ia KarafidKovin num phalanges, hastes positionrdt oapicoac tTayeiy, rdlg Bt quorum longitude impedimenteviuvoiQ Ktp^y. — c. 7- erat, glacis rem genere jubet."Livy seems to have misun- — I. 33, c. 8.understood these words, for heXLII.] Thessaly. 461line he led on his right with the elephants infront against the left of the Macedonians as itarrived, more in marching than in fighting order,on the summit of the ridge, where the ruggednessof the ground increased the difficulty of forming, orof preserving the form of, the phalanx. The successof Quinctius was complete. The Macedonians, terrifiedby the elephants, and thrown into confusion,soon began a disorderly flight, when a tribune ^who was in this part of the Roman line, by a promptunordered movement, and at the head only ofa small body of men, completed the victory bymaking a circuit to the left, by which means hegained that part of the summit of the ridge whichremained in Philip's rear, in following the retreatingleft wing of the Romans. At the same momenttherefore that the latter, having rallied, hadreturned against the front of the phalanx, thetribune attacked it in the rear, and in consequenceof its dense formation and difficulty .of .changingfront, threw it into the utmost confusion. Aftera great slaughter, the Macedonians either fled,throwing away their arms, or surrendered andlaid them down ; 8000 of them were slain in thebattle, and 6000 taken. Of the victors only 700fell ^ The Romans took possession of the enemy'scamp, but found that it had already been plun-»cic T&y xcXcapxw- — Polyb. sense to follow Polybius :c. 9. ** Nos Polybius secuti stigmasSome of the Latin writers non interdum auctor quumgave incredible accounts of the omnium Romanum rerum,loss of the Greeks on this oc turn prascipu^ in Graeca gestation,but Livy had the good sarum." — 1. 33, c. 10.4G2THB8SALIA.[chap.tered by the jStolians. Philip, as soon as hesaw his troops flying in confusion, retired from thefield, on the first day to the tower of Alexander,on the second to Gonnus, where he waited to collecthis fugitives, and from thence, after havinggiven orders for burning his papers at Larissa,he retired through Tempe into Macedonia ^.ra PaoiKucd ypa/i/iora. —Polyb. c. 1 6.Polybius has appended tohis narrative of this celebratedbattle some valuable observationson the advantages of theRoman method of palpitating acamp, with others still moreimportant and extended, onthat superiority of the Romanlegion over the Greek phalanx,to which the Romans weremainly indebted for the empireof the world. The Greekswere so heavily laden withtheir armour that a man couldnot carry more than a singleclara, or pale, and in formingthe pales they made choice oflarge branches with manyboughs, which were liable byan eflbrt of three or four of theenemy to be drawn out of theground* The Romans, on theother hand, slinging theirshields by leathern thongs overtheir shoulders, could carry twoor tittle charades, in formingwhich, they selected smallerstakes than the Greeks, andsuch as, having branches onlyon one side, could be morefirmly entwined together, andfixed in the ground, while bysharpening each branch to apoint, they rendered it difficultfor the enemy to lay hold ofthem. The phalanx is describedby Polybius as sixteenfiles deep, with a distance oiabout two feet between theranks, and a breadth of threefeet to each man. The armswere the clarissa or spear, andthe sword : the former wasfourteen cubits long. Theirfront rank protruded its spearsten cubits, and each followingrank two cubits less, so thatall behind the fifth rank madeno other use of their spears,while the phalanx was entire,than to hold them lifted up tokeep off the missiles whichpassed over the heads of thefive ranks in their front. Sodense an order was incapableof much motion, nor could itXUI.]THE6SALIA.The citadel of Pharaohs is seen from a part ofthe ruins of Scotussasa over the neck of the rockyheight which I have before described as lying onthe north-eastern side of Fersala. To the westwardthe eye enfilades and looks down upon theeasily change its ace or position,so that its main effectdepended entirely upon itsacting in a body, in which casenothing could resist it in front.But it required level groundand several other convenienceswhich the chances of war oftendenied.In the legion there were onlythree ranks, and besides thethree feet allowed to each manthere was an interval of threefeet between him and his neighbour,so that the legionary badtwo phalanges opposed to him*But he had it in his power tomove his shield and sword accordingto circumstances, andcould readily act independentlyof his cohort, to which the phalangeswas little accustomed.Against the irregular barbarians,to whom the Greekswere often opposed, the phalanxwas invincible, defyingtheir numerical superiority, andjustly obtaining the credit ofhaving been the salvation ofGreece against them. As longas its republics, with a similarityof military institutions, wereonly opposed to each other uponthe contracted field of theirown country, it was naturalthat no great change shouldoccur in their tactics, whichwere well adapted to theircircumstances. But in thereign of Philip, a change whichhad been in progress from thetime of his greater predecessorof the same name had renderedthe phalanx less suited to thealtered system of warfare. TheMacedonians had immenselyextended the boundaries ofGrecian civilization, arts, andcustoms ; the enlarged systemof politics which arose fromthat change had been still furtherwidened by the Romanswar was in consequence conductedon a greater scale anda more extensive field, and thephalanx was found unequalto contend with the Romanlegion, more moveable and notrequiring the concurrence of somany favouring circumstancesof time and place.464 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.ridge which connects Mount Karadigh with theremarkable height near Orfana, before noticed asknown by the synonymous Greek appellation ofMavrovuni. On a conspicuous point of the connectingridge are seen the teki^h and cypressesabove Tatar, on the road from Larissa to Fersala.Thereabouts the crest of the ridge may have formedthe boundary between the Cranruoma and Phar-salinas and a little nearer to Scotussasa it may haveseparated the Scottisscsa from the PharsaUa.The rocky crest of Mount Karadagh on eitherside of Gheremi, and as far as the summits aboveSupliy seems to have been the scene of the battle, forhere alone are any of those rocky eminences to befound which, according to Polybius, prevented theformation of the phalanx, all the ridge which separatesthe PharmKan valley from the Pannoniaand Scotu88(Ban plains being a gradual, smooth, andeven slope. That the battle was fought very near toScotussasa * may be inferred from the words of Plutarch,though it would be difficult to discover theresemblance to the heads of dogs, which, accordingto the biographer, was the origin of thename Cynoscephal®. It is observable, however,that Polybius, who was probably much better acquaintedwith the ground than Plutarch, merelydescribes the ridge as ^^ rugged, broken, and of aconsiderable height," and that no very clear ideareal n)y ^6rova<ravn-^ rpaxuQ S' ciiri kcu ircpuccicXav-Plutarch. in Flaming. fUpoi va irpoc vic uatvoy i£i^a-Oi yap irpoeipfffiivot \6^ r$hoyreQ, — Polyb. 1. 18, c. 5.jcaXovvrat fiiv Kvvoc^rc^aXoi*XLII.] THBSSALIA. 466can be attached to the description of the placewhich Plutarch has given, either on this occasion *or in his relation of the death of Pelopidas ', whichhad conferred celebrity upon Cynoscephalee longbefore the Roman wars ^ Pelopidas had marchedfrom Pharsalus to take possession of Cynoscephalse,when he found the position already occupied byAlexander of Pherse, who had moved thither fromthe nearer position of Thetidium. The Thessaliansof the party of Pelopidas succeeded in dislodgingthe enemy, but Pelopidas was slain in the pursuit,by incautiously advancing too far in front of hisarmy in order to engage in personal combat withthe tyrant.About two miles from the ruins of Scotussa^towards Fersala, is the tjiftllk of Amautli, whichwe leave on the right, and then crossing uncultivateddowns covered for the most part withdwarf linaria, arrive, at the end of one hourfrom the ruins, at Duvlatan, a small village ofGreeks. The Turkish makhala of Duvlatan ishalf a mile farther to the left. From hence wecross the plain of the Enipeus in the directionof Tjangli, which lies in the road from Supli toArmyro, not much more than one hour distantifia\oyro vel rac icaXov- fUaov Lord tcLq KaXov/xiyagfUva^ Kvvoc rc^aXacy ac X(^ii>v kvvoc re^aXc^c X(^aiv irepirXi-cZoai nvKy&y KoX xopaXX^XoiK y&y koI v>^f|XfSv Itryv"&Kpai XehtoI ii 6fAoi6rnra rov pd Kal fiiTiupa ytapla* — ottfa^ ityofidtrOfiaay, march. in Eloped.Plutarch. in Flaming. ' B. C. 364.*Ayareiy6yTi»fV Be irpoc toVOL. IV. H h466 THE8BALIA. [cHAP.from Duvlatan ; but we lose our way, and wanderfor two hours in the dark. At length, attractedby a fire, we find some shepherds sitting roundit, and desire one of them to conduct us into theroad towards Tjangli, or the khan of lueli. Whilehe hesitates, a boy happens to speak at a little distance: '^ Ah!" says the shepherd, 'There is theKhanji's boy," and makes his escape under thecover of this ready lie, leaving us to find our wayas we best can. Such are the tricks which theGreeks are forced to by the Turks, who take themfrom their labour and often carry them and theircattle several miles without rewarding them withany thing but blows or abusive words.January 1, 1810. — ^Tjangli contains thirty families,and stands in the entrance of a narrow valleywhich leads from the plain we have just crossedinto that anciently called Crocium^ and to Ar-myron.In the walls of the church are two inscribedstones, one of which is a fragment ofverses, the other a sepulchral memorial Thevillage stands on the eastern side of the pass, andopposite to it rises a steep rocky height aroundthe summit, the sides and the northern slope ofwhich are the ruined walls of an ancient city,probably Eretria Phthisis, the place where Quintushalted at the end of the first day's march fromPherse towards Scotussasa. The hill resemblesthat of Pharaohs on a smaller scale, and was fortifiedin the same manner. A long and narrow^ v. Inscriptions, Nos. 212, 213.XUI.] Thessaly. 467table-summit formed the citadel, of which thelower courses of the walls still exist in theirwhole circuit. The town walls are still betterpreserved, and are extant in some parts on theeastern side to the height of 18 or 20 feet. Herealso are two door-ways still perfect. On thewestern side are the openings of a door and gate,the former about half as large as the latter, whichis 11 feet wide. There is another gateway in thelower or northern front, close to the north-westernangle : on this side, where the walls were builtalong the foot of the slope, they are less preservedthan on the others. The masonry is of the samekind as that of Par solus ^ Pierces Scotussa^ andThebcB ; the courses being generally equal, andone foot and a half or two feet in height, butformed of stones endingobliquely, thus :7L. ^^A-IIn some places the courses are not quite equal.The walls are in general eight feet thick ; the twofacings are formed of large cemented blocks,and the middle of the wall of rough materialsmixed with mortar. On the slopes the flankdefence is obtained, not by a line broken intooblique angles, as in the ruins of Asterium atVlokho, and in many other examples of thehighest antiquity, but by short perpendicularflanks : on the easternside two of these flanksare unequal and opposedto each other, Interior,thus :H h 2468 Thessaly'. [CHAP.In the western front thegate is placed in thismannerUInterior,At the foot of the hill, to the west, stands Ineli,a hamlet of six or eight houses now deserted.Both on this side of the hill and towards Tjangli,but particularly in the latter direction, ancientfoundations are apparent on the outside of thewalls, whence it would seem that there weresuburbs ; which is the more probable, as the fortificationsdo not inclose a circumference of morethan a mile. On the western slope of the hill, alittle below the walls, are the lower courses of anoblong building, perhaps a temple.Opposite to Tjangli, on Mount Karadagh, is thevillage Karabairam. The road from Fersala toVelestino continues beyond Tjangli to follow thevalley between the two ridges, and at the end ofhalf an hour passes between Irinl on the foot ofthe Tziraghiotiko, and Aivali on the Karadagh.An hour farther it enters the pass between the twomountains in which Oridoklari is situated. Fromthence the distance is reckoned two hours toVelestino, descending by Kranovo, once thelargest village in the district, but now ruined.From Ineli we follow the lower road fromArmyro to Fersala, one hour to Gbenitzaro-khori', situated opposite to Duvlatan on the^ Tiviriapox^pi — Janissary village.XLII.] Thessaly. 469heights of Karadagh. To the left of the roadrises near us the mountain, which forms thenorthern side of the pass of Ghidek on the upperroad from Fersala to Armyro : on the right is theplain which I crossed yesterday evening betweenDuvlatan and Tangle. Ghenitzarokhori containstwelve or fifteen Greek families, and stands on theside of a lofty hill which rises gradually behindit, and on the other or western side falls precipitouslyto the JEnipeuSj which issues into the Charlatanplain between this hill and another on theopposite or left bank, equally steep. The roundrocky summit of the hill of Ghenitzarokhori is inclosedby the remains of walls of a remote antiquity.They are most apparent on the easternside, and were built, like those of Tiryns, of largeirregular masses, having the intervals filled withcemented smaller stones, most of which havefallen out. The whole seems to have been nothingmore than a fortress at the debauch of the riverinto the plains. On the summit stood a squarecastle of uncertain date, and indicated only bylines of small stones.From the ravine of Ghenitzarokhori the courseof the Enipeus may be traced upward by the eyeas far as the mountain of Gura, where are thesources of this famous river. From its left bankrises the lofty hill crowned with the ruins of anancient fortress, which was seen from our road onthe 10th December between lower Tjaterli andGhidek, and which is conspicuous from Armyroand its vicinity. The small village of Keuzlar,as I before stated, stands at the foot of the hill.470 THEBSALIA. [CHAP.The remains are perhaps those of Medusa, forthis city stood nearly in the route from HeracleaTrachinia to Pharsalus, near the MnipeuSj and ata day's march from the Apidanus^ where that riverwas nearest to Pharsalus. The proximity of to the Enipeus may be inferred from Strabo,who states that the MelitsBenses pointed out theruins of the city Hellas, on the opposite side ofthe Enipeus, 10 stades from their own city, whichwas named Pyrrha ^ From Thucydides the distanceof Melissa from the Apidanus may be collected.He relates, that when Brasidas marchedthrough Thessaly, from Heraclea Trachinia toDium in Macedonia, in the eighth year of thePeloponnesian war, his Thessalian friends fromPharsalus met him at Melitaea, and that fromthence on the following day he moved to Pharsalusand encamped on the Apidanus, near thatcity *.The hill of Ghenitzarokhori commands a viewalso of the elevated valley which I traversed betweenPharsalus and the Enipeus going to Armyro.The branch of that river which we crossed a littleto the west of Kato Tjaterli flows from an openingbetween the high round mountain behind Fersalaand the range of hills at the foot of which standsupper Tjaterli; from lower Tjaterli it flows byDerengli to the Enipeus. One of the roads fromFersala to Zituni follows the ravine of this tributaryof the Enipeus y and in an hour and a halffrom upper Tjaterli reaches Tjeutma, a Turkish» Strabo, p. 481. " Thucyd. L 4, c. 78.XLII.] THB98AUA. 471town with three makhalafl, where on the root ofthe mountain are the walls of an ancient city, ofthe same dimensions as that at Tjangli. FromTjeutma a plain extends to the lake of Taukli,the ancient XyniaSj and to the derv^ni leading toZituni. The ruins at Tjeutmd may have beenJSrinemnij or Caroneiaj I am more inclined to thinkthe latter city, as it would seem to have been themore important of the two, being noticed byPtolemy and Stephens' as well as by Strabo,whereas Perineum does not occur in any authorbut the 'last*. Possibly the remains on the leftbank of the JEnipetu near Koklobashi, may bethose of £rineium.It was probably by the pass of Tjaterli thatAgesilaus, proceeding from Asia into Greece alittle before the battle of Coroneia in Boeotia, inthe year B.C. 394, crossed the mountains of AchaiaPhthisis, after having made his way through theThessalian plains, in defiance of the Lariss»i,Crannonii, Scotusssei, and Pharsalii, throughwhose districts he passed, and who with the Thessaliansin general were allied with the Boeotianssagainst him. He not only conducted his infantrysafely through the plains in a square body, but atlength defeated the renowned Thessalian cavalry,and slew the leader of the Pharsalii \ This actionoccurred probably in the valley of the JSnipeus^ notfar from the mountains, as the defeated ThessaliansPtolem. 1. 8, e. 18. — Step Xenoph. Hell. 1. 4, c. 3.—phan. in Kopwvita. Vit. Ageail.Strabo, p. 484.472 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.fled into Mount Narthacium, in some part of whichAgesilaus, halting after the action, set up a trophybetween the town Narthacium ^ and another placenamed Pray. The next day he crossed the mountainsof Achaia Phthisis, and from thence hadnone but friendly territories to traverse in his progressinto Boeotia. It seems from this transaction,that Narthacium was the mountain which risesimmediately to the southward of Fersala. Praywould seem to have been near lower Tjaterli, andNarthacium on the mountain not far from upperTjaterli.Leaving Ghenitzarokhori at 8 Turkish, we descendthe hill, and in ten minutes cross theJEnipeuSj which is here a wide torrent, often veryformidable in winter, and sometimes quite dry insummer. The road then follows the foot of thehills for 35 minutes to Derengli, the Enipeusflowing along the middle of the valley a mile onour right. Derengli is on a root of the heightswhich we have coasted, a mile short of it wecrossed the neck of a low tabular projection advancingto the river side ; it is now cultivated,but among the arable some indications of anancient site are visible, such as large blocks,and smaller stones scattered about the ground.It may be the site perhaps of a frontier fortress ofthe Pharsalii. As to Thetidium *, where the pro-^ Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 13. Theatrum was so namedTO QtTlli6v koTi TrXtiffioy from a temple of Thetis, whoTwy ^apadXwv dfu^ly r^Q re was a favorite goddess of theiraXatac xal r% viae — Strabo, Phthiotae, as having been thep. 431. mother of their hero Achilles.XLII.] Thessaly. 473consul Quinctius encamped at the end of thesecond march from Pherse toward Scotussasa, itwas probably at or near Magula, on the oppositeside of the EnipeuSj that situation being in theplain, and not far from the frontiers of the Phar-salina and Scotussaay as the Roman camp appearsfrom the historian to have been. The march ofPhilip from his camp, near the site of Rizomylo,seems to have led on the first day by the positionof Ghereli to the river beyond that place, whichis thus identified with the Onchestus. Dederianiat the sources of the same river was perhaps thesite of Melamhium^ for it seems evident from Polybius,and particularly from the word irepipcc, tohave been Philip's intention to make a circuitround the northern summits of the mountain toScotussasa, when the fog having obliged him tohalt, he sent an advanced body to secure theheights between his camp and Scotussa^, notdoubting that the enemy was in that direction,and was at length obliged to follow the same routewith his whole phalanx.^0iac dc TiivhE kqX ir<$X£Ci»c ^apaaX/acSvyyppra valu vtSC, ty* 4 SaXavaiaUrine ^vy^Kei x<^p^C dyOpanrtay QeriQ^evyovv* SftiKoy' Oeaaako^ ^i yiy XeatcOiTiietoy ah^^ Ocdc X^P*-^ yvii^tv^driay,Euripides* Androm. v. 16.^ ^iXiTiroc Karayvvai mrtV" rely fiky Bvyafjuy tic xp^paxaSky €7rl TO irpoKtlfityoy^ &i'a- iraptyifiaXe, 'T^jy S* e<^iipeiay(eviaQ jrepipti fiery wdtrriQ Tfjc direoTciXe, ovvrafac cir2 roveorpaTtlaQf SvayfifiaTovfuyoc Si etrpovc ciri/SaXciv roi /i£ra£vKara r^v icoptiay hia r^v Oil" Keifuywy flovyQy, — Polyb. 1.X^l*^t fip^yy^ rSirvy hiayvvaQf 18, c. 3.474 THB89AUA. [CHAP. XLII.Beyond Derengll we follow the foot of themountain for three miles, when the atmosphere,which had been nearly in the same state as on themorning of the battle of CynoscephahBj suddenlyclearing, shows the magnificent rocks of the Met^oraor ^giniwm very distinctly in front of us,though distant not less than fifty miles. The fairweather,after having lasted three or four days,had ended yesterday evening in clouds, and thismorning a little snow fell with a light northerlywind. Such a change in winter generally producesthe clearest atmosphere. A line of N. 44 W.S. 44 E. will cut the rocks of .Xgiamm^ the hill ofAsterium or Vlokho, the western end of Mavro-veni near Orfana, the road from Fersala to Vales*(ino, one hour east of Fersala, where the observationwas made, and the pass of Tjangli or Eretria^leading out of the valley of the Erdpeus stato theCrocian plain, or that of Armyro.Having crossed the root of the rocky height,which borders the site of Pharmlus on the east,we enter the town of Fersala at 10.35, havinghalted ten minutes on the road from Derengli.CHAPTER XLIII.Thessaly.Battle of Pharsalw — Fountain Hypereia — Present state of Fersala— Demirli — Simikli — ^Yusufli — Euhydrtum^ PaUepharusSofadhes — Maskoluri — Mataranga, Cterhtm — rivers Ctia-rtt», ^/m^mttM^Kaputzi — Kardhitza — Paleokastro, Metropolis— Loxadha — Fan&ri, Itkotne — Linea — Rivers PamisuSfOnochonus, Phoenix AsopuSy Melas — Clement — Ghelanthi —Episcopi Oomphi — Pheca — Rapsista — Musaki — Fortes —Athenaeum — River Portico-Kotziaka — Mount Cercetium,Phaloria, Thalia — Poliana — Silana — Trikkala — Homericgeography of Thessaly — Meliboea — Stagiis — Kastraki — Meteora— loannina.To the traveller who takes an interest in the illustrationof history, (and to all others Greece willafford but a barren field,) there are few points inthe whole country more worthy of a visit than theacropolis of Pharaohs. From hence may be traceda great part of the marches through Thessaly, ofXerxes, of Brasidas, and of Agesilaus^ as well asmany of the movements of the armies of Romeand her opponents in the Macedonian wars. At ashort distance are the scenes of two of the greatestevents in ancient history ; by the former of whicha Roman army more than half achieved the conquestof Greece, and by the latter extinguished the476 Thessaly. [CHAP.republic of Rome. Of this great event the fieldlies immediately below the spectator.Csesar relates, that after his failure againstPompey at Dyrrhachium, both parties came tothe resolution of marching into Macedonia, wheredivisions of their respective armies under Calvinusand Scipio had been opposed to each otheron the Haliacmon, their purpose being exactlythe same, namely, that of giving succour to theirfriends or of cutting off the hostile forces as circumstancesmight determine. But Caesar being atApologia was farther removed than his adversaryfrom the direct route by Candavia, for which andother reasons he resolved to march through Epirusinto Thessaly. The exaggerated accounts spreadthrough the country of Pompey's victory hadcreated a feeling which prevented any communicationbetween Csesar and Calvinus by messengers,so that when Caesar was marching through Epirusand Athamania to ^giuium, Calvinus, who hadquitted his position on the Haliacmon for the sakeof obtaining provisions, and had arrived at Heracleaof Patagonia (or Lyncestis), there fell exactly intothe track which Pompey was pursuing, after havingcrossed the Candavia. By great good fortune,however, Calvinus received advice of the occurrencesin lUyria, and of the route taken by Caesar,just in time to avoid the danger, when marchingwithout delay to the southward he met Caesar at^ginium. The situations of Apologia, ^ginium,and Heraclea of Lyncestis, being certain, theCaesar de B. Civ. 1. 3, c. 78, et seq.XLIII.] Thessaly. 477march of Caesar was evidently through the valleysof the Dryno and loannina, and by the M^tzovopass to Stagus ; Calvinus, who was near Figuring,may be supposed to have directed his movementupon the same point, through Anaselitza andGrevena.After this fortunate reunion of his forces, Csesartook Gomphi by assault, and gave it up to plunder;then marched to Metropolis which capitulatedon hearing of the fate of Gomphi, and fromthence proceeded into the Pharsalia, where heencamped in a place abounding in com whichwas then nearly ripe. A few days afterwards,Pompey and Scipio, who had effected their junctionat Larissa, arrived at Pharsalus, and establishedtheir camp on some neighbouring heights.After having gathered in the com and allowedsufficient time for repose, Caesar endeavoured tomake up for his great inferiority in cavalry byconstantly exercising it, and often skirmishingwith the enemy, and at length, as well with theview of obtaining new supplies as with the hopeof drawing Pompey from the foot of the hillswhere his army was posted, he determined frequentlyto change the position of his whole army,in order to fatigue his adversary, and trusting thathe should at last be able to seize some favourableopportunity for attacking the enemy.Caesar does not mention Pompey ; the names are sup-theplace of encampment either plied hy other authors,of his own army or that of478 THB86AUA. [CHAP.Scarcely had he struck his tents for this purpose\ when finding that the Pompeians had advancedfarther than usual into the plain, he instantlyperceived that the moment for engaginghad arrived. Pompey also, as Csesar afterwardslearnt, had come to the same resolution.The former had 45,000 men, besides 3000 leftin charge of the camp and fortresses : Caesarhad only 22,000 men in position. The right ofPompey being well protected by a river whichhad precipitous banks*, he placed his cavalry,which amounted to 7000, as well as all his archersand slingers, on the left. Csesar headed the tenthlegion on the right, opposite to Pompey, and inorder to prevent his right from being turned bythe adverse cavalry, he selected from the thirdline six cohorts, and placed them in the rear ofhis right wing, with the admonition that uponthem would depend the fortune of the day. Hegave at the same time strict injunctions to thethird line not to move without especial orders.Pompey resolved to await the attack. The Caesareamade a short halt midway between thetwo lines, again advanced, disclaimed their javelins,received those of the enemy, and then cameto a close engagement with swords. While thetwo lines were thus occupied, the cavalry andAccording to Plutarch he ' The Enipeus, as Appianwas taking the road to Conforms us (de B. Civ. 1. 2,tussa : — wc M Sirorovir^c c. 75.bievtay ll^€vyw€v, — Plutarch,in J. Cases.JtUII.] THfeSSALIA. 479light troops of Pompey attempted a manoeuvrewhich he had ordered when he placed them onhis left; having forced the Caesarea horse toretreat, they were extending themselves in therear of Caesar's line, when they were unexpectedlyattacked by the six cohorts and completely routed,flying to the mountains, and leaving the archersand slingers to be cut in pieces. The six cohortsfollowing up their advantage now moved into therear of the enemy's left and attacked it, at themoment when the third line of Csesar was orderedto advance ; the Pompeians thus at onceassailed in the rear, and exposed to fresh troops infront, gave way, and fled to their camp, to whichPompey also retired, giving orders for its defence.Caesar determined immediately to attack thecamp, and notwithstanding the fatigue of his menand the meridian heat, was readily followed bythem, prepared as they were by discipline for anydegree or kind of labour. The cohorts of Pompeywhich had been left in charge of the camp, aidedby some Thracian auxiliaries, made a good defence,but at length fled to the mountains at theback of the camp ^, while Pompey had only timeto change his dress and mount his horse for Larissa,from whence he continued his route bynight to the coast, and embarked in a com ship.The mountain into which the Pompeians hadretired being without water, and Caesar havingbegun a circumvallation around it, they lost noIn altissimos montes qui ad castra pertinent, confugerunt.95.480 Thessaly. [CHAP.time in quitting it, and in taking the road to Larissa.Caesar followed with four legions, leavingthe rest of his army in the two camps, and bytaking a shorter way than the Pompeians, overtookthem at the end of six miles. They nowretired into another mountain, at the foot of whichthere was a river, but Caesar having before nighterected a work which cut them off from the water,they made offers of surrender, and in the morningdescended from the mountain and laid down theirarms. Caesar then sent to the camp for the legionswhich had been all night in repose, and proceededthe same day to Larissa. Fifteen thousandPompeians' were slain in the action, and morethan 24,000 taken, a part of whom were the cohortswhich guarded the forts, and who surrenderedto L. Scylla. The remainder of the armytook refuge in the neighbouring cities. Caesarlost 30 centurions and 200 legionary soldiers.It is curious that Caesar has not named theplace in which he gained the most important ofall his victories, so that had there been no otherrelation of it or allusion to it in history, we shouldonly have known that it occurred in some part ofthe country between Metropolis and Larissa, twoplaces which are forty miles distant from oneanother. But there is no want of evidence thatit occurred in the territory of Pharsalus, althoughAppian alone has indicated the exact position bothof the adverse camps and of the battle, by havingremarked, that the camps were 30 stades apart,and by showing that the river which covered theright of Pompey's line, and the left of Caesar's,XLIII.] Thessaly. 481was the JSnipeus^ and that the action took placebetween that river and the city of Pharsalus *.There can scarcely remain a doubt, therefore, thatthe camp of Pompey was on the heights to theeastward of Fersala, and that of Caesar at or nearHadjeverli, at the foot of the rocky height whichadvances into the plain three miles westward ofFersala. Here a fertile plain surrounding copioussources furnished exactly the conveniences whichCsesar had sought for'. The two armies whendrawn up for battle stretched from the JEnipeustowards PharsaltiSy and occupied a line of nearthree miles, beyond which there was a space nearthe foot of the hills, sufficient for the operationswhich occurred between the light troops of Pompeyand the six cohorts of Caesar, with their respectivecavalry. Strabo distinguishes Paleephar-salus from new Pharsalus', and Livy, who alsomentions both, applies the former name to thesituation where the Romans under Hostility werelong encamped, in the third year of the Persiawar, B. c. 169 * ; it would seem, therefore, eitherthat the fortress, of which remains still exist halfa mile to the eastward of the acropolis of Phar-Uoftirfiiot . • • . cirijfXOe xal vdXov re ir6\€tic Kal 'Evdriw^dvretrrparoiriievae rf Kaltrapi worafiov, c>^0a cat 6 KalvapK€pi 4fapaa\oyf Kal rpiaxoyra dyriSuKOfrfjLti.—^, 75.ffraSiovQ dXXfiXiay direixoy, — * Caesar. de B. C. 1. 3, c.Appian. de Bel. Civ. 1. 2» c. 81. 84.65. ' Strabo, p. 431, v. sup.Qoftwfiioc • • • • • irapiratrae p. 472, note 2.rowe Xoiirowc £c to fJitTaiv ^ap- * Liv. L 44, c. 1.VOL. IV. I i482 Thessaly. [CHAP.salus was known at that time by the name ofFalse-pharsalus, or that the acropolis itself wasintended by it, possibly because the town thenexisting occupied, like the modem Fersala, onlythe vicinity of the sources of water at the foot ofthe height, or the north-western part of the ancientinclosure, of which the upper part, includingthe acropolis, may have been uninhabited, and thewalls perhaps in a state of dilapidation. After thedisasters to which Greece had then been long exposed,such may very probably have been thestate of Pharsalus, though it would seem to haverecovered afterwards by favour of the conqueror andhis successors, as it was the only city in Thessalynoticed by Pliny as a libera ci vital *. Whicheverof these conjectures as to False-pharsalus may becorrect, there will be little difference in the situationof the camp of Pompey, so inconsiderable isthe interval between the two points in question.The camp occupied the heights to the eastwardof Fersala, which, secured by Mount Narthadumon one side, and defended by rocky declivitiestowards the plain, afforded such a position as theRomans seem to have considered eligible for anencampment *.The mountain towards Clarissa into which thePompeians retired when Caesar encamped oppositeto the foot of it, was probably near Scotussasa ; forPlin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 8. xaXir kqI oi KpiifAvol arparo-'Appian remarks of the wtievaai. — Appian. de Bel.position of Brutus at Philippi : Ci?. L 4, c. 106.TO wesley ^y kvaytavleaoBm.ZUII.] Thessaly. 483there alone is any mountain to be found with a riverat the foot of it. This river I take to have beenthe same which Herodotus has named Onochonus.If we suppose Caesar to have computed his distanceof six miles from the banks of the JEnipeus n<Mi;h*eastward of Fersala, and to have encamped atsome little distance short of the OnochontiSj themarch would not have been much greater thansix miles, though it seems rather underrated atthis number.Appian sufficiently accounts for the defeat of sosuperior a force, by showing that a large proportionof the army of Pompey was formed of Greeksor Asiatics, who fought very ill or not at all ; butwho, nevertheless, were slaughtered without mercywhereas, as soon as the victory was complete,Caesar gave an order to spare the Italians, whichbeing speedy known to both armies, the words^' stare secures" became a parole used by oneparty and respected by the other. According toAnnius Folio, one of the generals of Caesar,6000 Pompeians were found dead on the field ofbattle ' ; but these were probably the Italians only,as other authors reported a much greater numberto have fallen on that side.Plutarch appears to have composed his narrativeof the battle as well in his life of Caesar as in thatof Pompey, entirely from Caesar and Appian; andexcept that he names Scotussasa as the place towardswhich Caesar designed to march on themorning of the battle, Tempo as the route through^ Ap. Appian. B. C. I. 2, c. 82.ii484 THE8SALIA. [CRAP.which Pompey proceeded from Larissa, and themouth of the Peneius as the place where heembarked, there is scarcely a circumstance whichis not noticed in the Commentaries or the Greekhistory. Nothing is more probable, consideringthe position of the two camps, and the designof Caesar in moving as stated by himself, thanthat he intended to march in the direction ofthe site, which I have supposed to be that ofScotiissa. The mention, therefore, of that placeby Plutarch on this occasion, may be consideredin some degree as confirming the identity of theruins.It is generally believed among the Greeks ofThessaly having any pretensions to erudition, thatFersala is the site of an ancient city Phthia, capitalof the homonymous district, Pharsalus not beingacknowledged among them as an ancient name.That the city as well as district was named Phthiaat a remote period is not an absurd supposition, asPharsalus is not mentioned by Homer though itwas probably the capital of Phthisis, according toits largest boundaries, which comprehended all thecountry surrounded by the plains of the Apidanusand Spercheius, by the Euboic faith, the Gulf of Pa-gases,and a line drawn from thence to the Enipeusat its exit from the mountains, thus including thedistricts of Pharsalus, Proemaa, Thaumaci, and Lamia,as well as the country around Othrys, whichin later ages seems more specifically to have constitutedPhthisis \ In all this region there was noStrabo, pp. 433, 434.XUII.] Thessaly. 485spot to be compared to Pharsalus for a combinationof strength, resources, and convenience. Euripidesrepresents Andromache to have been a captive atPharsalus of Phthia ' ; this place, therefore, seemsto have been the capital and residence of Durationand Peleus *, whose territory included apparentlynot only Hellas, of which the chief town wasTrachis, since Achilles led the ships of Hellas toTroy as well as those of Phthia, but Colonia also,which is described by Homer as a portion ofPhthia ', and which, as well as the eastern part ofthe kingdom, was under a subordinate chieftain.If Andromache was a captive at Pharsalus, it becomesthe more probable that the fountain Hyperaemiaof Homer was not the source at Velestino,but some other in or near the kingdom of Achilles;and such, in the time of Strabo, was theopinion of the Pharsalii, who pointed out thefountains Messeis and Hypereia at a distance ofsixty stades from their city, where existed someremains of an ancient town which they supposedto have been named Hellas ^ The distance sufficientlycorresponds to Vrysia. As to Messeis, theSpartans maintained that fountain to have been^ Eurip. Androm. v. 16. Pharsalus Achilles (1. 6, v.y. sup. p. 472, note 2. 350).Thus also Lucan — regnumII. I. V. 480.v. sup. p. 435. * Strabo, p. 431.486 THB88ALIA. [CHAP.near their city ' ; and with some probability, asthe poet when he represented Hector as predictingto Andromache that she should be a slave atArgos, or draw water at Messeis or Hypereia*,seems to have had in view the three chief citiesof the enemies of Troy, in one of which Hectorthought it too probable that his wife should thereafterbe a captive.Coins, vases, figures of clay and brass, are oftenfound in the fields near Fersala, and in generalare destroyed as soon as found. Two brothersworking in a field not long since struck upon thearm of a bronze statue of the size of life, andbroke it in two by way of sharing the metalequally. All I can recover of it is a joint of oneof the fingers, which bears the marks of fire.Fersala is an archbishopric, depending immediatelyon the patriarch of Constantinople. Thepresent prelate had previously been a kalogherosin the patriarchate; and after having been employedas exarch upon several ecclesiastical missions,has been unable to obtain any better prefermentthan a see, of which the annual revenue isabout 2000 piastres, or 130/. sterling. He haslately been sent by the patriarch to loannina uponthe subject of the union of the metropolitan .Bacon. c. 20.Koi Key Iv^Apyei eovera irpoc ^iXXiyc tfrroy v^aivoiSfKai Key viiap <^epioi^ Metraritios Ij 'Yirepcii^cIloXX* diKa^ofiivii.II. Z. V. 456.iXLIII.] THBSSALIA. 487rich of Artaa and loannina, which the Vezir has noweffected by his influence at Constantinople, andprobably with advantage to both sees. The bishopconfirms the favourable opinion of the Greek hierarchyas to the general conduct of Alj^ towards theChurch, and states that on his late mission thePasha said to him, '^ I never injured your Churchand never will ^" He complains more of his holybrother of Larissa, who, he say, in spite of thepatriarch, has torn from him four of the best villagesof the plain, leaving only twenty in the archbishopric.Having found ninety piastres a year arent too burdensome for his slender income, he haslately endeavoured to repair the palace, but hasbeen obliged to confine himself to the expence of afew boards to save himself from falling into thestable through the floor of the only apartmentwhich he inhabited, and in which some sheets ofpaper now supply the place of glass in the ,while a few rugs on the divan andfloor are the only furniture. The Greek churchis severely burdened at present by an imdat superiorextraordinary war-tax, which the Porte haslately imposed upon the clergy, leaving them torepay themselves from their flocks as they can.The bishop, though conversant upon general subjectsin consequence of his long residence at Constantinople,is totally deficient in ancient literatureand history, and was even unconscious that themodern name, from which he takes his title, isbut slightly corrupted from that which the city•488 THSSSALIA. [chap.bore anciently daring a long succession of ages.He supposes inscribed marbles to indicate hiddentreasures ; and of all the ancient names in thiscountry Thessaly and Phthia alone seem to beknown to him. He might easily obtain a littlemore information by means of the work of BishopMeletius.The ignorance of the history of their country,which the Greeks so generally betray, arises fromthe total neglect of Hellenic literature amongthem after they have acquired what is taught atschool, or what is sufficient to qualify those youngmen for the church who are intended for that profession.But in this respect they might perhapsretort upon more civilized nations, and ask: showmanof you, after having spent several years ofyour youth in decyphering a small portion of thepoets, orators, and historians of Greece, have everbestowed a thought upon them ; or how many ofthat superior class among ye, who have so manyadvantages over us, have any knowledge of thehistory or geography of Greece. Such knowledgeought undoubtedly to interest those most nearlywho are born and live in the country, and speakthe ancient language little changed. Nor willthese motives fail to produce corresponding effectswhen education has made greater progress. TheGreeks will then easily take the lead of all thenations of Europe in a familiar knowledge of theirancient literature.Fersala and Dhomoko form one Turkish kaza,containing about sixty villages, all belonging toTurks but inhabited by Greeks, who have noXLIII.] TH£88AUA. 489agricultural property in the district except sheepwhich belong chiefly to Greeks of F^rsala or itsplain, and which thrive exceedingly, as they findexcellent pasture in the plain or hills, accordingto the season of the year. The Greek families inthe town are chiefly shopkeepers of the bazar,who in their houses spin cotton and weave it intocoarse kerchiefs for the head and waist, which areconsumed in the town or immediate neighbourhood.There is a school for teaching boys toread and write held, as usual in the poorer villageof Greece, in the church porch ; the schoolmaster,who is likewise papas, receives from eachscholar twenty or thirty paras a month. The retailprice of wheat is forty piastres the kilo of 150okes. Wood is plentiful, and costs only thirtyparas the ass-load, or one-fourth of the price whichit bears at this season in loannina : but loanninais an expensive place ; and my tatar Mustafa, whohas a lai^e family in that city, says that he cannotmake both ends meet, unless he gains fivepurses a year by his profession, now equivalent to160/.The Turkish population of this town and districthas diminished considerably during the lastfour years. Their own imprudence and indolence,the diminished produce of the land, arising chieflyfrom a scarcity of labourers, added to the vexationsof the Porte and of Alj^ Pasha, have inducedmany of them to sell their tjiftliks to Alj^ or hissons, and to retire to Larissa or other great townsbeyond the reach of the Aspirate tyrant. A fewbeys at Larissa, 'Egripo, and Thebes, are now the490 TflsasALiA. [chap.only Turkish proprietors in Eastern Greece, whoseincomes from their lands are sufficient to supportthem.The heat at Fersala is said to be sometimes excessive,in great measure caused by reflection fromthe rocky heights which rise above the town ontwo sides, but particularly from those to the eastward.The prevailing winds in the summer months,when rain very seldom falls, are called Boreas,Liva, and Trikkalinos^ The first, instead ofbeing from the north, as the name imports, isnearer north-east, and the Liva, instead of beingthe same as the Libs, or south-west, is nearlywest. The former is the Etesian wind so violentand constant in the middle of summer. It is cooluntil towards August, when all the Thracian plainsover which it blows become a parched desert, andthe mountains themselves reflect heat. For thesame reason the Liva, which in every part ofGreece is warm, even when it blows from thesea, becomes intolerably oppressive at Fersala inthe summer, and if it occurs in harvest-time,which not unfrequently happens, is sometimesfatal to the labourers. The Trikkalinos, or windof Trikkala, though having only a few degreesof northing in it, is refreshing compared to theLiva, notwithstanding that it blows equally overthe plain. It is in fact the regular maestraleof the western coast, cooled again in passingover the Pindtis. In winter there is a greatervariety of winds, and all of them bring rainXLIII.] raESSAUA. 491occasionally ; with the north-east the fine weatheris most permanent Snow comes chiefly with theBoreas, which is then a true north, or betweenN. N. W. and N. N. E. On the western side ofMount Pindus the rains constantly come from thepoints between the south-east and west. Duringthe present winter southerly winds have been morethan usually prevalent in Thessaly notwithstandingwhich I have scarcely ever been prevented fromtravelling by the rain, which at this season seldomfalls in torrents, as occurs in the spring and earlysummer, but generally in a mistJan. 4. — Quitting the north-western extremityof F^rsala at 4.20 Turkish, I follow the directroad to Trikkala for an hour, when at the fartherof two makhal&s named Kutjuk Ahmet we divergeto the left towards the mountains of 'Agrafa, leavingat a distance of two miles on the left Hadessituated, not far from the foot of the projectingpoint of the insulated height at the northwesternextremity of the Pharsalian ridge, aroundwhich I suppose the camp of Caesar to have beenplaced. The land around these villages is chieflyin tillage, but as we advance the cultivation diminishes,and the villages become less numerous ;the plough is drawn by a pair of oxen, and sometimesby a pair of bufFalos.At 6.12 we pass along the skirts of Demirli,two miles beyond which to the right, in the directionof Hadjobashi, is seen Simile, in the directroad from Fersala to Trikkala. These are bothconsiderable places. To the left are seen Ghy-nekokastro, Dhomoko, and a few villages in492 Thessaly. [CHAP.the plain towards the mountain of 'Agrafa, uponthe foot of which stand some small tjiftliks.At 6.40, Yusufli being four miles on the right inthe Trikkala road, we cross a considerable streamby a bridge of four arches built upon ancient piers.The chief sources of this river are at Vrysia, butit receives other waters from the heights aroundDhomoko, as well as from the foot of the rockypoint above Hadjeverli. At the bridge a smallheight rises from the right bank of the stream, onwhich, as well as in the surrounding fields, aresome vestiges of an ancient town. There are twoother similar heights in the direction of Matarangaforming a right line with the preceding. One ofthem situated to the north of Pazaraki is verystony. Some others are seen towards Orfana,which I had observed on the road from Vlokho toFersala. Several of these hills have been foundconvenient sites for modem villages, for the samereason which made them eligible to the ancients inthe midst of these alternately hot and marshy plains.The greater part of those which retain remains ofantiquity were probably the sites of come only, butamong them may have been some of the seventy-fivecities which Pliny states to have been includedwithin the magnificent amphitheatre formed byCircetium, Piers, Olympus, Ossa, Pindus, Othrys,Pelion, and seventeen other mountains of minornote '. Among the insulated heights to the northwardof our route, that on the left bank of theJEnipeuSy which I passed on the road from Petro« Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 8.XLIII.] THBS8ALIA. 493to Fersala, is particularly conspicuous. It is thesite perhaps of Mukydrium^ mentioned by Livy inhis narrative of the transactions which followedthe defeat of the Macedonians at the Fauces Anti*condenses, when Philip, followed at no great distanceby the victorious consul, retired rapidlythrough Thessaly, and desolated the cities whichhad been in alliance with him, that the enemymight be deprived of their resources. Accordingto the historian, Philip inflicted these marks of hisfriendship upon four cities between Phacium andPherse, namely, Iresi®, Euhydrium, Eretria, andPalsepharus. Supposing Phacium to have stoodat Allfaka, and correcting IresuB to PiresuB^ whichI have already shown to have been the ancientcity at Vlokho, we have a very natural route forPhilip : first, along the Peneius and Apidanus toVlokho, and from thence along the Fersaliti, orJEnipeus^ to Eretria at Snell, leaving Pharsahu alittle on the right, probably because that citywas too powerful to submit quietly to spoliationlike the smaller towns, and gave Philip the samereception which he met at Pherse, from whence,when he found the gates shut against him, andthat a siege would consume more time than hecould afibrd, he retired into Macedonia. Thesite near Hadjobashi is exactly in the road fromPiresuB to Eretria, and about midway betweenthem. PakBpharus would seem to have been nearOndoklari, or Kranovo, for these places lie in theline just mentioned, and the ancient name, implyingold Pherse or Phase, suggests a situationnot far from Piero.We cross by a bridge of a single arch a brook494 Thessaly. [CHAP.which, originating near Dhomoko, joins theriver of Vrysia, not far from Mataranga. Theplain for a great distance around us is now quiteuncultivated, but affords pasture to a great nom->ber of cattle and sheep which are brought hitherin winter from the neighbouring mountains. At7.45 we arrive at Pazaraki, a large village chieflyTurkish, situated five or six miles from the foot ofthe mountains, and nearly opposite to the tenura,or strait where the river of Soiadhes issues intodie plain between Dhranista and Smokovo ; itrises in the mountain near Rendhlna called Zy*giasta Nere. I find in Pazardki a cubical blockof stone which has been hollowed at one end toserve as a mortar: it was covered on two sideswith letters, but as they are reversed by theposition of the stone, and almost defaced, I canonly decipher in two places the names of someTayoiy but of what city there is no intimation. Thecharacters seem earlier than the Roman empire.Another fragment of a later period recorded themanumission of slaves, and their payment to thecity of 22 denaria ^ ; the same sum which is foundin similar documents at CyretitB and Oloasson.In 40 minutes from Pazar&ki we arrive atSoothes,. having crossed the river just before enteringthe village. Soiadhes, which lies in a rightline from Pazaraki to the hill of Matar&nga, themost central and conspicuous of the landmarksafforded by the insulated heights of this great plain,is a kefaiokhdri of 150 houses in the district ofLarissa. The mukatd is in the hands of AbdimV. Inscriptions, Nos. 214, 215.XLIII.]TUBSSALIA.49&Bey, but a yearly avayeti is paid to A\y Pasha.In one of the houses I find a marble inscribedwith characters which are exactly of the samekind as those on the more ancient of the twomonuments noticed at Pazaraki. The inscriptionwas in thirty-six lines, but I can only decipher aportion of it in two places, from which it appearsto have recorded some honours conferred upon anative or foreigner. The letters nOAEQSOA inthe twenty-third line seem to shew that the nameof Thaumaci was mentioned, this city having concurredperhaps with that in which the monumentwas erected in some thoracic exhibition as indicatedby the words i'^ofniyti<rev and rqc tCjv viiavawayfayi^. The tags, or local magistrates of thecity, appear to have been five. The act tookplace in the second assembly of the month Antonius,in the strategic of Lysimachus of Larissa ^ Thecharacters are hardly later than the time of Alexander.The plain around Pazar&ki and Sofadhes bearsV. Inscription, No. 216.We learn from the Armenianversion of a part of Eusebius,which is deficient in the Ghneek,that when Thessaly was liberatedfrom the Macedonianyoke by Flamininus, it wasgoverned for eighteen years byaanaal magistrates. In theLatin translation of Mai andZohrab (Medial. 1818, 1. 1.c. 39) these magistrates arestyled principes, in that ofAnchor (Vent. 1818, p. 340)duces. The Greek title undoubtedlywas arparriyotf thesame as that of the suprememagistrates of the Achaeanand iBtolians about the sametime. If the magistrate whosename is inscribed on the obverseof the money of theKoivov QgttffaXufv was the orpa^Tfiyoff the Thessalians preservedtheir form of governmentunder the Romans, forsome of those coins are as lateas the time of the empire.496 THB8SALIA. [CHAP.corn and sesami, the oil of which is in commonuse by the people of Thessaly who live too &rfrom the land of olives to accord that kind of oil.The plough does not differ from that of Pr^vyza,or of most of the other parts of Greece, except inthe form of the vvv\ or share, which in the Thessalianplains is like the head of a spear, as I beforestated ^ Travelling with menzU geldings overthe plain, our pace to-day is about six miles anhour. These horses have the shuffling pace calledShaken by the Turks, which is taught themby a particular process when young, and isesteemed also in America and the West Indiesas easy to the rider.Jan. 5. — Sending my baggage direct to KarlI follow the left bank of the river to and Mataranga. The banks are high, thestream not rapid, the depth at present about twofeet, the bed in general sandy. Maskoluri is onethird of the distance to Mataranga, which is aboutfour miles by the road from Sofadhes. At the river is crossed by a bridge of twoarches, built of stone, and constructed like thatof Larissa. The village contains between fortyand fifty houses, and is noted for a great fairwhich takes place in May, and lasts several days.A little beyond it are some artificial elevationsupon which are erected the tents of those whofrequent the fair. Proceeding from thence wepass a barrow on the bank of the river, not &rfrom Mataranga, which village is divided intoSee Vol. I. p. 425.Clin.] Thessaly. 497four or five makhaladhes, now chiefly inhabitedby Greeks, and showing by numerous Turkishsepulchres near all the hamlets how much theTurkish population has diminished here as wellas in other parts of the Thessalian plains. Duringa halt of two or three hours at the southernmosthamlet, upwards of 100 ancient coins are broughtto me for purchase, together with a few otherrelics of antiquity, which have been found in thecom or cotton fields adjacent to the height whichI have before mentioned as so conspicuous anobject throughout the surrounding plains. Thishill, though rocky, rises very gradually on allsides, and throws out to the west and south somelower eminences extending to no great distanceinto the plain.On the round summit of the hill are the foundationsof a circular Hellenic fortification, 100yards in diameter, with vestiges of a few of thetowers which flanked the walls. In some partsthe masonry is formed of large irregular massesas in the earliest times; in others the stoneshave been prepared and fitted with greater care.On a small peak rising from the centre are someruins of a keep or tower. This point commandsa beautiful view of the extensive plains surroundedby Pindtis and its branches of 'Agrafa,and Khassia, with Olympus OsMj Pelham andOthrys^ along the eastern horizon. The mountainsof 'Agrafa in particular, and beyond them tothe eastward those of the district of Fersala, aredisplayed in their full extent from the rocks of theMeteora to the pass of Ondoklari, near Velestino.VOL. IV. K k498 Thessaly. [CHAP;A small stream which rises at Magula, a tjiftlfkon the edge of the plain at the foot of an Agrafiotemountain called Katakhloro, joins the Sofadhitikoa little below the heights of Matar4nga.Although little exists above ground of the ancientcity which occupied this site, the generalityof its position in the great plains of Upper Thessalythe remains of antiquity found in its fields, andthe fertility of the surrounding country, are sufficientto lead to the persuasion that it was not anobscure place. An incomplete inscription in thewall of a church in the southern makhala ofMataranga gives me reason to believe that it wasthe city either of the YLu^iuq or MfirpoiroXirac, thesetwo names occurring, and the inscription relatingto that very common subject of discussion betweentwo neighbouring people, the adjustment of theirboundaries \ That Metropolis was in this part ofThessaly is evident from Livy, who mentions it onseveral occasions *, but still more from Caesar, whooccupied it on his way from Gomphi to Pharsalus '•On the other hand, though the name of the Corrientesdoes not occur in history, I have alreadyhad occasion to form a presumption as to theimportance of this people, from having met withsome varied specimens of their coinage in Thessalyor Epirus bearing the legend KcfpiaW *. Of^ y. Inscription, No. 217. them, see Transactions of th*Liv. 1. 32, cc. 13. 15 ; 1. Royal Society of Literature,36, c. 14. vol. i. p. 151.Caesar de B. Civ. 1. 3, c. 81. Kitpuitav for KccpicW, from^ For engravings of these Kiepccvc, seems to have been acoins, and some remarks upon Thessaly form, like M«if«/i#yXLIII.] THBSSALIA. 499these coins I find no less than four among thosebrought to me for sale by the peasants of Mata-range,a hct which, coupled with the evidence ofthe inscription relative to the boundaries betweenthe Corrientes and the Metropolis, seems to leaveno doubt as to their origin. We may concludetherefore that the hill of Mataranga is the site ofa city called Cieria, or Cierium. In the wall ofthe same church containing the inscription justreferred to, is a second which, though complete,contains only four words : —IIoaEcSwvi Kovipitf Kc^aXciiv Bujccvov,Cephalic, son of Socinus, to Neptune Cuerius ^The worship of Neptune at Cierium is recordedon three of its coins by the head of that deity, whichon one of them is indicated by the trident. Theepithet Cuerius is not so obvious ; but as thedominion of Neptune extended over rivers as wellas seas, Cuerius was very possibly the name ofthe river which flowed by the city, being the samecalled by Strabo Curalius, a name which existedalso in Phthisis and Boeotia, and which seems tohave been indifferently Curalius (in iEolic corals)or Cuerius, of which latter form Cuerius mayhave been a local variation. It is true, that in thetext of Strabo, the Curalius of Histiseotis seems tobe described as flowing, to the Peneius through theterritory of Pharcadon, which would make it atributary of that river on the left side ; but thisfor Mo^ewK. I have since seen * Y. Inscription, No. 218.a coin of Pierian with the ordinarygenitive Kupiimy.Kk2THB88ALIA.[chap.passage of the geographer is obviously corrupt ordefective S and Stephens furnishes us with astrong argument for believing that the CwraJiuswas the Sofadhitiko, or river which flows alongthe eastern side of Matar&nga into the Ajndanvs.From the ethnographer we learn the important fact,that Cierium was the same place as Ame', thecapital of the Boeotia, who were expelled fromhence sixty years after the Trojan war by therp 'Iffiroiwrcdi, cal ^ti iC ahrQy6 IIi|ycioc Kal 6 Kovpi/Xioc* Jv6 KovpaXioc |Jvc2c papa ri r^c'IrwWac *AOtiyaQ Upoy tic royUtiytidy ifffiaiy. — Strabo, p.438.The word aWAy has nodistinct reference, and Pbar-canon having been to the leftof the Peneus the Cnraliuscould not have flowed throughits territory.■ "Apyift wSkiQ Boutrlac'"OfitipoQ, Oi re iro\vtn'dfv\6yr* "Apyriv toy ievripa^w6\ic GeaoaX/aCf Axouwc TtjcBotttriaCf wtpl ic 6 XP^^t*^*"Apyti x<lp<vov9a /livct Bot^wyAyipa^ — 4 Kftipcov coXccrai.-—Stephan. in^Api^.Ame was said to have beenthe daughter of .solus, and themother of Boots, by Neptune,(Diodor. 1. 4, c. 67* —Isocrates et Euphorion ap.Stephan. in Boiwla^ Etym.M. in ed. y.)» or, accordingto other authorities, (Theseusap. School Lycophr. v.644, et ap. Etym. M. in^Apnf)the nurse of Neptune, who deniedto Cronus that she hadreceived the child from Rhea.Either mythus accounts forthe worship of Neptune atCierium ; but neither of themperfectly explains its coins. Afemale head is found on theobverse of one of these coinsand on all the others a femalefigure kneeling on the rightknee, and supported by the rightarm. The same figure on theobverse of a coin of Cieriumin brass, bearing the head ofApollo, is of a diminutive sizeat the feet of Jupiter, who islaunching his thunderbolt,holding an eagle on his lefthand. In another the samefigure is seen below a horseat full speed. All these aredoubtless intended to representAme.XLIII.]THE8SALIA.Thessaly of Epirus, who then attached their nameto the country, before called iEolis. The Boeotia retreatedinto Boeotia, from whence originally theirancestors, when expelled by the Epigoni, seem tohave carried the name Arne into iEolis. On theirreturn into Boeotia they occupied the districts ofOrchomenus and Coroneia, in the flatter of whichthey gave the name Curalius or Curious to a river,and founded a temple of Minerva Itonia in memoryof their former abode in Thessaly ^ It isnatural to believe that the name Arne may havebeen disused by the Thessalian conquerors becauseit was of Boeotian origin, and that the new appellationmay have been taken, with a slight changeto satisfy the ear, from the neighbouring river,for it was not an uncommon custom among theGreeks to derive the name of a tom from a riveror fountain on the site : of which an example verymuch resembling that of Cierium occurred atThrum, where the renewed Sybaris was sonamed from its fountain *.Herodot 1. 7, c, 176. —Thucyd. 1. 1, c. 12.— DiodonL 4, c. 67* — Clara ap. Stephan.in A^pioy. — Strabo, pp.411,412.435.438.There were three temples ofMinerva Itonia in Thessaly:one in the Amaea, one at in Phthisis, and a thirdbetween Pherae and Larissa. Itwas in the last that Pyrrhus dedicatedthe spoils of the Ghiuls,in the service of Antigonus,when in the year b. c. 273» heoverthrew that monarch, andfor the moment became masterof Upper Macedonia and Thessaly.The spoils taken fromthe Macedonians on that occasionhe offered to Jupiter ofDodona. — (Pausan. Attic, c.13. — Plutarch, in Pyrrha)—Both these authors have preservedthe four verses inscribedupon the dedication to MinervaItonia, and Pausanias thosealso at Dodona.Diodor. 1. 12, c. 10.502 Thessaly. [CHAP.The position of Ame thus determined, confirmsthe opinion already given as to that of PeiredtBfor Asterium, at Ylokho. for Strabo observes, thatAsterium was near Ame S which is true of Vlokhowith regard to Mataranga, both these places beingsituated on the bank of the same river with an in- Iinterval of five or six .miles between them. Hencealso it is evident, that in the time of Strabo theancient and more celebrated appellation Ame wasstill often preferred to that of Cierium. Still itseems unaccountable, that neither Ame nor Certumshould be named in authentic history, consideringthe important situation of this city, andits actual remains giving proof of its existence atthe time of the events which have been describedby the Greek historians, or by Livy, following Polybius,who in particular mentions occasionally almostevery Thessalian town of note, and of many ofwhich the names occur in no other extant authority.But the omission is perhaps more apparent thanreal. Livy relates, that when the consul Quinctius,after his victory over Philip on the Aous, enteredThessaly through Mount Cercetium, he first tookPhaloria, and then received the submission of Metropolisand Piers. Again, seven years afterwards,when the Romans and Philip were in allianceagainst Antiochus and the italians, the consulAcilius in marching from Pelinnseum to Larissawas met by deputies from Metropolis and PoemTlravoc 9 &iro rov trviifit'' oiov^ icac • ruv' koX to/3i}ir<$roc &yofjLdaQti' XeviciiyeMV ^Aaripioy f ohx AirwOcv rovrufyyap itrri ro xtaplov*' ApvriQ irXij- e^.-^trabo, p. 439.XLIII.]Thessaly.with offers of submission \ As in both instancesPiers occurs in conjunction with Metropolis whichthe inscription of Mataranga shows to have beenconterminous with Cierium^ the latter was probablythe place intended by the historian, from whomlivy derived his information ^> Liv. 1. 82, c. 15; 1. Sc.14.- ' in the paper of the Transactionsof the Royal Society ofLiterature, referred to in page498y note 4, I supposed thetext of Livy to require correctionin these places, but I amnow inclined to the opinion ofProfessor Miller (Dorian, vol.ii. p«4769 £ng. trans), namely,that Pierium and Cieriumwere the same place, Pie*rin having probably Beenthe general, and Cieriuin thelocal form. We have an exactlyparallel instance in theMacedonian Pydna of whichStephanas says, Kv^ya w6\itMaKcdovtac* Ocayivifc it *4 cord itapa^dopdyllMpa \iytrdi. PompousMela (1. 2, c. 8) id alludingto it has preferred the formCydna. Several authoritiesof different dates prove theexistence of a Pierium inThessaly ; one to which a referencehas been made in page495, note 1, shows that thecity was flourishing at the timeof the Roman wars. Amongthe names of the strategy whogoverned Thessaly from thebattle of CynoBcephalse to thedeath of Philip, as given byEusebius, the ethnics attachedto the names in the Latintranslation of Mai and Zohreb,are Piraeus, Scotussseus, Largesses,Atrocious, 63rrtonius,Metropolitan, and Piers,which last in the translation ofAuber is Pierensis, correspondingto the Greek Ilcepcevc. Thucydides,describing the marchof Rhamphias into Thessalyin the tenth year of the Peloponnesianwar, states that hisforces advanced as fer as Pieriumof Thessaly (/u'xP' ^*^'ploy rfjc BeavaXlag BiijXOoVy 1.5, c. 13), when hearing of thedeath of Brasidas, and knowingthe inclination of his owngovernment towards peace, headvanced no further, but returnedhome. It has beensupposed that Rhamphias, whowas proceeding from Heracleaof Ceste to reinforce Brasidas atAmphipoHs, had reached theborders of Pieria of Macedonia,that country being exactly inTHBMAUA.[chap.Having quitted the height of Mataranga at10 Turkish we pass two more barrows near thebase of it, and two or three miles farther fourmore standing near to each other. At 10.55we pass through Kaputji, a small village whereinthe wall of the church-yard is a stone withthree figures in mezzo-relievo wanting the heads.The middle figure is a woman covered withlong drapery, the other two are men clothed inaloose champs above a shirt reaching to theknees. Each of the men has an arm over thehis route ; but if Pierium wasthe same place as Cierium, itis necessary to infer, that forsome reason unexplained bythe historian, Rhamphias intendedto make a widely circuitouscourse through Perrhae-bia and Elimeia. delian (1. 3,c. 37) remarks, that in Piersof Thessaly there was a hysinundation, which madefrogs silent when they werethrown into it. ('£i^ Uupfcic ahr^y h^drmy Wxrcrac, &c.)and Pliny, who alludes (1. 8,c. 66) to the same story, withoutmentioning Pierium, namesthe lake Sicandrum, or accordingto other manuscripts Secundum,or Licendrum. Possiblythe country for a considerabledistance around Mataranga mayhave been commonly called thePierian plans and the inundationintended delian may havebeen that now named ,which is very extensivein winter, but is dry or nearlyso in summer. Theophrastusin his dissertation on winds,wherein he states that the Zeewhen it blew over theland, was pernicious to thefruits of the earth, but thecontrary when proceeding fromthe sea, instances Premium ofThessaly and the Maliac plainas examples of the former:Kelyrat yap ^f^f^ vp^C cfvoro-Xi^y, irtpuj(pyT€u S* opeaty v^^Xoic The eastern aspect ofMataranga is not very intelligible; but it is entirely surroundedat a distance by highmountains ; and the west windpasses father over the landthan the east.XUII.] THBS8ALIA. 505woman's shoulder ^ The sculpture is excellent,and the preservation not bad. From hence wecross a small stream by a bridge, and then fordtwo more considerable rivers, the first at 11.30,the second ten minutes farther. The easternenters the plain from the 'Agrafa mountain atKalifoni, passes by Vel^si, which stands on itsright bank in the road from Fanari to Dhomok6,and not far below Kardhitza joins the westernstream. The latter issues from the mountains atShekliza, a village on its right bank a little to theright of the road from Fanari to Dhomoko, whereare vestiges of Hellenic fortifications, and a churchcontaining ancient marbles and other fragments.Both these rivers retain water all the summer:the united stream is that which I crossed proceedingon the 6th December from Tzighioti to Vlokho,between the Salamvria and the river of Vlokho.At 12 Turkish I arrive at Kardhitza, and lodgein the house of the son of Salesman Bey, latelydead, and who as principal ay4n was for manyyears governor of the town, which contains betweenfive and six hundred houses, dispersed overa lai^e space of ground ; of these a very smallproportion are Greek. Though the situation islow, as appears by the muddy roads and marshy,state of the country around, the air is reputed notto be unhealthy, which is ascribed to the prevalencein summer of the westerly breezes blowingover the Pindus and to the coolness emanatingHereabouts may have stood Ame. — Rhino ap. Stephan.Fhemiae, or Onthyrium, which in 'OvOvpcov. — Hellenic ap.were towns of Thessaly, near Stephan. in ^niiiai.606 Thessaly. [CHAP.from the neighbouring mountains of 'Agrafa. Thetown is even said to be tolerably free from gnats,a great inconvenience of the Thessaly plains inthat season. Kardhitza is dependent upon THk-kala, and consequently pays all its contributionsto Aljr Pashd. These do not fall very heavy uponthe Turks, who in such a fertile territory, if theyhad the smallest industry, might live in comfort,instead of which their houses exhibit ruin andmisery.Jan. 6. — About five miles from Kardhitza to thesouth-west, very near an advanced root of themountain, upon which stands the Agrafiote townof Blazdhu, is the small village of Pale6kastro.A rivulet, which is dry in summer, issues from themountains between the slopes of Blazdhu and theadvanced height just mentioned, and flows throughPale6kastro into the plain, where it enters themarshy and now inundated track between Kardhitzaand Paraprastin, called Kolokjrthia K Paleokastroderives its name from standing on the site of a Helleniccity which resembled Mantinea as havingbeen of a circular form, and situated entirely on alevel not far from a commanding height. In thecentre of the circle are the vestiges of a circularcitadel, part of the wall of which still exists in theyard of the village church of Paleokastro, where hasbeen collected every thing sculptured or inscribedwhich has been found of late years upon the ancientsite. Among squared blocks, slabs of white marble,and fragments of columns, I observe some flutedDoric shafts, 1 foot 9 in. in diameter, with somerd Ko\oKv6ia,XLIII.] TUE88AUA. 507Others much smaller; and two inscriptions, oneon a large cubical block, the other on a headlessHermes both so much obliterated that I did notattempt to coj^y them. On another marble is afemale figure, wanting the head, in high relief butvery much worn ; and on a fourth, in low relief,a sculpture representing a sitting figure seated ona rock in long drapery, and leaning on a sceptrein the posture in which Jupiter is frequentlyrepresented on coins and gems. In face of thisfigure rises a rugged mountain, at the foot of whichappears a man in a posture of adoration ; on thetop of the mountain are other men, one of whomholds a hog in his hands. This part is moredefaced than the rest. The design is beautiful,and the execution where it is preserved equallyso. I have little doubt that the seated figurerepresents the Venus of Metropolis, to whomStrabo has told us that hc^s were offered insacrifice ' ; for the situation of Pale6kastro accordsT^c ^c MitrpomiKtrwy itm vanpoy Si ici wXeiovc irpo^e-Xwpac i 'IO^/ii?. 'H ^e MtfTpd' XiifOfiffay, iy ley Kal ^ 'Idwfiri,Topic irp&repoy fatty Ik rpiSfy KaXX//ia)(oc fiiy oiy ^rfaiy iyevyf KIOTO voXixyivy 'diriifAwv, rote *I<i/i/3otc»T^C *A^po2froc (n Oeoc yap ois fla)T^v KatnytfJTiy hinpfiaXiadai rf ^poygiyndffaCfore fi6yoy wapailxiTat nyr roy yah to doc 'OfUpioy ('OfOv-v&y Outlay o2 f puny T) — Strabo, pp. 437i 438.voTtpoy HXty^ay ob fiiay 'A^po- Venus Castra is mentionedSlrriy fidyoy iiXXa koI xXe/ovc by Lycophron (v.i403). to iOoQ toto, iy cording to Stephens (in Ktia-civai Koi T^iy kvT^ yirfrpoir6XtC toJ^ Castrum was a mountainTwig St fiiay Tdy ervyoiKiadtt^ near Ascends, in Pamphylia,9&y cic airily ir6X€fay wapaiov- and KaarytiiTiiQ was the gentileTaBSSALIA.[chap.perfectly with that of Metropolis whether withreference to the inarch of Csesar from Gromphi toPharsalus, which was exactly in the direction ofthis site or to the inscription of Matar&nga, whichshows that the districts of Centum and Metropoliswere conterminous, and probably divided all thispart of the Thessaly plain between them.There are many remains of Hellenic foundationsin the village, but the squared blocks of the town-wallhave probably been all removed for the useof modem buildings at Kardhitza, or the neighbouringvillages, for little now remains to markof that place, which not onlyexplains the epithet used byCallimachus but leads also tothe conjecture that the mountainand the hog representedin the sculpture at Palebkastroalluded to some mythus whichwas common to Ascends andMetropolis. The Appendixhaving been an Argive colony(Strabo, p. 667) probably derivedthe custom of sacrificinga hog to Venus from Argos,where it was observed at afestival of Venus, thence calledthe Hysteria (Callimachus autHerodotus ap. Athen. 1. 3, c.15)« It is curious to remark,with regard to the name Kaa-rv/a, which seems to be nothingmore than a local form of Kao^ravloy that immediately abovethe site of Meiropaliif near thesummit of the great mountainof 'Agrala, stands a modemtown called Kastania, morevulgarly Kastania. This indeedis not an uncommon namein the mountains of Greece,and is derived generally froman abundance of chestnut treesnear the place; but in thepresent instance, the occurrenceof the name, in combinationwith the passage inStrabo, and the representationon the monument at Paleokas-tro, gives reason to suspect thatCaflfittnfi may have been atown and mountain in DolapiOfas well as in the Appendix,There are said to be some Hellenicremains indicating anancient site below the modemKastania. I have seen a coinof Metropolis in copper representingon one side Venus witha winged Cupid at her feet.XLIII.] THB88ALIA. 509the circuit, except the trench from which thestones were taken, and heaps of earth and brokenstones on either side of it. In the wall of a privatehouse in the village, a long plain stele ofmarble has its narrow dimension covered with alist of names of men with those of their fathers,the latter expressed in the Thessalian fashion bythe patronymic adjective; the letters are of thebest times, but small and much defaced ^ TowardsKardhitza, beyond the line of the walls,are three or four barrows. The westernmost, nowcalled Magulitza, is planted with Turkish tombstones,which have all been formed from the spoilsof the ancient city.From Pale6kastro to Fan4ri is a walk of twohours ; the road leads along the plain parallel tothe foot of the mountain. We pass a circularflat topped height, partly artificial, upon whichare many Turkish tomb-stones, and at the foot ofthe hill of Fanari pass through a large villagenamed Loxia, from whence we reach the summitof the hill of Fandri by a steep ascent. Fan&ricontains 100 Turkish houses, and as many Greek,but many of the former are empty. It stands onan abrupt height, very remarkable from everypart of the surrounding country, as forming theextreme point of a ridge of hills which here advancefrom the line of the mountains of 'Agrafanorthward into the plain. The part of the hillupon which the village stands is composed for themost part of a cemented aggregate of pebbles:the soil is gravelly, the face of the hill ruggedv. Inscription, No. 219.510 THB88AUA. [CHAP.and torn into gullies by torrents, and several smallstreams of water issue from its foot.Jan. 7. — On the summit above the villagestands a small square castle containing a mosque,and two or three houses. Around it the groundis covered with relics of other fortresses of variousages, for which this commanding position wasan eligible site. Among them, near the northwesternface of the modem castle, are remains of awall of a very early period of* ancient Greece;a few large masses roughly hewn on die outside,but accurately joined to one another without cement,still remain in their places ; others are seendispersed on the ground near them. These arethe only vestiges I can find of the 'I0£}firi jcXm/iia-jcocar<ra\ if this be its situation, as there is thestrongest reason to believe from Strabo, whodescribes it as steep and rugged, and as situatedwithin a quadrangle formed by the four cities,Tricca, Metropolis, Pelinnseum, and Gomphi '.Of these sites the three first have been described,and the fourth was probably at Episkopi, a remarkableinsulated height near Rapsista, aboutfour miles to the westward of Fanari, not for fromthe passes leading to Ambraaay as we know GW-pki to have been, and where some remains ofn. B. ▼. 729.^Idktfiriv \ktfUoy ipvfi" Mi|rpoirAewc '■^a^ Ucktyralovvoy Kal Tf ovTi Kktafiaxoty, ical Tdfif^y, TffQ Si Mifrfo-lEpvfjLiyoy fiera^v Ttrrapiay iroXcrJy mori x^P^Q 4 'I^/<9* —fpovpiuy, &fnnp ky rtrpa-' Strabo, p. 487.wXevpf KiifUyfayf TpUmic xdlXLIII.] THB83ALIA. 511antiquity sufficient to prove it a Hellenic site arereported to exist. Episkopi is nearly opposite toTrikkala, as the site of Metropolis at Paleokastrois to that of PeUnfUBum at Pale6-Gardhiki, thuscompleting die quadrilateral figure which Strabohas described. Three sides of the quadrangle arenearly equal, but the fourth is longer than theothers; nor is Fanari in the centre of the quadrangle,being much nearer to the southern side,though nearly equidistant from the two ends ofthat side Oomphi and Metropolis. Such accuracyhowever is not required by the words of Strabo,who only says that the four towns formed aquadrangle. Ithome having been in his time inthe Metropolis, it is natural to presume that itwas nearer to the site of Metropolis than to that ofany of the other towns ; and this also we find to betrue. In this instance, therefore, Strabo has beena correct observer, or at least has been fortunatein the choice of the authority which he followed,having in a few words given us the means ofconfirming the position of four Hellenic sites (excludingTricca), more than one of which mightotherwise have been doubtful, and of thus placingthe ancient geography of Upper Thessaly on thesurest basis : O si sic omnia !The castle of Fan&ri by means of its advancedposition commands a most comprehensive view ofthe extensive plains of ThessaUoHs and HistiiBotis^from F^rsala and Dhomok6 to Stagiis and Portes.Besides the four ancient sites, just alluded to, andthe still more remarkable one of ^ginium at Stages,the heights of Vlokho, Kolokot6, and Kortlkhi,arrest the spectator's attention as having evidently512 THBS8AL1A. [CHAP.been the positions also of ancient fortresses or towns.Enough has already been stated as to the two first ;Kortikhi I believe to have been a town namedXtmiuea, for Livy shows Linea to have been in thispart of Thessaly, and the ancient name accordswith the situation of Kortikhi in the lowest part ofthe plain amidst streams and marshes, not far fromthe confluence of all the principal branches of theIn the year b. c. 191 Linea was besieged byPhilip, son of DemetriuSi when in alliance withthe Romans against Antiochus ; the Roman commanderEusebius was occupied at the same time inbesieging Pelinnseum. While they were thusemployed, Acilius the consul arrived with a largereinforcement from Italy, and sending his infantryto Larissa, marched with his cavalry to Limnsea,which immediately surrendered. The consul thenproceeded to Pelinnseum, and received the capitulationof the garrison of that place, which consistedas at Limnsea of a joint force of Antiochus andAthamanes ^Of the rivers which water the plains of Thes-^say, some of the ancient names cannot but remainunknown or uncertain, so imperfect is our informationon the geography of this country. Reasonshave already been given for identifying the Fer-saith,Vrysid, and Sofadhitikoi with the Mnipew^ApidanuSy and Czarina. The other names, occurringin ancient authors, besides Peneius andTitaresius, are Onochonus, Pamisus, Asopus, Me-las,and Phoenix. The Onochonus and Pamisus^ Liv. 1. 36, c. 13, 14 .XLIII.]Thessaly.are noticed by Herodotus. " Thessaly," he remarks,^* is surrounded on every side by very highmountains ; to the east by Pelium and Ossa, theextremities of which are united together, to thenorth by Olympus, to the west by Pindus, to the'south by Othrys^ In the midst is the hollowThessaly watered by many river, of which thefive principal are the Peneius, Apidanus, Ono-chorus, Enipeus, and Pamisus ; these after havingjoined their waters into one channel are dischargedinto the sea through a narrow strait. Below theirunion the name Peneius alone remains, the othernames being lost It is reported, that ancientlythe valley which gives passage to the river did notexist ; that neither the rivers nor the lake Boebe'ishad names, though the waters flowed as at present,Lucan has thus versified Herodotus : —Tressilian, qua parte diem brumalibus hornsAttollit Titan, rules Ossaea coerce.Cum per summa poli Phoebus trahit author aetas,Pelion opposite radiis nascentibus umbras.At medius ignes coeli rabidique LeonisSolstitiale caput nemorosus submovet Othrys,Except adversus Zephyrus, et lapyga Pindus,£t maturity prsecidit vespers luce ;Nee returns imi Boreas habitation Olympia,Lucentem toties ignorant noctibus Acton.Lucan, 1. 6, v. 333.rec €c r&vr6' iictdv hk (rvfjLfnx"Oiwat rax«rra, Irdevrey Hire &Uriyeiot t^ ohyofiari KaraKpa-'ritavy dvtavvfjLOVQ rove aXAovcilvat irouei. — Herodot. 1« 7«c. 129.01 /leV vvy €c TO irtilovToro tniXXeySfuyoi tK ray overHy JctpucXfiidyrtay riiyOEtrtraXiriy oihyofia(6fityoif Bityog ahX&yoQ Kal rovrov trrei"yovy tKpooy ^^(pvfri ig ddXaofrayfitpoavfjLfiiayoyret to 68«p wdy^VOL. IV.l1514 Thessaly. [CHAP.and that they thus made Thessaly a sea TheThessalians say that Neptune opened the passageat Tempe, through which the Peneius flows, andthis will appear probable to those who believe thatNeptune shakes the earth, for the separation ofthe mountains Olympus and Ossa seems to me tohave been caused by an earthquake." The wordsof Herodotus, descriptive of the junction of all therivers, as well as his distinct mention of the lakeBoebeis, seem to indicate that he had a betterknowledge of the geography of Thessaly than anyother author whose works have reached us. Thehistorian remarks, that the Onochonus was the onlyThessalian river exhausted by the host of Xerxes,and that in Achaia Phthisis the Apidanus, whichwas the largest river of that country, scarcely sufficed*. The Onochonus therefore was in the lineof march of the Persians in proceeding from Gon-nus,and the Pelasgic plain through Phthisis tothe plain of the Spercheius, near Thermopylae. Theonly intermediate streams between the Peneius andthe JEnipeus or Apidantis being those which flowfrom the Scotusscean hills, the largest of these,which descends from the heights of Supli by Kus-basin to the Asmaki, was probably the OnochonuSythough Herodotus in that case. has not been perfectlyaccurate in including it among the riversflowing into the Peneius, its discharge being intothe lake Bcebe'is. There remains for the Pamisusthat considerable tributary of the Peneus nowcalled the Bliuri or Piliuri ', which issuing fromwikayoQ. * MirXtovpc, DiiXiOvpc.• Herodot. 1. 7, c. 196.Xlii.] Thessaly. 515the mountains of 'Agrafa at Musaki, flows ia. frontof Fanari, and through the Kolokj^tbia to theSalarnvria, which it joins not far from the bridgeof Keramidhi, and nearly opposite to Kolokoto.As to the AsoptiSj Phoenix, and Melas^^ as allthese were rivers of the Maliac plain', it mighthave been suspected that they had been improperlyattributed to Thessaly, had the questiondepended only upon a poet, who has enumeratedalso the Achelous and iras among the Thessalianstreams, who has confounded Thessaly with Thrace,and Pharsalus with Philippi ; but Pliny also mentionsthe Phoenix of Thessaly, and Vibius Sequesterdescribes the Asopus, Phoenix, and Melas,as all affluents of the Apidanus^. The Phoenixbeing the only one of the three mentionedby Pliny, would seem to have been the largestof these tributaries, and may therefore be that£t quisquis pelago per se non cognitus amnisPenes donavit aquas : it gurgle raptApidanus, nunquamque celer nisi mists Enipeus.Accipit Asopos cursus, Phoenixque Masque. *Solus in alterius nomen cum veneris undue,Defended Titaresus aquas, laps usque supineGurgle Penes pro siccis utitur aris.Lucan. 1. 6, v. 371.Herodot. 1. 7, c. 198. century, ipse in Pennon decentAlumina Thessaly, Apical Enipeus, e monte Othrynus, Phoenix, Enipeus, Ono- Thessaly — Melas Thessalychorus, Pamisus. — Plin. Hen. in Apidanum fluent — Phoenix1. 4, c. 8. Thessaly in Apidanum fruit.Pianos Thessaly, in quo — Yib. Request. de flaminius.Enipeus, Melas et Phoenix 516 Thessaly. [cHAP.ivhich I crossed between the Peneius and Apicala little above its junction with the latter, onthe way from the bridge of Tzighioti to Vlokho.Its origin in the middle of Dohpia suggests theidea, that its name may have been cognate withthat of the leader of the Dolopes at Troy. TheAsopus and Melas were perhaps two of the riverswhich rise at the foot of the hills of Phtlda betweenFersala and Velissiotes.Deficiency of evidence renders it impossible todetermine the ancient positions at the foot of themountains of 'Agrafa, or in the plain adjacent tothose mountains, between the sites of Metropolisand Thaumaci. The largest, or at least the mostpreserved ruin in this direction is near Smokovo,where according to several concurrent testimonies,there are Hellenic walls and an entire gate. Ihave already observed, that Siekliza on the footof the mountain between Sm6kovo and Metropoliswas also an ancient site, and the inscriptionswhich I found at Pazaraki and Sofadhes lead tothe belief, that there was another city at or nearone of those villages. Some of these were amongthe places taken by the iBtolians when they brokeinto Thessaly, upon hearing of the defeat of Philipat the Fauces Antigonenses, about the same timethat the Athamanes occupied Gomphi and severalsmall places in that neighbourhood \ After takingSpeeches and Sacra Come, which were probablyin the valley of the Spercheius, the italianspassed into Thessaly, possessed themselves of Cy-liv.1. 32, c 13.XLIII.] THE8SALIA. 517mine and Augeee, were repulsed at Metropolisand Callithera, took and plundered the villages ^Theuma and Calathana, entered Acharrae by capitulation,occupied Xyniee, which had been desertedby its inhabitants, and captured Cyphers,a castle in a position which commanded the Do-copia.Of these places XynitB alone is determined, byits lake, now called that of Taukll, which I havebefore described '. As this lake was nearly in theroute of the italians from the valley of the Speechesinto the plains around Metropolis, and asCtemene was a town on the borders of Coloniaand Phthia, not far from the lake ', it seems veryprobable that Canine is an error of the text forCtemene. The exact site of Ctemene however isstill to be ascertained. Some inscription at Smo*novo, Siekliza, or in the neighbourhood of Soiadhes,may possibly hereafter lead to the determinationvices. ' Sec Vol. I, p. 460.'H^c KoX 'Ehpvi&fiac Krlfiivov iraic» ^TX'' ^^ X/^n^cXwidBo^ Krifiivriy AoXoiri|t^a yaurdaffxe,Apollon. 1. 1, V. 67.From a tradition mentioned The author of the Orphicaby Stephanas without naming in his Aigonautica (v 167)^any authority, it appears that has confounded the lake XyniasPeleus gave Ctemene to Phoe- with the Bcebeis.nix. — Stephan. in Rn^ficn}.EhpvBdfjuiQ ^ liripritri Xiicuy Boifiriiia Xlfiyriyf*Ayx6Qi II17 ycioco koX thvtkayio^ MeXiPoiaQ.The Scholiast of Apollo posed the two lakes to havedoris also, regardless of the been one and the same,epithet Dolopcis, have Thessaly. [CHAP.of some of the other places named in this passageof Livy.The chief produce of the district of Fanari isvines and maize. All the land which does notbelong to the few Turks residing here, is thepersonal property of Al Pasha, and the Greeksare all labourers. They had quite abandoned theplace a few years ago, and have only returnedsince it became the Vezir's tjiftlik. His Subashireceives from the farmers a tenth of the crop fordhekatla, and a third of the remainder as proprietor,without contributing any thing for seed orstock. The Subashi is now employed in sellinghis master's share of the wine to the vintners ofKardhitza and other neighbouring towns.In the afternoon I descend the rugged face ofthe hill of Fanari on the western side, and thencross the opening of a small valley which, branchingto our left, separates the heights of Fanarifrom the mountain, on the adjacent slope of whichstands the Agrafiote village of Gralista. Immediatelybelow Gralista is a hamlet called inTurkish Rule, in Greek Pyrgo, a little beyondwhich the valley terminates in a narrow passagebetween the extremity of the hill of Fanari andthe slope below Gralista. This passage has ancientlybeen fortified, or occupied by a small townof the middle ages. A rocky peak just above theBoghdz on the Fanari side, is called to ^ica/ivc/3a<riXiKo, or the royal chair.Having crossed the entrance of the valley andleft the village of Papa a little on the right, ourroad leads along the foot of the mountain south-xliii.]Thessaly. 519westward; a forest of considerable extent calledKiurka occupies the plain on the right. It wasnot long since burnt by Velj^ Pasha to prevent itsserving as a shelter to the thieves. Many of thetrees were destroyed, and all those remaining bearmore or less the marks of fire. Mavromati is atthe foot of the mountain on our left, beyond whichwe cross a part of the plain along the edge of thewood to Ghelanthi, a village of thirty houses onthe right bank of the Bliuri. Having crossed theriver and advanced half a mile, we arrive atEpiskopi, in 1 hour 45 minutes, with the mensis,from Fanari.Episkopi is now only a roiroci or the name ofan uncultivated height, with some ploughed fieldsat its foot, lying along the left bank of the Bliiiri,at a distance of two or three miles from the mountains.But enough exists here to show that itwas the site of a large Greek city, though, as wegenerally find in sites surrounded by plains andnot founded upon rocks, the remains of antiquityare few. The hill is the extremity of a range ofheights advancing to the eastward from a mountain,the last of the 'Agrafa range, which extendsfrom the ravine of the Bliuri at Musaki in anortherly direction to the Klisura of Portes or theGates of Trikkala. In approaching from Fanarithe height presents a triangular face, which, onarriving at it assumes the shape of a theatre,rising in the centre to a peak, from whence aridge slopes regularly on either side into the plain.The walls of the city followed the crests of theselateral ridges, and thus included all the theatresThessaly. [Clap.shaped space, together with a narrow level lyingbetween the foot of the hill and the river. Onthe summit is a level space retaining some vestigesof a small citadel. The circuit was between twoand three miles. The plain on the river side iscovered with broken pottery and stones, and theMusaki6tes who plough it often find coins herewithother remains of antiquity.Some of the ancient materials were not longsince carried away from hence to build a seraifor Mukhtar Pashd in his tjiftllk of Rapslsta ; allthe adjacent villages contain squared blocks ofstone, or columns, plain or fluted, brought fromhence, so that the only remarkable remains nowexisting here are some foundations of the townwalls, and some vestiges of a gate at the foot ofthe hill on the southern side towards Musaki.The modem name Episkopi accords with thefact of Gomphi having been one of the ancienttowns of Thessaly still existing after the time ofArcades \ and when it was a bishopric under theMetropolitan of Larissa. ^ A bishop of Gomphisat in the council of Pope Boniface the Second,in the year 531. On the other hand, as Gomphiis not found in any catalogue of bishoprics of alater date, it is not surprising that after a lapseof eight or ten centuries the name Episkopi shouldalone remain to attest the former ecclesiasticaldignity of the place, and that not even a solitarychapel should now be found upon the site.Through the plain which lies between the hillHierocl. Synecd. p. 642. Week.XLIII.] Thessaly. 521of Episkopi and the mountain of Kotziaka flows abranch of the Salamvria, which is named Portico\ as entering the plain through the pass ofPortes. It rises in the great mountain of Aspro-p6tamo, and after emerging from the Portes, flowswith great rapidity towards the Peneus the intermediateplain forming a considerable slope. Itspreads over a wide gravelly bed and divides itselfinto many torrents. The Bliuri is clearer, deeper,and flows more quietly, but both of them in rainyseasons are swollen and impetuous. The Porticojoins the Salamvria opposite to Trikkala; theBliiiri turns to the right after passing Episkopi,and traverses the plain in front of Fanari in aneasterly direction. At a distance of three or fourmiles from Fanari to the north it passes throughMagula, a name which gives reason to surmise thatone of the seventy-five cities of Thessaly may oncehave occupied this position, perhaps Callithera.The situation of Gompkiy in a fertile plain onthe bank of a pure perennial stream in the vicinityof the mountains, was one of the most agreeablein Upper Thessaly, and its frontier position renderedit one of the most important members of theThessalian community. It guarded two of theentrances into the Thessalian plains : that of Mus&ki,distant two miles, which was the exit fromthe Colonia, and the pass of Portes, at a distanceof four miles, which led into Athamania^ andthrough that province to Amhrada. The latterpass is described by Livy as the '^ narrow defile522 Thessaly. [cHAP.which separates Thessaly from Athamania ^ " Amy-wander,king of the Athamanes, who descendedfrom it on hearing of the victory of Quinctius overPhilip on the Aous, first took Pheca, which stoodmidway between the pass and Gomphi^ and thenGomphi itself, an acquisition important to theRoman consul, as it secured a communicationwith his ships in the Ambracic gulf, and by enablinghim to obtain an opportune supply, gavehim the means of carrying on his operations inThessaly with vigour. The historian (followingas usual Polybius) describes the route from Gom-phi to Ambracia to have been short but extremelydifficult ', as Philip found it nine years afterwards,when he attempted to reduce Athamania, andtwice was under the necessity of retreating toGomphi ^ The consul Q. Marcus Philippeentered Thessaly from Ambracia by the sameroute in the third year of the Persia war, b.c.169 *.A small village called Bletzi belonging to VeljrPasha, midway between the hill of Episkopi andthe Portes, at the foot of a projecting point of theheights which end at Episkopi, agrees exactly withthe position of Pheca. As to the other placestaken by the Athamanes on the same occasion,namely, Argent, Perineum, Thimarum, License,Simon, and Lapses, not a single conjecture canfauces augustus, quae ab difficile ita spatio perbrevi. —AthamanisL Tressilian diri- Liv. 1. 32, c. 15.munt. — Liv. 1. 32, c. 14. * Liv. I. 38, c. 2. — See p.est iter a Memphis Am 212, of this volume,bracing, sicut imperium et ^ Liv. 1. 44, c. 1.XUII.] Thessaly. 523be offered, as their names occur in no otherauthor.From Episcopal I proceed for the night to Rap*siesta, containing thirty or forty houses and distanttwo miles to the northward. At the church, amongother ancient fragments, are two inscribed marbles,both of which are testimonies of the liberationof slaves : the former contains the name of a priestof Bacchus Carries', together with that of thestrategic of Thessaly, under whom the record wasengraved ; in the other, which seems from itssiglae or combined letters to be of less ancientdate, is the name of the tamias, but in neitherof them does that of the city occur. The latterdocument, in which the fee paid to the city wasof the usual amount of 22 denaria', was on aquadrangular stele of unequal dimensions, inscribedon all the four sides, quite illegible on oneand much defaced on the others. It now serves,having been turned upside down, for the iliaTpavilay or altar of the church, and is supportedby a portion of an Ionic shaft 1^ foot in diameter,with twenty-four semicircular flemings. Anotherpiece of the same size and order I find in themiddle of the village, and a third at a churchnear Musaki, to which village I ride this morning(Jan. 8) in one hour, passing through Episkopi.Among several relics of ancient art in this church,is a plain quadrangular altar inscribed to Jupiter,the Avenger of homicide, in large letters deeply^lovvaou row Kapirlov. — * V. Inscription, No. 221.V. Inscription, No. 220.524 Thessaly. [Chap.engraved and perfectly preserved \ Jupiter Pa-laniusand Bacchus Carries were no doubtdeities worshipped by the Compresses ', and theIonic columns probably belonged to one of theirtemples.Mus&ki, which, like Rapslsta, is a tjiftllk ofMukhtar Pasha, contains forty or fifty families, andis situated exactly at the foot of a last steep terminationof the range of 'Agrafa, less than a milebelow the opening through which the river Bliuriissues into the plains : it is much exposed to thekleftes, with whom the inhabitants find themselvesunder the necessity of being on good terms, andhave therefore a difficult course to steer betweenthe thieves and their landlord. They have anappearance of health seldom seen among the inhabitantsin the middle of the plains. The heightsabove the village, like most of those betweenStagus and Fanari, are clothed with oaks and underwood,and are now covered at the summitswith snow.The two villages called al jropratg ril>v TpucicaXbiv,or the Gates of Trlkkala, stand on opposite sides ofthe river in isis faucibvs : the one on the rightbank named Porta Nikola, or Kato Porta, is in alow situation: Apano Porta, or Porta Panaghia,Z^y* UaXafAvlf, — V. In- 6 rowe ^ytig Kara^piirrt^y* —scription, No. 222. Estate. in II. E. v. 597.—V-IlaXafMvaioi Xiyoyrai oi Sid et Etymon. Mag. in IlaXa^-XtipoQ dyBp(H^vovyT€£f ward koToc*Till waX/ifiriv Kol ZevQ iraXa/i- * The coins are inscribed,ydiott o rove towvtovq rifjuapov- Tofi^uv^ TofJifirovyf ToftflTiar,fiiyog. — Photii Lex. in voce.XL III.] THBSSALIA. 525which is now abandoned, is in a lofty position onthe opposite bank. The latter name of this villageis derived from an ancient church dedicatedto the Virgin. On a summit above it is theruin of a small fortress said to be Hellenic, andwhich seems to answer exactly to that Atkeaoeumwhich was the only position retained by the Macedonianswhen their garrisons were expelled fromAthamania by Amynander, in the year b.c. 189 ;for Livy, in describing that place as " omnibus Macedoniasubject," thereby evidently meant theplaces in the adjacent part of Thessaly possessed atthat time by the Macedonians, particularly Gom-phi *. Philip, as soon as he heard of the revolt ofAthamania, marched with 6000 men to Gomphi ;and leaving 4000 there, proceeded with ^e remainderto Athenaeum ; hut finding all the countrybeyond it ladle, returned to Gompht, andthen entered Athamania with all his forces. Sendingforward Zeno with 1000 men to occupy Ethiopia,he followed, as soon as that service had beenperformed, and took up a position at the temple ofJupiter Acres, from whence, after a day's delay,in consequence of the tempestuous weather, headvanced towards Argithea. But the sight of theAthamanes on the heights overhanging the valleythrough which the Macedonians were to advance,so terrified them, that the king resolved upon aretreat. He was followed by the Athamanes, butwithout receiving much annoyance from them,until they had been joined by the £italians, whenleaving the latter to act against the rear of the526 THB89ALIA. [CHAP.retreating enemy they advanced by some shortpaths known to them, upon his flank, and threwthe Macedonians ^ into such confusion, that theysustained a great loss of men and arms, untilthey had crossed a river not named by the historian,when the pursuit ceased, and Philip effected his retreatto Gomphi. Zeno and his followers, who remainedat Ethopia, exposed to the whole force ofthe enemy, retreated to a precipitous summit, butwere soon driven from it by the Athamanes, whena few only had the good fortune with Zeno to rejointhe king ; the rest, dispersed among the rocks andmountains in a country unknown to them, wereeither slain or made prisoners. I have alreadyoffered a conjecture, that Argithea was in theParacheloisj above the bridge of Koraku, to theleft of the main stream of the Ackelau$. Theretreat of Philip seems to have been by the lineof the Portico, which was probably the river alludedto by Livy.From Portes to the Salamvria, at its exit intothe plain near Kalabaka, extends the woodymountain Kotziaka, vulgarly pronounced Kodjaka.It has long been a noted haunt of the kleftes. Atits foot are several villages, and on the slope twolarge monasteries : one above the village ofDusiki', near Porta; the other, called Vitoma*,towards the other extremity.Having returned to Rapsista, I quit that placeat 9, Turkish, for Trikkala ; but instead of takingthe direct road across the plain, approach the riverof Portes, in order to visit a place which a ^' pauliNroviru'oc. ■ B]|ro/iac*Xlvii.] THBS8ALIA. 527salvator Thessaly agri' whom we meet, callsprov 'AXi^avBpov; but where I find only an oldTurkish cemetery, in which one of the tombstonescontains a fragment of a Hellenic sepulchralinscription, which declared the violator of thetomb liable to pay a fine of 2500 denaria to theviscus K These solitary burying-grounds, whichnever fail to strike the traveller in Asiatic as wellas in European Turkey, are in some measure aneffect of the Mahometan custom of offering prayersfor the souls of the deceased in passing their sepulchres; whence the Turks prefer burying their deadnear a public road* But in numberless instancesboth in Greece and Asia, the villages to which thecemeteries belonged have totally disappeared —the latter only remaining to furnish the strongestevidence of the immense diminution of the Ottomanpopulation.Not far from the opposite bank of the Porticorises an insulated height, the pointed summit ofwhich is crowned with the vestiges of an ancientCastle. It was probably the site of one of thetowns mentioned by Livy as having been taken bythe Athamanes in the Antiochus war, and recoveredby the joint forces of Philip and Babies ;for Tricca, Gomphi, and ^ginium, are three ofthe places named on this occasion, and Athama-nia, from whence the invaders issued, immediatelyoverhung Gomphi, as Livy has described it*. Thefollowing were the places taken by the Athamanes:^ginium, Ericinium, Gomphi, Silana, Tricca,• V. Inscription, No. 223.Compos — imminent Athamania hic urbis, — Liv. 1. 31. c. 41.528 Thessaly. [cHAP.Meliboea, Phaloria. Of these, Patria wouldseem to have been between Tricca and the Macedonianfrontier ; for Livy relates, that when Philip,after his defeat at the Aoi Siena, fled into Thessalyby the way of Mount Linton and Tricca, theconsul Quinctius followed him into Epirus, wherehe showed great clemency towards the people,though the greater number of them had sidedagainst him. Having sent orders from thence forhis store-ships at Corcyra to enter the AmbracicGulf, he made four easy marches to Mount Acer*cetium, and from thence proceeded to attack theThessalian city Phaloria ; where the Macedoniangarrison, having made an obstinate resistance, thetown when taken was given up to plunder, andburnt. He then received offers of submission fromMetropolis and Pieria (Cieria), attempted ingeniumwithout success, and marching forward toGomphi, opened a communication from thencewith his ships in the Ambracic Gulf. Here it isobvious that the consul did not follow the sameroute-from Epirus into Thessaly as Philip : havingno chance of overtaking his enemy, he wouldnaturally prefer a route less exhausted of all suppliesthan that which the Macedonians had followed.I have before shown that the latter enteredThessaly by the pass of Metzovo and the vale ofthe Salamvrla'. The consul, therefore, probablycrossed the Pindus through Zag6ri to the districtof Prevent, and from thence across Khassia toPatria. As ^ginium was the place which heSee Vol. I. p. SSS, 399.XLIII.] Thessaly. 529attempted after having taken Phaloria, and receivedthe submission of Cierium and Metropolis,the main ridge of Khassia would seem to havebeen Cercetium ; and Phahria^ therefore, was probablyin one of the valleys which intersect themountains to the northward of Trikkala, either atPlatina or at Ardham ; both of which seem, fromthe description I have received of them, to beHellenic sites. The other was probably Pialiajwhich according to Stephens was another townon the Thessalian side of Mount Cercetium ^Piny includes Cercetium among the most renownedof the Thessalian mountains'; and probablythe same mountain was intended by Ptolemyin naming a Bcpicsr^<rfocy or Kipjcfr^crcocy togetherwith Barium and Olympus, among the Thessalymountains'. The ethnic terminationof the name in Ptolemy indicates perhaps thatthere was a town of Cercetium.At 10.25 we join the direct road from Portes toTrikkala at Poliana, the chief village of the plain,and of one of the subdivisions of the district ofTrikkala. On the road not far from the villageare several squared blocks of ancient workmanship.These and some sources of water at the villagegive reason for believing that it was the site ofan ancient town, probably one of those taken by theAthamanes in the year 191 b. c, perhaps Silana.^ IJiaX/a, ic6\iQ QtoaaKiKri ' Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 8.vero TO KepKirioy 5poc — Step Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 13.shah. in voce.VOL. IV. M m530 THE8SALIA. [CHAP.The soil of this angle of the Upper Thessalianplain is very good ; and in consequence of itsproximity to the mountains scarcely ever fails tobe plentifully watered by rain in the-spring andearly summer.From Poliana to the Salamvria we follow a kaleor paved causeway, rendered necessary bythe marshy state of the plain in winter. The riveroften does injury to these lower lands by taking anew course, sometimes in a single body, sometimesby dividing itself into two or three branches. Aftercrossing the main stream at 11 by the bridge ofKaravoporo— a name showing the former existenceof a ferry-boat in this spot — we arrive, a quarterof an hour farther, at a tributary of the rivercalled Komerki, from a bridge and toll-houseestablished at the passage. Here I find the inhabitantsof all the neighbouring country collectedto perform an angari, or forced labour, for thepurpose of preventing the river from injuring someof the cultivated fields belonging to a Turkishtjiftlik, by a new course which it had begun totake. At 12 I arrive at the house of a Greekpriest, at the foot of the castle wall of Trikkala,having crossed two streams besides the Komerki :the first, which we passed at the entrance of thesuburbs, rises in the hills of Khassia, and entersthe plain near Mertzi ; the second we crossed inthe middle of the town. Its principal sources arenear Sotira, at the foot of the hills of Trikkala, andnot more than half an hour distant.Jan. 10. — ^Tricca, Ithome, and Zechariah havingXLIII.] Thessaly. 531been the three cities which sent ships to Troyunder Podaleirins and Macedon \ Cecilia wasin all probability one of the strong positions onthe borders of the Upper Tressilian plain, whichwere afterwards known by a different name, eitherPeUntuBumf Gomphi^ JEginwmy or perhaps the ancientsite at Niklitzi. AH that Strabo remarks ofCecilia is, that it was near Tricca ', which indeedmay be inferred from the poet's words.In regard to the Homeric geography of Thessalyin general, no great difficulty presents itself, if weadmit that the Thaumacia, Ormenium, and fountainHypereia of the Catalogue were different fromthe places which bore those names in the time ofthe Roman Empire. The districts of the severalchieftains may then be consistently distributed,and even the positions of their towns nearly conjectured,making allowance for some of them havingfallen into obscurity in later times, and forothers having undergone a change of name. Somecritics have supposed that by Pelasgic Argos,Phthia, and Hellas, Homer alluded to cities ; andit is not an uncommon opinion even now amongthe few Greeks who have read Homer, that thefirst of these was Larissa, and the second, as Thave before observed, Pharsalus. There are sevenon ^ tl\ov TpUicffy Kai *I6m/ii|v KXktfMKdevaayjOc T ixoy OixaXlffy T6\iy Ehpvrov OixaXiiioQ*Twy tiff iiytiadfiy ^AaicXifWiov Svo vai^e*Ii|ri|p* dyadut IJo^Xcipioc ijBt Ma\diay,11. B. V. 729.rei TpiVn'iyK.'— Strabo, p. 448.1^ r» OM m 2532 Thessaly. [CHAP.oral passages, however, in the Iliad and Odysseywhich concur in showing that by all the threenames the poet intended not cities, but large tractsof country, and there can be no doubt that theGreek dramatists and some subsequent writersunderstood the words in the same sense. It seemsequally clear, that the line of the Catalogue inwhich Pelasgic Ai^os is named ^ marks a separationof the poet's topography of Southern Greeceand the Islands from that of Northern Greece;and that by Pelasgic Argos he meant PelasgicGreece, or the country included within the mountainsCenis, GBta, Pindus, and Olympus, andstretching eastward to the sea ; in short, Thessalyin its most extended sense. The kingdom ofAchilles, or rather of Peleus, comprehended at itssouthern extremity not only Trachinia, but also aportion of what was afterwards Locris. To thiswas added all the fertile valley of the SpercheviSjwhich river still bears the name EUadha ', or thatapplied by Homer to the country itself, togetherwith the hilly country northward of that river, asfar as the plains of Thessaliotis. This part of thekingdom of Peleus was called Phthia, Achaia,and the land of the Myrmidons ; it borderedwestward upon the Dolopes governed by Phoenix,and eastward upon the territory of Protesilaus,which contained the modem districts of Armyro,Ftelio, and Kokus, as far as the Evhoic channel.Nvv ^* ai rovQf ovtroi ro UeXaayiKoy "Apyoc iycuov,11. B. V. 681.XLIII.] Thessaly. 533At the head of the Pagasetic gulf began the countryof EumeluSy bordering eastward upon that of who commanded all the Magnetes, exceptthose of Melibcea and the three other maritimetowns, which sent seven ships under Philoctetes.Homer has described the Magnetes as dwellingaround the Peneius and Pelium, by which he seemsto have meant exactly the country which composedMagnesia as late as the Roman Empire, namely, allPelium and Ossa ^ On the other sides the districtof Humerus was surrounded by those of Polycrates,Eurypylus, Peleus and Protesilaus. Polycratesled the ships furnished by the cities of the Parisianplain, together with those of a part of Per-rhsebia, as far as Oloosson on the farthest verge ofPelagian. Guneus commanded those of the remainderof Perrhsebia. Beyond the states ofEurypylus were the cities of the Asclepiadse, occupyingthe western extremity of Pelvic Argos,and forming a district which, as well as that ofEurypylus, bordered southward on the Dolopes,who seem in all later ages to have continued tooccupy the same range of mountains in thenorthern part of 'Agrafa. I have before alludedto the remarkable circumstance that none of thecities of Thessaly which afterwards became theleading states are named by Homer, except Perseand Tricca. Phthia, Hellas, and Magnesia,contained perhaps no large towns, for whichreason Homer may have been contented withthe chorographical names. I should be discirepc Uiiytioy koi HiiXiov ilvofft^vXKoyfiaUffKoy. II. B. v. 757.534 Thessaly. [chap.posed to infer also that Gyrton, Cannot,Scotussasa, Pharcadon, Perineum, and severalother Thessalian cities, which were afterwardsof importance, either did not yet exist, or wereonly subordinate places, or were known l^ othernames, as in the instance of the Ephori andPhlegm, who were generally supposed to be thepeople of Crannon and Gyrton. Larissa was probablynot then founded, or at least was an inconsiderableplace, the principal town on that part ofthe Penehu having been Argissa^ the site of whichis well indicated by Strabo, and by the tumuli midwaybetween the modem Larissa and Gunitza; thedistance of this place from Larissa is so small thatit may serve to explain a remark of the Scholiastof Apollonius, namely, that the Orissa of Homerwas the same as Larissa'. There was one greatcity, however, not named by Homer, which thenexisted and was even in the height of its importance,if Diodorus is correct in saying that Amewas founded by Boots three generations beforethe Trojan wars From the silence of Homer wemay imagine either that the Arnaei were unwillingto contribute to the armament, and wereSchol. in Apollo. 1. 1, v. 40. a&v ^i|«r^ wX/i^ioy citra 7%He says the most ancient La TvpTktvff^, The last wordsmissa was the Adpttrtra *ApyccM- may be adduced as a fartherricci or Acropolis of Argos : — argument in favour of placingSivripa ii ^ iv HiKaayiKf rfj^ Carton in the plain of L&rissa.8£<r<raX/ac, i^v^O/ii^poc "Apycflr- See Vol. III. p. 383.Lucan seems to have intended Orissa in his words —Nunc super Argos grant. — ^1. 6, v. 656.Diodor. 1. 4, c. 67/XUII.]THBS8ALIA.sufficiently powerful to be able to refuse, or thatthey joined that part of it which was led by theirkinsmen of Boeotia.In historical times Thessaly was divided intofour cdvn, a division which is said to have originatedunder Aleuas, son of Neoptolemus; thesedivisions were Pelasgiotis, Thessaliotis, Phthisisand HistiseotiSy or Estiseotis. Hence Thessaly wassometimes known by the name of the Tetrarchy ^Demosthenes accused Philip of having placed anagent to maintain his influence over each of thesedivisions '. It is not very easy to determine theirboundaries : that of Phthisis proper has alreadybeen alluded to. As the whole country in a generalsense, derived its name from the Thessaly ofThesprotia, who established themselves in it by theirvictory over the Boeotia of Ame, we may presumethat Ame was towards the middle of the divisionnamed Thessaliotis, which probably contained alsothe districts of Phacium, Phyllus, Peiresiee, Metropolis,and the plains to the south-eastward ofthe Amaea and Metropolis, as far as the limits ofPhthisis. Consequently Histiaeotis, which whereit bordered on Perrhsebia comprehended Phar-canon ', contained all that was included betweenthe left bank of the Peneius and Upper Macedonia,together with the plain to the right of the sameriver around Tricca, Ithome, and Gomphi. AllStrabo, p. 430, 437, 438.441. — Aristot. et Phot. ap.Lex. in TiTpap\la,nrpaSapxiac KaOiaraKETrap alnoiQy Iva fifi fiovov KarairoXccct dX\d koI scar* iOvri oov-Xevwaiy, — Deraosth. Philip. 3,p. 117. Reiske.Strabo, pp. 438. 441.536 Thessaly. [CHAP.the eastern part of Thessaly within Magnesia,seems to have been divided between Phthisis andPelasgiotis.Jan. I ] . — The weather has been clear and cold,with a northerly wind and a sharp frost at night,which the heat of the sun dissolves in the afternoon.The plain is consequently dry; and inreturning this morning to Kalabaka I cross it toVoivoda instead of skirting the heights. We passthrough one of the villages named Mertzi, leavingthe other half an hour to the right, and not harfrom it a large barrow, the only one I can perceivenear the site of Tricca. Behind the heightsof Voivoda and Bala, hid in great measure fromthe plain of Trikkala, is a large valley, extendingfor several miles to Platina, which is situated atthe foot of a rocky brow surrounded by torrents descendingfrom the hills of Khassia. Voivoda, whichas well as Platina seems to be a Hellenic site, mayperhaps be that of Melibcea. We arrive in 3 hoursand 20 minutes at Kalabaka, where I dine withthe bishop of Stagi, and purchase a small bronzeHercules of him, after which we proceed togetherto Kastraki and the Meteora. The village ofKastraki is on the north-western or opposite sideof the great perpendicular rock at the foot ofwhich Kalabaka is situated, and stands uponground which is more than 200 feet higher thanthe level of the town ; so that the rocks, althoughas perpendicular on this side as towards Kalabaka,are not above half the height. There is a footpathfrom Kalabaka to Kastraki, through a narrowopening in the middle of the great precipice.XUII.] THBS8ALIA. 537Just where the ascent from Kalabdka terminatesare some remains of buildings, and at the foot ofthe pass in the village of Kastraki, a few stoneswhich formed part of a Hellenic wall of the thirdorder. Both these belonged probably to worksfor the defence of this remarkable opening, whichwas the only point in half the circumference of^ginium requiring any artificial protection.The upper part of Kastraki never sees the sunin winter, being surrounded on three sides byrocks. To the north-west the village commandsa prospect of the great valley of the Peneus withthe mountains of Malakassi and Miles rising fromits left bank, and those of the koli of Kllnovofrom the right. In the opposite direction the viewis of a singular description, and very beautiful.Trikkala and the whole length of the Thessalianplain as far as the heights of Pharsalusy withMount Othrys in the horizon, are seen like apicture through the frame formed by the narrowopening of the two towering precipices. The compositionof these rocks, and of all the peaks ofthe Meteora, is very extraordinary, being anaggregate of pebbles and broken stones of allsizes and descriptions, combined by an earthy orgravelly cement. At Kalabaka, however, thetown is built of a granitic stone, of which detachedmasses are observable also in the beds ofthe torrents. Half an hour distant from Kastrakiis the monastery specifically named the Meteora ;the road to it passes at the foot of the rock onwhich stands the monastery of Varlaam, and then538 THB86AUA. [CHAP.by a steep zigzag path through a narrow openingbetween the rock of Met^ora and another to thenorthward. At the highest point of this pass aladder, fifty feet in length, fixed to the perpendicularrock, reaches to an opening in the foundationsof the lowest buildings of the monastery.By this ladder persons generally pass to and fromthe monastery with such things as they caneasily carry ; for laisser commodities there is a nethooked to a rope, which is attached to a windlassin a high tower adjoining the church, and standingon the edge of the rock. Another lighterrope in the same place, moving on a pulleyand having a hook at the end, serves to raisesmaller articles. The perpendicular height bythe net is reckoned forty oi^hies, or 200 Greekfeet, but appears to me not so much. On ourarrival the net was let down, with a small carpetat the bottom, and we ascended in it separately.The net, when suspended to the hook at the endof the rope, and raised from the ground with aweight in it, forms of course a bag which revolvesrapidly on being first raised from the ground ; thisis the only disagreeable part of the operation ; the netbecomes more steady as the rope becomes shorter,and the inconvenience might easily be prevented byanother rope held by a person below ; but this is aluxury which has not yet occurred to the holyfathers. Their only rule is to draw up quick andlet down slow. The best advice to those who aresubject to giddiness is to shut their eyes.The monasteries of Meteora are seven in num-xliii.]THB8&ALIA.ber. The largest and most ancient is : I. TheMet^ra, properly so called. The church, dedicatedto the Mcra/iop^oioric or Transfiguration, wasbuilt, as an inscribed marble on the outside informsus, by the monk loasaf, in the year 1388 ^The tradition is, that this singular situation wasfirst chosen at a much earlier period by a hermitnamed Athanasius ; and that loasaf, who wasdespot of THkkala and a member of one of theimperial families of Constantinople, built the presentmonastery. This is all the information Icould obtain from the bishop of Stagi or any of theinmates of the monasteries. Within the church isthe following inscription : —'^ This most sacred temple was built from thefoundation by the labour and at the expence ofour pious fathers Athanasius and loasaf, presentholy founders. It was painted with figures by theaid of the most humble fathers, in the year6990 (a. d. 1482), the second of the month ofNovember."The Swedish travellerBiomstahl states the monasteryto have been built in1371» which, according to theGreek computation, is the yearof the world 6379 ; the lettersAre not very clear, but appearto me to indicate 6396.V. Inscription, No. 224.And this date seems to agreebetter with the time of loamwho was son of Simeon,and nephew of Stephen Krai ofServia, who took lo&nnina inthe year 1350. See an AdditionalNote to ChapterXXXVII. at the end of thisvolume.Tovroc 6 vapfriiTTOQ vaocolxoiofJifiBri ex fldOpwy vSy^ xalSawdvcu^ T^y btrltay ^arip^yilfJuSy *Adayaffiov koI *Iwa(ro^iyeffT^Twy &YioKrfiT6p^y' dytff"Topridii Sick (nfydpofiiJQ rtiyi\a\lffrwy iraripiay iii S"^ f540 THBSSALIA. [ChapThe church is one of the largest and handsomestID Greece ; the pronaos or gynecseum is supportedby four large columns, and the interior is entirelycovered with paintings, of which, those of theskreen are richly adorned with silver. The inscriptionwithin the church was intended to commemoratethe date and authors of these decorations.The cells of the monks and the apartmentsdestined for strangers are spacious and convenient,but the furniture indicates the decay into which allthese establishments are falling. The monasteryhas been twice deserted ; once for sixty years afterit had been plundered by a Pasha of Trikkala. Itnow pays 750 piastres a year to the Vezir, besidescontributions of butter, cheese, and other produceof its farms ; and nearly an equal amount toVelj^ Pasha, who has taken upon himself the particularchaise and protection of all the Meteora.When Veljr resided at loannina, this protection,although expensive, was of some benefit to themonasteries, by preventing the Albanian soldiersfrom quartering upon them — an important exemptionso near a road more frequented by Albaniansoldiers than any other in Greece. Nowthat Vel^^ is in the Morea, the Albanians, who arenever much disposed to respect such privileges,are quite regardless of them, and seldom passwithout visiting the convents, sometimes remaininghere several days, eating and drinking at theexpence of the callers. The Meteora has a debtof fifty purses ; some of the other monasteries oweas much as seventy, which bearing the usual interestof one per cent, per menses, is severely feltXLIII.] Thessaly. 541by them. But what the monks chiefly complain ofis the general want of charity among the Greeksthemselves, who no longer contribute to those collectionsmade by their travelling brethren, whichin former times constituted the greatest part oftheir revenue. The house is supplied with waterby means of an excellent cistern ; and wood is obtainedfor the trouble of cutting it in the adjacenthills. All the other necessaries of life consumedin this and the other monasteries are the produceof their farms, except a part of their bread,purchased at Trikkala. The rock of Meteora, unlikesome of the others, which are mere peaks, has asmall level on the summit, not only sufficient toafford ample room for the buildings, but leavingalso a field of fine turf, which forms a delightfulpromenade, but might be much improved if itwere planted and laid out as a garden. Thereare twenty monks in the convent, and as manyKOfffiiKolj or lay servants.2. The second monastery in antiquity is St.Nicolas ^ which contains five or six monks.3. The third in date and second in magnitudeand revenue, is Varlaam ', so called from a hermitwho is enrolled among the saints of the Greekcalendar, and who fixed his abode upon this rock,which has space only for the church and otherbuildings. The ascent by the net is three orfour fathoms longer than at Meteora ; and there isa ladder, as at the latter, reaching to the lowest1 •*Ayioc NuroXaoc. ' BafiKdafi,642 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.part of the buildings. Varlaam contains at presentonly five or six resident caloyers^4. Aha Mon ' is now empty.5. Orsini, or Russami ', stands on the peak ofa naked rock, and contains only two or threemonks.6« Saint Trinity is occupied by five or sixmonks.7. Saint Stephen * stands on the summit of theprecipice, which. I before described as overhangingthe northern end of Kalabaka.All these monasteries pay the kharatj and thetribute for their lands at Kalabdka. Their paymentsto the Vezir's private purse depend onlyupon his will. The Igumenos of Meteora, andtwo of his callers, with one or two from each ofthe other convents, are now in prison at loannina,for having supplied Evtimio, and probably willnot be released without a payment from their re-^respective monasteries.Evtimio, commonly called Papa Evtimio, ashaving formerly been ordained for the secularpriesthood, was a native of Isola in Khassia,and the son of a celebrated captain commonlyknown by the name of Blakhava, who hadthe command of the armatoli of Khas8i4 and^ According to Biomstahli ' 'Opdrd/i^, 'Povflrcra/Ki|.Varlaam was built by two * 'Alla Tpidda. Built,Greeks named Theoph'anes according to Biomstahl, inand Nectarines of loannina, in 1476.the year 1536. • "Ayioc ^rii^yoi.• 'Asia MoyihXLIII.] Thessaly. 543the surrounding districts. Upon his death, AlPashd continued to protect his family — andEvtimiOy with his brothers and followers, to thenumber of sixty, still continued to be paid bythe vilayeti of Trikkala, for the protection of thecountry against robbers. When the Vezir deposedthe captains of armatoli in 'Agrafa and Karlupon the breaking out of the war betweenRussia and the Porte, Evtimio was still entrustedwith his command. The first symptom of his revoltwas a journey to some of the islands of the^gtean in the summer of 1807. On returningfrom thence to Khassia in the ensuing winter, hebecame connected with robbers, fugitives, andoutlaws, from every part of Greece, who soonafterwards began to plunder and murder Turks inthe adjacent parts of Thessaly. Mukhtar Pasha,having been sent by his father against the robbers,found them in possession of all the rocks aroundKalabaka. They had obliged the monasteries tosupply them with bread, notwithstanding whichthey fired one day at the bishop of Stagi, who hadconcurred in furnishing the bread, at a spot whichhe pointed out to me between Kastrdki and Meteora.In April or May last they fought withMukhtar's troops in the same place, and were defeatedand dispersed. Evtimio then fled to hisformer haunts in the Islands, where, having beenbetrayed by means of a pretended pardon fromthe Capitan Pasha, he was conveyed from thenceto Constantinople. Considerable interest wasmade for him ; but k\y% influence having prevailed,Evtimio was sent by the Capitan Pasha to544 THBSSALIA. [CHAP.loannina, to be disposed of as the Vezir shouldthink fit. The great crime of the rebel Papas inthe eyes of Alps was a correspondence said to havebeen detected between him and the Russians atCorf, which might have led to a serious, revolt,as many of the Greeks at that period, regardlessof past experience, had founded new hopes of deliverancefrom the Ottoman yoke upon the Russianwar, and the presence of the Russians in the SevenIslands. There was no mercy, therefore, for Evti-mio. During a three months' imprisonment hewas alternately tortured, and flattered with hopesof pardon, for the purpose of extracting a confessionof his instigators and accomplices, but withoutany result : at length, in October last, on theday after the Vezir's departure for Tepeleni, hewas put to death, and his four quarters hung uponthe plane-trees at the entrance of loannina.The expected capture of Berat by Aly is viewedwith approbation by the ThessatianSy who hopethat he will henceforth resort to the fertile plainsof the Mizakia for a large portion of his supplies ;that the extension of his power will render his warsless frequent, and that it will give him bettermeans of curbing the lawless insolence and rapacityof the Albanians. Whether such an increaseand concentration of the military power of Albaniawill ultimately be beneficial to the Greeks, it isimpossible to foresee. On the one hand, it promotesMusulman ascendancy in that country, encouragesapostasy, causes the emigration of those who remainfaithful to the Church; separates the Albaniansfrom the Greeks — their relatives in manners andXliii Thessaly. 545origin — and tends to render Albania a Musulmannation of considerable power at no distant period.To this result the Porte will have largely contributed,by having constantly, since the year 1740,or at least with the exception of one short intervalonly, appointed Albanians to the government oflodnnina, the effect of which has been to annex allJEpirtis to Albania, and to give facility to their furtherconquests. As long as the supreme governmentcan employ a large proportion of the Albanian infantryas mercenaries dispersed in various parts ofTurkey, it may not feel any great inconveniencefrom the effects of its weakness in Western Greece;but in the event of a disastrous war, such is thenational discordance between the Turks and Albanians,that the latter will assuredly think more ofsecuring that independence which the geographicalsituation of their country always favours, thanof saving the Ottoman Empire from the dissolutionto which it inevitably tends. Should its declinestill continue to be gradual, the Greeks, as a thirdparty, may derive some benefit from the unfriendlyfeeling and balance of strength between the twoothers, and may obtain in consequence some considerationfrom them both, having always, moreover,this prospect, that if any unexpected politicalcontingency should render a new change ofreligion conducive to the worldly interests of theAlbanians, they will have no greater difficulty inreturning to a profession of Christianity, thanthey had in converting their churches intomosques.Jan. 12. — Having descended this morning inVOL, IV. N n546 TiiESSALiA. [chap.the net, and mounted my horse at the foot of therocky we proceed through an opening between twoof these stupendous natural walls by a steep zigzag,similar to that by which we approached fromKastrdki, then traversing the fields by an unfrequentedpath to the Salamvria, ford that river notfar below the junction of the lone or river of Krat-nova, and at the end of an hour and a half fromMet^ora, arrive at the khan of Kriavrj^si, whichstands opposite to the junction of the two rivers :from thence I follow the same route to the khan ofMalakassi, by which I entered Thessaly in 1805.At the khan I overtake the metropolitan bishop ofElassona proceeding from Constantinople to loan-ninato offer his prosk5^nesis to the Vezir before hetakes possession of his province. The Patriarchhad named him for Artaa on the flight of BishopIgnatius, and the nomination had been confirmedby the Porte ; but as Aljr had not been consulted,and did not like the appointment, he contrived toobtain the union of the two sees of Artaa and loan-nina,and sent the bishop back to Constantinopleto obtain another see.Jan. 13. — To Metzovo.Jan. 14. — A change of wind to the westwardbrought OH rain, but its effects did not preventme from following the bed of the ArachthuSywhich saved an hour in the way to Dhrysko.The descent, though almost imperceptible, mayhave contributed to the diminution ; in likemanner as on the 12th, the ascent may havecaused an increase of time between the severalstations, as I was travelling exactly in theXLIII.] EPIRUS. 547same manner as when I descended the Salamvriain 1805.loannina, Jan. 16. — It is now eight days sinceAljr entered the castle of Berat, by which he hasacquired the most important position in centralAlbania ; and though it gives him not more thanathird of the country, it very much increases hisinfluence over the remainder. He was in greatmeasure indebted for his success to the Gheghe, aconsiderable body of whom he took into his serviceon this occasion for the first time, having hithertobeen deterred probably by the high pay whichthey demand, but in return for which they fightrather more seriously than the other Albanians.In reducing Elbasan, which was his first step toBerat, he was assisted by the Bey of Libra, whohas married his niece.As soon as the fall of Berat was known at loan-nina,wher&Aly then was, the bishop of Larissawent to congratulate His Highness upon his success,carrying with him a present of money. Thiswas the signal for others to do the same, and allthe surrounding villages will now be taxed by theHodja-bashis, to make up a present. Thus it isthat some interested person often sets an exampleof making presents to the Turks, which they neverfail to demand from all other persons under thelike circumstances, as well as a repetition of themupon all similar occasions. This well-known customof the Turks is imitated not only by the Albanians,who require no masters in the art of extortion,but also by the Greek armatoli, as I heardillustrated not long since by a Vlakhiote sheepn 2548 EPiRus. [chap.feeder. A Koledji of Artaa applied once in thewinter to the shepherds of his district for a papafor his young son, who was perishing of cold forthe want of one, humbly representing the utilityof his men in protecting the shepherds and theirflocks : the papa was granted at the expence tothe shepherds of about 100 paras. When the boygrew up and his cloak was worn out, its place wasto be supplied with a new one of larger size. Thisdemand soon grew into that of an annual cloakto the Koledji, and to each of his family ; andhas increased until what was originally an act ofcharity, has become an annual payment of cloak*money from the shepherds to the Koledji of thedistrict.On the Vezir's arrival at Berat, one of the firstpersons, as in duty bound, to make his prosk^'nesiswas the metropolitan bishop of Velegrada, but hewas so simple as to lay at the Pasha's feet a presentof coffee and sugar. '^ Take these things''said the Vezir to a servant, ** to my son Salic;"a boy of eight or nine years of age : then turninghis head to the window, left the bishop standing,without taking the smallest notice of him, until heretired. The next day the bishop re-appeared,and laid a roll of 200 sequins in the same placeupon the divan. A glance of Ais eye towardsthe money, was instantly followed by a smilingcountenance, a few encouraging words of the usualkind ^ to the S€<nroriic, as he then entitled him,with an inquiry how he liked his mansup, andTt Ktifiyetg fiitpt ^etnrorfj' icaXoc yipoc ilaai.XLItl.] EPIRUS. 549whether his flock behaved well. The bishopreplied, that he had nothing to complain of, exceptthat the Greeks were somewhat irregular intheir payments, when the Secretary was immediatelydirected to supply the bishop with a writtenorder, enjoining all the Christians of his dioceseto be punctual in their acquittance of the bishop'sdues.Jan. 29. — Mukhtar Pasha enters lodnnina onhis return from the Danube at the head of about1000 men. The remainder of his forces he hasleft on his route through Albania, at the sameplaces where they joined him in the spring. Theinhabitants of lo&nnina knowing that he expectedto be treated as a Ghazi, or conqueror, advancedto meet him in great numbers on his approach.In fact his Albanians were the most effective corpsin the Grand Vezir's army, and he gained greatcredit for his personal conduct in the action nearSilistria. The old Serdar-Azem Kior Yusuf, whoformerly commanded the Turkish army in Egypt,said to him publicly after this affair, '^ You havebrought me to life my son, you deserve that Ishould feed you with sugar and your horses withrice." This was followed by presents of horses,pelisses, swords, and a Tjelenk, with an offer ofthe post of Riimeli Vales ; Mukhtar, however,who knew his father's opinions upon that subject,declined it, and asked for the Pashalik of Avlona ;but it suited the Porte just as little to bestowanother Albanian Pashalik upon the house ofTepeleni.Notwithstanding the glory which Mukhtar EPiRus. [chap.self has gained, some of his Albanians are wellinclined to treat their exploits with derision.Thou ISovXevc ro fuivpo to rov^cjci^ac i what Couldour poor musquets do ? said one of them to me,alluding to the Russian artillery. Others relatehow they took some of the Russian cannon threeor four times, which by some untoward accidentwere always retaken ; and how the Russians contriveda moving castle hill of artillery (perhapstheir horse artillery) which put all the Turkisharmy to flight. They allow the Cossacks to be abetter cavalry than the Turkish. The GrandVezir has been obliged by the scarcity of provisionsand forage, to dismiss all the troops totheir respective districts, and to remain at Simlawith a personal guard of three or four thousandmen. And such is generally the termination of aTurkish campaign.Prevyza, 18th Feb. -^ About 11 p.m. an earthquakeoccurred, the smartest I have ever felt inGreece, and which lasted so long, that after beingwaked by it, I had time partly to dress and makemy way out of the house before it had ceased. Atloannina and Corfu it was not much noticed, but atCefalonia it was almost as violent as at Prevyza,which agrees with a variety of testimony tending toshow that the countries immediately round the entranceof the Corinthian gulf, insular as well as continental,are the parts of Greece most subject toearthquakes, both as to frequency and intensity.To these JMConia^ according to ancient evidence,is to be added ; but in general Greece, althoughfrequently troubled by slight shocks, could neverXLIII.]EPIRUS.have been often visited by very destructive concussions.Had this been the case, its gloriousbuildings could not have remained so long uninjured,nor perhaps would ever have been raised,as the only safe mode of construction in a countrysubject to such visitations is a wooden frame work,strongly combined and firmly fixed in the ground.A liability to slight shocks, on the contrary, mightbe obviated by strength of materials, first inwood and then in masonry, and may thereforehave been one of the causes which led the Greeksto their massy Doric architecture, almost rivallingin solidity that which among the Egyptians had avery different origin, having been an imitation ofthose excavations in the rock, which were theirearliest habitations, sepulchres, and temples.ADDITIONAL NOTETOCHAPTER XXXVII.lodnnina in the Fourteenth Century,The manuscript alluded to in page 204 having been publishedin extensor by M. Pouqueville, (Voyage dans la Grace, tome 5,)I shall subjoin an abstract of it, as it presents a curious pictureof the condition of Epirus in the fourteenth century. It is achronicle from 1350 to 1400, and was evidently written by anecclesiastic : —** Under the Emperor John Palaeologus, when the Turks werein possession of Smyrna, Ephesus, and Prusa, and ravaged thecoasts of Thrace, when the Genoese conquered Chios, and theFranks of Navarre all the Peloponnesus except Monomaniaand Lacedaemonian \ loannina was taken ad. Id50, by StephenKrai of the Tribal or Servians, who had previously invadedthe lands of the Empire and seized upon the Grecian Ylakhia',the government of which he bestowed with the title of Caesarupon one of his officers named Prelubo (QpeXov/iiroc)- Thedesperate of ^tolia he gave to his own brother Simeon, who, onarriving at loannina, married Thomais, daughter of the lastdespot loin, whose son Nicephorus was then a hostage (o/ii^poc)at Constantinople, where he espoused a daughter of John CanvasAnna, widow of John, and late queen (fiaalXic) ofthe desperate, soon after the union of her daughter with Simeon,was married to a brother of the Krai Stephen, named Comnenus,1 MistrA.> Thessaly.ADDITIONAL NOTE.who assumed the government of Kanina and Belgrade (Berat).On the death of the Krai and of the Caesar Pr^lubo, Nicephoniswas sent by the Byzantine government to recover the Despotate ;upon which Simeon, with his wife Thomais, retired to Kastoria,where Simeon was proclaimed by his troops king of Servia,although Ureses (Oifpiofic) son of Stephen was already reigning; and the widow of Prelubo, with her son Thomas, fled fromTrikkala into Servia, where Ureses caused her to espouse anotherServia chieftain named Khlapeno (XXd^ci^ofi), who had madehimself master of Berrhoea, and some other places on the Greekfrontiers. A year after his marriage, Khlapeno marched intoVlakhia and took Dhamasi \ which he gave up to Simeon oncondition of receiving Simeon's daughter as a wife for his son-in-lawThomas. The nuptial ceremony was performed at Trfkkalaby the metropolitan bishop of Larissa, after which Thomas returnedwith his wife and mother to Khlapeno.Nicephorus found Vlakhia occupied by Servians, and theDespotate ravaged by Albanians, and lost his life in a battle withthe latter on the Achelous' in the year 1358, having reignedlittle more than three years. Simeon now re-occupied bothVlakhia and the Despotate, placed Thomais, by whom he had ason and daughter, in Trikkala, as the chief town, went himselfto occupy Artaa and lo&nnina ; but was soon recalled from thenceby the affairs of Vlakhia, where he was obliged to oppose th*designs of Khlapeno, who had established himself at Berrhoea.The southern part of the Despotate now fell into the hands ofthe Albanians, of whom Rhino Vain (Ftvoc Boiac) establishedhimself at Anghelo-kastro (in the Italian plain) and PetroLeosa (UeVpoc Acw^ac) at Artaa and Bogus. Some Greek lordswho occupied certain castles in the district of Vagenitia', in conjunctionwith the lo&nnites, sent to Simeon to request his pro-1 The fortress of Dham&si in theVolley of the Titarenut has beennoticed in page 299 of this Volume.** wtpl rt xwpCov * AxtKtfov TpoiT'ayoptv6fitvov,** says Cantacuzenus(1. 4, c. 43), speaking of this eventIn those ages there was a bishopricof Achelous under the metropolitanof Naupactus, and an inhabitedplace on the river of that name,through which Benjamin of Tudeiapassed in his way from Artaa CoAnatomist.Bayfvffrta was the name of adistrict near lo&nnina, as appearsfrom Anna Comnena, I. 5, p. 133.Paris. Vagheneti is still the nameof a small village to the N.W. ofIo4nnina.ADDITIONAL NOTE. 555section against the Albanians, and a governor. He xeeooimendedThomas, his son-in-law, who received the loannite deputationat his residence at Modena (Edeua)^ accepted the profferedhonour, and in the year 1867 made his entrance into loanninawith his queen Angelica PalsBologina*One of the first acts of Thomas was to banish the bishopSebastian, to give the villages belonging to the church to hisServians, to torn some of its buildings into magazines of hayand com, and to rob the church of its plate, &c. {ddkty vKtwv).Some of the leading men of loannina he imprisoned, tortured,and plundered, others he forced to fly* Yardhino, governor ofthe castle of St. Donatus (Paramythia), and John Kapsokavadhi,who held the tower (irvpyoc) of Areokhovitza ^ revolted, andmany of his own Servians quitted him. He encouraged traitorsand informers, and made one of them named Michael Apsaras hischief minister with the title of Protovestiarius. The city havingbeen desolated with a plague in 1368, he obliged the widows ofthe rich men who had died of it to marry his Servians, and deprivedthe orphans of their inheritance. He loaded the artisanswith forced contributions, extorted money under the bastonnade,exacted gratuitous labour from the citizens, legalized places ofpublic prostitution, and derived a profit from their monopoly, aswell as from that of wine, com, meat, cheese, fish, and fruits.For three years the lands of Thomas were ravaged, and the cityblockaded by Leosa and his Albanians, until Thonuw gave hisdaughter Irene in marriage to John the son of Leosa, after whichloannina was for five years at peace with the Albanians ; thoughThomas, who had received some children of Albanian chieftainsas hostages, threw them into prison. He showed his talent forevil in the invention of dungeons and places of torture. In 1374,a plague breaking out at Artaa carried off Peter Leosa, uponwhich John Spata came frt>m the Achelous and took possessionof that city, and then marching against loannina, ravaged thelands and forced the despot to shut himself up in the city.Spata is described as active, handsome, accomplished both inword and action, and possessing theory as well as experience —(Oiwpla ydp jcal irpJ^cc Ijy ev ahrf). In 1375 a second plague^ Probably the present Tzerko- ^povpia r^^ Baycviirtaff beforevita, and apparently one of the mentioned.556 ADDITIONAL NOTE.at loannina carried off Irene. Spata did not discontinue hostilitiesuntil Thomas had given him his sister Helene with presentsin marriage. The despot next endeavoured to collect a body oftroops, consisting of robbers and vagabonds to oppose the Albanians.Listening to the fiilse accusations of Apsaras, he ill-treatedhis wife Angelica, and soon afterwards fell into the mostshameful debaucheries. In 1378, Ohio Frati, with the Albaniansof Malak&ssi, marched against lo&nnina; but on the 14thof September was defeated, taken, and forced to walk into thecity with a drum upon his shoulders : the prisoners were sold*The same year the grand master (6 flag Malaria) blockadedArtaa; but the Albanians, collecting their forces, defeated him,made him prisoner, and delivered him to Spata, who sold him afew days afterwards ^ Thomas soon afterwards marched againstthe Albanians, and blockaded them in Artaa. In 1379» the again marched against lo^nina, and in February, by thetreachery of a deaf ferryman named Nicephorus, transported abody of more than 200 chosen men into the town, who tookthe upper fortress' (rov iwd^ta yovXdv) while the main bodywas landed in the island, from whence, having obtained agreat number of canoes and boats (jwv6^v\a xa^ /Sapracc),they advanced towards the city, but were opposed on the lakeby the citizens with two boats and a few canoes. In the townthe citizens fought for three days, both with those in the upperfortress, and against other Albanians who attacked the city onthe land side, until by the assistance of St. Michael, to whomtheir prayers were addressed, they put the invaders to flight,which induced those in the fortress to surrender at discretion.Thomas eben confined the chiefs of the Albanians in the citadel,gave up the soldiers to the people to be sold, cut off the nosesof the Bulgarians and Ylakhi, and claimed the surname of {*A\fiavtTOKr6voQ), In the month of May, Spatamarched against loannina, ruining the villages and vineyards,upon which Thomas hung his Albanian prisoners on the towers,or cut off their limbs and put out their eyes, which he sent to^ The grand master here men finely in 1380. But, according totoned seems eridendy to have been Vertot, he was taken, not at Artaa,J. F. D'Heredia, grand master of but at Corinth.Rhodes, who was a prisoner in Alba * Perhaps at Litharits&a.nia three years, and ransomed by hisAdditional NOTE. 557Spata, continuing these cruelties until the latter retired. Aboutthis time having discovered a conspiracy he put the leaders to acruel death, together with some who were innocent, and banishedothers whom he or his minister Apsaras had accused. He increasedthe imposts, the angora, and monopolies; and whenmany of the people betook themselves to flight to avoid histyranny, he gave their property to strangers. Near uponChristmas of the same year (1879) Theoph^lakto and Khondezi(XovriCrit), two archons from near Kastoria, came to requesthim to take possession of the castle of Servia (ro Kaarpoy tAv^epfiitiy)^ but he put them in prison in order to extort moneyfrom them*In the beginning of the year 1880, at the instigation ofKhukhulitzas prov Xovxov\tT(a)f he threw many of the magistrates(cyi'piVovc) into prison. Manuel Philanthropic, the chiefsecretary of the town (wpwatrfiKfifrriy), whom he liberated, andhad pretended to restore to favour, he poisoned with a cup ofwine ; and the president {trpoKa&iifjLtroy^ Constantine, whom hehad detained Ave years in prison, he banished to Nursing,(Bovpalya\ after putting out his eyes. Some others he deprivedalso of their sight, and many he sold ; so that every placewas full of the people of loannina while the town itself wasdepopulated. Having invited the Turks to his assistance, oneof their chief named Isaim, on the 2d June, 1880, took possessionof Vela and Opa, and obliged the Mazarakei and Zeno-vise to shut themselves up in their towns {dg rac UoX/r-f ac). Thomas then occupied the castles (jcaorcXia) of Nursing,Kretzunista, Dhragomi, Areokhovitza, and appointed theirarchons to be captains (jce^aXdBtg) and judges (^oviravacot), butcontinued to persecute the Albanians and loannites. He imprisonedIsaiah, prior (jcaOtiyovfAiyog) of the monastery of theHoly Providence {rrjg Upoyolag) at Metzovo, • and after receiving200 aspra from his friends as a redemption of his eyes, putthem out, sold the prior, took possession of the monastery, andexpelled its inmates and parishioners (vapoiKovg). About thesame time he purchased St. Donatus (Paramythia) from Mvpo-i-pofiipTog^ In 1882 he employed Kosti, with a body of Turks,to obtain the country of the Zulanei (ZovXaveoc), and on the5th May Isaim took Revniko (PevvfiKov). Spata marched toADDITIONAL NOTE.Aruli, when his son-in-law, Mvp^fiKu(iapoc '» having beencited in loannina with great honour, made peace by whichSpata obtained the cession of Yell, Dhryn6poli» Vagene^ andMalakassi, as fear as Kattoa, and his son-in-law the country ofZevemresei (Zc/3c/i/3c9aioc). Nevertheless in September, 1S89,Spata again came to demand the dowry of Helen, but Thomasinduced him by some trifling gifts to return*Thomas sent Gabriel, prior of the ^Apx^fidt^^fnoy*, and the archonMangafa to Constantinople, to obtain from Manuel Palseologusthat emperor's confirmation of him in the government of theDespotate. On their return, Thomas was invested by themwith the insignia of the office (ra ^etnroTiKa &{iM/Mira). On thisoccasion divine service was performed by Matthew, who had beenrecently made metropolitan bishop of loannina, to which dignitythe metropolitan throne of Nanpactus was also attached (iwix^f^Nul Tov Naviracrov dp6vov). Thomas not permitting Matthew toremain at lo&nnina, he resided at Artaa. A,D. 1385, in the time ofvintage, a large body of Tnrks under Demur Rash (Ta/iovpra^c)made an incursion towards Artaa, and carried away many personsinto slavery. Spata sent Bishop Matthew and Kalognomo tothe Despot to propose a joint expedition against the Tnrks, butThomas detained Kalognomo, banished the bishop, and gave hischurch to the Devil (rw 2evvaxcp/ft).At length in the same year, on Wednesday the 23d December,in the filth hour of the night, Thomas was slain by his ownbody-guards, Nikeforaki, Artavesto, Rainaki, and Antonio theFrank. The loannites then assembled in the Metropolitanchurch (j^y Tp fjLtirpoir6X£i)t demanded their lawful queen Angelica,and performed homage to her {irpoaKvvovinv), She summonedMeliglavo and Theodore Apsaras, who buried the apofr-^ Artaa, which was then consideredthe capita] of Acamania, had beenoccupied not long before, with someother places in southern Epirus, byCharles Tocco I., Count of Cefaloniaaccompanied by several adventurersfrom Naples, (Chalcedony. L 4, p.Ill, Par.) among whom were probably(wo named Messire Robertoand Messire Macagiano, or somename not very different.The Arkhimindrio still exists,it is a convent established by somemonks of Mount Sinai, who had removedfrom that place, and, like theconvent on Mount Sinai, is dedicatedto St. Catherine.ADDITIONAL NOTE.tate and declared loasaf, the brother of Angelica, king(fiaffiXIa elirfipovoi). The queen (4 fiaffiXiaffo) was kind toally and sent letters to recal those who were in banishment.Spata, as soon as he heard of the death of Thomas, marched toloannina, and invested it with his Albanians, upon which loasaf,with the advice of his council, offered Angelica in marriage toIsatt ('I^^eu)?), a lord of Cefolonta (clc riiv Ke^oXqviay aifdirrfiv).Michael Apsaras was then tried, deprived of his sight, andbanished.On the SOtih Jan. 1386, Izau arrived at loannina and wasdeclared Despot*. The Caesar Stephen, and the Kaiadpivaa(mother of Angelica) came to lo&inina, the latter as vopd^vfi^cat the celebration of the marriage. The new despot being a goodChristian (j^X^ypitrroQ my re-established Matthew on the Metropolitanthrone, and restored the church property. In concurrencewith queen Angelica and king loiaaff he emptied theprisons, destroyed the dungeons, closed the places of debauchery,restored houses to their proper heirs, and abolished the forcedservitude and the corporal punishments which had been Though the author makes useof this word more than once, it doesnot appear that Thomas ever becamea Musulman.From the description given ofIxaii, as a lord (or ike lord) of Cefii-Ionia, we might suppose that theperson intended was Charles Tocco,son and successor of Leonard Tocco»a Neapolitan, who about 1357 re*ceired a grant of Cefidonia, Zante,and Santa Maura, from the titularGreek emperor Robert II. ; for accordingto Orsini, Charles obtainedthe dukedom of lo&anina by hismarriage with Angelica. (See Du-cange,Hist, de Const L 8. c. 26.)But her union with 'iZAovkot laconfirmed by Chalcocondylas ; fromwhom we learn also, that Iz&ulo wassucceeded by a Charles, who marrieda daughter of Renier Acciiguoli,duke of Athens, and who was CharlesII. grandson of Leonard. In thecircumstances of the murder of Thomas,Chalcocondylas differs from thenew authority; from the latter itwould seem, that Ix&ulo was not thenat Io4nnina, whereas the Athenianhistorian asserts, that Iz&ulo was theparamour of Angelica, and himselfthe murderer, having been introducedby her into the chamber ofThomas. Chalcocondylas farther remarks,that Iz4ulo was unfortunatein war, but that lo&nnina was nevertaken, having fallen into the handsof Duke Charles, (6 i^ytfiutv K&po-\oq), by invitation of the people.This also agrees with the MS. asfar as it goes; whereas the authoritiesof Derange represent Spata tohave been lord of Io4nnina as wellas of Artaa.560 ADDITIONAL NOTE.«blushed by Thomas. He was then complimented by the loan-noteswith the titles of xayv^l^iX&rurog, and ecXafiirp($raroc« Spatahaving moved against loannina, Izaii obliged him to retreat,and made peace with the other Albanians. Paleologo Yrioniybrought the insignia of the desperate from Constantinople andcrowne Esau (jcal eoreipe or *I{'aov), the bishops of Yeasand Dr3rindpolis and the Metropolitan of loannin^ performingthe holy offices. In the same year (1386) Bishop Matthewdied, when the Servians endeavoured to obtain the propertyof the church, but Izau prevented it, and appointed provisionallyGabriel prior of the Arkhimandrio who was recommended toConstantinople as a fit successor to Matthew, by the chief personsof the Despotate and of its church. In the year (1387) theDespot visited the Emir (*A/ii7pd ^). A thunderbolt fell on thebelfry of the monastery and destroyed fourteen persons. In1388 Gabriel proceeded to Constantinople to ask for the vacantthrone of loannina, and in March 1389 returned as Metropolitanbishop. In 1389 the Emir Murat (6 *Afifipac 'A^iovpar) andLazarus (king of Servia) were both killed in battle '. In JulySpata marched from Artaa, and pitched his camp before loannina,when the Malakass^i revolted and submitted to him (rov irpoc'Kvvovtri), He then ravaged the country, destroyed the vines, andtook Veltzista. The bishop of Vela, possessor, by the concessionof Izau, of Vrivia (Bpi/3ta), submitted to Spata, and gaveup the fortress to him. Izau was not permitted by his friends-togo forth to battle, but he sent the Favorites and his other troopsagainst Spata, who defeated them, and launching two galleys(itrarcpya) on the lake, sunk one which the Despot sent againstthem. The Caesar (loasaf) came to the assistance of Izau fromVlakhia (Thessaly), and Melius (McXcovinic) frt>m the Sultanat Thessalonica, upon which Spata retired. The Despot thenproceeded with the Turkish chief and the Caesar to Thessalonica,where he resided fourteen months ; then returned by the Achelousto Artaa and to lo&nnina, which he entered Dec. 1392.loannina now enjoyed four years of peace. Izau is praised bythe author for frequently consulting the bishop.^ Sultan Murat I. * At Kdasovo.ADDITIONAL NoteIn December, 1395, Queen Angelica Ducaena Pa1»oIoginadied. Who can describe (adds the author) the cries of the city,the hymns, the candles, the parodies, the condolences, thelamentations (rove Prove reg iriSXedic rove rdrt, rove v/ivovc«rac XafJLirdBaCt tcLq >/^X/iwd/ac, rde irpoc dXXiiXovQ (nffiirXoKae KalOpivovc, &c.) After the proper period of mourning {kvrtXiffaerdc irivdifiove hiiipo-e d^iae) Izau was persuaded by the archonsand bishop, for the sake of the public safety, to marry Irene,daughter of Spata. Not long after the marriage, Vranezi, whohad returned with Izaii from Thessalonica, was routed by Spataat Dhrysko, and driven back as far as Fanaromeni, but whilethe Albanians were indulging in plunder they were attacked nearPastoral (rdc TLdKropao)^ and suffered considerable loss.April 5, 1399. Izau marched against Zenevisi with allhis forces, collected from Malakassi, Mazaraki, Papingo, Za-gloria, Dhryndpoli, Arghyrokastro and Great Zagori. As hewas advancing from Mesopotamia towards Libra he was attackedin the midst of a fog and tempest by Ghioni, and havingbeen defeated and taken prisoner, was put in chains at Arghyro-kastro, together with his archons. But the noble families ofFlorence to whom he was related*, having made interest forhim, he was permitted, through the influence of Venice, and themediation of its bail at Corfu (rov (iaiXoy rHv Kopvi^y), to purchasehis liberty for 10,000 sequins (^X&ip/a). After remainingsome days at Corfu he proceeded to Santa Maura, and fromthence to Grovalea (TpofiaXalac elc rd fiipri)^ where he wasreceived by Spata and his brother Sguro. He then proceeded toArtaa, and on the 17th July, 1399, re-entered loannina.April 28, 1400, Spata died, and was succeeded at Artaa by hisbrother Sguro, a few days after which the Servo Albano-Bulgaro-Wallachia Vonkoi (2c|)/3aA^avo/3ovXyap4$j3Xaxoc Boyxdrit) madehis appearance, drove out Sguro, and plundered and banished thechief persons.The MS. concludes with the author's lamentations for the fate1 According to Chalcocondylaa, have learnt, that he was of a Spanish*lZdov\oc, was from Naples (cic rev family, and his real name Indico dedphruv nctpOiv6irfis pofftkiutg, 1. 4. Davalos. Fam. Dalmat. xv. 4.c. 112.); but Ducangv seems toVOL. IV. O O '^562 ADDITIONAL Not.of Artaa, or Acarnania as he calls it, aeeoydnig to a common sole-cumof the learned of those times.Another MS., which like the former has been published by M.Tocqueville after briefly enumerating the European conquestsof the Ottoman Emperors, states that when Sultan Murat II.had regained all those cities and provinces in Europe which hadbeen lost to the Turks, when his grandfather Bayard was defeatedand taken by Timor Khan ; the loannites perceiving that theSultan exercised great cruelties over those whom he conquered,collected an army for the defence of Mount Pindus, and theother passes of Epirus. Twice Murat sent his forces againstthem, and twice was defeated by the gallant conduct of theGreeks, aided by the strength of the places. The Sultan thenwrote a letter to the loannites, representing that (pod had setno bounds to his empire, that with the exception of their mountains,all Ghreece had submitted to him (c£w dro rd fiovtfdautSoi ft' iwpooKvyriffay), and that he recommended them therefore todeliver up their city to him, if they wished to avoid the fate ofthose who had been cut oS by the sword, or sold as natives.He swore not to eject them from their castle (two to Kdtrrpowac) if they were faithful to his government The loannitesconsidering that many strong fortresses had submitted to theOttomans, and that their own was small and feeble, sent thekeys to Murat at Thessalonica. The treaty was sworn to onboth sides, a khatisherif was received by the loannites, andthe keys were delivered to Murat, who sent eighteen Turks totake possession. As soon as these arrived, they required thecannon to be fired as a mark of rejoicing, and the church ofSt. Michael, situated on the towers of the castle {ixtfUniy dcrov£ irvpyovc rov Ka^rpov), to be destroyed. They then builthouses for themselves in the part of the city now called Turksand on the refusal of the Greeks to give them wives,complained to Murat, who sent a firman (ypa/i/ia (iacOnKor)authorising the Turks to takesuch women for their wives as mightplease them. The envoy of the Sultan, who brought the paper,entered the castle in company with the Turks on a Greek festival,and waited at Pantokr^tora outside the Metropolitan church,until the Greeks with their wives and families came out of thechurch, when each Turk as he saw a young woman that pleasedADDITIONAL NOTE. 563him, took off his outer gannet (ro ^€fjta\ threw it over her,took her by the hand, and led her away as his wife. Somedays afterwards the Christians finding their lamentations useless,ceased to grieve, and some of them began to console themselvesby saying, that perhaps (ra'xa) those Turks were lords andarchons, not inferior in honour to themselves ; they sent dowries(wpoUa) therefore to the houses of their daughters, and to eacha female slave and a nurse (friar &^\r|y koI day (^v(daTpar\to which were added arable lands, meadows, and other gifts{(evyaXareia kqI \i(idSia xal (SfXXo x^Kpc^ftara), and thus the impiousrace of Hagar prospered (rwv'Ayapqvufv^ yivoc eirpox^peO*Next follows an account of an insurrection, called 4 ifravdinaffigrov 2icvAo0'o^v, or the insurrection of the Skylosoph or Dog-sophist,which gave the Turks a pretext, founded on the letterof Sultan Marat, for expelling the Greeks from the castle ofloinnina, and depriving them of their lands and tiara. Inthe year 1611 (says the Ms), Dionysius, bishop of Tricca,who had been deprived of his dignity because he had beenguilty of astrology, fortune-telling, and other unworthy acts,and who had fled to Italy, returned from thence and took uphis abode at the monastery of St. Demetrius, between Kerd-svo and Radhovistl. After some time he came to loannina,where, observing that the Turks were not numerous, and thatthey did not reside in the castle, be informed one Sagas andsome other friends that he had ascertained by astrology that hewas destined to give liberty to loannina and other places, andthat eventually the Sultan himself at Constantinople would risefrom his seat at his approach. Then quitting the city he marchedabout the country with a wooden drinking vessel (rXSaxa) at hisback, haranguing and giving wine to the peasants and shepherds,a large body of whom, after committing some drunken excessesin various places, at length attacked the Turkish villagesof Turkograniza and Zaravusa, distant two hours from the conventof St. Demetrius, murdered the inhabitants and destroyedthe villages. In the night of the tenth of September they enteredloannina, set fire to the house of Osman Pashd, who1 This word is much used hjr the from Ismael and Hagar, the slave ofByzantines and modern Greeks. It Abraham, whence they are oftensupposes the descent of the Turks called 'I(r/Aaf|X7rac.o o 2564 ADDITIONAL TfOTE.escaped with difficulty, and burnt in it several men, with theimperial treasure. They then cried Kvpu Ikhivor ^ " and downwith the khar&tj and anazuli'." The Turks, mounting onhorseback, fell upon the half-armed Christians, killed the innocentas well as guilty, and the next morning, being Sunday,slew many of the peasants as they were entering the town ; hadthey not been prevented by some of their own chief, theywould have put to death all the Christians in the castle. Dionysius,seeing his followers dispersed, fled to hide himself in acavern at the church of St* John Prodromus, where now standsthe mosque of Asian Pash£. Here the Jews, having discoveredhim, brought him bound to the Turks, who, without any inquiry,flayed him alive, and filling the skin with straw, sent itfrom town to town, and at length carried it to Constantinople,where it is said the Sultan happened to rise from his seat out ofcuriosity to see it, and thus fulfilled the Skylosoph's prediction.His followers taken at loannina were given over to die Jews,who, delighting in an opportunity of tormenting Christians,roasted some by a slow fire, suspended others by iron hooks,and invented other cruel modes of putting them to death. TheTurks then destroyed the convent of St. Demetrius, except thechurch, dispersed the monks, and confiscated the property ofthe monastery, which possessed eighteen metokhia. By a khati-sherif of the Sultan, the Christians were driven out of the fortress,and deprived of the privileges which they had hitherto enjoyedby treaty.To this MS. is appended a chronicle of events, of which thefollowing are the heads.1481. Oct. 9. — loannina taken by the Turks'.1449. March 24. — salamanca, otherwise called Artaa, taken bythe Turks.1599. Naupactus taken by the Turks*1683. — ^^The Turks defeated with great loss by ^^The Germans.1684. — Aglua Mara and Pr^vyza taken by the Venetians.The war-cry of the Greeks — from Meletius; the above agi«ealike the Allah I Allah ! of the Turks. with that of the contemporary hiatax which had been recently dorian Prance, from whom we learnimposed upon the Christians. also that Thessalonica was taken inAnother date of this event is April 1430.given, and a third, very erroneous,ADDITIONAL NOTE.1685. — Koroni, Kalam&ta, Samara, and Avarice, taken bythe Venetians.1686.— Motion and Anapli taken by the Venetians.1687. — ^Naupactus and all the Morea taken by the Venetians,and Belgrade by the Germans.1690.— Missa and Belgrade taken by the Vezir KiuprilP(KioirpcX%).1691. — ^^The Germans captured Missa and Sopha (Uskiup), andadvanced to Kiuprili (Velesa).1691. — Avlona taken from the Venetians by KhalQ Pasha.1700. — Sultan Mustafa II. made peace with the Germans andVenetians.1710. — ^A cloud of locusts descended from the north upon Artaa.They began to pass on the evening of the 7th, and continuedall the 8th of September, darkening the sun.1714. Sunday, July 27. — A terrible earthquake at Patrse, whichthrew belfries, houses, and rent from top to bottom thetowers of the castle.Aug. 28. — Another more dreadful at Cefalonia, wherethe Venetian admiral was at anchor with his fleet : theearth opened, hot water flowed out ; 280 houses weredestroyed, water issued from the earth, and the inhabitantslived two months in the gardens.1715. — The preceding signs were fulfilled {lirXripwBri to avtaOey(Tfifieioy), The Vezir marched with 60,000 men toCorinth, reduced all the Morea in one month, and killedor enslaved more than 40,000 persons.1716. — The Venir marched against the Germans with 40,000men, but was made prisoner with his army.1716. March 1. — san envoy frt>m Constantinople arrived inGreece, with orders to collect provisions, and assemble a> This celebrated Turk was namedAkhm^t, and, as well as his father,son, and grandson, was distinguishedby the name of the birth-placeof the first of the race, namely,Kiuprili (or Veles&), in the ancientPseonia. The Turks, having but asmall choice of names, sometimesadd that of the father for the sake ofdistinction; but when the individual'sfame is great, this is betterattained by a gentile not alwaysderived from the place of nativity.Thus the Dramatic and the Kiutayi,so named from Drama in Thrace,and Kiut&ya in Asia Minor, havebeen renowned in the Greek Revolution.ADDITIONAL NOT£.sufficient number of workmen to construct a road sixtyfeet in breadth from Larissa to Saiadha, for the use ofan army destined against Corfu ^ At BtUhroium theSeraskier Kara Mustafa Pasha, at the head of 65,000men, joined the Capitan Pasha Djanum Rhoda, whooccupied the strait of Cassino with sixty Sultanas, fortyGallons, besides Gracious, and other vessels. The Venetiansfrom the Adriatic attacked them with twenty-eightships, and after disabling several of the Turkish vessels,forced their way to Corfu. The Seraskier crossed intothe island and encamped at Potato, ten miles from thetown. After twenty-seven days' fighting, a heavy rainwashed part of their stores and apparatus into the sea.It is said that the Turks saw an aged bishop ' threateningthem, and who was accompanied by many youngmen bearing lighted candles. Such was the terror of theTurks, that they abandoned tents, arms, horses, and themilitary chest. Many were drowned in endeavouringto rain their vessels. The fugitives returned to loan-ninawith 2000 wounded, the greater part of whomdied.1731. July 25. — An adventurer arrived at loannina fromCorfu, pretending to be the son of Sultan Akhmet by aGenoese lady. As soon as Sultan Maimed was informedof it, he ordered the adventurer's head to bebrought to Constantinople, and his body was throwninto the lake.1735. Dec. 22. — The bishop Hieronymus died, and was replacedby Gregory of Constantinople. loannina wasafflicted by a plague, which lasted from February to thefestival of St. Demetrius (26th Oct. O. S.) ; from sixtyto eighty dying each day.1737. — san imposition of fifty-five purses on the town.1737* May 9. — A thunderbolt fell on the house of Miso, andburnt the tower (an omen). Miso was soon afterwards^ This road is still partly in existencenear Milites.s According to the Corfiotes, thiswas St. Aspiration, the patron saintof Corf. The real cause of theTurkish defeat was a sortie of thegarrison under SchullembeigADDITIONAL NOTE.murdered in the pass of Tornado, going to Constantinopleto lodge a complaint against Hadji Pasha.1740. Jan. 4. — From the 5th to the 9th hour of the night theearth shook ten times (another omen). The Porte, forgetfulof its salutary suspicion of the faithless Albanians,now, for the first time, appointed an Albanian to thePashalik ; namely, Surinam of Arghyrokastro, a man ofability, but cruel, restless, and violent. He persecutedthe Christian militia called the armatoli, put to deathGeorge, son of the aforesaid Miso, proestos of Zagori,who had opposed his extortions, and several others whobad power or riches. At length, on the complaint ofthe Christians, the Porte ordered him to be beheaded.Kaloy a native of loannina, succeeded to the government.He was more moderate, but put to death theproestos of Zagori, Nutza of Yradheti (Novr^av rdyBpaSiTtyov), and soon afterwards himself died. He wassucceeded by Kurt of Berat, who was commander ofthe Thessalian passes (eirap^oc T&y QeaaaXucQy ^€pj3e~vlwy); as well as Pasha of loannina. This Albanianshowed from the beginning great enmity to the Christianarmatoli, and persecuted them both secretly and in arms,so as to oblige many to fly to the mountains, from whencethey descended, and plundered the places in Kurt's government.He ruled fifteen years, died, it is said, ofpoison, and was succeeded by Al of Tepel6ni.SUPPLEMENTARY NOTESTO TBSFOUR VOLUMES.VOL. I.P. 90, 1. 4. — The passage of Pliny referred to is as follows :'* In Epiri ora castellum in Acrocerauniis Chimaera ; sub eo abuseregis fons" (H. N. 1. 4, c. 1). This seems to have been afountain of mineral water, where some king of Epirus had builtbaths, but I was unable to identify it.P. 103, line 25. — It is remarkable that the order here referredto differs in the Latin and Greek versions of Ptolemy (1. 3, c. 14.);in the former it is Thyamis ostia, Sybota, Torone, Adherents ostia*In the latter Ovdfuoc wot. eir/3oXa2, Topityti, 2^/3ora. I amdisposed to follow the former, as there is great probability thatTorone, the Toryne of Plutarch, was the modem Parga. SeeVol. III. p. 8.P. 290. — It has sometimes been supposed that the irvpiylicf'vea^wvoc was that commonly called the Pan-pipe, and not thesimple pipe here alluded to. Virgil, however, attributes Seven andnot nine pipes to that instrument. In reference to the pipes madeof the thigh-bone of the eagle, it is remarkable that J. Polluxstates that such a custom prevailed among the Scythian, particularlythree tribes, one of which was named the fieXdyyXaivoi^ fromtheir black cloaks (2icv6ai it Koi /ioXiora rovriay oi *Ay^pwpdyoi570 supplementary NOTESKal McXdyyXaivoi Koi *Apifiainrol dtr&v cal yvirwv carols aveBfjLiryiovtny. — J. PolL 1. 4, c. 10). Both the Karaguniaand the pipes of the Vlakhi may therefore have originated inScythia, from which direction this people undoubtedly came.The Latin word tibia implies that the Italians were in the habitof using the thigh-bones of birds or quadrupeds.P. 327» 1. 19. — TovXiayo^^ the modem name of the SlumsGlands is obviously a corruption of the FXaWc alluded to byAristophanes, £q. v. 999, 1030, 1093, and compared by Theseus,1. 7, c. 17, to the Latus of the Nile, which sometimesweighed 200 pounds.P. 444, 1. 3. — As both the French and English translator ofBenjamin of Tela have treated his travels as for the most partfabulous, ita fair towards the Jew to show that his route throughGreece will bear examination. From Corfii he sailed in twodays to Lata (L' Artaa), where he found 1 00 Jews ; Action(Achelous) two days by land, 10 Jews ; Natolikon (Anatoliko)half a day ; Patras, coasting by sea, one day, 50 Jews ; Lepanto,by sea half a day, 100 Jews ; Cours, or Crissa, one day and ahalf by sea, 200 Jews. These (he adds) were the only inhabitantsof Mount Parnassus. [Hence his Crissa seems to havebeen the modem Krisso.] Corinth, a metropolitan city, threedays, 300 Jews ; Thebes, a great city, three days, 2000 Jews,very learned, and skilful workers in silk and purple. 'Agrippagreat [city, frequented by foreign merchants, one day, 200Jews ; Jabustererisa, on the sea side, one day, 100 Jews ; B^-binica, one day, 100 Jews ; Sinonpotmo, one day, 50 Jews.Here began Wallachia, the inhabitants of which were not Christians,had Jewish names, and were in the habit of issuing fromthe mountains to plunder the Javanites (Greeks). [It appearsfrom this mention of the Wallachiansns, that the route of Benjaminfrom 'Egripo was not through Euboea but by the coast of Bcec^aand Locris, now almost depopulated. The three last names ofstations are evidently Greek. The second seems to have beenReveniko, a name not uncommon; the last indicates a river,probably the Spercheius]' Garden (GardhOci) a ruinous place,two days, a small number of Javanites and Jews. [The rainsalluded to are probably those of Clarissa Creates'] Armilo,two days, a great city, frequented by Venetian, Pisan, and Genoesemerchants, 400 Jews. [This name is evidently Armyio ;TO THE FOUR VOLUMES. 571but as one of Benjamin's daj^s^ according to their usual rate ofsixteen or eighteen o. m., would have sufficed to carry him fromGardhiki to Ann3rr6, I greatly suspect the Turkish Volo, whichis just double the distance, to have been the Armyro of thosedays, the name being common in Greece for a maritime site.]From Armyro he proceeded in one day to a place named Missing,inhabited by 100 Jews, and from thence sailed in two days toSalons, built by Seleucus, — ^a great city, inhabited by 600 Jews(Saloniki). From Saloniki he travelled in thirteen days by landto Constantinople.Germans, the English translator of Benjamin's work, particularlyinsists upon the statement of his arrival in three days inWallachia from Negropont, as proving that this part of his journeyis a fiction ; whereas, in fact, it proves his veracity : for welearn from the Byzantine history that, in the twelfth century, theWallachiansns were in possession of Thessaly, which was knownabout that time to the Greeks by the name of Meg&ii Vlakhia.The object of Benjamin's travels seems to have been that of visitinghis brethren, whose numbers he has stated at the severalplaces which he passed through.P. 445, 1. 4. — Thessaliotis seems to have been ascribed byStrabo neither to upper nor to lower Thessaly.VOL. II.Pp. 10, 40. — The remarks of Herodotus (1. vii, c. 176,198, et seq.) translated in these pages, constitute our datafor the coast line at the head of the Mallac gulf. " Thetotal distance from Trachis to the mouth of the Spercheius nearAnticyra was forty-five stades, of which there were five stadesfrom Trachis to the Melas, twenty stades from the Melas to theDyras, and twenty stades from the Dyras to the Spercheius.The Asopus issued from a Siao^di, or rocky gorge, near Trachis,from whence it flowed along the foot of the mountains (irapa n)y{nri^piriy rov ovptoe), and after having received the Phoenix,joined the sea near Anthela. Between the mountain of Trachis572 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTESand the sea (Ik rev ohpiu^v ic BdXatnray^ kot* & Tp^x^c reir^Xitfrai)there was a pain, containing 22,000 plethora of land."The " mountain** along the foot of which the Asopos flowedwas the north-western side of Mount Cauldrons, the northernpoint of which it encircled at a very small distance, and therereceived the Phoenix : from thence it flowed in an eastern directionmore than a mile farther, through impassable marshes adjacentto the sea-shore, until it was discharged into the sea oppositeto the point of Anthela. Thus the ancient was longer thanthe present course of this river, which now fails directly into theSpercheius ; and thus it differs from the Spercheius, DyraSy andMelas, of all which the course has been prolonged through thenew land at the head of the gulf, which the rivers themselveshave formed. Not only towards the sea has the Asopus assumed anew direction, but as high up as its issue from the mountains, forthose copious depositions from the north-rested side of MountCallidromus, which I noticed in p. 31, have evidently moved itswhole course through the plain of Trachis firth from the footof that mountain.With regard to the plain of Trachis, as we cannot supposeHerodotus to have alluded to the whole plain between Callidro-mus and the part of Mount Meta now called Katavothra, hisremark is probably applicable to that portion of it which belongedto Trachis. The most natural boundary between the territoryof Trachis and that of its next neighbour Anticyra was the riverDyras, which was twenty-five stades from Trachis. Now, thesquare of twenty-five stades is equivalent to 22,650 plethora, anumber so nearly coinciding with that which Herodotus has assignedto the plain between Trachis and the sea, as to afford astrong confirmation that the meaning of Herodotus was that whichI have suggested. In this case the distance from Trachis to the seawas about three miles, and consequently the shore, at the beginningof the fifth century before the Christian era, after having followeda general line, parallel to the northern foot of Mount Callidro-mus, at a very short distance from the points of Alpeni, Anthela,and the Phoenix, but forming a bay between the two former,continued in the same north-westerly direction for a considerabledistance, before it turned north to form the head of the gulf atAnticyra and the mouth of the Spercheius.With reference to the pass of Trachis, which was half a pieroTHE FOUR VOLUMES. 573thnim in breadth, and one of the entrances into Greece (4 ^laTpirxjivoi eoo^C h ri^y 'EXXa^, rp trrtiyordrtf ^fi(irXtBpoy\ itcould hardly have been any other than the Biafffd^ itself, or thatravine of the Asopas near Trachis, through which Damesbegan his march over Mount Callidromus.P. 141, note 2. — If Zagora be a word of imperial Greek origin,it would seem to have been employed as expressive of the retiredsituation of the place or people to which it was attached ; andalthough applied by the Greeks to the kingdom of Bulgaria, itmay not always have indicated a Sclavonic settlement, as thisnote supposes, as well as a remark in Vol. IV. p. 167, in referenceto Zagori of Epirus.P. 201, note 1. — The situation of the second battle of Scyllaagainst the forces of Mithridates, which is described by Plutarchas having occurred not fax from Orchomenus, and near themarshes, seems to be indicated by a large tumulus in the plainto the south of Orchomenus, distant half a mile from the rightbank of the CephissuSf and not far from the marshes. Here itwas, therefore, that the great quantity of armour was found inthe time of Plutarch, two centuries after the battle.Pp. 233. 243. — The situation of the Heraclea on oneside of Thebes, and that of the monument of lolaus on the other,as indicated by Pausanias, illustrate the narrative which Arrian(Exp. Alex. 1. 1. c. 7. et seq.) and Diodorus (1. 17. c. 8. et seq.)have left us of the capture of Thebes by Alexander the Great.I shall principally refer to that of Arrian, as it was derived fromthe memoirs of Ptolemy, son of Tagus. The temple, stadium,and gymnasium of Hercules, were in the south-western part ofthe lower city, to the left on entering it by the gate Electric.The gymnasium and stadium, named from lolaus, in the latterof which was his monument, were on the outside of the gateProetis : and beyond the stadium was the Hippodrome. AsPausanias adds that there was a road leading from the Hippodrometo Acrsephium, which lay to the north-west of Thebes, itfollows that the Hippodrome was in the plain to the north-westof the gate Proetis, nearly opposite perhaps to the gate of theCadmeia, named Borreise, or the northern. Arian relates thatwhen Alexander advanced from Onchestus to Thebes, he pitchedhis camp near the sacred land of lolaus (jcara ro rov 'loXaovTifUPo^)f making choice of this situation because it was near the574 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTESCadmeia, where tie Macedonian garrison was blockaded by theThebansy who were in possession of the lower town, and hadmade a double line of circumvallation round the Cadmeia.Alexander, on the day following his arrival, matched with hiswhole army to the gate which led to Leathers and Attica (theElectris), bat made no attempt upon the walls of the city, andreturned to his station near the Cadmeia, his object in this movementhaving apparently been that of demonstrating to the The-bank,who were in alliance with Demosthenes and the partyopposed to Macedonia in Southern Greece, that he was aware oftheir expectation of succours from Athens as well as from theIsthmus, where troops from the Peloponnesus were alreadyassembled, and that as he had an army of 80,000 infantry, and8000 cavalry, he was fully enabled to prevent an enemy's forcefrx)m entering the city. Though he received insults only in replyto his overtures tending to peace, he was still unwilling to proceedto extremities, as he knew there was a party well disposedto him in the city ; Perdiccas, however, without orders, b^^hostilities by breaking through that part of the enemy's outerentrenchment which was near his own post ; he was followedby Amyntas ; but endeavouring to penetrate through the innerline of circumvallation, he was wounded, and carried off the field.Thereupon Alexander sent to the support of Amyntas a reinforcementof bowmen and Agxianes, remaining himself on theoutside of the enemy's lines, at the head of the main body (roayrifjLa rwv MaxeB6vtay xal rove inraoir/ffroc tovq jSoffcXiKOUc).This reinforcement, in conjunction with the troops who had enteredthe entrenchments with Perdiccas and Amyntas, indorsedthe enemy in a hollow, which led to the Heraclea, (ic n^KKoiKiiy o^ov r^v Kara to *Hp<iicXccoy ^epovvav,) and pursued themin that direction, until at length the Thebans having rallied,obtained in their turn the superiority, and followed the retreatingMacedonians towards the position of Alexander, who thenadvanced with his phalanx, and entered the lines. The contestwas soon decided. The Thebans were driven into the city withsuch precipitation that they neglected, or were unable, to shut thegates ; and the Macedonians having followed them, some seized thewalls, along which they proceeded into the Agora, while others,having effected a junction with the garrison of the Cadmeia, nearthe Ampheium, the united body advanced from thence into theTO THE FOUR VOLUMES. 575lower town (irapeXOcSvrec etc n)v Kai/uiav oi /licv ckccOcv Lord ro*Afu^€ioy trifv roi KaTt^ovtriv r^v Kaifieiay tUpatyov Ic f^v aXXiyvir($Xci'. c. 8). The principal resistance was made at the Ampheium.If we may trust to the testimony of Polyaenus (1. 4. c. 12.), theoperations in front of the Cadmeia were assisted hy a portion ofthe army under Antipater, who from a concealed place advancedagainst the weakest and most undefended part of the walls, andwhen he had gained possession of his object, made a signal,on perceiving which Alexander exclaimed, &e fjiri rdc 04/3ac€xoc. The slaughter, loss, and destruction (says Arrian), whichThebes sustained on this occasion, had no parallel in Grecianhistory. A garrison was placed in the Cadmeia, the lower townwas totally destroyed, and according to Diodorus, more than6000 Thebans were killed, and more than 30,000 enslaved.The Cadmeia having been at the northern extremity of Thebes,and the lower city in the hands of the insurgents, it was in theplain to the northward only that their double circumvallationwas required, and here alone perhaps it was constructed, itswestern extremity resting upon the walls of the lower town, atthe gate Homolois, and its eastern end at the Proetis. Thehollow way, conducting to the temple of Hercules, could havebeen no other, as I conceive, than the ravine of the Platziotissa,or DircCf which leads exactly to that part of the site of the lowertown where the Heraclea was situated. It appears thatAlexander's camp extended across the plain lying to the northof the Cadmeia, in front of the enemy's entrenchments, and thatPerdiccas was stationed opposite to the opening of the vale ofthe Z>trce, and to the north-western side of the Cadmeia.The Macedonians probably entered the lower town at thegate Homolois. The junction of the garrison of the Cadmeiawith Alexander's troops was evidently effected by means of agate opening from the citadel into lower Thebes ; and theAmpheium seems to have been a tower, or some building capableof resistance, not far from that gate; for this Ampheium isdearly not to be confounded with the barrow of Zethus andAmphion, on the outside of the northern gate of the Cadmeia ;nor is the Agora the same as that described by Pausanias, whenThebes was confined to the Cadmeia.The accompanying sketch, though showing only the generalform of the ground, and not founded on any correct measuresSUPPLEMENTARY NOTESmenti or existing zemaiiis, may assist in explaining the precedingnote.P. Ses. The suburbs of Thebes. — There were four suburbs orvillages near Thebes, which no longer existed in the time ofPausanias, though some remains of the monuments for whichthey had been celebrated still marked their site.* These werePotniflBy Copia, Once, and Cynoscephalse.I. PotnuB. — It is probable that Pausanias, by the words inBoeot. c. 8. r^c ic6\ziaQ Zixa fiaXurra d^tarfiKori irraZlovg HorviwviffTiv cpe/irca, intended the distance from the Cadmeia, or Thebesof his time, and not that from the ircp//9oXoc rov dfy)(aiov recxovctor walls of lower Thebes, though, as immediately after noticingthe inclosure of Amphiaraus on the way from Potnise to Thebes(Ik Uorviwy iov<riv tQ 84j3ac), he proceeds to describe Lose wallsand seven gates, it seems at first more natural to measure theten stades from the gate Electric, as I supposed in p. 323. Batin this case we must place Potnise on the crest of the ridge, oreven on its southern slope, where no river exists ; whereas, if wemeasure them from the southern wall of the modem town, whichis nearly, if not exactly coincident with that of the time of theAntoninus, Patriae might have stood upon the river Dire,towards its sources, at about 400 yards from the walls of lowerThebes. And this proximity accords with Strabo, (p. 408. 412,)who states, not only that Potnise was near the city (*£or2 ^e ital4 A/pci} Kfifivfi Koi TLoTvial rfjc 7r6\€iag irXi|a/ov), but thatsome of the critics even identified it with the Hypotheses ofHomer (pi fit iixovrai 'iro\iSi6y rt 'YiroOi|/3ac tdkov/uyoyf ol Hrac Ilorviac)* This situation of Potnis accords also perfectlywith a movement of the Thebans when opposed to Agesilaos inthe year b.c. 377 (See Vol. II. p. 475). The Atpini Kpiipti seemsto have stood at the gate Crease, for Stations, the only authorwho names the gate of Dirce, agrees in all the other gates withPausanias, but omitting the Grenada. Probably in the time ofStrabo, and much more ardently perhaps, the Dirce was an artificialfountain, derived from the river, and which may have hadthe reputation of being the Aretia or fountain of Mars, at whichCadmus slew the dragon ; for it is to be observed that Pindarand the Attic poets constantly allude to Dirce as a river, not afount, and so Pausanias also describes it.2. Cfiopta. — I have alluded (Vol. II. p. 238*) to the situationADDITIONAL NOTES. 577of this milmrb of Thebes, the existence of which in the timeof Strabo though no longer in that of Pausanias, may bededuced from p. 404 of that geographer, where, in reference tothe temple of Amphiaraiu in the Oropia, he remarks, that theworship had been brought thither from Copia of the Thebaid,where the original Amphiaraeium was situated. (*£ir Kytinrla^ BenfC Oiy/Saur^c fuOtSpevfUyov iivpo ro 'Afi^cafkiccoy.) The exactposition is shown by Pausanias, who in approaching Thebesfrom Plataea, describes between Potnis and the ancient walls ofthe city, on the right of the road, a small inclosure (irepi/3oXoc ov/fcyac), containing columns (the remains probably of a temple),within which it was asserted that no herb would grow, nor anyanimal enter, nor would birds alight upon the columns. Here,according to the local reports, Amphiaraus descended with hischariot into the earth, when he fled repulsed from the walls at theattack of Thebes by the seven chiefs. Strabo again alludes to thistemple in the same page, in reference to an opinion maintained bythe Tanagrsei (Pausan. Boeot. c. 19.) to whom the deserted Harmthen belonged, that this place situated on the road from Thebes toChalks, had received its name from the chariot of Amphiaraus ;according to this legend, Strabo observes, the chariot arrived emptyat Harmaa, Amphiaraus having been thrown out on the field ofbattle at the place where his temple then stood (cmrca^vroc Ikrdv Ap/ioroc iy rp fJ^^XV ^^ *Afi^apaov Kara tov r<$irov, oZ vvvioTi rd upon aW<ni) — while others, he adds, meaning evidentlythose who maintained the Theban locality of the whole fable,asserted, that it was the chariot not of Amphiaraus, but ofAdrastus, that had given name to Harmaa. The words kv rjfi&XJf prose ^^^ Strabo here refers to a temple near Thebes,although, in speaking of the Amphiaraeium of the Oropia, heseems to have adopted a different version of the fable, and tohave supposed that it was there the earth opened to receive thehero and his chariot, and this notwithstanding the words ofSophocles, which he cites, and which clearly show that the poetsupposed the event to have happened not there, but in theThebflsa,^E^i^aro pandora QriPaia Koyi^AWdiffiy okXoic teal Ttrptaplar^ hii^p^.It appears, indeed, from Pausanias, that the Oropii neverVOL. nr, o o *578 ADDITIONAL NOTES.claimed the honour in question, but assented to the legendof the Tanagra : Xiyerai hi *Ap^iapaf ^vyom Ik Qti^Ay &a-oriiyai ri)v yfivt Koi cs ahro¥ ofuiu cal rd dpfta vweBH/oto' wXi^y ovTavTTi wfifiiiyai ^a<rcv, ctXXa ^ iffrir Ik Oii(iiliy lovaiy ig XaXxl^"Apfia KoXovfiiyoy. Attica. 84.8. Once. — Although at this place there remained only in thetime of Pausanias a statue of Minerva Tonga, and an altar in theopen air, there had formerly been not only a temple (see Vol. II.p. 234), but a suburb, as appears from the scholiast of Pindar(01. 2. y. 89. 48.), from Tzetzes (in Lycoph. v. 1225), andfrom the lexicon of Phavorinus (in v. oyicac), in all which Onceis described as a K&fiti rijc Boiwiac^ or a cwftif O^/Swi', whereCadmus dedicated the statue of Minerva Tonga. Here the ox givenby Apollo as a guide to Cadmus lay down, thus signifying to himthat he had arrived at the place where his colony was to be established.According to a scholiast of Euripides (in Phoen. v. 1069Xthis myths was recorded in the temple by an inscription, butwhich is probably of a late date :"Oyjcac vijoc ^^ inly *A0i|vd(, 6y irort KadfiocEio'aro fiovy ff tepevaev, Br* cjcrco'cy &ffrv ro O^jSac.Nothing unfortunately in this story fixes the exact position ofOnce, or of the gate Oncais (otherwise named Ogygia), beforewhich it stood. But if the suggestions which I have alreadyventured to make as to the other gates are not unfounded (seeVol. II. p. 241), the middle of the eastern wall of lower Thebesseems the most probable situation of the suburb and temple.We have seen that the Electris was at the southern, the Proetisat the north-eastern, the Borreise or Hypsistse at the northern,the Neitis at the north-western extremity of the city ; and thatof the remaining three gates, two, namely, the Homolois andGrenada, are almost unavoidably placed in the western walls.On the eastern side, therefore, there would have been no gatebetween the Prcetis and Electris, or between the north-easternand southern parts of the circuit, unless the Oncais had been insome part of that interval.4. Cynoscephalce* — I have already sufficiently adverted to thesituation of this place in Vol. II. p. 474 et seq. It seems tohave anciently occupied the projecting point of the low hills.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 679which advance into the plain to the northward of the Cadmeia^about 500 yards from it, where the river Dirce winds round thebase in a northerly direction into the plain.P. 431. Mount Lycaheitus. — In the same manner as I supposethe Pentelicum of Pausanias to have been the highest peak ofthe mountain more anciently and comprehensively called theBrilessus or Brilettus, — the former name in the time of theRoman Empire having displaced, in a great measure, the latter,in consequence of the fame of the quarries of Gentle near thatsummit, — so I am now inclined to believe that Anchesmus,which has not a very ancient sound, was a specific name of posteriororigin attached to the highest point of Lycabettus, a nameevidently belonging to the earliest history of Attica. Lycabettuscomprehended perhaps all those inconsiderable ridges whichextend north-eastward from the site of Athens along the rightbank of the Missus towards Pentelicum, the principal summit,now the hill of St. George, having possibly derived its nameAnchesmus from its position &yx*» or near the city walls, andits adoption in common parlance in consequence of the increasingworship of Jupiter Anchesmius on that summit. Everyauthor who enumerates the Attic mountains includes amongthem Brilessus and Lycabettus, except Pausanias, who substitutesfor those names Pentelicum and Anchesmus, neither ofwhich names is found in any other author except Vitruvius, whoalludes to the Mons Pentelensis. There is great reason tobelieve, therefore, that Pentelicum and Anchesmus were namesnot prevalent in common use until near the time of the RomanEmpire. I had already stated in the Topography of Athens,p. 70, some reasons in favour of the identity of Lycabettus withthe hill of St. George, derived from a fable of AntigonusCarystius, and from the words " pingni melior Lycabettus olive"of Stations ; but, upon the whole, J there gave a preference tothe ridges near the Pnyx, following the supposed testimony ofPlato. His words, however, will undoubtedly bear a differentmeaning from those which I deduced from them. Plato seemsto be describing (for his meaning is not clear) the ancient orfabulous state of the site of Athens prior to a certain deluge andearthquake, which were said to have removed a great quantityof soil. The Acropolis was then so large as to extend todie Eridanus and Missus, and to comprehend within it theo o 2*580 ADDITIONAL NOTBB.Pnyx M well as the mountain Lycabettos, which is oppositeto the Pnyx. — r6 H xpi*' ir erip^ XP^^f fUytBot ?v irp^c row'Hpiiayoy koI tov *IXc0-(rov hirofitPiiKvUi mu ir£f>iciXi|^v?a iirocTov TLvitKa Kal tov AwcAftiiToy 6pov («/• opo^) cc rov KararriKpiUyvKoc txovoa, — However the latter words may be construed,Plato evidently meant to say that Lycabettus was opposite toPnyx. If therefore by "opposite'* we may be allowed tounderstand diametrically opposite with reference to the generalsituation of die city and its circumference, it will follow, that asthe Pnyx was near its south-western extremity, Lycabettus wasto the north-east. And this interpretation is supported by thesituation of Pallene ; — from whence Minerva in the fable of And-genuswas said to have brought the mountain, which she hadintended for an outwork to the Acropolis, but which she threwdown upon hearing of the birth of Erichthonius, for Pallene was adeus of Attica to the north-eastward of Athens, where Minervawas particularly worshipped. (Y. Tr. of the R. S. of Literature,Vol. I. p. 141.) — Nothing perhaps after all is of greater weightin this question than the general consideration, that there is noremarkable mountain worthy of the fame of Lycabettus nearAthens, except that of St. George, including the ridge connectedwith it to the northward. In support of the identity of the peakof St. George with Anchetmus^ there is not much to be allq^,this name occurring only, as I before remarked, in Pausanias,but his description of it as an 5poc oit fiiya, after mentioningPentelicum, Pames, and Hymettus, is perfectly appropriate.There is no other mountain within the horizon to which thesewords can be so well applied, and the dedication of such a summitto Jupiter is exactly conformable to ancient customs.P. 558. — An inscription found at Delphi shows that some ofthe records of the manumission of slaves were in the theatre,and that the theatre was a part of the Herm. — See Boeckh.Corp. Inscr. Gr. Vol. I. p. 883.P. 572. — It was worthy of notice here, that the three goldenstars upon a brazen 'horror, or staff presented by the ^ginetans,and which in the time of Herodotus (vit. 1. 8. c. 122) stoodclose by the silver vase of Theodore the Samian presented byCroesus, seem to have followed the fate of the latter, as well as ofother similar objects, which had been converted into money.P. 585.— From a Latin inscription at Delphi (Boeckh. VoL I.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 581p. 838,) we hearty that a promontory on the coast between Cirrhaand Anticyra, which was the boundary between the districts ofDelphi and Anticyra, was named Opus, or Poeta. The latterform, which is the third case of Opoeis, shows that the useof that case in the names of places, now generally prevalent inGreece, was common as early as the second century.VOL. III.P. 26.— The gentile of 'lOaini was either "Itfojcoc or 'I6oc<k. —Etymon. M. in ''IOwcoq.P. 212. — Mount Disarm. — I have to regret that the historyof the Doric Race by Professor K. O. Miller of Gk>ttingen, wasunknown to me when the parts of this volume relating to theancient geography of Macedonia, were printed. My conclusions,however, in general coincide with those which that author's extensivereading and acute criticism have deduced from local information,still more imperfect than my own. One of the mostimportant points, in which I find myself at variance with himis the situation of mount Dysarum^ which depends upon that ofthe lake Prasias, and upon the extent assignable to the Macedoniaof Herodotus, in his description of the embassy of the sevenPersians who were sent by Megabazus, when he had reducedthe Stones (about 507 B. C), to demand earth and water, in thename of his master Darius, from Amyntas I. king of Macedonia."JSiOTi ii Ik r^c npaaca^c Xi/ivf}c <rvyT<ffioc capta ig rely *irptarra fuv yap i^ETai rife Xi/iviyc to fiiraWoVf e{ oSvoTtpoy Tovriuty rdXayrov dpyvpiov *AXc£av^p^ iffiipric licaffriycifolra' fiery ^i to fUTuXKoy ^virupoy icaXeofuyoy ovpOQ vvippdyratJyai iy Moucc^oWp. Herodot. 1. 5, c. 17*M. Miillerconsiders the country called Macedonia in this passageof Herodotus, to be that to the westward of the Lydiass, possessedby the Macedonia race when the Temenidae first establishedthemselves in this country, and which may be calledMacedonia Proper.The following are the passages of Herodotus, which seem tosupport this view of the question. The historian is describingADDITIONAL NOTES.the arrival of the fleet of Xerxes in the bay of Saloniki. writer SidwlKtro €£ re rijr wpoitptifiiyjiy Oipfirfy koL ^p^y re w6\tv koIXaXitrrptiv earl roi^'Aftoy xorafAor^ h^ ohpl(ei X^P^^ ^^ MvydoWiirre Kol BorrcaifSa, r^c cxovo'c to Tapa ddXaffoav ^rccvoy x^ipUtrwoXig^lxyai re xal IleXXa. 1. 7. c. 12B.'Qq hi ec r^v Oipfirir aTiKtro 6 iVepfiyc* ^^pvac avrov n^r drpa-Wiry* iiciay^t ht 6 trrparoQ ahrov (rrparoreBevSfuyoc r^v TopadaXatriray xitptfy roviiyht* dp^afuyo^ two Oipfiric xoXioc 'di rifeMvy^yiriQ /Jtixp^ AviUw r€ worafiov koI * AXiOKfioyog^ di dvpiiovm.lily rijy Bomadda t€ Kal Maire^WSa, ic rdnn'o fieeSpoy ro vdwpffVfifiltryoyreQ* ifrrparoinievoyro fuy ^i) iy rovroun rdlvt x^piowioi /3apj3afK>c. 1. 7* c. 127*From which testimony we may infer that the Lydiass formeda junction at that time with the Haliacmon, and not, as at present,with the Axis ; that between the latter river and the jointcourse of the two former there was a narrow portion of sea-coastbelonging to the Bottissi \ whose towns were Pella and Ichnae'that the sea-coast beyond the united channel of the two westernstreams belonged to the Macedonia, and (if we identify theMaKsSoyiri of Herodotus in 1. 5. c. 17» with his F^ Mcuce&vcc in1. 7* c. 127), that Dysorufn was the mountain which rises abovePella to the northward, and the lake Prasias that which liesbetween Doiran and the Axis. In no other way can we reconcilethe assertion of Herodotus that the road was very shortfrom the lake Prasias into Macedonia, nor even then would theagreement be very close, as the river Axis and its valley wouldstill be interposed between the lake and Mount Decorum.It is evident, however, that the conquest of Megabazus didnot extend beyond the valley of the Strymon, though Homer^ In later times the whole maritimeplain at the head of the gulf ofSalonfki, seems to have been dividedbetween Mygdonia, or Amphaxitis,and Bottiseisi for which reason I haveso marked the latter on the map.And, according to the Etymologist,a third named Bottea, or thecity of the Botteatse. See p. 455 ofthis volume. It is almost needless toremark, that this gentile was one ofthose local niceties of orthographyoften neglected in the other parts ofGreece. Thus we find that althoughThucydides makes the distinctions ofBottia and Notice, or country of theBottisi,in the names attachedrespec-lively in his time, to the western andeastern Bottiseis, he also applies Boreto the western, which, by Herodotus,is named Bomaitc» and thepeople Borrtatoi. And these weredoubtless the forms in ordinary useamong the Greeks.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 583places the Penes on the Arius, and the banks of That riverabove Mygdonia and Bottisea were still considered a part ofPannonia in much later times \ for it is expressly stated by Herodotus,that the Stones subdued by Megabazus dwelt on theStrymon, (etiy Si ^ Hatovlri earl ry 2rpv/Li<Svi worafif wtrnXifffiiyri.1. 5. c. 13.) and that one of their tribes were the Siropoeones,or people of Thrice, now Serres. For this and other reasons(see page 210, et seq. of this volume) I have little doubt thatthe lake Prasias was the same as the Cerdnitis or Strymoniclake, and consequently that Disarm was a part of the mountainousrange which separates the Strymonic plain from thosewhich extend to Thessalmuca and the jlxius. By Moxc^Wiy in1. 5. c. 17, Herodotus probably meant the Macedonian kingdomof his own time, or at least of that of Amyntas, who, augmentingthe conquests of his ancestors, had already made great advancestowards the Strymon, at which river the Macedonian kingdomhad arrived in the reign of Alexander I., son and successor ofAmyntas. " All this country," adds Thucydides, in describingthe invasion of Stances and the Thracian in the reign of Per-diccas, son of Alexander, " is called Macedonia." (to Si ivfiwayMaKsSoyia KaXeirai, 1. 2. c. 99.) The extension of the namehad probably kept pace with the conquest of the Temenidse, andalready, in the reign of Amyntas, comprehended a great part ofthe country between the Lydiass and the Strymon.P. 242. — Anna Comnena (1. 2, p. 60) notices the church ofSt. Demetrius at Thessalonica.P. 258. — Tzetzes, a writer of the same age as Anna, mentionsalso the BapSApri, Anna writes BapSopoc. To Bap^apc orBapSapiov is the modem form.P. 272. — The royal sepulchres of Jena were plundered by agarrison of Gauls, who were placed there by Pyrrhus, when hedefeated Antigonus, and for the second time obtained possessionof Macedonia. — Plutarch in Pyre. — Diodor. Exc. de Vert, et Vit.1. 22.P. 291. — The river of Berrhcea may perhaps be the Organs,which Stephens (in M/e^a) on the authority of Theagenes statesto have been named after a son of Bees, whose daughter Berrhosagave name to the city. Mirza, which received its name from a^ Thucyd. 1. ii. c. 99, 100.584 ADDITIONAL Notes.sister of Berrhcea, appears as well from this as from other circumstancesto have been an important city of Macedonia, and it isone of those most difficult to place. The name would lead nsto look for it in the same part of Macedonia as Berrhoea, whichagrees with Ptolemy, who classes it among the cities of Mathias.Stephens, on the other hand, still deriving apparently his informationfrom Theagenes, alludes to it as a t6woc ^Brfivfidroct andadds that it was sometimes called Strymonium. Alexander theGreat established an Aristotelian school at Missa, and it waslamed for a stalactitic cavern.— Plin. H. N. 1. 31» c. 11.P. 324, line 27* — Of the conjecture here advanced, I find aconfirmation in Diodorus ; namely, that Alexander returned toPella after the siege of Pallium in Dassaretia, and previously tohis rapid marches through Eordasa and Elimeia to PelinnsBum inThessaly, and from thence to Thebes, although Arrian has omittedto mention that return, and thereby has left the reader to supposethat Alexander marched directly from Pallium to Pelinnssum,and that in his route he traversed Eordma, which is quite inconsistentwith the situation of Eordaea, as deducible from otherauthorities. The words of Arrian are these : UvdofUrf ii^AXiid^ip^ ra rev 8i}/3aiwv, oi^a/iwc H^ku diukifrixg elrac"Aywv iii irapa t^¥ *Eop^aiav r€ koI r^v 'EXv/Mi^rii^,Koi irapa r^c Tv/i^a/oc icaX Ilapavatac acta, kfiSofialoc dfucvurat€( UtXXriyiiy (al. UiKlyvav) lijc GerraX/ac* (De Exp. Alex. 1. 1.c. 7.) Concerning which I have made (in Vol. lY. p. 120.)another observation, having no reference to the situation ofEordeea, namely, that the places mentioned by Arrian are not intheir proper order; since Paravaaa ought to precede Tymphcea inproceeding from Olympia, &c. to Pelinnseum, which was doubtlessthe Thessalian town intended by Arrian.Diodorus, in reference to the march of Alexander to Thebes,states, that he received intelligence of the revolt of some of thecities of Greece, particularly of Thebes, while he was employedin reducing the Illyrian, and other barbarians in that quarter ;and that he returned thereupon into Macedonia with the intentionof losing no time in taking measures for suppressing thetroubles in Greece : well ravra d' ovroc avrov, wnp^^dr rirtcdwayyiXkoyrtc koKKovq tUv 'EXXZ/i'WV vtm-tpLiuv Kok iroXXacr^C 'EXXaJbc iroXe<c irpoc dw6(rrainv wpfitiKivai, fAaXttrra ^eOiy/Saiovc* girl ^e rovrocc 6 fiaaiXiVQ irapoiffvdeic iwavfjikBev cicADDITIONAL NOTES. 585r^F Marcfcv/av, ^irev^v rds rani n)v 'EXXJ^a iravtfat rapaxac*1. 17. c. 8.Diodorus, therefore, confirms Arrian in that part of his statement,which shows that Alexander received intelligence of therevolt of Greece while employed against the syrians : and hyadding, that he returned to Macedonia previously to the adoptionof measures for suppressing the troubles in Greece, that historianremoves at once the difficulty arising from the assertion ofArrian, that Alexander marched through Eordsea in his way toPellnnseum, Eordsea having been exactly in the route from Pella,the capital of Alexander, to Pelinna&um. I have to correct,however, the supposition, in Vol. III. p. 325, 1. 2. that Alexanderreceived news of the revolt of Greece after his return toPella ; since Diodorus accords with Arrian in showing, that theintelligence reached him in lUyria. The reasons of his returninghome before he marched into Ghreece, are not explained byDiodorus.P. 340, note. — ^^The importance of Alcomenae on ^^The Erigonmay be inferred from Arian (Ind. c. 18), who describes one oftile Macedonian commanders of the triremes under Searches onthe Hydaspes as UtiBwv Spared *AXM>/i€y<6c.P. 464, note 2. — sit is here suggested that the Ariston, who wasdeprived of his kingdom by Lysimachus, as related by Polysenus,was the same prince who, together with Areta8(Arrian. Exp. AL 1. 3.c, 1 2), commanded the Pssonians under Alexander in Asia ; but thiscould not have been if Polyaenus was correct in describing Aristonas a fAupdict^Ti near fifty yean having then elapsed from thetime of the departure of Alexander into Asia. As it is not likely,though possible, that the Audoleon, who is proved by the Athenianinscription to have reigned in the archonship of Mittimus,B.C. 354, was the same as the Audoleon who was assisted byCassander against the Autariatse in 310, but more probable thatthe former was the rather of the latter ; Ariston and Areas, whocommanded the Paeonians in Asia, may have been younger sonsof the first, and brothers of the second Audoleon. It is natural thatAudoleon should have sent his younger sons with his Paeoniansinto Asia, and the more so perhaps as Pseonia, which had beenoften opposed to Philip, had been recently subdued by Alexander.The Ariston who was forced to fly from his kingdom by Lysimachuswas probably a son of Audoleon II. and brother of the586 ADDITIONAL NOTES.Aeolian princess whom Pyrrhus married. (Plutarch in Pyr.) —From a more correct copy of the Athenian inscription to which Ihave had access since chapter xxxi. was printed, it appears thatthe father of Audoleon I. was named Patrons, which not onlyfixes the hitherto doubtful origin of the coins inscribed HAT-pay,but renders it probable that Agis, who died b. c. 859,was the elder brother of Audoleon I., and that he died young,after a short reign. The words indeed of Diodorus seem toimply that he died unexpectedly : — 6 ^/Xciriroc . . • • airoXvdeic^c rov irpoc 'AOi|vaiovc woKifiov, koX nvyOaydfuyo^ rov (iainXiarev HatSyiav " Aycv rereXevri|reVac, virikafie jcacpov exccv IvtBioBatrole TLat6irt, — Diodor. 1. 16. c. 4.P. 47S. — The following was accidentally omitted after theword Thessaly in the 19th line, ** where he left Perseus wi4000 men at the Fauces Thessaly to watch the iBtolians whilehe marched himself against the Msedi." This transaction occurredin the early spring of the year 211, B.C. and formedpart of a succession of those rapid movements for which Philipwas so remarkable. From Pella he moved to Oricus and Apologia,from thence into Dardaniaia, then to the Fauces Thessaly,or passes leading from the westward into upper Thessaly nearGomphi and ^ginium, from thence into Medica, then, in hisway to assist the Acamanes against the italians, as far as Diumof Macedonia, when, having received advice of the retreat of theitalians, he returned from Dium to Pella. The distance wasnot less than 1500 miles by the road, besides the excursionswhich always accompany military operations, and to which thehistorian particularly adverts when Philip was in the country ofthe Msedi.VOL. IV.P. 328. — ^^The ruins here mentioned are sometimes called PaleaF^rsala ; and I have omitted in the text to notice also a finesource of water on the northern side of the hill, which concurs,with the insulated nature of the hill, in the midst of the Tressilianplains, to fix it for an ancient site.ADDITIONAL NOTES. 587P. 448. — ^As Lacereia is a name connected only with earlyhistory* Petra may possibly have been the appellation of thesame place at a subsequent date, and thus may have reached thepresent day ; for Petra of Thessaly was celebrated for the worshipof Neptune, as we learn from Pindar. Pith. 4. v. 246. and fromApollonius. The former addresses Pelias as Lai IIomiavoQHcrpatov, and Apollonius (1. 3, v. 1240) mentions the ThessalianPetra as one of the places where Neptune was particularlyworshipped : —Oloc l^''l<rBfAtov cTo'c lloiretBdiitv ec &yci^va"Apfxatriy c/i/3ejSa«lfc, fj Talvapovy ^ oyc AipvtiQ•^^wp, iJE Ear* dXffo^ 'Yavriov 'Oyxiorolo,Kal T£ KaXavpeiay fUTa ^^ Oafia ylaatrat iinroicHirptiy 0* AifioyitiVy ^ ^cyBpiieyra TtpaiaT6y*ToloQ ap* Ai^riic K6k)(iay dyoQ hey i^itrOat,P. 462. — The exact scene of the victory of the Romans overPhilip at Cynoscephalfie, in the year B.C. 197, may possibly beascertained by means of a passage in Livy, (1. 36. c. 8.) derivedundoubtedly from Polybius ; wherein he informs us, that whenAntiochus was at Pherse six years afterwards, preparing to act inalliance with the iBtolians against Rome, he employed 2000 mento collect the bones of the Greeks who had fallen at Cynoscephalae,and that he formed them into a tumulus. Legate Clarissa adconcilium Thessalorum sunt miss, et Atolls Amynandroque diesad convenient exerdtui Pleas est dictus : eodem et rex cumsuis copies confessio venit. Ibi dum obperitur Amynandrumatque iBtolos, Philippi Megalopolitanum cum duobus millionshominem ad legends ossa Macedon circa Cynoscephalas, ubidebellatum erat cum Philippe, visit ; sive ab ipso, quserentesibi commendation ad Macedon gentes et invidiam regi,quod sepultus milites relinquished, months; sive ab insist regiusanimate, ad consilium specie amplius, re inane, animo abject.Tumulus est, in annum osseous, quae passim strata grant, concernfactus; qui nulla gratian ad Macedon, odium ingensad Philippi, movit.P. 503.— The determination of the position of Cierium servessto restore the text of Scylax and Strabo, both of whom, it is nowevident, noticed this place. It would seem from these two authors,that the name of the town was written K/cpoc, or Sepoy,588 ADDITIONAL Notes.as well as KUptav. In Scyiaz (OerraX/a) we find 4cif»«aXoc»Upon (KUpoy) ncXXcFraioy. In Strabo p. 485, as follows:Tara ^ ^trrl r^c OerraXt}^tiog^ fu&Q t&v rtffad(My fupHmyrj|£ [v Gcr]raX/ac> i(c i^ sal rd hir ElrpmrvXov ml 6MAX[oCf tvBa *Aw6XXu']yoQ rod ^vXKalov Icpoy, ical "Ix*^* ^^vi^ 6^/ic[c 4 *Ix^^A n^/uarac* oral R/tpoc ^ ii aitr^y trvyTtKelrat[kqI rd /ti^XpO ''^^ *AOa/«oWac. The brackets show the lettersdeficient at the end of each line in the best MS. of Strabo, thatof Paris, No. 1897. See the French translation Vol. III.p. 345.INDEX.VOL. IV.PpINDEX.ABBREVIATIONS.c. city — ^t. town — ^r. river — evil. village — ^mn. mounUun— fn. fountain — isl. island —prom, promontory — mon. monastery — He). Hellenic — pt. port— up. upper— peo.peoples. EmruB^Th, Cleanly— 70. Vlyria^jEio, ^tolia— Joe. Macedonia—^tt. Attic— Aa. BflBotia.— Tsar. Thrace— Don. Da88aretia.-^<tf». Atin-tania^rien. Tbenaliotia— /Tic^. Histiieotifr— PAii^. Pbthioti»— Peas. PelassiotiaPho. Phocis— room. Acamania— Perrr. PerrrrliKbiar— diet district — or thus:lo&n. d. for lo&nnina district, &c. — Where two names occur combined, aaMae.'Tkr, or BeBO,-Pko, &c. it implies that the place is on the borders of thetwo countries.Ancient Provinces Territories or Idandt.AcARNANiA, chap. iii. iy. xxxii. xxxiii.xxxiv.^NIANBS, chap. X.stolid, chap. iii. xxi. xxxii. xxxiii.Amphilochia, chap, xxxviii.Attica, chap. xvii. xviii.BflBOTiA, chap. xi. xii. xiii. xiv. xv. xyi.xvii. xviii. xix.Doris, chap. xi.Epirus, chap, i. ii. iv. v. vi. viii. ix.xxii. xxxii. XXXV. xxxvi. xxxvii.xxxviii. xxxix. xliiEuboea, chap. xiv. *Illyria, chap. viii. xxviii.Islands of the .^OiSAN, chap, xxiii.of the Ionian Sba, chap. xxii.LocRis, easterly chap. xi. xiii. ; wetter,xxi.Macedonia, chap. vi. vii. xxiv. xxv.xxvi. xxvi. xxviii. xxx. xxxi.Magnesia, chap. xl. xli.Boards, chap. xvii.Eblis, chap. X.Pbrrhabia, chap, xxviii. xxxix.Phocis, chap. xi. xiii. xx. xxi.Phthisis, chap. xl.Thbssalia, chap. ix. xxix. xxxix. xli.xlii. Xllll.\* In ihefoUowhg Index the ardent names art mrnOed in Italkt: ike modem mHoman letter, supplied with accents on all words of three or more syllables, aswell as on ikose of two in urilicA the accent is on the last syUabU.Ahantesy neo. Chaonia^ i. 375Ba, t. Pho, ii. 164, 549Altera, t. Thrace, iii. 215Abdim Bey, of Larissa, iii. 364; iv. 294AbdulU Paahi, of Elbass&n, i. 53Abufakl&r, vil. Peas. iv. 419Canals, t. Chale. Mac. iii. 147, 148.160. 168The heading of the psfpes, vol. ii. from 252 to 265 inclusive ought to be Euboea,not Boeotia.1 PpINDEX.AcheUtus,, r. JEto.-Acam, \. 121. 187287. 290; iii. 513. 527. 555; iv. 211.Acheron, r. Tkesprctia, i. 232. 234. 242;iii. 7; iv. 53. 188Aehenuia, lake Thesprotia, i. 242; iii. 7AckUle$, cave of, on Mount PeUmm,iv. 385Achria, c. Bulgaria, i. 339 ; iii. 273Ackhoriua the Gaul, at Delphi ii. 59AeiltM, the consul, ii. 27.61.624; iv.Aoontitma, station in Thrace, iii. 180Actium, mn. B€BO,'Pho. ii. 99. 143.145. 163Aera, t. jEto. i. 148. 154Acraphit, lake Ben, ii. 308Acnepkium, t. Ben. ii. 295—305. 308Aeroaihot, t. .peto, 3/ctc. iii. 149, e<j4rr(Nrratrfita, mn. Chaonia, i. 2 — ^7.79. 88. 374Acre, peninsula Afar. iii. 114 — 142isthmus of, Mae, iii. 142Asia, games, i. 186. 193, 194Action, il. 147.333.Adimm, temple, Adam* i. 174. 194 ; iv—,battle of, iv. 33AamhoM, or Putdm, t. and r. Doris, ii.Adam Bey, of 'Epakto, ii. 611Adh&mi, vil. Hist, iii. 162JEanteium, prom. Man. iv. 397"^ i», t. Evitoea, ii. 176p, mn. AU, ii. 382KB, uEu/mbo, ii. 275; c. Mac. iii.13.272yEoftniM, t. Denarii, ii. 410. 412j^ia, isl. i?»&a», ii.^422. 432■ ■ , isl. Crete, iii. 75ilipe, t. Ithaca, iii. 49imam, t. //m«. i. 421 ; iv. 511. 528.11.537tium, t. JEto. ii. 614. 617ia, t. Melts, ii. 21^^.Jhcna, t. Regards, ii. 405. 504.h20AZneia, prom, and t. Mac, iii. 451 —Aeneas, his voyage round Greece, iii.454; iv. 182Venus, t. Thrace, iii. 215ASolic dialect, ii. 130. 152. 447. 472;in. 356. 365JEolis, t. Pho, ii. 579Mropus, mn. ^<tff<. i. 385. 389Aesculapius, temples of, at Trieea, i.429; iv. 286; near Tiihorea, Pho. ii.90',aiElateia,Pho. u. 83JEsone, or yEsMno, t. Moan, iv. 399i£«ym«, t. Thrace, iii. 178. 224^/)UcM, pco. Ep. Th, iv. 277Aet6, Hel. ruins, iii. 33, 34; modemfort. iv. 12Mioiia Epietetiu, ii. 623Aeolian plain, i. 138jEtolians, i. 210; ii. 27. 30. 58. 61.626; iii. 566Aforismds, mn. Ati. ii. 429Agamippe, fn. Bagot. ii. 492Agassa, t. Pierian m, 423, 424AgesHoMS, ii. 331. 474 ; iii. 506; iv. 471Aghia, pt. Pho. ii. 524. 549; t. Magi.iii. 374 ; iv. 408'Aghion 'Ores, see ActeAnti, peo. jEto, iv. 245. 252'Agra, dist. iv. 266vil. iv. 272A^apidhii, pt. Cassopen, i. 244. 253;IV. 47Agriculture, ii. 108. 216 ; iii. 515. 545;IV. 54. 113.280 334Agrfli, pt. CepkaUeniay m. 55Agrili6, mon. Aeam. i. 160; iii. 504^^'m'ttin, t. ^Eio. i. 152. 155, 156; iiAgro, king of lUgriay i. 67Aguriani, vil. Mt. Pamasstte, ii. 581Aidinli, vil. Mt. Ossa, iv. 413Aid&neus, king of ThesproHoy i. 234Aio Vlasi, vil. Pho. U. 106'Aio VasfU, vil. Chaotic, i. 17Aistr&ti, isl. ^^Egem. iii. 113Ajar, shield of, ii. 314son of Oileus, ii. 176. 188■ ^ dominions of, ii. 410Akh&Ua, vil. Bwo. ii. 267Akhili, pt. Sqvrtw, j^esam, iii. 106Akhin6, vU. Phih. (Eehitmsj, ii. 20Akhrida, or Okhri, t lU. i. 342Akri, from. Adam. (AcHumJ, i. 175 ;Al&klisi', vil. Mae. (PeOaJ, iii. 260Alalcomenm, t. Ben, ii. 1^. 138Alatf, isl. ffulf of Volo, iv. 396Alatjaushluk, vil. near Pella, iii. 266Albania, its chieftains, tribes, and politicalsubdivisions, i. 45. 61. ^4.346; iii. 522; iv. 203, 294Albanian character, i. 43. 279; iv. 544;dress, i. 39 ; iv. 89Alcaiho'i, citadel of Megara, ii. 394 —Aloes, king ofEnirus, i. 252Alcomenm, t. up. Mac. up. Tk, iii. 841 ;iv. 575; or AlalcometuB, t. Ithaca,iii. 48Alofomc sea, ii. 406. 515AlMldmo, vil. and prom. CorfSi, i. 94Alumina, vil. Metis, ii. 32Alepukh6ri, vil. lo&n. d. i. 263: iv. 79Alexander the Great, ii. 298. 316 ; in.211. 434; iv. 120of TricJiomum, i. 147son of NeopUJcmus, iv. 180of Herm, iv. 465Alex6pulo, ruined vil. Ben. ii. 327Alifaka, vil. />«£». i. 434; iii. 366; iv.Alike, pt. Bc. w. coast, ii. 503. 520Alikiiki, vil. Orooia, n. 444Aliv^ri, vil. and Miy EiAmu ii. 439Almada, t. Mac iii. 471, 472INDEX.Ammonia, t. md dist Mae. iii. 444Alone, t. E. Loc. ii. 176^^jpecum, hill Halioftiay Bwo, ii. 210Ahnu, t. Bottun, iii. 435Alpmij or Alpontu, i. E. Loe. ii. 14. 38.Alp^MMte, tU. JIfe/tt, ii. 8. 24^/m, t. PMh, iy. 337. 356. 36*2Alp[ Pasha, of lo&nnina, his court, action,and preeminent, i. 26. 29—^.72. 89. 168. 203. 225. 283. 254. 277.308. 356. 401. 405. 427. 441 ; iii. 488.501. 549; iv. 45. 85. 149. 220. 268.282.410life of, i. 463.496AljboaiUi, or Alibaaai&tee, vil. Edonia^iii. 182Aljfxia, t. Aeam, iii. 24 ; iv. 14Amant, t. Ckaonia, i. 34. 90. 375~America, mn. Perrr, iii. 333. 344 ; iv.Mari vil. Pelas. iii. 360Amaxikhi, t. LeuoaSy iii. 1 1Ambel&kia, t. mt. Oua, iii. 384. 386Amelia, yil. Euboea ii. 266Ambel6kipo, tU. Att. ii. 427Ambighi, mon. Att. ii, 443Ambrada, c. Ep. i. 162. 199. 208-.217; iv. 183Atubrfieic gulf, iv. 30Ambraau^ fort Ambraeia^ i. 213, 214AmbrytuB, t. Rhoda, ii. 5^5AmmoH^ temple of, at Thebes, ii. 234AmpdWy prom. Sitkoma^ iii. 119Ampkomm, t. Phil. ii. 91 ; iv. 371AmpluucUi$y dist. Mygdtmiay iii. 449Amfkiarafta^ temple of, Oropui, ii. 441.Ampkideiay t. Pile. ii. 75. 86Ampkipaauay prom. Corcyra, i. 94; iii. 2AmaktpoUty c. Edonu^ iii. 181, e< 1109.» the battle at, iii. 191, et aeq,Amboina, t. W.-Loc. ii. 589AmphitryoHy house of, at 7%e6ef, ii. 232Ampktynu, r. i'AM. iv. 337Amiiri, vil Perrr. iii. 334; iv. 302Americans, t. Krivari, ^Eio. i. 124Amvrakia, vil. Aim. i. 159 — 163Amynander. luM of Atiamania^ i. 142;iv. 522. 526Atnyrwt, t. and plain Pelas, iv. 447—4^-, r. Pela. iv. 449Anabasis, voyage d\ translated intomodem Greelc, i. 354Sanatorium t. Aeam. i. 173; iii. 493;iv. 28. 30Anaselftza, dist. Oregtis^ i. 317. 321 ;iv. 121Anastasia. St. mon. Ckalc.-Mac. iii. 162Anatoliko, t. and isl. yet. i. 113; iii.lagoon of, iii. 573AtMurw^ r. Magm, iv. 381Auazi, Til. Arte d. i. 202Attehiatmut^ or Oneketmus^ or port ofAnchises, t. and pt. Ckatmia, \, 13 :iv. 183Anekok\ lake Bcbo. ii. 289Antea, vil. E.Loe. ii. 178Andhro, isl. and t. jEffoan, iii. 105Andiparo, isl. JEgmm^ iii. 87grotto of, iii. 88Antonio, the bandit, iii. 551 ; iv. 206Arachne, shrub, i. 394; ii. 516Andrew, St. pt. Ithaca iii. 55Andritza, vil. Tanoffraa, ii. 465, 466Advocate*. monument of, Platwi», ii.343. 485Angeit, t. Chal.'Mac. iii. 456Anghel6-kastro. vil. and castle peto, i,1-25. 153Veritas, or 'Anghista, r. Adonis iii. 183.An^kistri, prom. PhtA. iv. 360. 368. 371Anus, name meaning river, ii. 22Anilio, part of Metzovo, Trnnphaa. i.411; iv.261'Anno, mn. jEto, ii. 18; vil. Adam,iu.504Anna, Aghia, mon. Acte, Mac, iii. 114Anon, \nl. and mn. Ithaca, iii. 24. 38Anaptea^ road and mn. near Thermalii. 42, 43. 53AnthedoUy t. Bceo. ii. 272, et seq.Anthers, t. near TkermomUB, ii. 34its plain, ii. 7. m. 51Anticyra, t. Melt, ii. 10. 20t. W, Loc, ii. 618t. Pko. ii. 541Aniicyra^ three, ii 543, 544Anthcmwty t. Mac. iii. 450Anthony, the Syria of, place ucaiThebes, ii. 243Aniwoneia or Alcjeandreia, Troas. ii.1^2t. CrwuBa, Mae. iii. 460t. Pwonia, iii. 442. 460t. Chaotic, i. 32. 70. 72Aniiaonettaesy Fauces. Ckaonia. i. 69. 71«3^.385Aniiope, cavern of, in Eleutheria, ii. 378AvHpatria, t. lU. i. 361.^n/irrAuMii^rom. W. Loe. i. IllAntiochus, Kinff of Syria, i. 153. ii. 61.268. iii. 371. iv. 456Antonius, Marcus, iii. 218, ei aeq. iv.33, et seq.Antron, t. Phih, iv. .349Danville, D\ hit opinion on Aettum^ iv^o^. T. Ep, i. 297. 383. 390. iv. 116,volley of the, i. 377bridges of, i. 74, 75stcnl or strain of, i. 32. 385. iv.Aperamtia, t. and dist. into. i. 141, 142Af>heta,pt, Atagn. iv. 3.97Apanomi, prom. vil. and pt. Cru»aa,Mac. iii. 452, 453AphytiSy t. PaUene, Mac. iii. 155INDEX.Apidamu, r. Test, iv. 320. 324. 387.ApiUu, r. Pieria iii. 406Ap6kttro, (list, and lake ^io, i. 119.124. 126. 149Apology named Avlu^ in PdaagktUy iii.356. 361 ; temples of Awm^-1i Ahm^ii. 165; at Actum i. 175. 194; iy. 28.81 ; at Caliban, unnamed LaphrmtUyiii. 534 ; at Delian, Ben, ii. 44d^-453 ;at Delay iii. 97, et $eq,; at Delphi, ii.555 si ; at EtdretU, Bceo, ii. 522; atCm Legate, iii. 41 ; at Lutea, ii. 72 ;at Afeard, several temples and statues,i). 395, et teq, ; at Ivicopolisy Ep.i. 193 ; in Afeaarw-Attiea, summedPyUUiUy ii. 392 ; in Megarig-'Corndkia,summed LaUnu, ii. 415; at PkathUyHid. ii. 621 ; at Ph^ta, Hid, iv.323; on Mt. Poei^tfm, AU. ii. 385;on Mt. PUmm^ Ben. ii. 279. 307 ; atPytkitim, Perrr. iii. 341 ; at Term,Orchomotta^ ii. 153; in TVnuw, iii. o61 .391 ; at Tubes punished /nnMiMw,ii. 231. 233, at Thermal, AEto, i. 146 ;on Mt. Thurium^ Chttrotma, ii. 196 ;at TUphuaa, Bmo. ii. 142 ; near TUkra-num, Pko. ii. 88Ap611ona, prom. Neunu, iii. 95Apologia, t. Choir, Mac, iii. 457c. lUyria, i. 36^-575■ ■ , four towns of that name inMacedonian Tkraee, iii. 457, 458ApodoH, peo. JEio, ii. 619. 623Apostolic r. Doris ii. 72, 92Apostles, pt. Oropta, ii. 442Pius Claudius i. 72. 75Apse$, r. I a. i. 336. 342. 390; iv. 113.ArwJUhut. r. Epirus. i. 208. 217. 298.399.422; i v. 217. 220. 546vale of the, i. 220AracmOkuB, mu. ^Eio, i. 118. 121. 128.154. iii. 528Arikhova, vil. Mt. Pamaanu, i. 131Aripi, vil. AmnkilocMa, iv. 236. 251Grasse, mon. ^o^ossiv. i. 243Aratiu accompanies Philip to Tennis,i. 144Arbutus, the, i. 394; ii. 516Ardkuetety monument in Damlna, Pko.ii. 104ArckdaWy place near Chmronda, ii. 1991 — , officer of Mithridates, ii. 196Arckidamuty orator of jEtoUa, i. 140Area, r. Thrace, iii. 216Afdhim, vU. THkkaU d. i. 429. iv. 265.Ardhenitza, mon. and vil. Ill, i. 379Ardhomista, vil. lo&nnina, d. i. 269.Ardkuaa, fn. Itkaoa^ iii. 53, 54fn. Ckaleii of Evlma, ii. 254pass, Mvadonioy BiBatHa^ iii.170. 461Arj^ti, vil. Meufn. iv. 381. 389Argaliki, mn. Alt. ii. 430Aivhvr6kaatro, t. Obcioma, i. 25. 41. 78.plain of, i. 23. 76; iv.Argus, t Thnue, iii. 171. 195Argu^piuiy temple Plasma, ii. 348Aryisfa, t. Pelat. iii. 367; iv. 534Argiikea, t. Atkamamia, Iv. 212. 272.525,526Argot Predictum, iv. 121■ A mpkHockicum, iv. 238Pe&^ieum, iv. 531, 532Aiigost61i, t. CqpAalleina, iii. 60, d$eq.ArgjfnOy i. W, Lock ii. 622Argyrintiy peo. CSkooina, i. 78Ankdha, vil. Aral, iv. 239. 252Aria, t. Regards. ii. 412Arkhfrdhitza, vil. TkAmorThmnu^ ii.Arkudh6rema, torrent, Ddphi^ ii. 568Armenians, i. 438Armenvtm^ t. Pda», iv. 451Armyri, pt. E, hoc, ii. 185Andre, lagoon near Bidknillwnu Ep,i. 101-, pt. AmfUdloekiay i. 161 ; iv. 237.>, t. Pm. iv. 333. 367Amautli, t. Pdou. iv. 465AnuBy t. Ckalc, Mao, iii. 170Ame, t. BcBO. ii. 305 ; iv. 500. 502^j t. Tke99, iv. 534Arma, t. Eordma., iii. 315Arpitza, vil. Cb«fop«a, iii. 3. 5Arsali, AghU, mon. Mt, ParmunUy u.Ardm'e, i, JEio. i. 125. 153ouccn, ii. 495Artaa, c. Kp. (Ambrosia,) i. 202; iv.223. 22a-234river of, i. 201. 271. 292. 294gulf of, i. 160 ; iv. 236, d ma.Art(itaxu», commander under Aiardo-mu at Palmy ii. 336retreat of, ii. 351Artemis, isl. Alto. iii. 571'Artist, vil. Ousoptfo, iv. 5Artzista, vil. Zag6ri, loin. d. i. 898;iv. 126Area, vil. Latin. iii. 523Atcotdus, or Sacerdos, place in Pieriaiii. 423Abra, t. Ml HeUtxm^ ii. 491AKurtBy lake, mt OUrmpm^ m, 349.Askiti, vil. Moan. iv. 413. 416Asmaki, r. Peu. iii. 373 ; iv. 403AwnatUy mn. Attn, i. 385. 389A»opu», r. Mdu, ii. 6. 11. 26. 31. 53;r. Scotia, ii. 324. 326. 424. 442. 44a455: r. The. iv. 515Aspbaitum, or bitumen, mine of, inlUyna^ i. 365. 378Appleton i. Bcbo, ii. 162Aspra Spitia, vil. Pko, H. 524. 539~INDEX.•Aipii Raft, tomnt in Gkumia^ L 7ABpro, r. JSto.-Aoam. (Aekdotu)^ i.121 ; iii. 521. 544Aroropotamitiko, mn. Atkamania, i.An>rop6tuno, dist. Athanasian i. 124.Acta, t Cal, Mae. ui. 153Atwia, tU. CkmvMia, ii. 100. 199. 201Atao, fort. CqikaUetnc^ iii. 67Asnu, r. B€BO,-Pko. ii. 195. 201AdaaUy i, Acaru. iy. 4. 6Adermm, t. 21m». iv. 323. 502Action, t. Pmmia, iii. 475Atlrmum^ or >£Mr«i(iii, t. sac. iii. 466,Adratu, r. Foe. ui. 293^«^|fm«, r. Fwoma, iii. 464. 475Atlas gold mines. PkUtppi^ iii. 217Ater*, pt. GsyAscwimi, m. 67AikamamtiMm, plain, Bceo. ii. 306; iv.AikavMi, ii. 306. 308Athens on r. 7V«few, t. Brno, it 136.AthetUBum^ fort. ^Mamomei, ir. 212.Athens, arrival at, ii. 336. 388^ excursions, ii. 426aqueduct of, ii. 427AtaUuda, isl. Bcbo. E. coast, iu 172Athos, Mount, iii. 114. 127. For thepeninsula of Athos see AteAthyuia, or Aghia Thymia, vil. W.Loe. ii. 592Athyto, vil. PaUene, Mac. iii. 164Ankles, Atmiamiaj iv. 118Atrax, t. Perrr. iii. 369; iv. 292Aureus Hence, ii. 301Tus Pompamtu, L 95AudoUon, king of Parma, iii. 463;iv. 575Acetic reed, in lake Cooais, ii. 156Augeimy t. E, Loc. ii. 1/9Auauttua, i. 185. 193. 371 ; iii. 8. 20.218, et tea. ; iv. 33, et sea. 443Await, t. Bubo. ii. 249. 252. 263^i(^,t./tf. (Avl6na)i. 1., pass, MygdiQimay BiaMa, miAMtarvaUB, peo. lUyria, iii. 463Avaro, vil. Soli, i. 241Avdh^lo, t. Mt. Pmm/m, i. 304Avl^mona, pt. Tergo, iii. 69. 74Axis, T. Afar. iii. 258. 289. 437. 469Ay&n, vil. Pieria, iii. 426Aierb6, vil. Phanalia. iv. 330Axonu, t Perrr. iii. 319. 342Bahia Ki^presi, bridge of Pemeim, iiiBabatiik6, vil. OoMopaa, iv. 50Babini, or Bambini, vil. Adam. iii. 505;iv. 10.Bacchus, temples of: — at Anikedon^ ii.275 ; at AmpfdeMa, ii. 75 : at Btdis,ii. 520; near EieuthertB, ii. 378; ofB. Catjdus at Chw^, iv. 523; ofB. Nydelmi at Megara, ii. 394; atOrckamemUj ii. 147: mountain of Bnear PkUippi, iii. 190. 217 ; temple atTanoffra, m. 459. 471 ; of B. Lymeat Tkebei, ii. 234 ; coins and worshipof B. at Ndjnuj iii. 95 ; worship of B.in7^niO0,iii.213Bagnio, pt. C^aoma, i. 102Bagotj&s/yil. loan. d. iv. 78Brim, Turkish feast, i. 36B4krina, vil. Pela. iii. 859Bahun&t, vil. near Tempe, iii. 384Balm Bev, vil. Gulf of Artaa, i. 164B&Utza, vil. Plaudit, U. 324Binitza, vil. LyncedU, iii. 318Banda, t. Chaonia, iii. 328Bantza, vil. castle, and r. near Tepeleni,i. 33Bapk^nUy r. DittnL, Mae. iii. 412Bardj6ia, mn. Magm. iv. 2KKBarkumidhi, vil. lo&n. d. i. 269. 291Bamatf, t. Eordaa^ iii. 316Barth, vil. lo&n. d. i. 222BasUeia, festival at Lebadeia, ii. 130Bahia, t. TkesmHa, iv. 74Bazar, vU. Perrr. iii. 344BmorrOy t. and lake Eordma, m. 289.Beklr Ag, of Tepeleni, i. 38 ; iu. 550Beldame, Mr. of, Matz&ki, i. 285B^limi, vil. Pho. ii. 95. 97. 190. 200Belinda, r. Chaonia, i. 29. 57. 64Belov6cU, vil. and r. Korytz4 d. i. 341Merit, t. Dom. i. 35^-^2. 380; iv.224. 544. 547BeTat6ri, or Imperatoriaia, ancient sitenear Metzovo, i. 296 ; iv. 278Beryl, t. Sitdioe, Mae. iii. 229Barium, or aermmM, mn. EnuUkia.i.305; iu. 295Berrheoa, c. EnudJda, iii. 290—292Besikia, t. and kke Mygdonia. iii. 162.170. 230, 231pass of, iii. 461Bessaritza, vil. Perrr. iii. 344Beam, t. E. Loe. ii. 180Best, peo. Tir. iii. 190. 474Breve, t. and r. LmoedUy iii. 310. 314Banco, cape, in Corfli, i. 94 ; iii. 2Biklista, vil. Oredu, i. 334Bird, or Trvpa, hill near Suit, i. 228.237. 239 *Biaaliee, r. Biaaltia, Ui. 228Bimdiia, dist. Mae. iii. 171. 212Bisdiini. vil. Io4n, d. iv. 89Bisdunopulo, vil. loin. d. iv. 88Bishoprics of Greece : —'Agrafa and Lytza, iv. 271Akhridha, iii. 273Anchises, i. 13Ardham^ri, iii. 251Aivh>T6ka8tro and Dhr7n6poli, i.Art and Naupacttts, i. 205; iv. 255Athtn4B^ ii. 66Delvino and Khimara, i. 48. 65INDEX.Bishopric of Greece, eoHH$uied : —Dheminiko and Elafit6na, uL 345:iv. 303Diabolic, i. 340Dhebr£ and Prespa, iii. 273Demerits, iv. 380Dodona, iv. ^200Ettrkwa, iv. 64, et aeq.'Egripo, ii. 254Faniri, iv. 271F^nala, iv. 486Gai^hiki, or Kanihiki, i. 433; iv.Glvky and Buihwtum, i. 48. 233;IV. 56Gwnphi^ iv. 520Grevena, i. 302; iv. 216HadrianopoUay i. 77Ieria86 and 'Aghion Ores, iii. 250lo&nnina, i. 48; iv. 148. 200Jwtmkma Prima, iii. 273KamlMuiia, i. e. the Campania ofLower Mac. iii. 25) . 25dKastoria, i. 330Nitro, iii. 250K6nitzaand Vel, iv. 109Kor& and Moira, iii. 273Tory tz4 and Sel^foro, i. 336, et aeq,Lidhoriki, ii. 597Lvko8t6mi inA Platina, iii. 250Medhinltza, ii. 66Moeleni and Moleskh^, iii. 273Ne6patra, iv. 271Nioopolis of Epinu, i. 189. 199Paronaxia, iii. 93Pagoda (Italia) and Prillapo,iu.319PhoUce, or Vcli. iv. 97Pogoniani, iv. 101Radhovizdhi. iv. 271Rending and Lde, iii. 461Rog(i8, iv. 255Serres, iii. 204S^rvia and K6zani, iu. 250. 299.Sisini and Siitista, i. 305. 321Skiitho and Sk6pelo, iii. IllSkyro, iu. 108Staghi, i. 420Tidings, u. 171Thaumacmy (Dhomok6), i. 457;iv.271rAena/o»u», iu. 250Trikkala, i. 429 ; iv. 285VeUgrada and Kanina, i. 49. 364.379 ; iii. 273Vodheni, or Edesio, iii. 272y6nitza, or y6nditza, i. 165?it(ini, i. 457 ; ii. 1Bimik^ni, or Bisbken, vil. Pko. u. 96Bit61ia, i. Pdaaoma, iii. 319Blazdhu, vil. Agrafii d. iv. 270Bletzi, vil. HiM. ir. 522Bliiri, r. Hist. iv. 514. 519. 521Boagruu, r. E. Loc. it. 67BobCishti, vil. Orr«^t>, i. 322Bocchc di Castro, i. 5Bnfo, i. and lake P^Uu,-Magm. i. 445;iv. 403. 421-^431. 445. 449. 514Bon, peo. IU. iii. 328BcBoH, peo. ii. 140; iv. 501. 535BcBUioy geological structure and climateof f( ^W7B«Mfte dialect, u. 113. 154. 300. 458Boston, fort. Boo. w. oooat, ii. 520Avttm, t. Doris, ii. 91. 94Bosnia, mn. Days. i. 348Boghatzik6. vil. Gratis, i. 321Bofloni&, vil. Adam. iv. 14Bokhara, vQ. jEto. i. 109. 112lagoon o^ iii. 541. 573Bole, i, and lake Mygdoma (Bedkia),iii. 170.231.462Bologna, vU. Mi. (Hmnwis, iii. 350Bolyoa, march, Chtdo. Mae. iii. 155. 457Boni, peo. JBto. ii. 623Bordji, vil. and castle Khimara, ^. i.64.79Botaigo, mode of making, i. 9BottisBa, dist. Mac. iii. 449BaUimi, peo. Mac. iii. 486BottiattB, peo. Ckalc. Mac. iii. 455B6tzari, Suliote family, i. 225. 238. 246Box tree, frequent on Mt. Pindus, i. 41 1B6ZOVO, vil. Trikkala d. iv. 266Brackish family of Tkishe, Bwo. ii. 511Brasidas, the Lacedaemonian, ii. 403;iii. 168. 192. 315Br&loa, vil. Doris, ii. 72Brats, vil. Bwo. ii. 465Br^lesis, vil. and bridge, loan. d. iv. 78Breasts, the Gaul, ii. 56Brilessus, mn. Att. ii. 430Bmtus and Cassius, in Three iii. 215,et se.Bryamum, t. Lynoestis, iii. 307Reckon, r. Magn. iv. 385BuMka, vil. Bcm. ii. 327Buchan, t. Tkesprotia, iv. 73. 256Budji, dist. Eordaa, iii. 297B&fiilo, pt. Etna, u. 4^^Buiati, vil. Tanoffriee, ii. 462BufIalo8,i. 363;'iii.555Bukka, Pale, fide mouth of the Araek^rate, gulf of Arte, i. 201Bulgarian conquest of Greece, i. 341language, i. 342. 347BnUs, t. BeBO.'Pho. ii. 5ia-^20Biimisto, mn. Alarms i. 163 ; iii. 24. 499Bun&sa, mn. EHmeiO'Perr, iii. 333Bunila, vil. lo&n. d. i. 222^223Buragao, vil. Pelas. iv. 402Burbutzik6, vil. OresUs, i. 322Burino, mn. EUmeiay iii. 303. 305Buahigr&d, vU. Korytzi d. i. 334. 342Bustard, called Toil, ii. 419Butkrotum, bay, t., r. and lake Ckaoma,i. 91—101 ; iv. 175Btflazora, t. Paonia, iii. 464. 470Bris, or Bois. t. III. i. 35. 70CoAetri, temple of Tkebm, ii. 214. 244— , sanctuary of, Afdhedon Brno. ii.INDEX.CboAo&t, r. TitkoTM^Btdo, ii. 78. 81Cadmeia, citadel of Tkebet, u. 222. 228Cadmus, u. 234GB»ar, a JtiUut, i. 5. 7. 9d. 423; W.476—483Clammy, t. TT. X<n;. ii. 622Cb/ama, t. Chalc. Mac, iii. 170Callant, t. ^. Xoc. ii. 180CkJlidromuB^ mn. Mdi9-<Ei4ta, ii. 62,63 ; roftd over it, ii. 5, «< «ef . 39. 42.53.59; described, u. 68CaUidromum, fort, ii. 63CaUipeueey forest, mt. OUmtna^ iii. 405CaUwoUt, or Oi^^Mfm, t. into. ii. 58.61^,624CaOOkera^ i. Test. iv. 521Calucci, Mr. of Cefalonia, iii. 69Cafydott, c. ^fo. i. 109. 112; iii. 533,etteq.Cambu$UL ins. Perr.'EUimeia^ iii. 303,Csmeh. iv. 295Camp^m^ r. .£to. i. 156Cammama^ dist. TAessprotia, iv. 74Canal of Acrapkium^ Bobo. ii. 311 —316; of LiriBsa, iii. 359; iv.296or diofydtu of Leuccu, iii. 19. 21of XerxcB, at Aeanikus, Mac. iii.143—147Camuirmum. prom. PaUene. Mae, iii.Candavia, mn. iZ^. i. 343; iii. 280Catietkit*. hill on the ^urtpiffl, Bcbo. ii.259,270Capons, or Greek cloaks, see K^L iii. 16emperor, i. 421 ; iCarta, citadel of Megara ii. 394Cb^ynw, pt. isl. Ckudc, Mao. iii. 166Caf»tu.m,racaUa,the emperor, i. 421 ; ii. 300Capkarem, mom, EvbtBa^ ^'A^Gree'isl.thecarta, citadel ot iw eparo,Carrnu, isl. Adam. iv. 16Cars, rude agricultural, i. 304. 379. 425OxmiiKier, king of Mae. i. 156. 252;ii. 229; iii. 434; ir. 363Cbaaamfma, t. Palieney Mac. iii. 152Gunope. t. Corcyra, i. 92. 94Gum Lcmgituu, L. iii. 392. 399Cbnc^, c. ^. i. 245. 247dist. and peo. of, i. 252; iv.75 ^Canova, fn. Deem, ii. 554C<utoto, fh. MM, ii. 555-^7Ca$Uumma, t. il/(»ii. iv. 383Outre Pyrrki, of Melotu, Ep. i. 387.Castrum Mentis, station in lU. iii. 476Catherine, St. prom. Corf, i. 7. 12CS:i<o, ii. 62Castrum, t. OfM^ts, i. 330; iii. 310; iv.CWjdrfiiaw, r. Cftoonaa, i. 3.Ceiuntm, penis. Ewmbo, ii. 67. 177CepkaUetuay bl. Ionian sea, iii. 55—68O^mUmw, Uke Bubo. ii. 157. 308—310Cepkinus, r. ofAthent, ii. 417. 426. 428;r. of EUusif, ii. 374. 379, H 9eq, ; r.Ban, ii. 71. 83. 95. 99. 144. 154. 189,Cepki$$uty T.BoBo, katav6thnk of; ii. 281subterraneous course oil ii.283.292■ , issue of, ii. 286, d $eq,-, source of, ii. 70. 84Ccrota, mn. AU. ii. 391Ceroetium, mn. Hist.-EUmna. iv. 528,CtrdnCy mn. Mae.-T%r. iii. 444Cerdifliumy mn. Edonii, iii. 172Ceram, or Acrocerawmay ins. Cka^oHUiy i. 2—7. 79. 88Ceres, temples or sanctuaries of :— of C.ana ProeerpmCy at AntkedoHy Been.ii. 274; of C. Theemophorue at Diy.tfUBOy Pko. ii. 73 ; C. Europe at Lo'badeioy ii. 123; at Membra. ii. 394;of C MjfoaletsiOy near JuTMoueecnM, ii.249. 251. 267 ; near Pyn^umu, Path,iv. 366; at Shriek Pho. ii. 532; C.TkeemophoruBy at riMes, ii. 234;C OabeMa and Proeerpim. in theThermal ii. 244CWvMUMN, t. Hid. iv. 449CeretsuSy fort Boo. ii. 490. 500Cerigo, isl. jEffoan (Cythera)y iii. 69U.75Ceryeiumy mn. Tbffagrtce, ii. 459Cedric t. Chaonioy iv. 73• , dist. of, iv. 175Ounxmeiay t. Bow. ii. ia. 112. 143battle of, ii. 116. 192ChaLBumy t. W. hoc. ii. 594Chalagtray t. MyadoniOy iu. 450Ckaiddioey dist. Imo. iii. 162. 454Chalcis t. at the sources of the Acke-sow, L287: iv. 211c. Eubeeoy ii. 254. 266. 268• , t. and mn. jEto. i. 110; iii. 538Chaleodonitmymn.PherteayTTi. iv. 442.Ckalia. i. Beeo. ii. 473Chaoniay dist. Ep. iv. 117. 120Charadray t. Moloasity i. 258 ; iv. 255 ;t. Pho. ii. 85, 86Charadrimy Baccy Mae. iii. 151Ckaradnuy r. Molossity i. 258r. Maraikomoy ii. 431Charity fort, in Temper iii. 397Charon* oiMmray, i. 386Candy peo. T%e9proiiay iv. 76Chestnut, forest of, i. 120 ; etymon. of,iv. 383C^m^ray or Ckimerinmy t. CAooiim, i.Chimerical fort. 77keH»ro6a, iii. 5Chiron the Cbitotfr, iv. 385CkryMy isl. ^^^^ean, iii. 113Ckutriy salt-springs Thermopylae ii. 156Cicero M. T. iv. 17. 31Ciekyruty or EpkyrCy t. Thespian iii.7, 8; iv. 53. /3CVc;ynne/AtM, isl. gulf of PcMas0, iv. 396Cieriumy t. These, iv. 499. 503Cimoliay isl. ./£a<8nit, ii. 413Cirphisy mn. Pike. ii. 106. 535. 539.Cirrhoy t. Pkn. ii. 583Index.Cmut^ ma, and t. Mffgdoma^ iii. 458Cumin, fo. HaUartw^ Bim, ii. 208CiHugnm. mn. Abo. ii. 262. 325, H ma,335. 407. 461puget of, u. 830. 381Cth'tfin, a summit of JPmdtu, i. 298t. Ematkia, iii. 288. 447Cleombrohu, king of Sparta, ii. 406. 486Oxon, of Athens, iii. 192Cleon t. .acte, Mae. iii. 149, «< im.C/^ww, an officer of Perseus, i. 73. 75Clients custom of. iv. 104Climate, ii. 119. 208. 604 ; It. 159. 227.398. 427. 490Clodkma, t. lU, iii. 280Cmmidw^ fort. E. Loe, u. 176. 182Cenis, mn. E. Loe, ii. 66. 180Cnopmt, r. Tkehtn^ ii. 321OM^te^ r. TketproUay i. 232; iii. 8;OMfWem, t. i>a«. iii. 328Ctda^ pass, at ThaunuMci, Tken^'Phtki-otis, 1 . 458Coins, ancient, iii. 213. 226. 457. 463.483.486; iv. 405. 498CoUaeeia, X, Mtlu, ii. 21QmaruB, pt. NioopUis, Ep, i. 185. 194.Commerce, i. 183. 275; iii. 387; iv.Commodity the emperor, ii 299Ckmrnenuty MidMU Anadiu, despot ofjEtoUa, i204Camnanj his descendants, i. 204; iv. 203Ophu, pt Stroma, Mae, ui. 119Condyle, fort. Tempe iii. 397Mom, or ^rsMoc, t. jEto, i. 125. 14a152, 153 ; iu. 510Cbpau, kke Bw>. ii. 158. 310C^, t. Bubo, ii. 292. 306C&raaB, t. Mmu, iv. 384Our, mn. J^, u. 91. 624 ; iii. 40. 53Corofrm^ colonies of the, i. 871Corfu (Corcyra), i. 7, 8. 92, 104;m. 1channel of, i. 16. 91 ; iii. 2Corvma^ of Tanoffra^ poetess, ii. 459ChnAus, tomb of, in Megara, ii. 398.Corwieia, i, Bubo. ii. 132. 140; iv. 471■ , vale of, ii. 205CbroRW, mythus of, iv. 446Compile Mena, pass, Trace, iii. 215Concha, t. E. Bmo. ii. 184CortuB^ t. W. Ben. ii. 520Corydum^ cave, Mt. Panuusus, ii. 578CotydalUu, mn. AU. ii. 384CSo^y^tfum, nm. Euboea, ii. 439CVtra^, mn. Ambraeia^ i. 214Cnifita, or Cranny i. CepkaUema^ iii.61—63Cranium, t. Pe^. i. 446 ; iii. 365Craiet of CAoM, engineer, ii. 292. 316CraugcUlium^ t. Pho. ii. 587C^ntuwuidoii, r. Ma. iv. 385Cnffur, AmphHochuiy iv. 251Crtnidei^ t. T^imv, iii. 189. 216Crtdoma, dish. Jllae. iu. 448OreuaiB, or CV«iiii0, t. and pt Bmo. w.coast, iL 406. 505. 521Crista, t Pho. u. 566. 585gulf of, u. 549■ — , plain of, ii. 563CHthote, t Aeam. iv. 6Croeimm, plain. Pith, iv. 332CrocyUia, t /lAooa, iii 49CrocyUum, t. YT. JLoc. ii. 613. 618Cnuma, Commas or Ost, that Mwc.iii. 451Ctemene, t 2nihess iX}&9Ma, it. 516, 517CaariuSy or CWu^ws, r. Bmo. ii. 140;r. PktkioHs, iy. 356— — , or Cue i Mt, r. 7^le«. iv. 499CtuiM, t Eubma, iL 440Curates, peo. .<£to. i 119Ctfriatm, mn. Alto. i. 119Cunant plantations at Meaol6nfhi, LCustoms of the Greeks and Albanians,i. 49. 87. 183^ Vus, r. Alto, L 154; iii. 513Eiia Tempe, pass, tito. i. 154lake, ^£to.L 110; in. 573dyttoteepkaU, Tkebma, ii. 474^Sooi an m a . battle of, iv.459-462Cmomtra^ prom. MaraHoma^ ii. 432CW&itf, mn. DdtUy iii. 100, e< «bo.Cynut, t ^. Xo0. u. 174. 182QpamiM, t PAo. ii. 579QfretUB, t Per iv. 304—310Cyrene. or CWioMSS, t and mn. Bso.ii. 184Cytiniumy i. Dort, n. 91, 92CyAefv, isL and t hoffman, iiL 69-^75Data. festival on Mt. CUkmrtm, ii.D&ghawi, Albanian sub-district, Thativ. 71Dali&ni, family of Konispoli, L 98Daphnephoru8, office of, li ^2DapkHus, t. j&. Zoc. ii. 176. 182Dardan peo. /tf. iii 470, et $eq. ; iv.Date-trees, ii. 249 ; iii. 14Natus, t Three, iii. 189, 228DauHs, t PAo. ii. 98. 100. 105DeaboUty town of the Greek Empire, in2>asiafv^ i 389DeceUia^ Ate demise ii. 424Dederiaui, vil. Pela$. iv. 452. 473Deer, of several kinds, in the forests ofAcamania^ iii 496. 516; on Mt.Berries, iii. 296; on Mt Pan$,ii. 421 ; on Mt. Peiuim, iv. 433Delikali, villa (imprinted valley),Sherman Tk. iv. 435Odium, vil. and temple of ^no/fo, Bmo.ii. 445. 450. 452Delphi, t PAo. ii. 551—582^ attacked bj Brcnnus the Gaul,ii.60Ddpkiy inscriptions of, ii. 635Index./MnMiniMt, pt. OrofM, k. 445Debts, »1. jEffiBan. lii. 96—102Delyin&ld, or DhelTin&ki, vil. MoUmu,i.398; iv. 100Delviiiak6pulo, or Dhelvi]iAk6pulo, vil.Moloms^ \r, 79Delvino, or Dh^lvino, t. CKoonta, i. 18—21.65Demaraius, kioff of ^Jporia, ii. 44Demerit$, t. Mown. iv. 963. 875i>0tiMfriM, son mPhiUp^ iii. 466PoUoroete$j u. 884; iv. 863Demur Dost, of Gardhfki, i. 59, 60. 62Bey, of KMtorfa, i. 825DemSgkni, vil. Mygdoma, iii. 238DemSrkapi (Axis Stena)^ pMs, Mac,Paria, iii. 442Demirifls&r, t. OdomaniWy iii. 201Demis, Ibrahim, of Fili&te«, Ep. i. 104DemoiAemi, Athenian commander, ii.92. 450. 612 ; ir. 247Athenian orator, ii. 485Dadhektm, peo. lU, iii. 474Dereli, t. near Tempe. iii. 359. 381Derengli. vd. Phanaiia, iv. 472Oerdpugl, or Derdpoli, dist. Chapmani. 25. 77Derrhu^ prom. Sitktmia, iii. 119Derv^nia, description of the, i. 22Derveno-kh6ria, Biz villages of ,ii. 374Dervishes, bektashlS, i. 36 ; iv. 284. 413Dervish Agrfi, vil. AU, ii. 417Derxiat, epitaph of, in PkUtwtU^ i. 461Despr^ux, Cousin, his History of Greecetranslated into Elomaic, i. «S5Dewdaba, t. Mitdioa, iii. 471, 472DeueaiuM and Pyrrha, rocks, in thegulfofyolo,iv.359. 371Dev61, r. and t. Oredi$y Dan, i. 334.(Deacons), i. 339Dhadh{, t. Pho, ii. 69. 73. 107Dhalhi, mon. AU, ii. 384. 386Dhafhi^, pass, Aeam, iii. 498Dham&si, vil. Pert, iii. 370 ; iv. 299Dhamaata, vil. near Thermopylae ii. 6Dhaskali6, isl. near Ithaca, m. 46 ; isl./*Ao. ii. 541Thalia, Vil. Pho. (DomIuJ, ii. 98Dh^mata, pt. Adam. near Letters. i. 1 70.Dhemati, near Aghii, Mani, iv. 414Dheminiko, vil. Perry. CCvretuB) iv.Dhesfina, or Tjesfina, vil. Pho. ii. 546Dh^iani, vil. Pdat,'Magn. iv. 407.418.450Whiles, isl. ./C^wom, (Deut and Renewaliu. 95—104Dhilissi, vil. Boo, (Ddnm), ii. 453,Dhimiko, mn. AH. ii. 433Dhimitrios, Aios, vil. near Mt. (Hgm-pus iii. 337, vil. Then, iv. 324Dhimitrioa, Aioa, khan and vil. loan.d. i. 222. 224mn. Att, a. 487' , mon. Pteria, iii. 403Dionysia, Aios, mon. Mt. Olyn^MU,iii. 4D7mon. Aet$. Mae, iii.Dhip6tamo, (or two rivers), MoUmig,i.292Dhissikita, vil. Perr.-EUmeia, iu. 344Dhistomo, vil. Pho. (AmbrwusJ, ii.Dhokiario, mon. Ate, Mae. iii. 120Dhokimi, a sunlit of Pindus. i. 418.DholianL vil. MoUmia, iv. 98Dhomok5, vil. Pkh.'Then. (Thaa^mad), i. 455Dhon&tos, Aios, peak near Suli, i. 228.pt Adam, iii. 29t cable of Paiamythfa, Ep.iv. 76miracles of, iv. 64Dhoxi, mn. iimaiOna, (Bermmm), iii,Dhrsffomano, or Tragotn&no, vil. Pho,Dhrsgomi, vil. ThewroHa, iv. 58Dhrsgonires, islands, Aeam, iii. 30;iv. 4Dhr&kia, t.Magn, iv. 384. 392Dhrakon^ria, salt lake, AU. iL 433Dhrakopl^mata, Pho. li. 95Dhrakospilii, vil.' near Ter mo pvUt, ii.6. 14. 35.37. 53Drama, t. Thraet, (DrcAeaem), iii.Dhramisifrs, vil. loam. d. i. 263; iv. 80Dhr}'madhes, vil. Khim&ra, JEp. iv. 101Dhryno, or Drink, river, branch ofAous, ChaomorAtin, i. 25. 29. 56.77; iv. 191Dhryn5poli, mined town, Chaomia-Aim. I. 58. 77Dhrvsko, or Dirsko, mn. near Io4n«nina, i. 269. 291. 410; iv. 131. 164Dhumhli&ni, vil. Chaoma, \, 35Dhyo-vunii, vil. Metis, u. 25Dium, c. Pieria, i. 147; iii. 409. 419y t, Acte, Mac. iii. 149, el teq.Diudila, vil. near loan. iv. 89Djumi, dist. and t. Eordma, i. 812; in.Djumerka, or Tznm^rka, dist. and mn.Athamania, i. 271. 288; iv. 212. 229Dindvmehe, temple of, near Thebes, ii.Diogenes, Count, repaired Megara, ii.Dirce, r. at Thebes, ii. 235Diana, temples of :— of D. Anuuyria inEubasa. li. 265; at Belie, ii. ^; ofD, EUethma at Chenroneia^ ii. 113;of D, Euckia at Thebes, ii. 234; ofIndex.DiamLt^phwa^xCal^doM, ui.536;on Mt. Tttmum^ Moan. iv. S96 ; foan-Lin of, PkUtBit, ii. 83S; statue oCDiana Soteiru^ at Foot, u. 408Domini Ogl(i, vil. M^ffOonia^ iii. 232Dobera^ peo. 7*Anice) iii. 21'iSoberly t. .^fis^risa, Jfoc. iiL 444. 467I>ob6, mon. Bwo. new w. coast, ii. 617Dobren4, or Domini, rin. Bmo» near w.coast, ii. 505Dorothy mani at Dodona ir. 189Dodona c. Molomty ii. 20; iv. 16ft—Dodona, dist. Molot$u, ir. 173^-2010oghir&n, or Doirin, t. Creitointf, i£s-trmiy Mac. iii. 440DoUekej isl. ^ea?^. iii. 574t. Pert. iii. 344JMopiay Dohpe», dist. peo. 77k. ii. 21 ;iv. 274. 533Dombr^ni, tU. Ikut, i. 350DomUuu CaUtfimuiy his camp on theHaiiaemony i. 314— , his marches, i. 423 ;iv. 476Donaoouy vil. Tke9pias, ii. 501Donafr68,vil./tf. 1.366Darimackuty prrniot of ^tolia, i. 144;iv. 185DorucHMy t. Thrace ii. 49Darius or Deriumy t. ./£to. i. 156Dora, Kavo,prom. Eubcsa, ( Caphareutjyii. 423DoHitmy t. and plain, Pela$, iv. 420.447. 451Dovrlh vU. Zaff6ri, loaned. iv. 126Dorado, vil. EUmeiay i. 305DrabescuSy t. T^rocr, (Drama), iii.Dn^6ti, vil. near Tepeleni, Ep, i. 54Dremtja, mt. ^£^0. u. 599Dr^pano, pt. Lucas iii. 17Drin, r. /&. i. 77Dronovitza, vil. III. i. 366Drowning, a Turkish punishment forwomen, i. 401. 404Drwmany or DrymuSy t. Pko, ii. 73. 87Dries Dropsy U. 21, 22. 94Dtmin, vil. Peat, Ma, iv. 407DuKfcdhes, or Dnkai, vil. Kbimara, Ep»i. 2. 88. 90. 375> ■ ^ vil. on the A<m$yDuUj'&ni, t. lU. (Olcuuumjy i. 80Dulcet, prom. Lewxu (Leucaitjy iii.10.21Diiklista, vU. Perrr. iii. 344DuUdUuniy of Homer, inquires concorning it, iii. 50, et am.D6rdjova, mn. ifito. ii. 603D&flhari, vil. Days. i. 348Dusikl, vil. and mon. Hist, iv. 526Duvlatin, vil. ScotusstBOy iv. 465Dynuriy of AchaiOy iii. 556JJ^raSy.T. Melissa ii. 1 1. 26DyrHuMckiufHy r. Ill, i, 6. 380DjMnmy mn il#jQ;idbiiw-BiioltM, iii.all, €i JM./>^M, t. EidMm (DhyaU), u. 438. 439Earthquakes, iv. 316. 550Edudonuy r. Mygdomiay ui. 437. 439EtkmadMy the islands, iii. 29, Hin, 51 ;iv. 4Eckimuy t. Pktk. ii. 20; iv. 346. 358;t. Actum, iv. 23Edenay or ^^y c. Emaikiay iu. 272—£UofM, peo. Thrifty iii. 180Education in Greece, i. 331 ; iv. 387EdyUumy mn. Bwo,-Pho, ii. 97. 99*190.200Eels, i. 182; ii. 157. 281 ; iu. 184EgwUiOy roy a Roman road, i. 380; iii.180. 311. 317'Egnpo, t. Euboea (Ckalcitjy ii. 247.i bridge of, ii. 257sanjak of, ii. 252EOesiumy t. Ban. ii. 469EtoHy t. BtMUkiy iii. 173£k41i, vil. IU. i. 365EUsuy or Elegy pt. t. or dist. Tkapro-/la, m. 9EUguty t. and plain CAoontti, i. 73. 75.Elasonftiko, r. Perrr. iii. 334Elas»6na, t. iVrr. (Oloommjy iii. ^45iS^«ta, t. PAo. ii. 82; iu. 381its plain, u. 188t. near TViw/w, iii. 381 ; iv. 298t, Thetprotiay iv. 74Elatia, mn. Ben, (CWuBronJy ii. 372Plato, mn. W, Loc, ii. 592mn. CepkaUenioy iii. 55. 59Elbassin, t. IU. i. 357; iii. 280; ivymn. of iCandoffiaJy i. 343EleftheTo-kh6ri, vil. Pieria-BaUimOy iii.428. 433. 435Eleflheiokh6ri, past of, ThttproHoy iv,£Ile6kali, mon. Io4n. d. i. 270Eulogy t. Bow. ii. 322. 468Elerigova, vil. Chalc. Mac. iii. 161Edessa, vil. ParavaOy i. 393EUutUy on r. THtoHy t. Beta. ii. 136.t. Att. its plain and bay, ii. 374aqueduct of, ii. 382EletUhenBy t. AU. ii. 375. 3781 P*BB of* »• 334EUa, pt. Thetfntiay iu. 8Elias, Aloe, hill at Ambraciay i. 213vU. Mto. iii. 528mon. E, Loc. ii. 170-, mon. at Zitza, MoIoms^ iv*of the almond-trees, vil.selon iii. 544. .^2Eliineiny dist. Mac. iu. 305. 324. 339Eliitiy peo. Tkcsprofuty iv. 75INDEX.Ell&dhA, r. Melu-Mnhnes, ii. 8. 13. 15.17; iy. 582EQamemUy t. Lewcaa^ iii. 23JE/oM, t. Perrr. iii. 345'Elymo, mn. «&d tU. AU, ii. 425Mathias, dist Mac. iii. 225. 442—447Empereurs prom, near Chalet$, ii. 263Enipeut^ r. rA««. i. 447; iii. 420; iv.320. 330. 469EordaOy diet. 3f<Mr. i. 315; iii. 305.EordaicHS, r. lU, iii. 281'£pakto, t. W, Loc, (Naupaetiu), ii.Epamitumdaty ii. 131. 487J&kiaUes, ii. 45^ t. ThBttmOia, iii. 7; iv. 53. 175pnyrai, or Cra$moniiy peo. P«^. i.Epienenuda. peo. J?. £oc. ii. 66. 68.178. 181Epidatfmut, or I>)rrrAa£i&«ifjn, c. lU. i.Epirotet^ defeated by the/%rtam«, i. 68defeated and enslaved by theRomans, i. 216 ; iT. 81. 181-, their cities destroyed by theRomans, i. 216 ; iv. 73Episkopi, site Hid. (Chmpki)^ iv. 510.ErHria, i, Euboea, ii. 266. 443. 445PAtiltofM, iv. 466Erievdumy t. Perrr, iv. 315Bhwon, branch of r. Axis$, iiL 275. 441Erikh6, t. Ckaoma, (Oriau), i. 3«— , lagoon of. i. 88Erim^kastro, or Kim6ka8tro, vil. Boo.ii. 478Erinmay t. Mmri$^ ii. 408Perineum, t. Jntk, iv. 471Erinetu, t. Doris. ii. 91Eriss6, or lerisso, vil. Chalc. Mac, iii.147; its gulf, iii. 142dist. CephaUana^ iii. 67Eritium, t. Perrr, iv. 310. 313Ermitza, r. jEto, i. 126. 136Erockua, t. Pho. ii 89Erythrts^ t. Paratopia, Bcbo, ii. 329 ; t.W. Loe, ii. 618Eteomu t. Pannonia, Bon. ii. 332Eie»an vomit, the, iv. 426Ethopia, t. Atkamama, iv. 212. 525, 526Eubaa^ the channel of, or Euboic strait,ii. 422; iv. 346isl. ('Egiipo) ii. 252, et teq,Eudeidm^ or Appleton, t. Bma. ii. 162Euiierum^ on mt. Cnympua, iii. 351.417,418Eykydrium, t. Tess. iv. 493Eupalium, t. fT. 2k)c. ii. 617. 620Euporia^ t. Edonity iii. 228Euripides tomb of, at ^re^nM, Amor.iii. 170J57i(n>iis, strait of .fiiiftcKi, u. 247—258.EuropuSy t. on the Aaiut, iii. 444Eurotas^ r. Parr. iii. 345Eun^o^uSy of ischia, his expeditioninto jEio. ii. 93. 117. 612. 615; hisdeath, iv. 247EurymetuBy t. Mcic9»$y i. 253; t. Moan.iii. 402 ; iv. 415Eurytamea^ peo. AEto, ii. 623. 626Evemu, r. jEto. i. 107. 109 ; ii. 599Evgh^nia, Syria, mn. jEio. i, 120. 126Eutrtsu, t. Boo, ii. 521. 522Etdretm^ pt. Bdso. w. coast, ii. 520Evtimios, Pap, his rebellion, iv. 410;his death, iv. 542. 544Example, pt. Chaonia^ i. 92Exarkh6, vil. Pho, ii. 163Ezer6, vil. and lake near Mt. (Hyinpua^iii. 349. 418Fag, mn. Bubo, iPhidumY u. 213Fan&ri, vil. Hist. i. 426 ; iv. 270. 509.^ Porto, ThetproHa^ i. 232; iii.4 ; iv. 51plain of, Thnprotia^ iv. 50. 54.Fanaritiko, r. 7i&ejpro<ia, i. 232Fanarom^ni, mon. at Artaa, i. 207. 213Fan, site in Phi. iv. 348Fares, or feria, or fhitri^, Albanian, i.27. 85; iv. 59Fasidhero, vil. AU, ii. 429Fasts, Greek, i. 10. 14 ; iv. 425Merit Ag, of Lidhoriki, ii. 605, 606Ferekfsi. vil. lo&n. d. i. 224F^r8ala(Turk. Tiat41tje) t. Tke9»,'Pkik.i. 448—454; iv. 329. 474. 486Fersaliti, r. Then. (Enipeiu)^ i. 447 ; iv.Fete Bev, of Zikhna, iu. 184Fever, the copia teizana, i. 380Fidhiri, or Figaro, r. Mto. i. 108 ; ii.599.625Fidh6kastro, fort. Ambraday i. 201. 214Milites, t. Chaoma^ i. 104; iv. 73Filoth^n, mon. Ade, Mae. iii. 126Fil6rina, t. LynoulU, i. 333 ; iii. 282Finish, vU. dhaoma, i. 20. 66Fisheries, of Ampkjpolu^ iii. 185* ofAnatomise and Me8ol6nghi, i. 114;iii. 530. 543 ; of Artaa, i. 182 ; of lakeBcAeit, iv. 403. 421 ; of Astoria, i.327 ; of Privy, i. 182. 197; of Vut-zindr6, i. 95Five Palea, site Pho. ii. 84. 89MaminimUy T, QuinetiuSy i. 71. 385;ii.542; iv. 305. 457. 528Flemb(iko, peak at Ddj^i, ii. 568Fond&na, pass E, Loc-Pho, ii. 67Forts, fort. Leueaa, iii. 17Fortes, vil. lo&n. d. iv. 217Fortune, temple of, at Thebes, ii. 234Forty Saints, vil. church, and pt. Cia-ont,i. 8-15. 78Franco Lamina, pt Ade, Mao, iii. 142Franz, vil. Merit, ii. 8. 13. 23Fr&ihari, vil. Data, i. 345INDEX.Fmtaai, tU. AHm. !▼. 106FrikM, pt lAaea, iu. 62Froifni, of lo&n. her death, i. 401. 40SFtehi, or Aftelii, pt. Ckaomia, i. 102Fteti6, or Ptele6, vU. and pt. Pkik. iv.FteHt, vil. Pierian iii. 835Fteri, pt. Magm. W. 415FtUviut Nobis, the ooniul, i. 209Furent, described, ii. 104Farka, pMt Fkik, i. 461Fume, vil. Agnfa d. iv. 270Fume, plain Aik. iv. 869Furniture, Greek, L 448 ; iv. 145Fumut, pt. Ceriffo il. iii. 76Fla, vil. Eubtga, u. 439Oaidharonitt, isl. gulf of Artaa, i. 200-, isl. Bao, E. coast, ii 270Oatadrm^ t. Bordsny iii. 316Galatia, nm. jEto. i. 107, 108Galatians, t. Chap. Mac. iii. 162Galazidhi, t and pt. IT. Loe. ii. 593Oaleptut, t. Mae.'Thr. iii. 155. 178ChJaSaan, t Cndomia, Mae. iii. 438GaUikd, r. Mygdoma, iii. 258. 439Gumbo, Son, vil. JEto, t. 121G^MMSteff, or Gamgaa^ r. Edom, iii. 217.Gaidhiki, or Kardhiki, t. Ckaomia, i.29. 59. 63or Gaidhikild, vil. loin. d.iv. 89Pide6, vil. and Hel. ruinsHist. i. 431 ;iv. 288•, t. ThetpnHa^ iv. 58(TompMi, fh. Platmu, Bobo. u. 333.Gai^i, or Marian, vil. Chaoma-Atm.l27Gauls, the, in Greece, ii. 55. 571refute the often of Perwui, iii.Oivala, or K&vala, vil. Mu. i. 128.GavroUmni, pt ifito. i. IllGaaBonUy t. Edomt^ iii. 229Gelberini, mn. Ambraday i. 205Celi, vil. E. Loe. ii. 170GeU, Mr. ii. 132Ommuy r. IU, in. 280Otranmay mn. and fort. Megara ii.375. 409. 412GtrashUy t. and prom. Etibrntj, ii 423Ghelidha, prom. Aearm, guilt of Arte,i. 165Ghel&nthi, vil. Hist. iv. 519Ghenitzarokh6ri, vil. Pkh. iv. 468Ghenokl&dha, vil JS»«mm, u. 16GhereU, vil. Phtraa, iv. 401. 451Gbeiemi, viL Sootustaa, iv. 453Germans, pt Megarisy u. 373. 405Ghianoti, mon. Fear, iii. 344Ghidh4ki, pt. Itkaea, iii. 53Ghid^k, viL Fkik, iv. 331Gbi6ivhi, Ai, (Geoive, 8t) vil. and r.Molouis^ i. 258. 261 ; iv. 80. 254Ghidighi, Ai, t St^rua^ iii. 107vil. Magm. iv. 392. 400y monasteries of, i. 102. 1 19.143; ii.37church at Dheminlko, iv. 305church and portion at prevail,iv. 253i»L Ssrpme gulf, ii. 371hal. bay of O-ttso, u. 593-, vil. r. and peas near Conmeia^Abo. ii. 140. 141>, hill of, at lo&nnina, iv. 136.154,162GhioKtep^, mn. EHmeio'Eordmt, iii.Ghiustendil, t Aorwim, iii. 475Ghyfi6kaatro, HeL nina near Heaoldn-gbi, i. 118; iii. 539 ; on mt. dtimrom,U.375; in wot. iv. 292Gbymn6, vil. EuboBtt, ii. 439Ghynek6-kaatfo, Hel.mina,i'iii.-7^haa.i.455Gyamtowaottg, on the temple of DdpM^li. 573Qigomuy t. Croatia, Mae. iii. 451CfUamm, t TkeBproaa-Ckaomiii^ iv. 76Ghaphgrm^ t MQgm,'Pdiu, iv. 432QUmau^ temple of, at Awtktimy Bma.ii. 275Gletj4dhea, vil. Twnpkma, i. 417Gums, t TMtfo, ii. 24a 250Gloria, prom, of Mta. Aarooerwuria^ i.4.3/4Gliiniata. vil. PAo. u. 73. 87GKhm Ztnea, pt 7*Aeipro<w, i. 185.!292 ; iii. 4 ; iv. 51, H aeq,Glyfoner6, pool at Lanrmma^Bwa.'Pha.&.288Glykj, dist Tketjyroiia^ i. 231ruined viL and church of, L233; iv. 51 5a 66. 192Gold mines of Cremdet^ Mae^Thr. vLGdmaro bay, near NkoptJu. Bp. i. 195Gomenitia, viL and bay T%upnltia, i.103 : iv 72G<M^, t HkL It. 212. 263. 510.Gemm,i.Fda9, iii. 371. 379.389.397;iv. 312Grana, viL near Suli, i. 242Goritza, suburb of Berat, i, 354. 360HeL site near Volo, iv. 375Chfigma^ t. on r. Ajmm, iii. 444Gribitza, or Garbitzi, viL and pass CSki-ossa, i. 23Graces, temple of the, at Orchomemm,Ban. ii. 148. 152Gr&dista, vil. and HeL ruins on thc^ons,IU. i. 35. 70. 365Gr&ditza, or Grayish, HeL fort nearSiatista,£7tiMsa, L313Grm»y or Tanagra Ben. u. 455GrmMttMm^ viL 7ks&«o, ii. 474GWUisU, vil. 'Agra d. iv. 518Grimiata, or Oiammoa, t. and mn.OreeHt-Dam. i. 334, 335. 425; iv. 122Index.GrammAtik6, vil. Att, u. 436Grinittt. vil. new L$badeia^ B90, ii., mn. ofl ii. 140Gntzian&, vil. MolomSy it. 79Gravis, vil. Dora, ii. 90. 92Greeks, modem, character and mannersof; i. 204. 241. 323condition of their peasantry,ii. 108. 208 ; iii. 516. 545 ; iv.839. 345.— , of their women,iv. 146their resemblance tothe ancients, i. 279. 448 ; iv. 146, their language, i. 463 ;iv. 150GrefforiuB and Daniel, of Milies, Mt.Felium, iv. 387. 391Greg6rioB, 'Aios fSt. Gregory), room.Ade, Mac. iv. 116Green, diet. EUmeia, i. 302—304Gravendista, vU. Mt. Fmdm, i. 294Greene, t. of Green, i. 30^-304river of, i. 303Griko-kh6ri,vil. ThetiprGiia,'\y.nGrim&dha, or Griro&la, site of Tamaara^Brno, ii. 455Gritzi&no, or Grisons, vil. Hist i. 432 ;iv. 290. 316Griva, mn. Chaonia, i. 32.Dhrako, iii. 500Greate Places, vale in mt. Griva,C^€umia, i. 34Galimidhes, Albanian tribe, Chaonia^i.60Gnmenitza, or Gomenitza, vil. and bayThetproHa, iv. 74Gamerdjina, t. Tkr, Ui. 216G&nitza, vil. PeUu^Perr. iu. 868Gui, mn. PktM, {Othryi), i. 459, 460,vil.iv. 330Gurffo-potam6, r. Melius ii. 24. 26Gun Inrei, or Comment Litharge, fort.Z>a«i. 1. 349. 350Gurii, vil. Mto, on r. Achdout^ iii. 521Guri&nista, vil. Io4n. d. iv. 83.Gurl&, or r. of Suli {^Adieron)^ iv. 52Gladly or ApoUonta. c. Ill, i. 372G^yrUm t. /'efof, iu. 382 ; iv. 534Hadji Bark, vil. Pelat. iv. 452Hai Sert, his poem on Mf Pasha, i.4oS— 496Hadja&r, vU. Peru. {Cramum,) iii. 362—366HadjSmes, vil. Pkeraa^ iv. 401Hadiirin, vil. Elimeia, iii. 829Hadj6.bashi, vU. Then, iv. 328vil. in Amjfrie plain, iv.ffadrianopoHa, t. Chaonia, i. 76ffamusy mn. Tkr, iii. 474Hal4By t. Boo. u. 184. 288HaUaemon, r, Mac, i. 808. 814 ; iii. 292.ISHaiiaHia, dist. Ben, ii. 211ffaliariut, Unto. ii. 137. 20tfJ ^ marsh of, ii. 310HaUmetut^ isl. ASgmm^ iii. 112Hampton, Mr. William, iii. 69Hammer, station near ScttpL IU. iii.Harmaa, t. Base, ii. 248pass of ii. 251Harpesfus, r. Tkr. iii. 215Hassan Ag, Tjapari, of Mariti, i.405 ; iv. 47. 220Hassan Tat4ri, vil. Poi, iii. 362Hate, t. Pieria, iii. 424HtAnu, r. Tkr. iii. 216Hecatompedum, t. Ckaoniay iv. 120 ;road in PelaB,-Magn, iv. 406Helen, son of Priam, iv. 175Helmet, mn. B<ao, ii. 106. 205. 213.489-^600. 506. 513. 526Hdieranum, vil. Chaonia, i. 69, 70HertBwn, see Jtmo.HeOoM, site in PlUh. iv. 470. 531Hellebore, ii. 542Hellenic remains : —of^6«,i'Ao. u. 164of ^«mMi», Mac. iii. 147Kii AcrtBpittum, Beao. ii. 295of ^c/taim, seam. i. 174; iv. 25oi .Vitium, W. Loe. ii. 617of J^imnm, Hid. i. 421 ; iv. 537of JJ^^gfothena, Megara, ii. 405at Aet6 in Itkaoa, iii. 35of Affair, AEto.-Acam, iv. 252at pt. Alike, BcBO. W. coast, ii. 503of^/^,J?.Loc.ii. 176of^;M,i'AM.iv.337of Aljfxia, Adam, iv. 14of Amantia^ChfOomaA, 89. 375tXAmbrada, Ep, i: 205of Awbracui, Ed, i. 214of Ambfyam, Pno, ii. 535of Amp&ma, Phih, iv. 368. 371of Ampkideia. Pho. ii. 75of Amplius, W, Loe, ii. 588of Sanatorium, Aeam, iii. 493at AndritxA in Tanaorux, ii. 466of Pantheon, Bteo, ii. 272of Anticyra, Pho, ii. 540of Antrum, Phih,iY. 349of Apera$Ueia, jEto. i. 141of^po2&msa,/Z/.i.369of Ap(Moma, M^dtmia, iii. 458at Ardh&mi, ^tf^. iv. 529of^i7Msa,>e2a«. iii.367of Argos AmphUoAieum^ iv. 238of ^scm. Boo, ii. 491at Also, CephaUenia, iii. 67of Adacu», Adam, iv. 4of Atkamantium, Ben, ii. 295. 307of Athetuntm, Athamama, iv. 525of^rrar,iP«rr.iii.368of Axorw, Pert, iu. 334. 342at Bert, i. 361of Berrkau, Mac, iii. 292of Babe, Magn, iv. 428INDEX.UvUenic remuna: —of Bulii, BoBo.-Pko. iL &\Sof BiiUis,IlLi. 965of BiUUm MaHHrna, lU. i. 2. 876of CalUdrommn^ near Tk^rnufpjflw, ii.of Ocd^dom, jEto. Ui. 584.of Cbmaw, isl. ^eaiti.iii.29; W. 16of CcMope^ Ep. i. 245.of Cettrta^ or Jlium^ Ep, !▼. 74.ofCAaM,.^o.i.ll]of C%a^cM, JSru&aa, ii. 254of Chmroneia^ Bvo, ii. 112of CharadrfL, MolotsiSy W, 255of Ckaradra^ Pho, u. 70of C%tm«ra, Cftoontd, i. 89of ChiwMtium^ Tkeapixiiia^ iii. 3of CVcAvnw, or JSJfkyre, TJietproHa,of CimoUa, Megara ii. 413of C^rrAa, PAo. ii. 564of Oiemi(fe», £. Loe. i. 177of ConapeyOt Arainoc, jEto, i. 125of Cop<B, Indo. ii. 306of Coronets Boo. ii. 134of Coroneia^Phth, iv. 471of Odiitt, VepkaUeuiay iii. 61of Crane, PeUu, iii. 363of CVii£Ao(e, Adam. W. 5, 6of QfiMMO0p^a(«, «Soote«t«a, iv. 454of ChfHua, jE. Loc. ii. 175of^-^fitf^PeiT. iy. 304of Cythera Mgman^ iii. 73ofZ&Wtf,/'Ao.ii.lOOofI>e/Nim,i3<0o.u.449of Z>e;;tMU', u. 552-^1of Df/fw, Mgaan^ iii. 96^102of Demerits Magn, iv. 375of Dodona, Ep, iv. 127at Dhragomi, 7%e^m>/>a, iv. 70near Dhnuuisi&B, in Moiotm. i. 264 :iv.80of2>t«m,Afae.iii.409ofZ)o/icft«,/'err.in.344ofZ>M«a, PAo.ii«73near DudLn, Magn,-Pdaag. iv. 408.ofJE^4wa,il/a<;.iu.276of^tbff,7%r.iii.l73of£r/a<0ia,PAo.u.82of Elateia^ Pelaa, iu. 381of Eleuthera, AU, ii. 375of Eftstria, Eubaa, ii. 265. 439of Eretria^ Pkth, iv. 466of Perineum, Phth. iv. 471of Eritwm, PerrAv. 313of Ervthrm^ Boo. ii. 329of Euhydrium, Thes, iv. 493of EurymentBy Mam, iv. 415at Gardhikika, loan. d. iv. 90near Gratian. Chaonia-Atin. i. 75at the maff^ia of Ghereli. Plena.iv.451at Ai Ghi6i^hi, 'Agnfa d. iv. 272of Glapkyra, Man. iv. 432of Glitas, Bao, n, 246. 250Hellenic remains :—of Cfom>U,^H<.iv.519of<7oMHw,Pm-. iii. 388at G6tzi8ta, lo&n. d. i. 292at Guriinista, Iota. d. iv. 83t^Gyrton, iV2iu.iii.861. 882of HaUaariM».t B€». ii. 206of ffarma, Bmo, ii. 247. 250of Heradeia TVodUnia, ii. 26of Hvan^poUt, Pho. n. 167of lufpatay JEnianety ii. 18of^2e,BaK>.u.81Sof HmuB, Boo, ii. 327at Ai I&nni) Tketpniia^ iiL 8 : iv. 73of the two IdomuuB, AmpmlotUm^iv.250of JolctUy Magn, iv. 880of/<«onM,^&.iiR.510of /tAorto, .<£&>. iii. 577at Kaltza, 'Agrafa d. iv. 272on mt. KaliIU^ Agrak'i^. 253near Kalarf tee, &. i. 281near Ki4Wokli6ri, BMeBo^ iii. 436at KapuUi, Tim, iv. 504near Kastanii, 'Agrafa d. iv. 272at Kastraki^ TptMun^ iv. 587at KastH. near lake Babel, iv. 404at Kastr), near L61ov«, MolomU. \.at Katafyvbi, ' Agrala d. iv. 272near Katwoa, Adam, viL 60$at Kekhriniatza, Gravity \, 158at Kekhrop&la, ^coTM. i. 172; iv. 24at Klar^ntM, nes pro hoy iii. 4at Lima, W. Loo. ii. 618at Klia&ra, Aoi Siena, i. 884at Kniaovo, 'Agra£i d. iv. 272at Kolokot6, Tke$, i. 431; iv.290near Komb6ti, Artaa d. iv. 286near Kometzadhes, Artaa d. I* 230at Ktivelo, JEto, i. 126at Kyfn, 'Agrafa d. iv. 275of Laeereiay or Dotiumy Peat, iv.445at Lakhani, Jlfoa iii. 280of LamiayPhik.W.'ilat Langage, Mae, iii. 233of 2;aruM,/'«2a«.L 439of Clarissa Matte, Pink. iv. 347of Larymtta. Baso.-Pko, ii. 287of£e6a<iMa,BM>.ii.l21of£edb»,Pib.ii.83. 89of Leueaty loom sea, iii. 14of Leuctra Abo. ii. 485at Li&skovo. 'Agrafa d. iv. 272ofXtX«»,i'io.ii.71of Liamaay Adam. i. 160 ; iv. 244-of Ltmnmoy Tkm, iv. 824. 512on lake Ldv&dlii, Brno, ii. 278near Lukiai. Aw.ii. 275near L^kokn6ri, .veto. ii. 605of iMnmackiay /Eio, i. 158at Malandrina, W. Loe, it. 698of Gallia, Perrr, iv. 312in Margariti d. Tketprotiayiwli)at Manol&tea, Doris ii. 86at Mavro-dhiliaai, AU, Bmo, li. 441Index.Hellenic remains : —of Mania. sto. i. Illon MavTovuni, Tess. iv. 327of MedeoUy Adam. iii. 503. 575of JfA2e(Mi,PAo. ii. 548of Melibceay Moan. iv. 414of Militia, Phd.W. 469ofMeUts^ JEqmm^ iii. 79of Mended Mac, iii. 157of Metropolis, Adam. iii. 511. 576Pelas. iii. 360 ; iv. 298Up, Th. iv. 506of Molyereia, Felo. i. Illof Mojmum^ Pelas. iii. 377 ; iv. 298of MvcaleinuLBcBO. ii. 246. 251of Ammonia, W. Loc. ii. 592of NarycPy E. Loc. ii. 187of Nampactus^ W, Loc. ii. 607ofNelm,MagH.\y.^9at Neokh6ri, 7i&enMa«, u. 499at Ni&usta, Mathias, m, 288ofiNTttwa, £:. Zoc. ii. 38ofiVtcopo^u,^:/). i. 185of ATtMM, M^faris^ ii. 399*ofOca/eo,^<BO. ii. 205of aSafUheia,W. Loc. ii. 594of CEneon, W. Loc. ii. 616of (Emadmy Adam, iii. 556*of O^fioe, Att.'Bcdo. ii. 375of (Hoonon^ Perrr. iii. 346of OiiMP, AmtikUoehia., iv. 251ofO$R^,3fac. iii. 154of Oackesiiu, Boo. ii.213ofOipM,^. jDoc. ii.l74of On^omeiuu, Boo. ii. 145, «< mq.of Orettf, or Ifistun, Euboea iv. 352of OrobuB^ EtAeea, ii. 176of Oropitf, Att.-BcBO. ii. 444of PiBanium, jEio. iii. 577of PoffdSy Megaria^ ii. 407of PaoauB^ Magn, iv. ^0of Pateay CepkouUnia^ iii. 65at Palea Mani, Adam. iii. 524at Psde6kastro, near Pella Mac. iii.on the Single Gulf,ui. 153of Pandora, Thesprotia. i. 232; iv. 55of Panopeus^ Pko. ii. 1 10at Paradhtria, W. Loc. ii. 598on lake Parading, Bwo. ii. 278at Paramythiaj T^etproHa^ iv. 61of Parapotamu, Pko. ii. 191at Pazariki, Thea. iv. 494of PeireeuB, Tea, iv. 319of PdimuBum, Tket, i. 431 ; iv. 288of Pisa, Mac. iii. 260, ei teatPetrie, The, iv. 326at Pend6mia, W. Loc, ii. 622of Phadum, Tket. iv. 292of Plagues, Mac.-Tkraee, iii. 176of PkSaima, PeUu. ui. 352. 379 ; iv.of/'Aa2orKi,/rMf. iv. 529of Pharaoh, Hist. iv. 317of Pkarmdw, Phth, isisVOL. IV. 15Hellenic remains : —of Pkarwa, or Tarphcy E. Loc, ii66. 179on Mt. Peleus, Att. ii. 438of Pera, Peku. iv, 439of Philip, Mac.-Tkracc, iii. 214of Phauaoe^ Chacnia^ i. 66of Pheeteia^ Adam. iii. 575 ; iv. 12ofPA^;aee,P;^A. iv. 331ofPA^,.<l«.ii. 417of Phyt€Bum, Mto. i. 155ofP^otoa, B<0o. ii.325of Pleurotty JEio. i. 115on Mt. Pasalum^ Att. ii. 3a5at Potion, Hist. iv. 529at Polis, Ithaca, iii. 45at Polvp6rtu, W. Loc. u. 621near Frodhromo, Adam. iii. 514of Proemaa, Pkth. i. 455gf Prone. OephaUenia, iii. 66of Premium, AEto, i. 119of Pteleum, Pkth. iv. 342of Pydna, Mae. iii. 427. 429of Pyrrhasus, Pkth, iv. 366at Rendhina, 'Agrafa, d. iv. 272ofiZAamnttf,^/^. ii. 434of Rhenda^ Aegean iii. 103of Rhoduntia^ near Thermcp^^ ii. 63at Ruffs, ffulf of Artaa, (Aoam.J iii.of Salganeus, Boo. ii. 267of Saucy CephaUema^ iii. 55of iScme, Mae. iii. 144of Seirone^ MegariSy ii. 413of&o/i»,^<BO. ii. 369of Scotussa^ Peku. iv. 455of SeyruSy JEMsan. iii. 108at Sesklo, Man. iv. 399near Siatista, Mac. two ruins, i. 313at Sidhiro-kafkhi6, Pho, ii. 538at Si^kliza, Tkts. iv. 505of Sirrha, Mac. iii. 205at Sis&ni, Elimda-Orestis, i. 318at Sm6kovo, 'Agrafa, d. iv. 272. 516at Sofidhes, Thes. iv. 495at Sokh6, Mae. iii. 230of Stageirus, Mac, iii. 168of Chris, Pho, ii. 528at Strat6ni, near Acanthus. Mac. iii.of Strategy Adam. i. 137of Sycurium. Pelas. iii. 374at isti, 'Affrafi^ d. iv. 252. 272of Tanagra Boo. ii. 455of Typhus, CephaUenia, iii. 67of Thaumaci, Phth. i. 457of Thea, Bwo. ii. 226Pl^thiaiaB, iv. 858of Themes, JEJta, i. 133of Thc9fnmy Bobo. u. 479of ThcssaUmiea, Mac. iii. 244, st tea,of nu&0, BsBO. ii. 506of Chromium, E. Loc. ii. 178of Tiberius, near ThermopgUSy ii. 63of TiphsB, or 5i>*«, PAo. ii. 514of Ttthorea, Pko, ii. 77INDEX.Hellenic remus : —of Titkrumum, Pho. u. 76. 87of four towns in Tjer»enil>4, iii. 808on Mt. Tom6r, Dan. i. 852of seven Town on the frontier ofAtHca, u. 381ofTricoaA.429; iv.285of Tripoaiteua^ ii. 411opposite to the islands Tnz^nia, W.Socii 616near Varlaniy lo&n. d. two fortresses,i. 222near Vam&kora, Mto. a town and afort. ii. 605at Ai Vasili, Adam. iT. 21at Vatop^hi, Ate, Mae. iii. 140at Vath^, port of Thine, Ban. u.507I Ithaca, iii. 28at Veliani, Tkemrotia, iv. 69at Velitzista, loan. d. iv. 196at Veliikhovo, W. Loc. ii. 600 •at VSthari, W. Loc, ii. 621at y6nitza, Adam. i. 171at a manila near Vdnitza, i. 171at Romani (little), ' Agrafa, d. W. 272at Xeropotami, Acte, Mac, iii. 117of Xyma, Dohpia^ i. 460HeUopSa, Ep. iv. 88. 171. 184. 193Heraclea, X, Adam. iv. 24Aihamania^ iv. 212■ Lyneestis, i. 423; iii.-.^ Pieria Mac. iii. 4055W«»,iii. 226Trachea, ii. 2. 10. 27. 29 ;W.346Hetvdeius, r. Bii/w, Bmo.-Pho. U. 519HereuUi, his temples ; — near Marathon,n. 430: near Orchomenus, Bcao, ii.161. 820; at Thebes, ii. 232; in theThebaa, named HippodehUy ii.320: at Thespis, li. 483; at Thisbe,iL508, his death on Bit. (Eta, ii. 20.^ small statues of, in brass,purchased bv the author, i. 125; iii.389; iv.53fir-, port of, near Aiyzia, Adam..> son of Alexander the Great,iv. 15murder of iv. 276Heroine, r. at Lebadeia, Bmo. ii. 118 —126. 142Jlermaum, near the Euripus. ii. 260.267. 269; at Tanagra, ii. 459Iliera, or Nea, tsl. JEgtmn. iii. 113isolated position of oil the morecelebrated, iv. 197Hierenaea, peo. of Amelia, ii. 20Hippocrene, fn. Mt. Helicon, u. 494. 499Hippodrome at Thebes, U. 243-— near Delphi 'u. 583. 595Ilittuga, c. and plain m Eubma, iv, 352Nistiaotvi, Up. Th. iv. 511. 535Hosts, wild, in the Acaruauian forests,iii. 496Hogs, wild, in Mt. Bermim», iii. 296in Mt. Forms, ii. 421in Mt. Pdmm, iv. 433Holland, Dr., i. 25. 35. 379Holmes, viL Ordiomtma, Brno. ii.183., 184Holopktfxua, t. Acte. Mac. iii 149Honore, or liomoiium, t, Magm. Bi.402; iv. 415Habits, fn. and r. HaUartia, Brno, ii.Horrium, t. Molosms, iv. 81HoTiennw, iL 79. 98. 193HottiUw, the consul, i. 73, 74; iiL 416;iv. 481Hughes, Rev. T. S. i. 248; iv. 46Hyampeia, peak of Delphi, ii. 558. 568HyampoUM, t. Pho, ii. 168—170pass of, ii. 188Hydame$, the Persian, ii. 6. 8. 39. 46.Hwttut, vil. OrcAommia, Bubo, ii. 183,HyUgthtu, HyUeht9, or HjAaema, r. JBJko.-W. Loc. ii. 619H^, t. TkA<ta, ii. .^3t. W. Loc. ii. 619HyUx, lake, Kama, ii. 313. 815Hvmetimt, mn. Att. iL 420Hypata, t. Mniamea, ii. 19. 23Hiatus, mn. Theban, ii 219Hypertia, fo. Th. iv. 434. 440. 485liyphanteium, mn. OrcAoMano, Brno.u. 97. 100. 145ffypocnemidn, W. Loc. u. 181Syria, t. Octo. ii. 469or Lwimachia, Isle wfito. i 153Hytia, t. Bm. ii. 327. 377. 474JackaUs,i99Jamphorina, t. Madka, iii. 473lan&ki, captain of armatoli, i. 244. 253I&nkovo, vil. Emma, i. 305Il^nni, Ai, or 9t. John, mon. near Thtr-mopjda, ii. 39pt. of Kak6sia, Ben. u. 507pt. near Paiga, Ep, Ui. 4. 8 ;iv. 73Anni, K&tziko, ui. 500lannitza, or Yenidj^, t. near PtBa, m,-, mn. of, iii. 267lake of, iii. 283. 287. 436manila, r. Att. ii. 426J(isoM,iv. 381.399ofPhMB, u. 30. 168Ibrahim Pasbfi of Be^&^ i. 45. 338—Ibrahim Pasha of Skodra, i. 45learns, mn. Att. ii. 429Jew, si. Mgmm, iii. 112idomenm, nm. and two forts, ,iv. 649, 250Domine, t. on r. ^4tw, Mao iii. 442Units, r. lU, i. 367lerakCinia, (Ital. Faleonira), isl.J£gaitn, iii. 77INDEX.Jev», i. 443; iii. 248; iv. 137. 570,Ignatius, bishop of Artaa, i. 202. 403Ilex, (quercus ilex), described, i. 128;Ilianu, r. AU. ii. 427iUmmy t. Da9$,-Atm, iii. 328or TVo^, t. C^trum^Ckaonia, W. 74. 176Imperatoriaia, site and plain, Twmpkaa^i.399; iT.278Inaekm^ r. fenian. ii. 22r. Amph, iy. 239IneU, Til. Pkik. iv. 331. 468India, tU. Ttmagrwa, ii. 462. 463Ini6-kar&-stL, r. Mae. fffaUaemouL i.903.332; iii. 293. 303. 329/no, or LeuooAea. my thus of, ii. 414.Ifupu$^ r, Ddua isl. iii. 102Inscriptions, ancient : —at Acrwpkium^ Boo. ii. 295, H teq.632, et mq.at AeHMm^ Aeam, ir. 27at Aghik, Moan, iv. 417at JEmmum^ Hitii, i. 421at .^C^oseiMO, Mi^ria, u.405at Ambraeia^ Ep. iv. 234at Amphibia Pho. ii. 75at AmphipoUa, Mac.-Tkr. iii. 187at AMpkt$aa^ W. Loe» ii. 589, HseatAntuyra^ Pho, ii. 541in Antiparua^ isl. JEgman^ iii. 89at ApoUoma, lU. L ^0, etf m?.at Aihenty AU. iii. 463; It. 576 ;Ins. PI. Xlll. Nob. 57.58, 59at BerrhcM^ Mac. iii. 292at Bomb, Laconia. Ins. pi. XXIV.No. 114at Billet, lU. i. 35new Corydon, JEto. i. 112at Cluaroneia^ Bet. ii. 113, ei so.at Cierwm, Tke$. iv. 498, et mq.at Copa^ Bubo. ii. 306at CbrofMta, Bcbo, ii. 133near , ii. 134in the Corycium, (cave on Pampasii. 581at CnmnoH, PeUu. iiL 365, ei $eq,at Creamy Perrr. iv. 305, et tea. ;Ins. PI. XXXVIII. No. 182at Daulit, Pho. u. 101, el aeq. 627,el $eq. ; Ins. PL V. No. 23at DeljM, Pho. u. 558, el aeq. 685,el aeq. iv. 574in DetiUy JEganm^ iii. 96, et aeq, 101at St. Demetrius, Kr&vari, d. Ins.^. XXIII. No. 103at Dhsm&sU Perrr. iv. 300at Dh^iani Mam, !▼. 418at Down, Mac. Ins. PI. XXXI. No.at Edeaaa^ or /Egm, Mac. iii. 277,el aeq.St El3eiay Pho. ii. 82Inscriptions, ancient : —at Eretria Phthaotia, iv. 466near Gomphi, Het. iv. 523, e< aeq.at Giinitza, near Atraat. Perrr. iv.near Hyaanpolia, Pho. ii. 169at Hypata. jEmaMea, ii. 18; Ins.PI. III. No. 17; PL IV. No. 19at loannina, Ep. i. 254 ; iv. 204in Ithaca, iii. 37. 52at K&lamo, Att. u. 440■t Barytes, W. Loc. ii. 597at Ksstri, Magn.-Pelaa. iv. 405at Katokhi, near (Eniadaay Aeam^m.5S6at Khaivit, near Theaaaloniea,Mac. iii. 235at K6zani in Elimeiuy Mac. ti.at Lanuay Mdia-Phih. ii. 2at Lariaauy Pdaa. i. 440 ; Ins. PI.ILN08.9, 10, 11, 12at Lebadeioy Brno. ii. 129, el aeq.at Lq)en6, near Strata Ins. rl. I.No. 2at Leuoaay iii. 17at Mavrodhilissi, AU.-Beao. ii. 441mt Menidhi, AU. Ins. PL XII. No.in Media, jEgaaoHy iii. 81 ; Ins. PI.XXIV. No. 115at Met^ra Tymphmty iv. 539at MelropoUay Vp.Th. iv. 509at NaupaetiUy W. Loc. Ins. PI.Xxii. Nos. 104. 105at or near Nioapciuy Ep. i. 188.192; iii. 492; Ins. PL XXXIV.Nos. 161, 162at OlooaaoHy Perrr. iii. 347near Opus, E. Loc. ii. 173at Orehomenuay Beao. ii. 152, H aeq,630, tt aeq.at or near Oropuay AU.-Bceo, ii.U7 yet aeq.in Pansy Mgaany iii. 87. 91at PagaaaBy Moan. iv. 368; Ins.PL XXXIX. No. 198at Pursmvthia, Theaprotiay Ins.PL XXXIV. No. 169at Pazaraki, Thea. iv. 494at PdagomOy Mac. iii. 319, et aeq.at PelinnaBumy Hist. iv. 289at Petra, Dotian p&tin, Pelaa. iv.at Phareadony Hist. iv. 817at Pharaalwy Phth. i. 454«t PhcrtBy Pdaa. iv. 443near Ptolemy Phtk. iv. 343at or near Pydmay Mac, iii. 426, elin^io^Astf, JEffanny iii. Illat Sirrhaay Mac.-Thr. iu. 205at Sisini in Elimday Mae, i. 318at Si&rpi, Phth. iv. 341at Stitches, Thea. iv. 495at Stmsy Pho. ii. 531Qq2INDEX.Inscriptions, ancient :—At Tanagra, or in the Tamoffriee^Bubo, 11. 457. 464. 470, el mq.Ki Tatiri, Diu. iii. 361 ; Ins. PI.XXXI. No. 148in Tempe, Th. iii. 392at Thaumaci^ Pktk. i. 457at Tkebm, Bwo. ii. 223, €t am.Pktkwticte, iv. 359, ettea. ; Ins. PL XXXIX. Noa. 195,196, 197at Thespis, or in the Theapiag^Bm>. ii. 4a0, et aeq, 488, et mq,493. 500, et tea,at TheemUmiea, Mae, in. 236. 242.246,e<«».at Thidie, Bcbo. ii. 511, et tea.at TkroHum, E, Loc. ii. 178at Tithorea. Pho, ii. 78; Ins. PLV. No. 22at Trieea, Hut. iv. 285at T&mavo, Pda$, iii. 356. 371 ;Ins. PL XXX. No. 145at Aio Vasili, Acorn, vr. 21at Vatop6dhi, mon. Ade, Mae. iii.at and near y6nitza, Adam. iv.21; Ins. Pl.XXXiy. Nos.«l66,at Volo, Moan, vr. 387 : Ins. PI.XL. Nos. ^1,202, 203loinnina, city of, L 401; vt, 84. 130—165. 219— , citadel of, iv. 187climate of i. 268history of, iv. 202. 553—567— , the authors house in, vr. 141lake of, i. 219. 403. 409; iv.127. 134. 155island of, iv. 154plain and valley of, i. 222;iv. 187metropolitan see of, i. 48. 199John. St., church and festival of, nearloin. iv. 88-, mon. near DhesfSna, Pho,ii. 546; at Efkyn^ Tkeeprotia, iv. 53.73 ; at MeUbeui, Magn. iv. 414. SeeAi anniJolcusy t. Moan. iv. 379son. r. Hut. m. 342 : iv. 279. 546Ionian Islands, iii. 21Jones, Mr. i. 248. 379Irini, Syria, HeL ruin, JEio. L 115.130 ; iii. 539/n», or era, t. Mdis^ ii. 21Ipidhoro Ai, pt. near Antieyra, Pho. ii,Snail Bey, of Serres, iii. 202Tenus, f. Thebes, ii. 235, 236Jtmtria^ t. TkefproOa, iv. 64Asthma, dist. Phth. iv. 351/«/Am«ir, thesis. 389Isti, t. Paonia, iii. 469. 475ImtSy t. Meoarisy ii. 408Ithaca, iii. l»5-^0Itkome^ X. Hid. i. 429 : iv. 510/toMM, t. Phlh. iv. 356Iron, mon. Aete^ Mae. iii. 124Juniper, the tree, iu 523JmtOy temples of :-—Baeilu^ at Lebadekk, ii. 129at Plan, ii. 364at Ckmmeioy ii. 139JufiUr, temples of: —at Dodtma^ iv. 196—201of J. AcrtnUy near jEttopto, AAama"MO, iv. 525J. Ad^gmSy on Mt. /Wnuii, iv. 385J. ^aesnw, in CephtMuoOy iiL 59J. ^jMimm, at 7*Ae&e«, iL 234J. Apkuimny Mealy ii. 414J. BasiietUy or TrooikmtM, at £0-badeioy ii. 123. 130, 131J. OmuUy at Megara, ii. 394J. ElntkeritUy at PlatMy ii. 366J. Hmaiu»y in ThAmay u. 248J. HfimdM9y at 7*Me*, ii 233J. JjapkwttuUy near ChnmefOy ii.139,140; at^/M,iv.362J. MeffkttUy at Sn^, ii. 520J. CHwmpimgy at Megara, ii. 393;at Lmm, iii. 410J. PalamnuUy worship of, at Chm-phi iv. 528Jupiter spear or sceptre, at C9U»»roneia, ii. 115Justinian, edifices of, L 67; ii. 64: iv.65. 97Jtutmiama Prima, or .helm, t. Macor JU. iii. 273Jtutimtama Seemmday or Ulpiama^ i.Three or Mae, iii. 476JtutimanopoliMy i. Chaomiay Ep. i. 76Kadj, khan of the, Beeo.-Pko. ii. 96.Kafkani, pt Ovale. Mae. iiL 166Kaienitza. r. Doris u. 72. 86Kaitza, vil. 'Agni. d. iv. 272Kakardhitza, or Kakaxdhista, a summitofi'MM/itf,L283t prospectfrom, i. 286-289Kakiskila, mn. .peto. i. 107 ; ii. 606Kak6sia, vU. Boo. (TT^iebeJy u. 506—Kalab&ka, or Stages, t. Hid. ( JRgi-mummy L 419-724: iv. 262. 536Kalamk, r. Tkupraiia {ThwmieJ. ii.26. lOa 400 ; iv. 79. 94; valley of theUpper Kalami, iv. 191Kalamiki, mills near Lebadekty Brno,ii. 138. 504Kalamitza, pt. Scyruty isl. in. 107Kilamo, vil. AU. ii. 438-J isl. Adam. iii. 29, d 9eq, ; iv.13. loKal&na, mn. Grassy i. 288 ; iv. 253Kalap6dhi, vU. E. Loc. u. 170. 186Kalarf tea, t. Mt. Pindn$y L 271 4283;iv. 207. 214INDEX.KalUki. vU. and khm, Molotsis, i. 400;iv. 97KtUntri, vU. EulxBa, ii. 439Kali&ai, vU. Elimeia, ui. 304Kali&ri, t. Eordmi, I 329 ; iii. 317Kaliiaa, yil. Chaonia, i. 18. 65Kaljff6ni, ruins of Lnuxu at, iii. 14Kalk6ndui, vil. lU. i. 379Kalogheritza, hill near 'Egripo, ii. 262.Kal&tzi, on tho Aous, Chaoniuy L 35Ramirez, Til. Dority ii. 73KanuHna, vil. Oanopaa, i. 244■ — y Hellenic ruins at, i. 250liver of, iv. 47Kambo. sub-dist. of Arts, iv. 229Kamenitza, ruined vil. Chaonia, i. 65Kanaki, Kyr Christ, of Delving, i. 18Kanalaki, vil. Tkeaprotiay iv. 50Kanili, vil. Gusopoa, iv. 47Manilla, vil. on lake Bofteiir, Tk. iv.420—428.435Kanavari, or Kan&vri, r. Tkebdda. ii.216. 478. 485Kand!li,mn.^«.-il/M. ii. 275. 371. 409;iii. 24Kanina, vil. and castle near Avl6na, Lui.2/384 ; iv. 554KanzL vil. MoUmit, i. 256 ; iv. 254Ku»a (Ital. Capua), its manufacture, i.45. 274. 284 ; iii. 335. 407 ; iv. 394Kap4, vil. Hist, iv. 518K^Mmdriti, vil. Att. ii. 465Kapesnttza, vil. Breath$, i. 333K&prena, vil. Magn, iv. 431Kaps&li, pt Cerigo, iii. 69Kapsokhori, vil. Myodotua, Mae, iii.259.436Kl^puma, vil. Boo, (CktaroneiaL ii.109. 112. 192■^, inscriptions at. ii. 628Kaputj!, vU. These. iv. 504Kanbairam, vil. Sootussma, Tk. iv. 468Kanbeb^rTkaiein, of E^gripo, u. 253Karabum6, prom. Crusts Mae, iii.438.452Kara Mustafa Pash£ besieges CorfCi, i.42: iv.566Kana&gh, mn. PeUu, i. 444. 447 ; iv.442. 45k 464Karidanli, vil. Pais. iv. 332Karadere, or Light, vil. PeUu^-Perr.iii. 352Karadj61i, vil. Pelas, iii. 352. 380Karaff6nidhes, shepherds, iv. 85. 430Karakaxa, mn. Att, ii. 444Karamusa, vil. Bao. ii. 201Karasm&k, or Mavron^ri, r. Bottom,iii. 270KarssA, Turk, name of rivers Erigom^Strymon. and Nestwi, iii. 268. 275KaratjaSr, lake near Larissa (NesmmitJ^i. 445: iv.403Karadigfa, or MavrovAni, mn. T%et8. i.KarakUo, mon. Air, Mae. iii. 130KaraUr, vil. PfJa9. iii. 373Karam6nghi, a Summit of HeikoH. if.Kaiamurat&tes, the, Albanian tribe. Up,^.iv. 101Karasm&k, prom. mouth of Agiug^Mac. iii. 4o7Kar&va, mn. 'Affray, d. iv. 275Karav6poro, bridge, Trikkala d. iv. 530Kardhenitza, vil. E. Loc. (Opus). ii.Kardhiki, vil. Dora, ii. 72. ( For otherplaces of this name see Gardhiki)Kardhitza, or Gardhitza, vil. Bmo»(Aerapkium), ii. 2197279. 295t. Up. Th. iv. 505Marian, or Karai&nni, dist. Eordaa, i.Kari6U, vil. Tkesprotia, iv. 59Karitza, t. Mt. Qua, iii. 401 ; iv. 415, vil. Molom^ iv. 92Karla, lake of, Tk. (BaAeu), iii. 378 ;iv. 403. 419. 427Karlili, district of, i. 123—125; Ui. 510.Karpenisi, t. DryopU. ii. 17kaz& o^ i. 119. 124Barytes. vU. W. Loc. ii. 596. 620Karvunari. vil. Chaonia^ i. 35Karvunaria, r. MdiM fA»opu»JJd. 31Karvuni&ri, vil. Tkemrotia, iv. tOHarris, vil. E. Loc. h. 67vil. Dogma, i. 460 ; ii. 16 'vil. Abo. ii. 138vil. Mt. Olyn^fMts, iii. 349Kar^dhi, mn. Efforts, ii. 371. 409Kary^s, or Nares, t. AcU, Mac, iii. 121Cassandra, (PalleneL Mae. iii. 163gulf of, iii. 162gate of, (Potidma), iii,Kaaa6po, vil. Coif, i. 12. 93channel and rocks of, i. 12. 91Kaftamonitu, mon. Aden Mae. iii. 120Kastanii, vil. on Mt Demum, Mae, iii.s Megili, vil. 'Agrafa, d. iv.270.508Astoria, t. and lake, Ortaii». i. 323—332; ui.336Kastriki, vil. Hid,-Tympkma, i. 419;iv. 536Kastri, Hel. site, MoUmit i. 256Hel. site on Mt. Omx, iv. 414-, vil. Pho. C Dd^i J ii. 553-, vil. and Hel. site, TkeaproHa, i.232; iv.51. 55-, vil. and Hel. site, near Mt.Pelham, iii. 373; iv. 403. 447Hel. site near TCimavo, Pelat,iii. 360. 380; iv. 298Kastri6ti8sa, ruined fort. Gulf of Arteiv. 287Kastrftes. (the inhabitants of Aighyr6-kastro,) i. 26Kastritza, mon. near lo&n. i. 269. 291Hellenic city at, iv. 127. 196Kastro, vil. Meus, iii. 78INDEX.KaaUMkii, tU. Omopaa. iv. 48Kataf6mo, pt. AmpkUochia, iv. 237.250K«tafVghi, yil. Pieria, iii. 297Katafyghi, vil. 'Agra d. iv. 271KftUit6, pt. Chaoma, i. 102KaUv6thra, mn. Melii, ii. 4 — 24or abyss of the CepkiauUjBrno, u, 185. 280, ei tea,of the HaUartia, ii. 309,of lo&nnina, i. 410 ; iv. 135Katherine, t. Paria, m, 414. 424Kato Martin, or Logoth^ti, viL Att, itKat&na, vil. Adam. i. 163; iii. 511;iv. 13. 499Katuka, vil. near loinnina, i. 269Katokhi, vil. sto. iu. 543. 556Katzikav^H, vil. Tht»pmu, Bcbo, u. 478Katz^a, vil. Panuomn^ Bcao. iL 327,Kazaklari, vU. Pelas. iii. 360Kazik-bumCi, prom, mouth of AaUu,iii. 438Katzik6.Ianni, iii. 549Kavila, t Mac.-Tkr. iii. 180^ gulf of, iii. 179mountain of, iii. 222Kav&ya, hi of, ///. i. 374Kefal&ri, r. Haliartia, Bmo, ii. 207.212. 497Kefali, prom. Chaonia^ i. 12peninsula, near Anticjfra^ Pko.ii. 540Kefal6, isl. gulf of Artaa, i. 200Kefalonia ( CepkaUenia ), iii. 55-^8K^falos, or grey mullet, i. 9; iii. 185Kefalobi, fn. and Hel. site, PAM. iv.336.355Keftdovr^ses of the Crphissut, Brno. ii.70.84Kekhrenii, viL Adam. i. 159ridge of, i. 159 : iii. 505Kekhraniatza, pass and Hcl. fort. Aearm.i. 158Kekhrop^la, Hel. site, Adam. i. 172;iv. U. 24Kelberini, mn. Ambraeia^ i. 215. 220Kendr6mata, mon. Adam. i. 163Keramidhi, vil. Moffti. iv. 416Kerasii, pt. Chaoniay i. 102Errata, mn. Att. ii. 409Kervaaara, pt. and Hel. site, Adam, L160.162; iv. 229. 243Kernel, vU. IU. i. 366Kesaria, vil. Elimeia^ iii. 304Ketjel, Ak, vU. Phth. iv. 357. 359Keuzlir, vil. Phih. iv. 331. 469Khadova, vil. on Mt Dermuu^ Mac. ilLKliaali, vil. Mygdonia, iu. 231Khiva, vil. near Saloniki, iii. 234pass of, iii. 461Thalia, vil. Beeo, ii. 474Khaliki, vil. at source of AckeloHs, i.287. 294 ; iv. 210prom, gulf of Artaa, iii. 495'20Khalki, vU. Plain$, ii. 324Khalkitza, nm. Adam. iii. 544Kham&ko, vU. Pktk. iv. 343Khanko, mother of Al Paahi, i. 29.Khan6pulo, khan and pass near Artaa,i. 219; iv. 135.256Kharalambo, St., church of, near That,ii. 483Knarkiopiiili, vil. Aorau, iv. 253KhaHib tree, L 164 ; iii. 498Kh&sika, villages Ck<dc. Mae. ui. 162Khans vTlTDamUa, Pko. u. 98. 216KfaasBii, mn. and sttb-4. Hit L 426.430; iv.266viL Att. ii. 382KheUdh6ni, r. Nati, i. 346. 348Khier&sovo, vil. .^£to. i. 120; vil. Momusi. 262; viL Ponrnpa, iv. HI ;vil. 'A«rafa d. iv. 253Khilandiuri, mon. AcU. Mae. iii. 141.Khilidhrdmia, isl. JEg^n^ iii. 112Khlim6. mn. Phtk. iv. 338Khlomd, mn. Ben. ii. 163. 167. 180Kfaimara, t. and dist. Ckaoma, i. 2. 81 ;pt. 82; manners, 84, 85. 89Kh6ika, vU. ThtMtvtia. iv. 57Kholom6n, or Solomon, mn. Chair,Mae. iii. 162. 230Khol6, r. Phtk. iv. 333, 356Kh6pari, or Pari, mn. Jkm. i. 343. 345Khoreft6, pt. Magn, iv. 393Kh6rmovo, vil. and mn. Atm. i« SO, et9eq. 56, 57. 469Khorti&tzi, mn. near Saloniki, iii. 232Khort6-ka8tro, rains Mam, iv. 381Kh6sia, or Kh6stia, t. Mt. HeUoom^ ii.Kbrysovitza, vil. Zag6ri, lo&n. d. i. 293l/i\iiTfk^i\.B«Bo,(Me»tapmt)^ il.219.Khiibavo, vU. Pkoy ii. 95. 190Khumelitza, vil. CAaoma, i. 57. 60Kiaia or Ghiifa, vil. and castle nearSuU, i. 228Kiari, dist. Dats.-Orettis, i. 342Kieperla, vil. and valley ^fni. i. 392Kief>er6, vil. Khim&ra, £^. i. 79 ; viLGraven, Up. Mac. i. SOLKicking, mon. near KalarVtes, Mt. ,iv. 213Kifisia, vil. Att. u. 428Kineta, r. Bwo.-Pho. ii. 96. 190. 195Ki6ni, pt. Itkaoa, iii. 52Kirtzini, vU. Hist. iv. 287, 333Kiel, vil. W, Loc. u. 621Miserly, vil. Mt. Osso, iii. 380Kissavo, mn. Th. (0$aaL iii. 384; iv.Nitro, vil. Pierian iii 427Klarentza, vil. TT^eqtroHo'OiMtmmcn^m. 4Kleftes, the, iii. 551 ; iv. 206. 353Klimini^, pt. LetuxK^ iii. 23KUnovo, vil-CMiWw, iv. 265river of, i. 418INDEX.Klis{a«, Til. cutlc, Hel. site, and potson the Atmt, i. 32. 382—388bey of, i. 41— , or iwM of Mt. Zjg6%. JEto, \.119. 122of Sur, i. 231. 287of SiitistA, Bltmeia, i. 311of Porter, or Gfttes of Trikkala,iv. 519VUkho, t. Orutw-Emyima, i.Knlsovo, viL Agrafa d. iv. 272Kokhla, vil. Beeo. (Plataea ii. 323K6kkina, pt. PkiA, iv. 366K6kkino, vil. near lake Copais, n. 280.^ r. JEto. ii. 600K6kkino-tith&ri, vil. TymphM-jEOieia,i. 417Kokkinopl6, vil. Mt. Ofympw, iii. 335Kokl6baahi. vil. Pkik, iv. $30Kokot68, vil. Mt. Othiys, iv. 339Kokiis, dist. Mt. Othrw, iv. 338Koli&dhes, vU. Mohuit, i. 220. 262Colles, a summit of Helicon ii. 529Kolokot6, vil. Hist, i. 431 : iv. 290. 316Colonia, Albanian dist. Dan.'Orestu^i. 322.342; iv. 113. 123Komb6ti, vil. near Ana, iv. 235— — , river of, iv. 236Sometimes, vil. Ambrada^ i. 219Comment Lithiri, fort. Ikug. \. 348Komol4dhes, vil. JEniamet^ ii. 14Konask6, vil. Elimeia, i. 319Kondoiinni, Mitjo, captain of armatoli,iv. 252Koudo-vCini, mn. Peas. iii. 372Koniaridhes, Tnrks of Thessaly, i. 144 :iii. 174. 357 ; iv. 327. 419Koniaro-kh6ria, villages near Clarissa,iii. 357Konidhiri, vil. near y6nitza, Aeam,i. 166. 172Koni^Ii, t. Ckaonia, i. 98ruins on Mt. Ofymjms, iii.K6nitKa, t. Caravan, i. 396 ; iv. 108—115. 124Konopitza, vil. Aeam, iii. 503K6prena, pt. Gulf of Artaa, Eo, iv. 236K6raka, rocks in Ithaca iii. o9. 41Kor&ku, bridge ofL Adudom^ Atka-nuima, iv. 269. 272Koran6pulo, vil. The^troHa, i. 405 ; iv.Koran, or Dorian, vil. near CoronetsBwo. ii. 135Korombili, mn. Bteo. w. coast, ii. 500—602Kor6ni, mon. Agralk d. iv. 271K6rono, mn. A'cutcm, iii. 95Kortikhi, vil. Hid, iv. 316. 512Korytzi, or Gortji, t. Daw. i. 336, etan.; iii. 329Kosmiri, vil. loin. d. i. 263; iv. 83Kostalexi, \-il. jE/uawjf^ ii. 14Kotovazdhi, vil. Tympfimi^ i. 416•21Kotovizdhi, river of, i. 417Kotra, vil. near Tepel6ni, i. 56. 889K6tziaka, or K6tiaka, mn. and subsist.of Trlkkda, i. 419; iv. 277.K6trika, vil. Ckaoma, i. 104K6tzista, vil. Mt. Pindus iv. 83Kov^ltzi, vil. near Trikkala, i. ^4K6zani, t. EUmeia, iii. 299Kranii, vil. Grevena d. i. 300; iii. 404Kr&tzova, sub-dist. TrikkiOa, i. 418;iv. 265or river of Miritza, iv. 262. 646Kravari, dist. AEto, i. 124 ; ii. 599. 602Krevasarfc, vil. Pho. ii. 95hill of, ii. 95. 189. 194Krio-ner6, sources, foot of Mt. C%aleit^jEto. i. 107; sources near loan. iv.Kriss^, vil. near Ddphi, ti. 583. 586Kritiri mn. Perrr, iii. 358Krupi, vil. Bow. ii. 143Kr^pista, vil. Orestia, i. 333Krf hiss, vil. Elimeta, i. 304Ktinii, vil, EHmeia, iii. 304Kubla, vil. Grevcni d. i. 305K^dhesi, mn. and dist. Chaoma-IU, i.4. 35. 352Kaf6, pt. Stroma, Mae. m. 119Knits, vil. Mt. Othrm, iv. 352Kuffhni, mn. near Suli, i. 227. 239K6kia, fort near Suli, i. 228K6kora, vil. Mt, Helicon, u. 205Kukuriva, vil. near Mt. PeUitm. iv.403. 418Kulakii, t. Mwd. Ui. 258Kuliaridhes, vil. Perr.-E^, iv. 217, 218Kulindr6s, s\\, Pieria-mathias, iii. 293.Kuloritza, vil. CAoofitia, i. 26Kum^rki, or Kom^rki, r. near Trikkala,iv. 264. 630Kdndura, vil. Afeaaris, ii. 374. 408Kurbali, vU. Hist, i. 430Kiirendo, sub-dist. lo&n. d. iv. 165KurSla, mn. Thenprotia, iv. 57. 73. 192Kurt Pasha, of Berat. iii. 540Kurt-age, vil. jEto, (CalvdonL i. 109.112; iii. 533Kurt^i, t. The$pnjiia, iv. 71KurteziL a summit of Helicon ii. 373Kurtzolari, prom. Mto, iii. 571KutlumCisi, mon. Ache, Mac, iii. 124Kurutjai, r. Thrace, in. 216Kutzan6pulo, vil. CassoptBa, i. 243Kntzi. vil. on up. Thyamis, Ep, iv. 95Kutzos, vil. Strymonic slain, iii. 198Kfivelo, vil. and Hel. ruins ./£to. i. 126Kyfu, vil. 'Agrafa d. iv. 275Kyras, bridge of, r. Arackihus, i. 292;iv.259Kyri&ki, vil. near Stirs, Pho. ii. 518.I^banitza, mn. T^eimi^ftia, iv. 72Labovo, t. Atifi. i. 27. 417INDEX.LacereiUy or DoHum^ t. Pela$, iv. 446Laetus a summit of Pimius^ iv. 240.Xoi'iM, death of, ii. 105Lake, sub-list. Ari, iv. 229Ukhani, viL BmUHa, Mae. iii. 20aLakhAnokMtro, ruins Tympkma, i. 294vil. and castle MolotsiSyiv. 106Ukik, vil. MoUmu, i. 225river of, i. 225. 229L&mari, sub-dist. Ari, i. 244 ; iv. 229Lamia, t. Pkik,-Melu (Zit6ni) ii. 2. 20Lamia, dist. Adam, near Venom, iii. 14.Langage, vil. Anlkemui, Mae. iii. 208.2o2 233LajJ^ium, mn. Bao. ii. 139. 141LaosMta, lake of, near lo&n. i. 400 ; iv.90. 127. 133Lar, r. at Tanagra Boo. ii. 455. 460Liriisa, c. PeUju. i. 435-443 ; iu. 360.372 ; iv. 294. 534Palpi, vil. Pelas. iii. 361Clarissa Create, t Pa. iv. 294Larmes, mills of, Beeo. £. coast, ii. 206.Lamiki, pt. Chinaman bay, U. 593, 594Laguna, upper and lower, t. Ban.'Pko. ii. 287: 289XonotAM, fort near Tempe, iii. 350.^418Salle, Mr. i. 164. 181Laspokbdri, vil. near mouth Peneusiv. 328Latin, vil. Bwo, ii. 461Laurence, St vil. Moffn. iv. 392Lauriumy mn. AU. ii. 426Livdhari, vil. Z>a«s. i. 345Laura, mon. Acte, Mac. iii. 128Lazar, a summit of Ptii</iw, i. 3] 7. 397;iv. 107. 125LcaUier, dye for, iv. 280Lebadeiay t. Boo. ii. 120, et sea,LedoHy t Pho. ii. 89Lefka, vil. Ithaca iu. 37— , ruined vil. Bow. (Thespis), ii.Lefkidba, (Leuca$,J iii. 10 22strait of, J. 165. 172L^fkimo, prom. Corf(i, iii. 2L^fta, vil. Pho, (Lateral ii. 82LeftheHdha, isl. Chalc. Mac. iii. 167Iieflhero-kh6ri, vil. Pert. iv. 315Leftokaryi, vil. Mt Olympus iii. 406Leon, the Roman, iv. 462Lekhli, vil. Chaoma-AtiH, i. 54Lckhdnia, vil. Magn. iv. 378. 392LdantuMy plain Eubna^ ii. 265LdejCy too of, Megara, ii. 399L^lovo, vil. MulosttiSj i. 256 ; iv. 254Lcnia, mn. Dam. i. 342. 346LeonicUuy kinff of Sparta , ii. 6. 40LepenCi, or Ix!peni6, vil. near Straits,Adam. i. 13^. 143!j2valley of, i. 157Lcpalna, vU. AU. (EUumM)^ ii. 379Leadie o/Deivki, u. 554Z«e^, t Mygaonia, iii. 461Ldkwtu, r. at rHboa, Tk. L 425; tv.285.289Leueatfy prom. XeaMw, liL 10. 41Leuctra, vil. Ben. ii. 480. 484battle of, u. 131. 485LeueimtUy prom. Cbrnrm, i. 94; iii. 2. 5Lia, pt. Itkaoay iii. 5$ 54Li&kura, summit of Mt. PansoMW, ii.105. 527. 535Loapc, Albanian tribe, i. 60, 61Liaskoviki, t /'aroooa, iv. 109Li&skovo, vil. 'Agimik d. iv. 272lAbHktioM and Petra filia. Mt liftedBrno. u. 139lAbelkrmm, mn. Bmo. ii. 139. 141; iii.413. 422Ub6khovo, t AHn. i. 24; iv. 101LidadeSy islands, Emboie straits, ii. 177Lidhorfki, t W. Loe. ii. 597Li^ntja, Albanian dist i. 24Lightning, the hill of at Suli, L 228.Ivied, i. Pho. ii. 71. 84. 90. 119. 581lim^ni, lagoon at V6mtza, Aeam. i.LimfUBa, t Adam. i. 144. 148. 162;iii. 675; iv. 243—251 ; t Hill. iv.Linghiidhes, vil. Zag6ri, lo&n. d. i. 399Lingo, mn. MoUmu, L 387. 398; iv.Linovr6kbi, lake Aaxm. i. 173Lips, vil. EtAcoa (jEdepttuh ii. 176Lust, t IU. (Lash), iii. 477^Litharitza, castle and serai, in loan. i.405; iv. 151Ldt6khoro, vil. Mt Olfmpmg. iiL 406.Lies, isl. jEgaan (Cerigotto), iii. 75Liv&dhi, or VlakhoHviuUio, t Perrr. L319; iii. 334or lake of S6nzina, Tkebm», ii.Livadhia, t Ben. (Lehadeia), u. 118,ei seq. 202, e^ ttq.Livadh6, t. and dist. O^fhaUanay ilL 60Livadh6stra, pt. Bubo. w. coast, ii. 504Livan&tes, vil. E. Loe. ii. 175Liberi, t CkphaUema^ iii. 60. 64Lizati, vil. near Tepeieni, i. 56Loeri OziUa, or western, ii. 91 . 615eastern, ii. 176Logar6, lagoon near Artaa, i. 202L(^theti, or Khondrodhima of Livad-hia, ii. 202or Khaliki6puio of V6nitza,i. 166; Hi. 181Longiiri, vil. Edom, iii. 181L6pe8i, or Ii6pesi, vil. on lower Aomsyi. 34; viLThe^ntia, i. 102Lnpkia, r. Haliarlia, Bmo. ii. 209. 498Love, worship of, at Thespis, ii. 482.Lozidha, y'd. Hist. iv. 509Index.Loz^Ui, vil. lo&n. d. iv. 217L&ari, vil. lU, i. 366Luke, St. church at Thebes ii. 223,mon.%X Stirv^Pho. ii. 524. 529LukSsi, vil. BvBo. E. coast, ii. 271. 276Lukovikis, vil. Edonit^ iii. 199L6kovo, vil. Chaonia^ i. 79Lunji, vil. Chaonia, I. 35Luro, vil. castle, and sub-dist. Artaa, i.243.255; iv. 264river of, i. 181. 258; iv. 256Lusieri, Roman artist, iv. 160Lasting, vil. lo&n. d. iv. 79Lutr4ki, pt. Gulf of Artaa, Adam. i. 163,164; ii[. 498; iv. 243Lutzi, vil. Orckomema^ Bubo, ii. 159Lutziatii, vil. Adam. iv. 5L}rbj&dha, plain, pt. and isl. Chale. Mac.iii. 165, 166J^^nidus, t. lU, iii. 281Lychnitis, lake, iu. 280. 828X^fooreia^ summit of Pamaagus (Laa-quia), u. 81. 579Lyooalomiwn ( Temper, iii 389Lydiaa,otLudia$, r. J^VM,ni. 270.437Lygovitzi, mn. and mon. Adam. iii.-511lake of, i. 157; iii. 512L}rkokh6ri, vil. sto. on Mt. Vi^na, destroyedbj a landslip, i. 131jEto. on the Mom, ii. 605Lykdstomo, khan and bridge near lo&n.i. 401 ; iv. 127(Tempe), iii. 384. 388LykCirsi, vil. TheaproUa, iv. 53Lmceatis, or Lynctu^ dist. Up. Mac. iii.282. 311Lffaander^ death of, ii. 207Lwsimackia, or Hyrie^ t. and lake JEto,i. 122. 153Lvamaehu^ king of Mac. 1. 153; iii.464 ; iv. 576Ltfrippus^ the work of at Dim, iii. 415Macedonia distinction of Upper andI^wer,iu. 305; i v. 123. 186I , division into four provincesby the Romans, iii. 227. 480; iv. 124MoMia^t. W.Ltjc. i. HIMadliemokh6ria, vii. Ckalc. Mac, iii.Medica. or country of the MmU^ Tkr,iii. 44/. 472Malaria, fu. Marathon, ii. 443Moffnetes, city of the, iv. 381. 396Mag&la, various Hellenic sites namedthus, i. 123. 171; ii. 584; iii. 361.543.553; iv. 451. 521Mahomet II. iv. 267IV. i. 440Maize, the reed a material for cottages,ii. 158Makari6ti8Ba, mon. Mt. Helicon ii.493. 511Makhali, vil. Acarn, iii. 505. 510Makhera, vil. Acarn. iii. 505; iv. 10Makriarakhi, vil. Maffn^ iv. 394Makrikh^ri, vil. ncar'TVmfie, iii. 381Makrinitza, t. Magn. iv. 388Mari, isl. Echmadet, iu. 574; vH.Adam. iii. 505Mariners, mn. Ambrada-AmpkUockki.i. 138. 162; iv.253-— , the pass of, i. 162. 215Makryplii, mn. Meaarit^ ii. 375Makr^voro, mn. Am, ii. 602. 607Malak&ssi, dist. loin. iv. 165vil. Tympkaa, i. 416khan of, i. 416 ; iv. 261. 546Malak&stra, dist. IU, i. 366Malimata, vil. W. Loc. ii. 607Malandrina, t. and dist. W, Lac, ii.598.601.622Malathri&,vil./'teriar/>i»mJ, iii. 408.Mal prom. Laootda^ iii. 76Malesina, vil. Bubo. ii. 286Maliac forest, the, i. 461■ ■ gulf, ii. 4. 16-^-— ^ plain, iv. 504MtdienaeSy or Mdien$e8^ ii. 20Malis6va, t. Latin. i. 470Malta, t. Perrr, iii. 379; iv. 811Malta, vU. Bmo.-Pho, ii. 106Mamas, Aio. vil. CkaU. Mac, (Olyt^tkuaj^ iii. 153MandUi, prom. Emma (Gtrmiu$)^ ii.Mani, Pale, Hel. ruin Adam, iii. 520,Minna, forest Adam, i. 181 ; iii. 519Santo, the prophetess, ii. 231Manufactures, i. 45; iii. 253. 354; iv.278.390Manuscripts, Greek, 4i, 518; iii. 127Marandili, a summit of Hdwon, ii. 493Martha, plain, W. Loc. ii. 618Marat, suburb of Ari, i. 218MaraikoH, t. Att. ii. 430lake of, ii. 433Maratkus^ t. Pho, ii. 549Mardonhu, campaign of, ii. 336. 408his dc^h, ii. 350Margarita, t. TkeaproHa, i. 405; iv. 17Marwuy r. IU, iii. 448Mark6pulo, vil. Att. ii. 442Marina, Aghia, vil. Mdis^ ii. 95Maronites vil. Pho, U. 72. 86. 90. 94Mariti, r. Tkr, (Hebrus). iii. 216M&rmara, site of Ampkipoli»^ iii. 183Mammary, vil. Eubaa, ii. 432Barbarians, vil. Mt. Ova, 373, 379Mart, fn. and sancti. of, at 71tebe», ii. 238.Martin, vil. Bern. ii. 286Maskol^ri, vil. Chaoma, i. 57■, vil. TkesM. iv. 496MaaI6ra, isl. near Corf, i. 7Masonry, styles of Hel. in N. Greece,iv. 69. 314. 432Mataranga, vil. Then. iv. 316. 496. 498Mati, fn. and marsh Perrr, iv. 299Matz6ki, vil. Mt. Pindus, i. 282. 284.290; iv.210Mara, Agiiia, fort. Leucas, iii. 10INDEX.Mavn-n^ria, sources, MdU. ii. 25Mavroner6, r. Bwo.'Pko. (Oepki$mu)^u. 98. 191Mario, vil. Drji^opis, ii. 17Mavrogh^ni, family of Paros isl. iii. 85Mavrom&ti, family of, Aeam. iii. 501vU. JEto. iii. 539MavTon6ro, prom. Ep. L 103— , mn. Att. ii. 437M&vrovo, Til. OnaiiMy i. 329vil. and lake Bi$aUia^m. 230Mavro-dhilissi, Bel. site AU.-Bmo. iLMavrovuni,-a summit of Pimdms^ i. 296-, mn. Moffn, iv. 407^ mn. Tketa. iv. 326-, mn. Flat. gee Karadagh-, \i\, Zag6ri loan. d. i. 997Mazar&ki, vil. Volant, iv. 95vil. Thebaa, ii. 216Maxarakia, vil. Thesprotia, iv. 71Maze, vil. Haliartia^ ii. 205, et tea.Mazoma, laktf otNioopotu^ i. 178. 186MecvbernQy t. Ckalc, Aise, iii. 154MedeoHy t. Baeo. ii. 215; t. Pho, ii. 548.550 ; t. Adam, iii. 575Medhinitza, or Pundonitza, vil. E, Lot*ii. 66Mega, r. JEio, ii. A9MMohazue, commander of the ships ofJterjteSy ii. 268Meguiisl, isl. near Leuoae^ iii. 30; iv.Megara, ii. 389. 392-^1Meant defiles of the, ii. 374Mehm^t Ali, viceroy of Egypt, iii. 174.287 ; iv. 219Mehm^t Pasha, of Potassa, i. 336. 355Mehm^t, or Quinine, i. 54. 223. 406. 408Mehmetiaus, or Mamutj4us, vil. Artaad. iv. 229. 254MeilickUy the gods so called, ii. 592MelanUtium. viL Sooinataay iv. 458.Melampus, temple of, at ASffoetkenOyMegariSy iL 406Mektmpuguay rock at Tkerinoj^ii4By ii.42.52MelcUy r. Melity ii. 11. 26 ; r. Orckome-ma. Boo. ii. 154. 161. 185; r. Tess.iv. 515Melenlko, t. Odomamtiee^ iii. 201Meletius, mon. of St Att. ii. 371. 377MeUbeeUy t. Magn, iv. 414.gulf of. iv. 412t. Hint. iv. 536MeUoertegy or Pedant, mythus of, ii.Mdisfuraiy t. near ThetmdomoOy iii. 461Elite, lake JEto. iii 573Melissa, t. Phth. iv. 470, 471Melciie, dist. Moloteis, iv. 101. 119Meldna, pass Perrr, iii. 351Melt, isl. (Milo), iii. 77—83~, ancient city, iii. 79Memmmy vtatuc of, at E*nm(iau Then,ii.396Mente. t. PtMeme^ Mae. m. 165Mend^li, mn. AU. (PmUeliemmJ, iLMenidhi, viL AU, ii. 417— ~, pi, gulf of Artaa, Mp. iv.Mensis, or Turkish port, i. 337Mere, vil. Beoo.-Pko, iL 109, torrent of ii. IllMend, vil. Pko. ii. 95. 189Mertzi, vil. near Trikkala, iv. 536Mesoldnghi, i. .peto, L 113: in. 5S2, lagoon ot i. 113; iii. 533.542 '"^ ^Meeeapia, t W. hoc. u. 622MeteapUuny mn. Bmi>. E. coast, ii. 219.Meaeeuy fh. near Sparing tv. 485Metapa, t. jEio. L 145. 149. 151Meters, trenches used bv Turkish adAlbanian infantry, i. 4o. 231Met^ora, mons. and rocks, 7\fmpkmmyL 418. 458; described, iv. SeiMedina t. Pierian iii. 435Metjob6n, Albanian officer, iii. 294Metropolis t Dore, n. 91t. Adam. iiL 511. 576two in rae. iiL 371 ; iv. 498L506 511M^txovo, t Tym phma ^ i. 294 ; ir. 260— , river of, i. 292Zyg6s or mn. of, i. 294. 411—415; iv. 261Midas king of the Brwgee. or Phngetym. 447Mideia. or Lebadeta^ t. Beeo. ii. 120Mikhalitzi, vU. and hill at Xieopola, I180; iv.217MUcoruBy or Miaoorua, t. Ckale, Mciii. 456Filia, vil. Prevent d. i. 299Milles, t. Moan. iv. 392Milyngiis, vil. loin d. i. 263Minis, bay of St. at Egripo, ii. 256MmervOf temples of: — at AkdeomemmyBcao. ii. 135. 138; of M. Alddemne,at Pella, iii. 264; at AmbraciOy i.213 ; of M. Area, at PiaUea, iL 364 ;of M. Crofun. near Elateia^ Pko. iL83 ; of M. Jtomay near Ooromeia,Ben. ii. 139; two others of M. /. inTkeeealy, iv. 501 ; of M. Prom, atDdi^i, ii. 553, 56*2 ; of M. Telekima,at Teumeettu, Brno. ii. 245; in ,Megara ii. 396 ; at DadU^ii. 105; at AnajhiamLt iL 592; altarand statue of M. Mo, at Tkekegy ii.Mmoa^ isl. Megara ii. 401Minas the treasury of, at Orekometme^Ben. ii. 147, 148Mirlta, vil. Talaree, Up. Th. iv. 262Mi8aliri,vi]. Trees. iv.326MUhradaiee. his arms in Greece, ii. 193.Mitres r. PienUy iii. 420index.Mitzik^li, mn. aev loan. i. 400; h,126. 16SMhakia, dist. lU, i. 351. 366, 367Modhi, vil. Fio. n. 77Mogleni, dist. t and r. Mae. iii. 268.270.276Mole, or Mole, vil. near Tkermopglm,hits. 12. 37. 179Mole, giilf of, Ithaca, iii. 24Moloeu, r. Plume, ii. 348Mol6gbusta, Til. Perrr. iv. 301. 311Molom, peo. J^. i. 74. 268. 298 ; it.118. 179Molossia. or Colonist dist. ^. iv. 117.178.266Colossus son of Pyrrhus, iv. 175Moiua^ r. near C%4*rTMifta, j^ceo. ii. 198Molyereia, t. ^fo. i. 110Monasterii, or Bit61ia, t. Pelaaoma, iii.Mon^xvla, or canoe of the lake of Ka«-toTia,'i. 325 ; of the lake of MeMl6n-gai, iii. 542 ; of the lake of loinaina,IV. 9.Opium, Mt. PeUu. iii. 377Mortier, Messrs. J. and D. i. 283Mariti, vil. Tkebaa, ii. 244. 278. 818lake of, or Parading, ii. 277Morus. r. near Ckitroneia, Bobo. ii.196. 199Mom6B, r. jEto, ii. 92. 596. 598. 602.Modena, vil. Chaoma^ i. 22. 70Moskokh6ri, vil. Adeline ii. 24Mo8k6poU, t. Datu. i. 343, 344Mdstiari, vil. loin. d. iv. 98Motioned t. Magn. iv. 384Mndhari, prom. Cerigo isl. iii. 76Mukhtir Fash, i. 404; iv. 153. 410.Juliana, vil. Ari d. i. 220 ; iv. 229Multi, vil. Pko» ii. 76. 86 ; vil. Bwo.ii. 213Murex, fish yielding a purple dye, ii. 520Murcia, vil. Chantry i. 97Musa Pasha, at 'Epakto, ii. 610; at ,iii. 236Mus&ki, pass of, iv. 521vil. Hut. iv. 523, 524Muses, gi-ove and games of the, in Mt.Hdkon, ii. 492. 494^— , sanction of the, Mt. lAbe-arum,Beeo. ii. 139. 141Mustafa, Pasha, of Delvino, i. 19Mustafadhes, vil. Panuopki, Bwu. ii.Muziakati, vil. Tkemrotia, iv. 51Mutja Hush(if, or Musa Yusuf, bey ofTepeleni, i. 41Mj/calefsua^ t. jBobd. and its dist. ii. 249—252. 264Myc^MSy pt. Pho, ii. 549Mwxmut, isl. idSmKm, (M^kono), iii.Myqdoma^ dist. ^(ac. iii. 448yfwa. fort. Perrr. iv. 311Mylop6tamo, vQ. Cerigo id. iii. 76;cavern there, ibid.Myoma, U W, Loe. ii. 592Mwotmetut, isl. Phtk, iv. 848Mlwrm, t. Mom, iv. 416AlyrcimtSy t. Edom, iii. 180iMjrroM, works of, at the Mumum ofHdicony ii. 495Myromdet, the Athenian, victories ofli. 463Martini, mon. at V^nitza, i. 167; iii. 494Myrtles, ii.S8.517Afy ivmti m m , lake Aearm. i. 173 ; townAeam. iv. 24M^tika, vil. now Pr^vyxa, i. 178bay of, i. 195conference with Al Pashnear, iv. 45MyCipoli, Hel. ruins (EleutkerwJ ii.371. 373—876JVaisnw, t. Mytia, iii. 468Narthacium, mn. and t. Pkarmdia, iv.NaryiF,uE.Loc, ii. 187Assert, mn. near Suli, i. 242Naupadtu, t. Jeu. ii. 607, et tea.NaupUa, peak of Delphi, ii. 56oNape, Pamaetia, Pho. ii. 527. 550NarciuM, fn. of, Thespian, Ben. ii. 496.Naxia, isl. jEmBon (Najnu), iii. 93NeapUis, or Leopold, t. Mac-Tkr, iii.180. 217. 224Nefter6poli, nt. and mins, Mae,'Thr.iii. mNeium, mn. Ithaca, iii. 47Nekh6ri, vil. M<taH, iv. 383. 392Nelia, t. Moffn. iv. 379Netneitu, temple of Jtipiier, W. Locris613. 617Femme Ehammuia, temple of, Att. ii.Nemertzika, mn. Atm.'ParaMBa, i. 24.384. 389, 390; ito precipitous rocks,i. 395. 398Neokh6ri, or Neokh6rio, vil. ,iv. 237 ; vil. near ,i. 113. 124; vil. Maces(Amphipotuj, iii. 181. 188;vil. Perrr, iii. 33d; vil. on lowerAchelout, iii. 543; vil. The$protia^iv. 72; vil. Tketpku, Brno. ii. 488;vil. near Dia, Mae, iii. 261Neon, or Tithorea, t. Pho. ii. 79. 130Ne6patra, or Badrajik, t. manes, ii. 14Nepos, Oaitts Antonio, iii. 68Neptune, temple of, at Om^fetihu, Btso.ii. 214; at jean, Even, ii. 2/5; N.Cuerhu, worship of at Ciermm, iv.Serious, t. Leuccu, iii. 16Certum, mn. Ithaca, iii. 37NewmiB, lake Peku. i. 445 ; iv. 403Nestle, the centaur, i. 108Nestor of Oropua, i. 74INDEX.Nedus^ r. Trace, lii. 215NeToliani, vil. Mt. Otaa, iv. 413Nevrok6po, t. Thrace iii. 183NeYr6poIi, pus of ( Mt. (Eta ii. 31plain of, in 'Agra, \r. 272Xff^h«, tribe of Albanians, i. 61Ntc^Ba. t. near Tkermopyt^^ ii 6. 10.14.38Nicaus. tern, of Sumter, Molotm^ LNicander^ the jEtoUan, i. 211Ni&iuta, t. EnuUhia, iii. 283, ei mq,NicephoruB GrMroras, whig journey intoJIfyria, iii. 467. 478Nicieu^ Athenian commander, ii. 402Niomaolis^ c. Ep. ruins of, i. 178. 18S—£01 ; iii. 491aqueduct of, i. 244. 256. 258.259.261Nigra, vil. Bixdtia, iii. 226Niklitii, vil. Hist. iv. 263. 277. 531Nik61a, Aio, mon. near Mt. HeUetm(Mtugium)^ ii. 492Nisi, vil. Aeam, Gulf of Artaa, i. 164;iu. 495. 497Nikolitza, vil. Orettw-DoM. i. 334Nikoriki, vil. E. hoc, ii. 177Nitj6, mn. Mac. (Bora?) ui. 270Nivitza, vil. near Delving, Chaonia^ i.i6rs■ ■ — , viL Khim&ra d. Catania, i.89. 375Nizvoro, or Akbar, vil. EUmeia^ iii—'— , or Sidherokapsa, vil. Chale,Mac, iii. 142. 158. 160Normans, the, i. 339 ; iv. 202Notes, Additional : —on the life of AH Pasha, i. 463Valiant khan, i. 497History' of Suli and of PufB^i. 524Inscriptions of Danlia, ii. 62/^— — — of Cfttfroneta, ii. 628I of OrckomemUj ii. 630■ of Acrtephium, ii. 632of Delphi, ii. 635Anathemas of Ddjphi in the timeof Pausanias, ii. o39History of lo&nnina, iv. 553 — 5iVuM Ways of the EdtmL, afterwardsAtnphipolis^ iii. 181Niaa^ or Tints, t. Bcbo. ii. 275Atom, pt. of Megara, ii. 399. 401. 410Nisi, Kali, islands Cornelian Gulf, ii.Nvrnjokaum^ prom. Ade, Mac. iii. 114.Nymphs of CSthmron, cavern and oracleof the, ii. 334, 335— — , cave of the, Itkaea, iii. 40worship of the, iii. 91Oak timber, where most remarkable, i.88. 164. 172. 181 ; iv. 49, 50Ocalea^ t. Bmo, ii. 206OchCy mn. EubcBa, ii. 423OetohpkuB^ in LmooHi. iii. 308. 310iu Perrhtmna, iii. 417Odomamti, peo. PdBonia, iii. 210. 906.(Eneon, t. W, Loe. ii. 616(Eiuoi, Old, t. Adam. iii. 526(Eniada, t. (EUbq, ii. 94c. Adam. iii. 556 — 570(Ene, deus and fort. Att, ii. 375, ei$eq.CEnopkykBy vil. TanaarMi. ii. 463Oeroe, r. Paris, ii. 324. 330. 359CEta^ mn. and t. (Erga, u, 4. 9. 19.*25Ogia, summit at yiokh6 or Tkermmt^jEto. i. 131(Hem, t. jEto. i. 154Olixon, t. Moan. iv. 384(Eantkeia, t. W, Loc, ii. 621. 594(Regalia, t jEto, ii. 623t. Hid. iv. 531(Edipodia, fh. at rJMes, ii. 241, 242Olmeims, or Olmuu, r. Abo. ii. 212. 497.499.501(Horus, mn. Pieria iii. 433CHootmm, i. Perrr, iii. 345 : iV. 316(Hpa, fort, W. Loc, u. 622, pass near Saloniki, iii. 234fort, Ampkiloekia, iv. 246. 251CHymjria, games, at Dmmh, Pieria, iii.(Mvmptu, mu. Perrr-mac, i. 319. 484;ui. 297. 336. 341. 348. 384, et eo.407; iv. 296. 445. 497. 513. 529.(Hynthut, c. Chcdc. Mae. ui. 154. 455.l59Ol^tzika, mn. lo&n. d. i. 221. 224. 263 ;IV. 182Omer Vri6ni Bey, iv. 219Omfijla/ufm, t. Atmitmia'Paraicma^ iv.OncAtfimttf, pt. Chaoma, i. 13. 92(huhedu»y t. Ben. ii. 214r. Prae. iv. 458Ondokliri, vil. Pela. iv. 452Oneia^ ins. Megarisy ii. 381. 409OnooAoiiM, r. Peku, iv. 512. 514Ontkyrium, t. These, iv. 505'Pari, mn. Dare. i. 342. 345, 346Opkieneee.oT Opkkmeneee^ peo. Aston. U.614. 623Ophthalmia, the, i. 262CmUaSy or Itonumtms^ r. Cartmeia, Ben.ii. 141Opus, t. E. Loc, ii. 67. 173. 181its gulf, ii. 174Oracles, of Apollo at Ddpld, ii. 411.147. 209. 411. 484. 574; at Ages, ii.165; on Mt. Pump, Ben. ii. 279;at Terrae ii. 153of Bacchus at Ampiicieia^ ii.75 ; among the Satree, Thrace iii.of Jupiter at Dodona iv. 55.170. 183. 1^INDEX.Oracle, of Trophtmmt at Lebadeia^ ii.— , a modem near Repent, i. 50,Orbeltu, urn. Mac,-Thr. iii. 211. 463OrvkaUdes, vU. Haliartia, ii. 210OrcAom^man plain, the, ii. 155. 158^— — — inscriptions, ii. 630Ortkomemiy peo. ^090. ii. 294Orehomemu, or ErchomemiSy t, Bao, ii.U3,et9eq.ir. 355Ordines dist. Megaria^ ii. 405OreUa^ peo. Ambrada-Ampkilockia, i.Ores, vil. and bas, EtAata^ iv. 350Officii, peo. ri&mee, iii. 213, 214Orulu, that. £^. il/oc. ui. 305; iv. 121.Orfani, dist. Mac-tir, iii. 174, 175— , gulf of, iii. 145vil. Them. iv. 327OncwM, t. JUrChaonia, i. 3. 6. 90Oro, Count Angelo, iii. 12. 21OriwM, r. III. iii. 477Onnanli, vil. Perrr, iii. 344Ormemum^ t. Then, iv. 434Orminium, t. Magn. iv. 433Familia, or Ermylies, t. C%a/!t;. ilfcM!.iii. 153Ort}5t0, t. JE^i6a», ii. 176. 275Oropw. t. AU,'B4B0. ('Oropo), ii. 440—449Oro ('Affhion), see ActeOrpheus, m. 412. 422'Orsova, vil. Bimxliia, iii. 182Orthe^ citadel of Phalanna, Peku, Hi.Ortholithi, mn. of A tyolu, ii. 423Orthopagium, mn. ChteroneiaAi. 196Osman Bey, of 'Epakto, i. 107Omni, a summit or Citron, ii. 373Osphagua^ r. Lyncedis, iii. 310Ostrovitza, mn. Da$. i. 345'OatTovo, t. and lake, EordaUj iii. 275.282. 305Mo, mn. Magm. i. 434; iii. 380. 390,et 9eq. 401 ; 'iv. 298. 411, ei 9eq, 513,514.533t. Baltic, ui. 213. 230Ostanitza, vil. Paravwa-MoUmit, i.396; iv. 119Othonfts, ill. near Corf, i. 7, 8Othrw, mn. PhtUotie, ii. 17; iv. 330^Ovri6-kaBtro (mina of Rhamnw,, AH. Ji. Ill; ii. 434(ruins of Ckalcu. jEto.Ji. IllOssa, isl. jEto. iii. 571Omub, or Thou, ills. jEto. iii. 52. 571Oxen, Wallachia, i. 142; iii. 554Oxon, vil. Ithaca, iii. 39, et seq.Oayneia, t. Talares, Up, Th. iv. 279Paofda, dist. Mae. Acquit, iii. 212.305. 462. 470Paopim, peo. T%raoe, iii. 213Pagasa, t. ^fagn, iv. 369, et $eq, 398Papa, or Pegm^ t. and pt. Megara$, itPagodas of 7^ll«A«f, ii. 451Pakht68, viL Attntama-IU. i. 364PaLenu, t. roam. iv. 18Palapharue, i, Pherma. Th. iv. 493Palais, vil. This. iv. 324Passa, vil. Chimera, Chatmia^ i. 5Palate, islet, Najnu, iii. 93PaU. t. CephaUema, iii. 50. 64Palea, mn. Ben. (Ptoue), ii. 277, 278 •mon. ii. 279Paleavli, vil. Delving, Chatmia, i. 65Pale6.Gardhiki, ruins Hid. iv. 136Pale Gh^lissi, ruined vil. Pannonia.Boo. ii. 328Pale6kaatro, vil. near Sykii, Perrr. iv.Pale6kafltro, vil. near Suli. i. 225^,vil. near Blazdhu, ' Grata, d .iv. 506. (For Pale6kflstro in genetsee ** Hellenic remains.*^)Paleokh6ri, ruins in the Regards. ii.Paleo-panaghia, ruins Theepku, ii. 488Pale6pyTgo, ruins, ii. 175; iv. 236. 250Paleovuni, or PaIeov{ini, fMt. Helixu. 205. 506. 514. 527— -, mn. in Zag6ri, lo&n. d. iv.Palermo, pt. Chaoma, i. 7. 78, 79PaliCiri, or Jerusalem thorn, i. 164Pallene, Macedonian peninsula, iii. 152.155.453Paleuxiri, vil. JSto.- W. Loc. ii. 602Palim-Bev, or Balm-Bey, vil. Adam.Gulf of' Ari, i. 164 ; iii. 497PambeBotian festival near Corotteia,Boo. ii. 140Pambotie, (lake of loan.) iv. 189Pamela, r. Th. iv. 512. 514Pamphium, t. sto. i. 145. 147Pan and the Nymphe, worship of, iii.Panachtm, fort. AU.-Ben. ii. 370Panis peo. Edonia, iii. 465PanatoUwrn, mn. Mto. i. 131 ; iii. 512Panaghia, vil. Thespis, ii. 489peninsula Pfuh. iv. 343— , prom. Gulf of Artaa, iv. 29Pandokratora, mn. Corfii, i. 7mon. Ade. Mac. iii.Pandotiay t. Theeproiia, iv. 55. 73Pangmnm. mn. Mae-Thrace. iii. 176.190. 212Pan, mn. AU. ii. 426Panopeue, t. Pho. ii. 109. 199PanomtM, pt. near Noricum, Chaoma^i. 3pt. near Ckivuera. Chaoma^i. 7. 79'-^ — , pt. in CkphaUema, iii. 67Papadh&tes, vil. jEto. (Lynnuu^uajy U\£tt. XSHPapadh&tes, or Papalktes, viL Adam,iii. 505INDEX.Plains, tU. and nm. Potomm, i. 397;P&nyni8, the reed, ii. 909, 310; U. 156PandhifU, Til. W, hoc, ii. 598. 622Parakilamo, diet. Chacmia^ i. 104; !▼.Parallax that. Mac. iii. 460Paralii, peok^ Mdk, ii. 20Panltmni, or lake of Morita, TkeUtOyii. 277. 318. 320Ranmytbia, t. TketpraHoy i. 233; iy. 59—68.76PaT«p6rti, fn. Tkebe»^ u. 217Pampotonm; t. Pho. ii. 97. 191. 195Pan^&nghi, vil. Boo. ii. 324Paraskcvi, Aghia, vil. PaUeme^ Mac, inapass at Simili, i. 237.Paraaopia, dist. Boo. ii. 331. 369Parma, dkt. Ep, iv. 115. 120its people, i. 393; iv. 117.Partmbole^ site LyncedU^ iii. 313Parga, t. Thttprotia^ i. 185. 237; iii—y history of, t 501. 524Pariiroritisiia, church at Artaa, i. 202.214.218Paria, t. Pan isl. iii. 86PamoMian upper plains, ii. 528Parnaanu, mn. Pio, ii. 70. 77. 81. 106.527.651Parties, mn. AH, ii. 370. 420Pans, isl. ^mm (Part), Hi. 8^-4)2PardUcopolu, t. Stidicf, iii. 229Pashalimltn, or Porto Elagus^ {Pamtkr-mm of Noricum) i. 3Patron, t. Melons, iv. 81Passes, gorges, or straits, i. 119 : —near Acrapkimm, Bubo, ii. 306of Ampk^oUs, iii. 182the Faueei Antmientea, or straits ofthe Aous, i. ^. 52. 68. 72. 383, eiweq.of Arthur, or ifu&M, Mae. iii. 170.of the r. Amity, at Demirki^, iii.of Ml Berries, Mac. Hi. 275. 295of the r. Osn4ttM(s, Ben,- Pho, it95. 97. 107of Mts. CWuBnm and Pames, ii. 834.370, e< ses. 438of CcBto, or Tkaumad, PkA, i. 458of CuHmntm, Doris n. 93. 593of Delphi, it 582.^93of Demiglara, near Saloniki, iu. 234of Dhafiu, Mt. Pemhm, AU. u.of Dhaftiies, Aeam. ni. 498of Etaieia, Pelas. ui. 381of Eleuthcra, ii. 379. 381of Eordmo'Lwcediey iu. 314of Fond&na, K. Loc.-Pho. it. 67of Karutea, W. hoc, ii. 696of Kara, JEfnanns-Th, i. 4602^HS^ 8<>if06, and strata : —of Maknn6ro, Ep.-Aeam. i. 162 :iv.236of Marathomia-Rhamnuma^ u. 433of the Merit, u. 374of M6tzovo, i. 293. 412; iv. 261. 546three near Paramythia, iv. 70, H mq„of Affhia P^nskevL at SuU, i. Wof PHaaoma, iu. 320of Pendepitidhia, MoUmity u 220of Petra, Boo, H. 137. 205of Petra, Mt. (Hvmpiu^ iii. 337. 342.of Mt. Pimdtu, i. 297. 322 ; iv. Illof Portes, near Servia, EUmeia-Perr.iu.332of the Portes of TrikkaU, i. 426; iv.of iyct, near PkUippi^ Hi. 217of Pylcne, jEto. i. 119of T^oji, Lymeeriie-IU. Hi 314of the Sap(mmdOwpai, ni. 180.315of Si&tista, El^meta-Eordma^ i.311;Hi. 298of the r. Etymon, near Deminasir,Hi. 201. 209. 465of ThermopjiUB, n. 5. 31, ei aso.of TJang^n, Orcdu-lkm, i. 334of Villa, Perrr. H. 469of YlldoT^ Ematkia-Eordma^ ui 275Vit. also the names Klis(ira, S(en4,and TempePaatri, a summit of HeUam^ li. 873Pasvin, Ogle, i. 238. 477Patriotic, or Patraisiki6tika, nm.(Etna, u. 8. 19Patron*, vil. Dasdia^ Pho. u. 98. 104.Paul, St. in Grace, i 189; Hi. 330mon. Ade, Mac. Hi 116Paulus, L. MmiUm, Hi. 429. 480 ; iv.Pausanias, king of Sparta, H. 343the traveller, H. 122. 309.PmdaUa, t. Pmmia, iu. 475Paula, r. Cftooaao, i. 15Pavlianf, vil. Doris, H. 72Paulo, vU. Ordiomema^ Boo. u. 159Paiai4ki, vil. These, iv. 492. 494Pazariidhi, t Mvodotiia, Hi. 458Pedieiues, peo. Pho. n. 89Petra, t. Magn. iv. 383Pdreaia, t. These. iv. 322. 502Pelagian, isL ^EMdait, iii 113Pdoffoma, c. (>. Mae. Hi. 318PeUuai^ migration of th iv. 174Pelawudis, dist. Th. i. 444; iv. 172.Pdtys^ iv. 435. 682Pdioania, site in Ortkomasia, Brno, u.Plum, mn. Madam. iH. 310; iv. 372~384. 893. 407Delta, c. Mac. in. 262lake of, in. 270. 289Prides, pt. Bttfhrotnm, Ep, i. 100INDEX.Peicpidat^ at T^ifra^ n. 159at CjfmoteepkaUBf iv. 465Pence Pig&dhia, or the Five Well, vil.and khan Molouu, i. 220 ; iv. 257Pendeniua, inlets, gulf of 'Eghina, n.Pend6mia, Hel. rite W. Loe. ii. 622PenewB^ r. Tk. i. 431 ; iii. 382. 395, tiaeq, 403; iv. 283 291. 318. 403. 513PmteUamy mn. AU. ii. 428. 430 ; iv.Pmtheu$, u. 369. 370Peparethus^ or Tripolis, Ul jEgman, iii.Repels, mn. Dat. i. 342Perakh6ra, vil. Maoris, ii. 503P^rama, vil. lo&n. a. iv. 154Tertii, vil. Adam. iv. 14Petticoat, king of Mac. iii. 315Pergamtu^ t. Pieris, Thrace iii. 178Pergandl, mn. Aeam, i. 165, 166. 172;iv. 20Perrhabi. city of the, iii. 340; iv. 311Perrhantke^ hill at Ambraeia^ i. 2(^Person, a summit of Pindus i. 284.289. 294Periv61io, vil. Mt. Pmdtu, i. 304Permetnu, r. Mt. Helicon, ii. 212. 497Peneus, king of Mac. i. 72. 140. 211.298; iii. 179. 288. 338. 375, 416.Persian history, ii. 50armies,— at Mansion, ii. 431 ;at Plai€Ba, ii. 336, ei teq. ; at Tker-mapvUB, ii. 49, H sea,Pe^, vil. lo&n. d. i. 221Petaa. vU. Ari d. i. 205; iv. 235Petals, isl. Aeam, iii. 51. 571 ; iv. 2PeialuB, isle. EidnBa (PetaliusJ, ii. 423Poem, t. TMbM, ii. 305. 320PefUartu^ r. AperanHoy i. 141 ; iv. 253Petals, vil lo&n. d. i. 400Petra, vil. Pelas. iv. 420. 444mon. 'Agraia d. iv. 271pass Mt. O^imnw, iiL337.430and hill JBao, u. 136. 142Petrarch, mn. Ckaromeia, ii. 112. 197Peril, vU. 'Agrafa d. iv. 270Petting, vil. Them. iv. 324. 326Petrogheraki, fn. Mt. Chiron, ii. 373,Petross, Kyr, of Korytzi, architect, i.223 229.253• , Aios, pt. Aeam. (site of ^noe-form), i. 173; iii. 493Pet^B, vil. TkeaproHa, iv. 77Petri, vil. Canons, i. 58Pkacium, i. Pela$. iv. 493. 535Phaatut, t. These. ii. 621Phagregy t Pierit, Thrace, iii. 177Phalacrum, prom. Corcyra, i. 93, 94Phalaena, i. PeUu. iii. 379; iv. 298PkalatuTy the Macedonian, iv. 462Pkalara, t. Belie, ii. 20; iv. 358Phalartu, r. Bao. ii. 138. 140Phaloria, t. Hitii. iv. 528Horde, t. Chaonia, i. 72. 74Pkareadom, t. Hkt. iv. 316. 318. 535Pkanalia^ bale of, iv. 476-^484Phanalut, pt. Chaonia, i. 5, 6c. Phth,'Tke$». i. 449L-454;iv. 463—481Para, vil. Tanaarice, ii. 468Pkaryga, t. E, Loc. iL 179Pharvaiumy prom. Pko. ii. 549Pha^mu, Phodan oommeutdery ii. 187Pkecoy vil. near CTom/xAi, ^m<. iv. 522PhemuBy t. Then. iv. 505Pertly c. Pe^. iv. 439. 493Pkidum, mn. Beeo. ii. 216. 309Phidias the works of, u. 365. 394Play t. Pttjna, iii. 405. 417. 422PhiUBuiHy temple. AU. ii. 384Pkilenuy %,Myffdaniay iii. 451PkiUp. son of !kmMi/a«, king of Jlfotf.ii. 116. 435: iii. 188son of />CTne<rtic«, king of Mae.i. 71. 142-146. 385. 398. 458; ii.94. 381; iii. 19. 807. 473; iv. 397.457. 493. 525Philippi c. Mae.-Thr. iii. 189. 216the battle of, iii. 214, el teq.PkUipp^iSy c. Tir. iv. 364PhUtppuSy Q. Marcus consul, iii. 338.348. 405. 416-~424PkiiobmtMy hill Pho. u. 194Pkodeumy building near Faulty ii. 106PhcBtticey t. CkaottUiy i. 20. 66. 70Ph^miciumy or PhiciuMy mn. Bet. n.214. 219PhanicuSy pt. C^fthera isl. iii. 74PheatLcy wnofAmynioTy iv. 434r. TkermopjfUgy ii. 11.32; r.Then. iv. 515PhateitBy or Phytiay t. cam. iii. 574Phorewy pt. //Aooa, iii. 32. 40Photicfy t. ^. iv. 96Phryncy of 7W>ft0, ii. 482Phtkioy mPhihiotisy i. 450. 455; ii. 3.21 ; iv. 484. 5.35mountains of, iv. 321P^laoey t. Phth. iv. 332. 364PhylaaUy tenens of, at Delphi ii. 562Shyly fort. Att. ii. 417. 440PhyUu$y t. Them. iv. 323. 326PhpecuSy i. EonkfOy iii. 316PlufUgumy t. Mlo. i. 145. 155Pialiay t. Hist. iv. 529Pi41ago, an Adriatic vessel, i. 4Piety peo. Mac.-Thr. iii. 210Pieriay dist. Afoc. iu. 177. 337. 413. 446t. Mac. iii. 414Pieriumy or CierimMy t. These, iv. 503Pienuy mn. Pieriay iii. 413Pigeons, wild, at Thisbe ii. 507PiK^met, vil. Chimera, i. 79Villa, plain near Nai^tactuey ii. 606.Plliuri, vil. Khim&ra d. i. 88Pilonuy t. Stthoniay Mae. iii. 153Pilo-v6ni, mn. Chaoniay i. 64Pimplettty t. Pieriay iii. 423Pfni&a, isthmus Palleney iii. 152Pinakates, vil. Offa. iv. 392INDEX.Pindar, his house tt TMbe», ii. 244■ y his contest with Corunna ii.Pundits. central ridge of Northern Greece,i. 272. 317. 415. 418; ii. 91 ; iv. 111.113. 125. 186Pipe, shepherd's, i. 290PinsuBy t. Tkeu. iv. 493Pimari tree, varieties of it, ii. 534nm. Mac.-Tkr, (Pangmum).iii.176PirtuUBy peo. Da$. iii. 329Episcopi, vil. Kalamo isl. Aoarn. iii.Pispir, r. AH. ii. 428Pitch, fossil, i. 4. 35. 378PiiyonetuSy isl. near ^ginay ii. 423Plaghia, vil. and mn. Acaru. i. 165.172; iii. 23. iv. 14Plata, scala in pt. of TAuAf , Cor, Gvifyii.507, prom. LeuoaSy iii. 10Platina ruins of, Boo. ii. 323. 325history of, ii. 369battle of, ii. 335, et seg.Platanaki, mon. Themis ii. 246^ , torrent of, ii. 250Plates the, ii. 333. 335. 342island of the, ii. 347. 357Plataea, r. vil. and castle, Pieria,Mac. iii. 349. 404—409. 421Platonic, vil. Piatmwy ii. 333Platonic, r. Bcbo. ii. 99. 104. 191vil. Cerigo isl. iii. 76Piano, t. Phil. IV. 339Platanugy r. Corotuiay Bcbo. ii. 174. 287Platii, or Pandeleimona, pt. Adam.iv. 4isl. EybcBcty ii. 432Plat, vil. Adam. i. 160Plats , pt. Aden Mac. iii. 142Platzi6tis8a, r. Thei (Dirce), ii. 217.227.236Pleidoanajty king of Sparta ii. 462Pleidusy r. Pho. ii. 550. 583Pleasant, vil. Chaoniay i. 104Plessis, vU. Peas. iv. 406. 454Plessidhi, summit of Peliumy iv. 384PleuratuSy king of lUyriay i. 211Pleurisy t. y^. Old and New, i. 117,118. 154; iu. 539Pli&ssa, vil. Dat. i. 336Plough of Greece, iii. 548; iv. 496Plumy t. Patagonia iu. 309, 310Podhogora, vil. Artaa, d. iv. 229Podhofforiani, vil. MoUmiSy iv. 98Podhoiovitza, vil. on the Lower Aeke-Unus Adam. iii. 521Poff6ffhiani, or Pogoniani, dist. MoUmisyi a. 39/, 898; iv. 100Poliana, suh.-dist. of Trikkala, iv. 265.PolichnCy t. MmruAi. 410Polighero, t. C^. Mae. iii. 459Polidna, vil. CAooiita, i. 60Polis, fort. W. hoc. ii, 615. 619, 620Pots pt. litany iii. 44. 46Politics, vil. £W6aMi, ii. 275Politzia, plain near M6tzovo, i. 296 ; iv.Piling, mon. iU. (ApoUomaJy i. 368Polvandrium at TkermomUB. ii. 48Polyanthesy r. Chaoniay i. 376Polvdh6ndhri, vil. Mam. iv. 416PclygnatWy Lem^o/Delpki^'attA by,ii. 560Polyp6rtu, Hel. ruins, W. Loc. ii. 621PompeiuSy Cn. iv. 476 — 484Pone Servility bridge of Drily IU. iii.Poplar, the Lombardy, i. 344Pori, vil. Moffn, iv. 394Port, vil. Lucas vil. iii. 41Porta, sub-dist. Trikkala, iv. 265mon. and Hel, site, Adam. iii.510.575; iv. 11Portarii, t. Moan. iv. 392Port^iko, r. Hist. iv. 521-^27Portes (or Gates of Trikkala),ffist.-Atkamaniay iii. 382; iv.426. 521— , two villages there, i. 426; iv.Portkmugy pt. Eabosay ii. 435Pondiumy prom. Chaoniay i. 92prom. PaUene. Mac. iii. 156Potamii, vil. and r. Molo$tiMy i. 259.261,262Potidaniay t. W. Loc. ii. 613. 618Potidauy t. PaUeHCy Mae. iu. 152PotM^y vil. TMneoy ii. 323Pouqueville, Mr. iv. 46. 552. 562Poyani, vil. £kus. i. 336vil. IU. (ApolUmia)y i. 368Primanda, vil. Mt. Pindn»y i. 271Pram6ritziL, r. Elimday i. 316Plagiary Uke EihnUy iii. 210Proviso, t Pierian Tkraee iii. 178. 222Praxiteles works of, ii. 233. 393. 898.Pregon&ti, vil. Chaoniay i. 33Premedi, Termed, or Permit, t. Panevmty i. 24. 391Preapa, dist. LyneatiM-IU. i. 334Prevents, vil. on Adidou$y i£ft>. i. 141Pr^vyza. t. Ep. i. 175—199. 237. 481 ;iii. 488. ; iv. 550strait and harbour of, i. 174.180; iv. 31. 41,42.,gulfof, i. 174Prisr^nd, t. IU. iii. 477Probation r. OrdkomemOy Brno, ii. 143Pr6dhromo, vil. Adam. iii. 514Proem t. TT^en.-Phik. i. 459Proniy or Pronetuty t. C^pkaUeniay iii.Pr6nio, family of Paramythia, ir. 60.Pr6tako, pt. near Antiewray Pho. ii. 540Pro$dUumy t. Mio. i. 119; iv. 246Proakyni, vU. Ben. ii. 174. 184. 287Prot6papa8, vil. Dost. i. 348., vil. Molossi$y iv. 91Prodhov&li, vil. John. d. iv. 219INDEX.Pr6Tlftkt, isthmus of, Arte. Mac. iii.Pmphara (AntiaoneiaL t. CViuao,Mae. iii. 460Pmtpkii^ t. AH. ii. 441Ptftth6, pt Megaria^ ii. 407Pulinkhi, nm. near rik;^, u. 219Ptolemy, t. Pi(M. iv. 341Pump, mn. ^«o. u. 169. 219. 277. 279.Pandonitzft, or BundonitUf vil. E. Locris5. 66, et teg. 179Ponta, prom. Aearm, (AetimmJ^ i. 174;prom. Pho. ii. 538Purii, pt. iS:yrM, iii. 110Cumin, Til. Pko. ii. 186Gurnard, inundation, 7^e6«o, ii. 315Pydna, U Pieria, iii. 426. 429. 432-^bataeof,iii. 433Pla, pass near PkOim, in. 217tune, t jKio. i. 119/ycm* I»« LyneeaHa, Itt. iii. 318Pyoo, palace of the Ampkietyones^ atIMjMt, ii. 567Pjrm, on Mt. (Eft, ii. 20. 624Pyramidal stones, worship of, ii. 399P)rig4ki, HeL min (Lateral ii. 491Pynro, HeL ruin, Aw. W. coast, ii.Prigot^s, ^1. Mt. (Hympiu. iii. 404Pyrrha, prom. Phth. iy. 359, 360. 371Pyrrha, t. Phih. iv. 357. 362. 367Pyrrheiumy palace in Ambraeia^ i. 210.PyrrkM^ or ArMpto^muif, iv. 175Icing of Epirus iv. 181. 223.PyUuanaamM^ Hippodrome of the, ii.Pytkiim^ t. Perrr. iii. 341. 430Pytkodorua ofTkebea^ sculptor, ii. 189Quinine, Marco, aHaa Mehm^ Effendi,i.54Radii, vil. Orckomema^ Bcao. ii. 159Radhot6pi, vil. lo&n. d. iv. 91Radhovisi, or Radhovizdhi, sub-dist.and vil. of Artaa, i. 288; iv. 271Radostiu, Til. lU. i. 367Ragusa, pt. gulf of Ayl6na, i. 3RUko, viL lo&n. d. iy. 94. 231Rakhi, vil. Bteo. ii. 138Raldi, vil. Cepkt^ema, iii. 67Amazon, fast, i. 86. 111. 200Rapsani, t. Mt. dympua.m. 350. 386Rapsista, yil. loan. d. i. 22$. 263; iv. 83yil. Hai. iv. 523Rashid Bey of Tempo, u. 219Rastamiti, vil. HwuxrHa. Beao. ii. 136.Raven, vil. Zag6ri, loin. d. i. 398; iv.Renaud, Paul, of Siatista, i. 308Rending, gulf of, Mac.-Tkraee^ iii. 167.173.462VOL. IV. 31RevenSko, yil. Ckaie. Mae. iii. 161WuBoelus., or AZn*na^ t. Cnuuaa^ Mar,iii 453jRAammtf, AH, its temples and fortress*.ii. 434HkeUkntm, pt. Ithaca iii. 47iZftecfi, salt streams in AttUn, ii. 382,Alendb, isl. ^gman^ iii. 103Rkixonie, Gulf, lU, (Castro), i. 5/ZAtTMs, t. Magn. iy. 384Rkoduntia, fort, near Thermopylae ii.10. 62. 64/2li», plain in Megara., ii. 394Ribs, yU. Artaa, d. iy. 255Rigani, mn. Mto, ii. 607Rim6kastro, or Enm6kastro, yil. ii. 4/8Missa, vil. and castle, Cataopaaa, iii.5; iy. 48Rica, lake near Buihratumy i. 96Riz, sub-dist. of Trikkahu iy. 265Rizomylo, yil. Pheraaa^ Tk. iv. 401.Roads, remains of Hellenic, ii. 270. 277.380.883; iv. 406■, Roman, through Greece, i. 76.377; iii. 179. 311. £o. 423. 461. 468.Rossini, summit at Delphi ii. 568Rogiis, ruins, Artaa, d. iv. 265BtmoMa. transactions of the, i. 71, 72.209. 216. 314. 385. 423; ii. 61. 160.193-201; iii. 57. 215—225. 288. 307,ai aeq, 322. 826. 338. 343. 875, et ea.381. 399. 416—421. 429-^433. 480,et aeq, ; iv, 32—43. 73. 81. 169. 181.305, et aeq, 457 464. 476-^84. 502.512. 528structure of the leon andmode of forming the yallnm, iy. 462Hominis yil. E. Loe. ii. 178Romances, yil. near Suli, i. 225Rosa, General, i. 475. 480Royi^s, vil. Etdnta (OnbuaL ii. 176.Ruga, Hel. ruins, Gulf of Artaa, Aearv,i. 171; iii. 495; iy.243Rughin, yil. near Tempe., iii. 384Rumili, the castle of, coast of J&o. i.IllRnssot&ri, a summit of Padua., i. 821Rusted Ag, of Nizyoro. iii. 160Russians, conduct of the, i. 21 ; iii.Riissiko, mon. Ade., Mae, iii. 120Sacred Way of Eleusis, ii. 382Sai&dha, pt. Chaonia, i. 102Sakal&r, yU. Pelaa, iy. 402SakeU&rios, Dr. G., of Kdzani, i. 354.380; iii. 301Salagh6ra, pt. of Artaa, i. 200Satan, isl. Ati. ii. 409Salamyria, or Calabria, r. Th. ( Pt-nehtaL i. 415. 419. 433; iii. 403; iv.291. 526. 530RrINDEX.Salaameua, t. Bm>. E. out, H. 267Salle, son of AU Pasfa4. i. 37Militia, pt. nioutn of AatelouB^ iii. 555Balonm, t. W. hoc, (Ampki$$a^, H. 588Japonica, or Saloniki, c. Mac. lii. 235>—Sunarinft, t. Mt. Pindw, iii. 333; iv.IllSonata, or Siamati, yil. and mn. 7^htta, ii. 219. 245. 250 'Same t. CepkaUtmia^ iii. 55, ei 9eq,SamikG, site, ithaca, iii. 44Samoniya, vil. near Suli, i. 228Samuel, priest of Suli, i. 240. 474. 492Sane, t. Ade, Mac. iii. 144. 149. 157Papal passes of the, T^mee, iii. 180.Sarakiniko,pt. Itkaea, iii. 53Saraklno. isl. jB^mm, iii. 112Sarah. yil. on the Aatu, ChaotnOy i. 34Sarand&foro. r. Perrr. iii. 3348arandfr>pot4mi, or Sarand&poro, r.ElcHiu (Ckjii$gu»Lu, 374. 379Sar&ndi, pt. Ben, W. coast, ii. 514.Serapis, tern, of, at Ckanmeia, ii. 115Sarighioli, dist Cordial, i. 311Sarmatia, mn. near ThermcpyUB (Calllidromus). ii. 8. 13. 53Sara, t. SUkoma^ Mac. iii. 153Saraca, t. Mace-Thrace, iii. 227Sarum, t. Dan. ui. 328Sairw, peo. Tkruoe^ ui. 190. 210. 213Nimium, fn. Bum, Bwo.-Pko. ii. 519S&zona, isl. gulf of Athena (SatoJ^ i.2,3Scampii^ t. lU, iii. 280Soandeia, U Cytherea isl. iii. 73. 75Scarce, t. Parosopia, Bobo. ii. 331SoarpketOy t. £. Zoc. ii. 178Sotrdilaidasy prince of /tfvrta, i. 69, 70iSbUife, pass in Phodt, ii. 105, 106. 551.SekcnnUy t. Bteo, ii. 820Schools of loinnina, vr, 148of Amelia, !▼. 388SckOkui, isl. .^«oii. iu. 112ScwMy t. Fallen, Mac. iii. 155jS^tptb, commander under Pompejf^ i.314; iv. 477, Nadcay iii. 431iSb'rone, vil. Megara ii. 413^, its rocks, ii. 406. 413Siiirpi, vil. Phth, iv. 338Scold, t. Bno. ii. 330. 369t. Chalc. Mac, iii. 456^xMRtW, or SoomirM, mn. Mceria-Thrace, iii. 474Soopada, family of CWmnofi, i. 446Soopdue, isl. Seaman. iii. IlliSwwfiM, mn. /tt. iii. 477&0/WSO, t. PeiM. iii. 227; Jv, 455S^pi, t. Dardaniaia, ni. 468. 4/9iScrvrw, isl. Mgaan, iii. 106Sclasforo, ruined town, Date. i. 339Selenitza, vil. on the Aow, Chaofua-J1L i. 365. 377Selim Bes of Monatttr, tomb of, i. 313Koka, I 98Selitza, vU. EUmeia, i. 316Selitzani, viL Mt. Oem, iv. 413Sells, vil. Mt. (Hywume, iii. 344Sell, or Hei, veo.' Spins, iv. 170.184.189.192.199S^tza, vil. Chaoma, i. 65S^nzina, vil. TMm, ii. 278. 314Sepiass, prom. Magnesia, iv. 382Senior, t. Memo, iii. 468Seivhis, vil. TkeUn, ii. 246Seram&^ vil. Io4n. d. iv. 218Seritziani, vil. near Suli, i. 242Sermo, L Ckalc. Mac ui. 154Serres, t. Odouumtioe, iiL 200, el ses .Serrimm^ prom. 7%rtwe, iii. 215S^rvia, t. Elimeia, iii. 303. 330. 332i kingdom of, iii. 205. 478; iv.203. 553, ei eeq.Sesklo, vil. Magnesia, iv. 898S&ka, viL and lake PkocU, il 95. 188.Sfeliniki, vil. lo&n. d. i. 261Sheikh, ridge of the, PharwaUay i. 446,447 ; iv. 464Shepherds of Mt. Pindme^ i. 290; iv.215.548Si6tista. vil. Molauit, iv. 94Skafidh&ki, vil. and peninsnU, Golf ofArtaa, Ep. iv. 29Skarfitza, pass Chaoma, i. 63, 64Skarmanga, peninsula Alia, ii. 384Skimatin, v^ Tanagra, ii. 449. 464Sidhiro-k&psa, dist. Chale. Mae. iu. 159.Sidhiro-kafkhi6, prowl and ruins, Pio.ii. 538. 549Sidhiro-peliko, Hcl. site Perr^PeUtM.ui. 368Siekliza, vU. Doiopia-Tkem. iv. 505.Sifno, isl. ./Egmam, iu. 84Silver mines of Nizvoro, C%aic. Mac.iu. 161.189.213Sim^nu, mon. Acte, Mae, iii. 140Simikli, vU. Trees. iv. 491Sim6petrs, mon. Note, Mae. iii. 1 16Sin&tziko, mn. Oredia-Elimeitu i, 317.Smdmt, t Mjudonia^ iii. 450Smgui, t. StSumtOt and its gulf, iii. 153Sintioe, dist. Mae. iii. 227S^ffhm, t. Ben. W. coast, iL 515S^ro-paonee, peo. Pmmia, iii. 209Sirra, Sirrha, or Serra, i. OdomwttM(Series), ui.204Sis&ni, vU. EUmeiarOredis, i. 318Sallee, king of Thrace, iii. 442Sithtmia, peninsula, Mae, iiL 455isthmus of, iii. 146Si&lisd, vU. AU.-B«BO. ii. 370Si&tista, t. Eiimeia, i. 305—318klis6ra of; i. 311, 312Sana, t. Hid. iv. 529Skamnia, vil. Mt. Olympia, iii. 350INDEX.Sk&nghero, isl. Jemmy iii. IllSkhino, pt. ithaca iii. 25. 32. 53Skl4tina, yU. 'Agrafa d. iv. 273. 536Sklivena, viL Alabama, iv. 14sepia, t Dardaniaia (Sctupi)^ iii. 469SkortCis, vil. Acarn. iii. 511Skating, glen, Chaoma^ i. 64Skrep&ri, vil. and mn. Dom. i. 375. 391 ;iv. 113Stripe, vil. and mon. Bcbo, (OrtAome-nus), ii. 144—154Skropon^ri, a summit of Mi. Ptoum,Bmo, iL 219. 277. 281Skurta, vil. AU. ii. 370Sliff&ni, vil. near Kastoria, OroHt^ i.Sling bullets (glances iu. 176Might, bridge of Haiiaemou at, neariUatoria, i. 322Sm6kovo, vil. 'Avniia, d. iv. 516Sni61ika,a summit of PindtUy iv. HISoftdheB. vU. Them. iv. 324. 4948oiadhitiko,or r. of Sofadhes, That, iv.321. 494. 500Sofik6, bay of, &inm«; gulf, ii. 4248okh6, or S&kha, vil. BiaalUa, iii. 230SoUmmy t. Adam. iv. 18Solomon, or Kholom6n, mn. Chase,Mac, iii. 162Samaria, mn. Pho, (CirpkisL ii. 546Soinki, viL That. iv. 101. 105Sopoii, vil. and mn. Chaonia^ i. 64Sopoto, vil. and castle, Chaonia^ i. 79Sore, mn. Tanaormi, ii. 245. 330. 455.465. 470Sosko, t. Eordaa^ iii. 480Soient games, at LAadda^ ii. 302Spdiiliks, ii. 203i^khidhes, vil. Tamtgrma^ ii. 246. 473^pakdkra^ t. Mc, iv. 384Spaniards, tradition as to the, i. 91 ; iv.Sparta, vil. and om. Adam. i. 138. 159,et tea. ; iv. 237SpartottUy t. Ckale. Mac. iii. 455Spercheitu. r. MeUg^ Females, Drops.ii. 8. 11. 15. 32; iv.Sphinx, mn. of the. Bmo. ii. 214. 309,310. 319, 320. 481Spragidwm^ cavern Mt. CWusron^ ii.Spiffhi, vil. Pieria iii. 414Spini, pt. Chaoma^ i. 79l^n4gr, or Spiragri, mn. near Bert, i.360. 375Splantza, pt. TkesproHa (Glycy$ LimenJ^ iv. 51, et tea, 66Stairs, vil. III. i. 367Sioffeinu, t. Chalc. Mac. m. 159. 168Stagiis, or Kalabaka, t. Hitii, (./Egi-mum I 419-424; iv. 263. 511Stadium, ^i Delphi, ii. 577at 2>»«i», iii. 409at NioopoUs, i. 191Stamina, vil. Mt Boileau, AU. ii. 429Stain, vil. jEto. iii. 528. 544Stand, mon. 'Agrafa, d. iv. 274Stagnates, or India, vil. TatiagrtBa. ii.Stand, vil. Adam. i. 160Stavrokoraki, mn. near Marathon, ii.StavTopiffhi, mon. 'Agrafa, d. iv. 270Stavronikita, mon. Ate, Mac. iii. 130Stavrosj vil. Chalc. Mac. (Skbgeirus)^iii. 167St^fano, 'Aio, mn. and mon. of, nearStages, i. 419. 424Sten, of the Aom», or Antinomian, i.32. 62. 69. 72. 383. 385. 390; iv. 116of the r. CephistuB, u. 95. 97.-, of the PeneiM (Tempe), iii.-, of the Axiusy iii. 442-, of the Sirymon^ iii. 201. 209.-, of the Haliaenwn, ui. 290. 297.330.332Sten, pt. near Anther, Pho. ii. 540Stephen Russian, kmg of Servia, iv.Step^zi, vil. Chaonia, i. 57Shrine, t. Pho. u. 528-^32Stobi, t. Ptfoma, iii. 306. 440Strata Bianca, or Aspri Ruga, torrentKhimara d. i. 7Strakav^tzi, mn. Aiin.\, 398Strat6ni, Bel. site and pt. Calc. Mac,iii. 159Stratonioeia, t. ChtUc. Mae. iii. 160Stratus, c. Aeam. i. 137—143; iii. 513Stravolimi6na, pt. Aeam. iv. 14. 19Stravov6ni, mn. Phih. iv. 349. 351Str6zi, mn. near Salonfki, iU. 233Strivina, vil. Artaa, d. i. 219river of, iv. 256Str6mitza, t. JEttrm, Mac. iii. 465, et9eq.Str^nitza, vil. Tymphm-Talaree, i. 417Striitzina, a summit of Mt Ptoum,Boo. U. 277Sermon, river, iii. 183. 225-4229. 465.",its ferry, iii. 172-, sources, iii. 201Strymamc jmlf, iii. 167lake, iii. 210plain, iii. 182.200,201straits, iii. 201. 465Sura, t Eubaa (StyraJ, ii. 422. 432Stylish, pt. of Zitiini, Mere, ii. 4Styndkxra, t. Up. Mac, iii. 306Subashi. bridge of the, near Tepeleni, i.30. 57Sudden, vil. Zag6ri, lo&n. d. iv. 126Sukha, r. Atini. i. 27. 397vil. Themrotta-Molossis, i. 226, et9eq. 474. 488; iv. 193the wars of, i. 225. 234, et sea.its history, i. 501-^-, mountain and rocks, i. 225. 241 ;iv. 57RrINDEX.Simili, river of, i. 225— 2Sl ; iv. 52of KCirenda, on the Kalomi, vil.lo&n. d. i. 226 ; iv. 79. 94. 193BuUman Bev, of Ar^hyr6kaBtro, i. 41Linaria, vil. EUimeia. iii. 298Culinary, vil. Bm>. u. 135Salle, mn. Tkebma^ U. 330Sulpkiui, the coonil, i. 330; iii. 307Supli, vil. SooiutMMj iv. 454Surbi, vil. ad summit Mt. Hdioomy ii.106.529SuTovigli, vil. Ao^ru. (SifuhuL i. 140.5t(f, r. Period HL 422S&tzista, r. Czarina, i. 85. 768uv4k, vil. Fko. U. 70. 86Syboia, islands Thesprotia, i. 103; iiL 2continental vil. iii. 8Mari$, t. Italy, iv. 501^fcurium, vil. on Mt. Osm, iii. 376Syk&mino, vil. Oropia^ ii. 448— , vil. Paravma^ iv. 106vil. Perrr. iv. 302Sykii, vil. SUktmia^ Mac. iii. 153Svlau^ pXunSttymonio gulf, iii. 168. 170i^a, it. 79. 116. 143. 193-201. 229SymMumy mn. Tkr, iii. 217S^ndhikno, or SVndekna, vil. AmpkUo-old, iv. 253Sera, id. JEtfoan^ iii. 84Syr4ko, or ^rraku, t. Mt. Pwdmt, Ep,i. 271. 274; iv.214Syvisti, ruins in 'Agrafa, iv. 252Tabakidhcs, vil. near TMbcM^ u. 223Twit, a ThetBoUan magistrate, iv. 309.408.494Takbynds, vil. on the Strvnumk lake,iii. 198Titania, t. E. Loe. ii. 171. 186TalartSy peo. Ep.-Tk. iv. 195. 278Tam(ikhari, nt. Magn. iv. 383Tamynm^ t. Etdtsn^ ii. 439Tanagra t. Bwo, iL 454—460Tanagra. dist. Bcbo. ii. 424. 462Taphm. isl. Aeam* (Meganisi), iiL 47;iv. 16t. CepikaUmiia^ iii. 67Taphia$gmy mn. .^Sio, i. 110Tarimari, vil. Bit. u. 330. 369Tarpkcy t. E. Loc. ii. 179Tatar, rapid ioumey of a, i. 291Tat4ri, vil. near Clarissa, iii. 360. 382vil. PkarmUay \. 447Tatcza, vil. Thespis. ii. 500Tat6v, vil. Att, li. 424. 428Taiikli, vU. and lake Colonia, i. 459,460; u. 16TVittridfia, t. CregtomOy Mac. iii. 44|0Austin, vil. CrtmfMWfb, Th, iii. 367Taxiarches, St. mou. Bubo. ii. 514Tii,nUe9,omceroiMiihridaie», ii. 193TtcmoHy t. Molotsisy iv. 82TrytfrayyW. Orckomeniay Bwo. ii. 153. 159TncMiUy fort near Themwpwlay ii. 10TdresskUy tomb of, ii. 13H. 234Tckcli, vil. near Saloniki, iii. 258TeloUlia, an art of the mooBtaiiifri, LTelov6ni, mn. AU, (HymeUmV iL ^5Temerity of Mac iii. 445. 463Turnkey valley and pus, Tk,-Mm, i.3&. 434 ; ill. 360. 384-401Temerity plain Tkehmiy iL 215. 320TepeUni, t. Chaoma^ L 30— S6Tereut and Prate mythus of, iL 105Semitic, vil. i»*o. ilsTervitziani, or Denridjani, viL Afrfoww,Retina, mon. 'Agrafm d., L 288; iv.«Oa. £ivTetr&niaa, pt. Ciaoma^ i. 92TeirapkifUay t. AikanuttUa^ iv. 213Tetrc^iolii, of Dan$, ii. 91Teirar^ of MaeedmM, iiL 227. 480;'- ofTiettafy, iv. 535r«iiiiieMiw,vil.aQdhill7M«a, n,245.248.470Testa. queen of lUfrw, i. 68, 69thanet, t Mt. Bona, iv. 414Thasui, isl. jSMnm^ iii. 2177%ammaekkt t. Magm, iv. 416TkoMmaciy t. Pktk. (Dhomok^), L 457Theatres, ancient Greek : —ziChiBnmeta^ u. 112. U5tXCauope^Ep, i. 247at i>n(0i^ iL 661at Delay iu. 100near Dhnmtsi(is, Afo^osm, L 264at Jimmy iii. mnear Lib6kbovo, i. 75at Mealy iii. 83at Nieopolis^ i. 190at (EnwdtBy iii. 561at /»AaRt», CAooMo, L 66at P^rofl, L 116at Tanagra ii. 456at ThdMByPlUk. iv. 362Thtbm Qynicmy t Bim. w. cost, ii. 521Their PktkioUemy t. i>A(i. ii. 21; iv.358—3657%0&e«, city, u. 221—244. sa 473gates of, ii. 231. 236. 239plain of; ii. 216. 218. 318., history of, ii. 220. 2287!i^jii, t. Amamama^ iv. 21 vTheodore, St. fn. Tithes iL ^27. 242Theory or sacred missions ioMpki%ii. 564; iii. 97Therambwy t. and prom. Palates Mac.iii. 155TkenauUt, X. Il uL 477Tkerapnay vil. ThdMo^ ii. 369Theriakh&tcs, vil. CkwmiOy i. 23Thermo, or Ckytriy of Thermopylae ii.41. 51TheniUy X. Mac. iii. 244ThcrmodoHyT.Bm}, iL 249TkermopsfkBy peas Mdis-E. Loe, iL 5 —14. 31ancient and modem passcompared, ii. 40, ei seq.the false, u. 32. 34INDEX.Thermomflm, military tmuactioBt fti, ii.Tkermu, c. jE(o. i. 126—130. 146. 151Theseus, of Athens, ii. 235. 237. 414TVput, t. Bm>. U. 479. 499TkeapUu, or Thespioey iu extent, ii. 502.TkegproHa, dist. Ep, situation and extentof, iv. 74. 1/4. 195, et eo.T^hemdian community, the, iv. 274.495.521Tketaalv^ ito soil and climate, i. 425. 436 ;iv. m 397. 400, 401, 426. 414. 490.-^ distinction of upper and lower,i. 426. 445; iv. 186,description by Herodotus, iy.-, Homeric geography of, iv. 531Tkeatia, t. Mto. L 152. 155, 156Thetidiumy t. PkarsaUa, iv. 472Theodora t. Atkamamia (Thodh6.nana), iv. 21 1Thisbe, t. Ban. (Kak6ua), u. 80$Thorny ifiU. JEto. iu. 571Thomas Prelubo, governor of loin. i.254; iv. 204. 553ThratybuluM, at HaliatiuSy ii. 209Tria, t. AH. u. 384,pl of, ii. 380. 382Thnmtwm^ %, ChaomarlU. i. 376t. E. Loc, ii. 177Thucydides at Scaptes^, iiL 195Thumii, vil. near Linea, i. 435Thuriumj mn. C%«rone*a, it 196. 199Thuamu, r. Ep. i. 103; iv. 23. 97r^mttf, mn. Afraid, iv. 246. 251Ti^frium<, t. Adam. iv. 16. 97Thwstusy i. AcU^ Mac. iii. 149, ti Mq.Tichium, t. jEto. u. 61:^. 618TusAuM, fort near Thermo, ii. 62, 637ii(nAo«M, or TiMtuaa^ fn. and paia.-—TUphtmmmy TUphuntan, or Tilpho*-MBttifi, mn. and fort. Ike. ii, 137.142.205.211.524Timari6te«, holding lands by personalservice, L 3257ii. 327Timothy, the naval victory of, at Al^f-z<a, iv. 15Tiphw, or Siphay t. Boo. ii. 515TwBum, mn. MiigM. iv. 396Titan, mn. TAesf. iv. 323Tt^nutW, r. i'err. iu. 334. 349. 358.396 ; iv. 295TiiaruSy mn. Perrr. iii. 345Tithorca, t. Pho. ii. 78, rf ae^.TUhromumy t. i'Ao. ii. 87Tjai(ibci,vil. ^/(ii. i. 28l^amili. vil. Orchomeniay Bmo. ii. 162du, i. 297Tiara, or Zara, vil. Boo. ii. 106. 527Tiaraplani, vil. Mohuk, iv. 106"narStJEena, t. Perrr. iii. 347[^ar&khi, isl. Pho. ii. 541Tjaterli, two vils. Pkaraalia, iv. 330fjelova, vil. Zyaceslu, i. 333Tiepo, vil. Chaonia, i. 57Tjcrkovista, vil. loan, d. i. 263; iv.79. 166TierovSna, vil. lo&n. d. iv. 98T}crs6va, vil. Paniviva, i. 394Tj^M, and Tj^ipista, vile. BiacdiiA, iii.Tiersembi, dist. Elimeh, iii. 302lleutmi, vil. Phth. iy. 470Tierdsia, vil. Elimeioy i. 316tjerv^na, mn. Elimeia^ i. 312, 313tlighi6ti, 1.432; i v. 290. 318TJtkuratcB, vil. near Suli, i. 2SIjikur^la, or Tzukurela, a summit ofrates, vil. near Suli, i. 229. 242ur^la, or TzPindus, i. 293Tiik6ri, vU. na, iv. 53jimovo, site on the AracktkMiy iv.Aimyr6,Tiingiri, vil near SuU. i. 229l^ingh^ti, or Kedjel, pU ofPhth. iv. 355. 367Tjini^hi6tiko, ma.PkA. iv. 452Tnivn, vil. and summit of Mt lleUooMyu. 518-^26Joanna, vil. ThebtBa, ii. 216Jl' -Ijum^rka, or Djumerka, mn. Atha-jjobin, vU. Oratio, i. 322ukalia, lagoon near Artaa, i. 202um^rlu, or Cmania iv. 229Tjurkli, vil. Elimew, i. 3041x>bacco, its culture at Yonidie, iiL 267 ;at Servia, iii. 330Tocco, Charles, iv. 204. 558, 559TAivasi, vil. Peku. ui. 380TolophoHy t. W. Ux. \\. 619, 620TomQ.rw$y mn. Das$. m. 328mn. Molouuy iv. 190. 192. 196Tomarokh6ria, vils. Io4n. d. iv. 196.Tom6r, mn. and viL Jam. L 350, 351.353. 375 ; iii. 328Tomoritza, valley and dist. Date. i. 35dTopalti, plain near Crit, i. 360. 366Topi&kos, vil. lake of Astoria, i. 327T(^61ia, vil. Brno. (CopcfJ, u. 281.vil. OuarmBa, iv. 49Toroncde Gulf, Afar. iii. 153Torone. t. Bithynia, Mae. iii. 119. 155.Potency or Tones t. TheqtrotMy i. 103;iii. 8 ; iv. 569Toshke, Albanian tribe, i. 61. 346TMjer, vil. and khan Atm. i. 381Teaching vil. near Lebadeiay Boo. ii. 143Tracy t. Melissa ii. 7. 11precipices o^ ii. 7, 8w lOw 24w26.29^ In Greek the sound Tj is expressed by Tz, whence many of these names willbe found in the places referred to written with Tz.INDEX.TnigBiii^ti, vil. Aeam. iv. 5I ^ ftkaU of, iv. 4Troilus, t. Edonit iii. 228rmmpva, t. Tympkaa^ iv. 276Tritloltu, U Siniioe, iii. 229TrikhiU, prom. PAo. ii. 588Trebusin, mn. Atm, i. 31. 382. 389Then, yil. Oretti$, i. 334Tria khiniA, (three iniu) Mt Pindus.i. 293. 410; iv.259Tri&dba, St. num. Alt. ii. 4181 mon. Mt. OTmnum, iii. 349» mon. jEio. iii. 54'Trickmium, t. jEto. and its bke, i. 128.137. 145. 151. 155Trieorytkui^ t Ati, ii. 433Trilcardho, manly of, iii. 574Trilcardh6-kMtro, Hd. nina Aearm,((Eniadm), iii. 556—570TrSkeri, peninsula Magm. iv. 879. 896town, iv. 395Pale, island, iv. 396Trikkala, t. Hitii, (Triooah I 425—430; iT. 279L-287. 530. 536Trikorfa, mn. W. Loc. ii. 605Tripods. or Tripoditeuiy i. Afeard. ii.403. 410Trellis, t. Pda^oma, iii. 319■, Soeoy Til. near Lariita. iii. 875Tnpolitis, of Perrliabia^ iii. 339. 341 ;iv. 312atPdaaoma, iii. 318. 340Triporo^ prom. n. Loc, ii. 593Trtphylw of MeloHi. dist. MolotaU^ iv.Il9^Trip5tamo, rite Alio. iv. 253Tris6nia, or TFaz6nia, isle. W, Loe, iLTrUmi, t. Pho. ii. 89t. W. Loe. ii. 622Thou, T. Bono, ii. 136. 139Trodutetaa^ lake at Ddtu^ the, iii. 99TVtww, rite in the DamiOy Bwo, ii.Tropkoniua and Agameda^ ii. 121. 294prove and orate of, ii. 122-129 ^Trypa, mn. and fort. Bull, i. 228, 229.24 1 ; iv. 57Crypt, mon. Chcumia. i. 57Mundi, vil. AU. ii. 417Turkeys, vrild, ii. 419Turks, their language, i. 347■ , their mode of meaning time,L254■, chance, iii. 255 ; iv. 220T6mavo, t. Plug, i. 434; iii. 352; iv.-, mountain of, iii. 350Turba, mn. EmaAia^ iii. 271Turkokh6rio, or Eased, vil. Pko, ii. 67.TumjJuBO^ that. Ep. iv. 120. 275Tifmphe, a part of AWvir, i. 422 ; iv. 276"fvmphrtttuay mn. Dryotrii. ii. 17. 94.Tymta^ Mae, i. 318r/sMM, t. Dardamia, iii 476Ufyita in Jtkaea, iii. 32, et wm.UramopolMs, i, Ade, Mac, iiL 149Uria, lake jEto. iii. 573Utmandi, or Makiikh6fi, viL newTempe, iii. 381Uz&mi, r. Atm.-Dan. i. 35L 353. 360.382; iv. 113Via, vil. Tkebma, ti. 216Vakop61i, vtt. iU, i. 364. 366^Valaro, or Valiant, viL and khan CS«-mo, i. 27. 497Valide Sultan, appan^ea of the, L 277.Villa, or Balla, t. Pieria. iii. 4S5Viltcai, vil. B, Loe, ii. 170. 186Alto, aub-diat. of Karlili, i. 124. 157.the Uke of, i. 157 ; iii. 504—509Variaaova, mn. jEio. i. 106 ; Ui. 538Vardhiri, r. Mae. (AmubJ, iii. 258. 438Vanlh&tea, vU. MeUt, ii. 8. 25Vardh^ri, mn. jEto. ii. la 598. 624Viii, r. Molossit, i. 224Vari&dhea, vU. Molouu, i. 224Varl&am, mon. TympkmOy iv. 537. 541— , prom. TletpnrfuL iii. 3. 7> vil. lo&n. d, i. 221Vanilla, vil. Aearm, in. 24. 501y&maka, mn. Aeam, i. 163 ; m. 496Yam&kova, mon. jEto. ii. WSVanilla, vil. and mn. Alt. ii. 437T&aari, vil. on the Aous, Chaotic, i. 34Vaaili, Ai, vil. Aeam, iv. 19>, pt. Boo, w. coast, ii. 504^- ) lake of, Mjigdomioy iiL 231ya8il6pulo, vil. Aeam, iv. 5V&tika, bay of, Laetitia, iii. 77VatooMhi, mon. Aden Mae. iii. 131,Yathf , pt of Alii, Bm>, u. 263pt.of Mniwftt, ^. L 181. 196;iv. 31pt. of TTkube. B4m>, ii. 507-, t. and pt. Itkaea, iii. 25, ei $eq.V&vdho, t. Ckale. Mae, iii. 162Vel, mon. Molouii, iv. 96. 235Vel&ghora^ plain Aston. I 288Velanidhik. prom. Bao. w. ooaat, iL 517Veleai, t. Pmmia, iii. 469, 470VeUri. vU. Tket. iv. 505yclc8t!no,t.i'e^.rPA0fW),iv.4OO.436Veliani, vil. Tketprotia, iv. 59. 69. 75Eliza, vU. Pko. (THkona), iL 77, ei107.119VelitzSata, vil. loin. d. iv. 92Vel&khi, mn. Drooping, ( Tympkretiu )yii 17r. W. Loc. ii. 599VeKikhovo, Hcl. rite, W. Loe. iL 600.VeKitzi, mn. Aeam. iv. 5. 8Yelvendda, t. Pieria, iii. 332Vol Paahi, i. 37. 404. 420; iiL 415;iv. 408Vcniikda, vil. AUiU. i. 882INDEX.yenet(ft>Pkddi, Hel. rains on the Tltya.fnU, Ep, It. 73. 176Venetian, r. Eiimeia, i. 302yentr6k, lake Lvnoeaiia. i. 334; iii.Venuty temples of: —two at Megara, ii. 394. 398of y. Lamia, or the Syrian inCamera, iii. 74, 75of y. Mdmms at Tketpim, ii. 483of y . Praxu at Megara, ii. 398of y. PkUe in the Sacred WagotAthetu,i\. 384wonhip of y . Ccutnia at Metropo-Utjjp. Th. iv. 507of y. Uramay Pandemut, andApoatropfaa, at Thereby ii. 234tergo, TU. Ckatmiay i. 65yergutiani, fh. Palms, u. 326. 333yern^ pass of, near Tempe iii. 381.— , bridge of, iv. 296y^rria, t. Emaikia (Bertha), iii. 290^295yerseniko, mn. Pho. ii. 538nerva, vil. Chaoma, i. 104yerzan4, ruined vil. Pko. ii. 76yestav^tzi, vil. Io4n. d. iv. 218Vettu (BottuBi)y peo. Mac. iii. 485yiina, mn. JEio, i. 120. 126 ; iii. 512yigia, mn. TbiMmce, ii. 469mn. near aSrvia, Perrr. iii. 333yigUza, or yiliza, Hel. site, Mt. Pin-dutyi. 271. 281. 284cilia, vU. Megara, u. 873. 408Vmiu$y the consul, i. 385. 388yi6M, r. Ep. lU. (AatuL i. 31-^56.74. 3«4-&7 ; iv. 107yiskirdho, pt and prom. Cq)haUeniayiiL 59. 6/yistritza, r. Churnkty i. 20— , r. Mae. (HaUaenumJ. i.305. 321 ; iu. 292r. ^nianeSy ii. 16yiBsiani, vil. Moiotsisy iv. 103yithari, vil. W. Loe, ii. 621yitom&, mon. JEOaoet. iv. 526yitzi, mn. OnttiSy i. 329 ; iu. 275yiadoya, vil. Ema^ iu. 275yiakhi6te8, their settlement in Greece,i.274y language, i. 280. 347yUkho-i4nni, vU. Perrr, iv. 311. 313yiakho-kh6ri, vil. 7%»pro/M». iv. 72yUkho-klisto, vil. Oretiw-Eordaay i.yiakholivadho, t. Perrr. i. 274yiakhoviini, mn. jEto. ii. 600. 602views, or extensive prospects described,from Mt. Tirpa, Suli, i. 231from Kamarina (Canape)^ i. 244from Mt. Kakaidhitza (Piadmjyi. 286from Zitiini, ii. 4from Pundonitza, ii. 67from the pass S. of Punt. ii. 69views, or extensive prospects described,from Mt. Petra, Boo. ii. 136of Athens, from Mt. Pacilumy ii.from Mt. Panes ii. 421, ei tea.from Pyrgo, on Mt. Korombili, ii.from a root of Hdicony near Bulls.ii. 524from Delphi ii. 567from AmpkipoliSy iii. 182from Saloniki. iii. 240from yodhena^ iii. 271from S^rvia, iii. 331from yiakho-livadho, iii. 336from Ambel&kia, iii. 385. 390from Lit6khoro, iii. 408from Latina, iii. 502from Makhali, iii. 510from Lygovitzi, iii. 512from St. £Lias, near Stain, iii.from Zitza, iv. 93from K6nitza, iv. 109. Illfrom and of loannina, iv. 161, e<from Pale Gardhfki, iv. 289from Kastri of T(irnavo, iv. 298from the site ofPk^aoey iv. 332from Kham4ko, iv. 346of Mt. Plumy from Pagauty iv.from Goritza (DemeMaaJy iv. 378from the Po. Ko. of Askiti, iv. 413from Kiprena ( Glapikyrm )y iv.from Matariinm (Cierhm)y iv. 497from Fan&ri (ItkomcL iv. 51 1from Kastriki, near Met^ra, iv.from yiokh6 (Thermuajy i. 132from y6nitza castle, i. 169from height near y6nitza, i. 171from St. George, near Kalarvtes, i.from a point on Mt. Pinky L 300from Tom6r, i. 352from OstanStza, i. 396from Trikkak, i. 426fern Clarissa, i. 439from the ride of the Sheikh Pkar-taUaylWfrom the AcrcpoUi of Hamlin, i.from Dhomok6 ( Tkaumad)^ i. 458from Psilirakhi, near Thebes, ii.from the site tf Mvoaleuusy ii. 247from Mt. Kaiogheritza, near'Egripo, ii. 262from a ridge of Mt. MenapiuMy ii.from a rise of Mt Dummy ii. 278from a ridge of Mt. Brilmus^ ii.from Kalamo, ii. 439INDEX.YicwB, or extensive prospect described,from Paleopanaghia, ii. 490from a rise of ilt^lieou, near Kh6-Bia, ii. 514from Sidbiro-kafki6, ii. &38from a ridtra of Mt. Cirphii^ ii. 550from a high ridge W. of Silona, ii.from a ridge of Mt. Rigani, ii. 603Vlikha, vil. AmplUU>ckia, i. 162; iv.236, et mq.y]okh6, Subsist. KarlilL i. 124■ ■, mon-veto, (Thermal i, 126^135. 149vil. Brno. Ii, 472., Til. Them, iv. 316-.S23Voidhomiti, r. PaitMwa, i. 897; iv. 107Vodheni, t. Emaihia (EdemaJ, ui.271, ei tea,Vo^ani, vil. Pko. ii. 167VoinikoTo, or Kaftav6thra, near lo&n. i.Voiv6da, vil. Ifitt, i. 424 ; iv. 264, 265.Volo, t Moffn. iv. 368—380T6mtza, t Adam. i. 165. 171 ; iii. 494;iv.24Voltuiafia, defile of, EUmeia-Perr. iii.yoak6poli, t. Data. i. 343Vnkhana, or Multo, vil. Thstprctia, i.103; iu. 2Vrakh6ri, t. Mio, i. 122. 136Vrai, vil. Marathon, ii. 429Yranii, or Ivorina, t. Madras iii. 473Vranianfc, two vils. 'Agrafa, d. iv. 272Drastic, vil. Bi$aUia, iii. 171Vrestenftza, vil. Manum, i. 288Vritx&kha, mn. near Suli, iv. 77yruk61aka, or Vampire, i. 492; iv. 216Ynrrii, or Bey Bun&r, vil. PAom/ta,i. 454Viii, marrii Hitii. iv. 289Vulgar, or Yuigari, mn. 'Agnfa, d.iv.271Vulgaris, or V6igarii, r. Perrr. iv. 813Juliana, lake, loam. i. 165, 166. 172,173 ; iv. 24Yulko, pt. Aeam, iv. 14— , or Yurko, pt. 'E^po, ii. 256.yun6, t. Khimara, CkaoniaA. 87Vuri4ndi, or Yuri^mi, r. Octo. (Aao-tnuh ii. 448Yurvvi, pt. SWioma, iii. 146Yutin6^ vil. Mt Pmdm^ i. 294Yutiindr6,Hel. nu and fishery (Butk-ntmmjy Ckatmia, i. 95—102Yuv&Ul hal. gulf of Artaa, i. 201vil. Perrr. iii. 334. 342Yiiv6, r. ThetproHa^ fCof^), andmarsh, i. 232 ; iv. 52Yyzitza, vil. Alii. iv. 892Wheat, various species of, i. 112Wolves, in Mt. Pames, ii. 421Wolves, in Mt. Bfrmiui, iii. 296in Mt. Pflium, iv. 433Wood-cricket, the, i. 221Xenagorau, his measure of the height ofOlimpm$, iii. 341Xenofu, mon. Ade, Mae. iii. 120Xer&^ r. Parr. ( TUareahuj, iii. 358 ;IV. Z»yD ^ XfXeroffhlinni, mn. Pko, ii. 546Xcrokambo, plain AmpkUodkia^ i. 159Xerokh6Ti, vil. Bubaa, iv. 344. 352Xcr6mcro, sub-dist. Karlili, i. 124Xeronomi, or Xeronom^, vil. ThapiaSyBao. ii. 501. 522Xeropigadho, vil. Pko. ii. 583Xeropot&mi, r. Pko. (PleututJ^ ii. 551— - — , r. and mon. Ate, Mac.iii. 116, r/«^.Xer6pyTTO, tower Oftkomemia, Btn, iiXer6valto, plain Molouuy rv. 99Xeroviini, mn. MoUmit. i. 220; iv.132. 217• , mn. E. Loe. ii. 172mn. Pko. ii. 539mn. Oredk-DoMt. i. 335Xerxes and his army, ii. 10. 41. 336.562; iii. 177; iv. 514his canal of Aete^ iii. 144, ei teq.wreck of his fleet, iv. 414JTjmiay t. and lake, Dolopia^ i. 460 ; iv.Yenidj^, or fannia, t. near Pttta^JIfac. iii.262.267YuHiks, Turks of Mae. iii. 175. 257Ya8safPash&,iii.203Yalid^ Kiiyasty, L 123Agk Arapi, i. 38k Arapi.,ofVirakh6ri, i. 123. 126Sahara, mon. villages, and mn. Brno. ii.133. 141river of, ii. 212Zagora, t. Magn, iv. 383. 393, H teo.Zag6ri, sub-dist. of lo&n. d. i. 397, 7SS%.468 ; iv. 166Zagoria, vil. Ami. i. 25. 392Zagorii, vil. Molomu, i. 400Zacharias, Cant, of Khimkia, i. 82. 86.ZakUviri, vil. Ckak. Mac. iii. 162Zalitaa, pt. Bm,-Pko. ii. 519Z&longo, mn. and mon. Quaopma^ i.243,e<seg.Zap&ndi, vil. ^fito. i. 136. 156Zara, or Tzaia, vil. Mt. Hdieom^ li. 106.5^Zara, Zar6palo, wilt. near Bmtkrtlum^Ep. i. 97Zarko, t. Hid. i. 432; iv. 265. 318Zav^rdha, vil. Aeam. i. 166; iv. 14Z&vitza, vil. .cam. i. 163 ; iii. 24 ; iv. 13Zelasium^ prom. Pktk. iv. 351Ze1og6sh, vil. Ore$tu, i. 333INDEX.Letitia, or Zeriki, vil. Mt. HtUoon. ii.619. 527. 529Servia, vil. Ouk^mps, l 243Terms, vil. CbsMpoa, i. 242Zerv6khia, r. Magn. !▼. 385Zervokh6ri, vil. SuUict^ iii. 226ZethuB^ and smeaton, their monumentaXTkAea,u.&SZia, mn. Naanta isl. iii. 95ZikhnA, t. MaC'ThrouXy iu. 198ZiliakhoYB, yH Mac-Tknoe, iii. 109Zimen6, pass Pho, (Chide, ii. 95.Zimiatza, vil. Perrr, iv. 266Zit<im, t. MdU-Pm. l 462; ii. 1, ^^atq.Zitza, vil. MoUmis, iv. 91. 93Zmyma, prom. Acte, Mae. iii. 149Zomfii, mon. AeU, Mae, iii. 120. 142Zuliti, vU. Ckaonia, i. 64Juliana, vil. Thegp. iv. 72Zvffaete»^ r. Mac-Thrace, iii. 220. 2262^gia8ta Nere, mn. 'Agrafii, d. iv. 494Zyg6s, mn. near M^tzovo, i. 295. 399.4ll,e<t09.; iv. 261. 276Zjg6%, mn. and hub-dist. Karlili, i. 1 15.ll&,etmq.; iii. 528. 552lake of, i. 122. 124. 153, 154klisikia of, i. 119. 122. 154;uii.5^.THE END.VOL. IV.SsLondon:aiLBEKT AND RIVINOTON, PEIMTEES,IT. Johns BQUAEB.