PRINCIPLESOFGEOLOGY,BsmaAN ATTEMPT TO EXPLAIN THE FORMER CHANGESOF THE EARTH'S SURFACE,BT BEFEBBNOS TO CAOSBS NOW IN operation.CHARLES LYELL, Esq., F.R.S.FOR, SEC, TO THE QEOL, SOC, ^c.IN TWO VOLUMES.Vol. I.«LONDON:JOHN Murray, ALBEMARLE-STREET.MDOCOXXX,LondonPriaitdbf WuxiAx Ci«wat«• •• • •• •*•• • •• ••• •• • •iCONTENTS.ProbCHAPTER I.Geology defined — Compared to History — Its relation to other Physical6dence»— Its distinctness from all — Not to be confounded with CosmogonyCHAPTER II.Oriental Cosmogony — Doctrine of the successive destruction and renovationof the would — Origin of this doctrine — Common to the Egpytians-^Adopted by the Greeks — System of Pythagoras — Of Aristotle — Dogmasconcerning the extinction and reproduction of genera and species — Strabotheory of elevation by earthquakes — pliny — Concluding remarks on theknowledge of the Ancients • • « • • ■ •CHAPTER III.ArabiAn writers of the Tenth centuzy-^Persecution of Omar — Cosmogonyof the Koran — nearly Italian writers — ^Fracastoro-controversy as to the realnature of organized fossils — Fossil shells attributed to the Mosaic delugesPalissy— Steno— ScDlar—Quirini—Boyle— Plot— Hooked Theory of Elevationby earthquakes — this speculations on lost species of animals — pray —Physic-theological writers — Woodward's Diluvial Theory — Burnet — Whiston— Hutchinson^-Leibnits-^Vallisneri'— LaztoroMoro— Generelli — BufibnHu theory condemned by the Sorbonne as orthodox — Bufibn's declaration— ^Targioni — Arduino^Michell — - Catcoti— Raspe •— Fortis •— Testa-^Whitehgwt— f aU m S ansiuiB , , , t . 21Vi CONTENTS.PaceCHAPTER IV.Werner's application of Geology to the art of Mining— ExcorRve characterof his lecfai TM E nthnnaam of his pupils-this authority — this theoreticalerrors — Desmarest's map and description of Airrcigne — controversy betweenthe Vuleanists and Neptnnists — Intemperance of the rival Sects — Button'stheory of the Earth— His discovery of granite veins — Originality of hisviews—Why opposed— FUyfai^t iUusti at io n g ■ I nflnspBe of Voltaire's writingson Geology — imputations cast on the Huttonians by Williams, Kirwan,and De Luo— Smith's m^ of England— Geological Society of London—Pio g ie ss of the Scene in Franc e G rowing importance of the study of organicremains • • • • • • • 55CMXPTSRV.Review of the eases which have retarded the progress of Geology— Effidiof prepossessions in regard to the duration of past time— Of prejudices arisingfrom our peculiar position as inhabitants of the land — Of those occasioned byour not seeing subterranean changes now in progress— All these causes combineto make the former course of Nature appear different from the present—Several objections to the assumption that existing causes have producedthe former changes of the earth's surface, removed by modern discoveries • 76CHAPTER VI.Froo& thai the climate of the Northern hemisphere was formerly hotter —Direct proofs from the Organic remains of the Sicilian and Italian strata*IVoofs from analogy derived from extinct Quadrupeds — impending of Animalsin Icebergs — Siberian Mammoths — evidence in regard to temperature,from the fossil remains of tertiary and secondary rocks — From the plants ofthe coal formation . • • • • • .92CHAPTER VII.Ontfaacaniesofvieisdtndasinclimite Remarks on the present division ofheat over the globe— On the dependence of the mean temperature on the r^native position of land and sea— Isothermal line— Currents from equatorial iw*gions«— Drifting of Ice e igi D ifihrent temperature of Northern and Southernhemisp h e we Combination of causes which might produce the extreme coldof which th earth's surface is susceptible— On the conditions necessary forthe production of the extreme of heat, and its probable «Aets on organic Ufli IMContents. ViiPageCHAPTER ViiGeological proofs that the geographical features of the northern hemispheresat the period of the deposition of the carboniferous atrata, were such as would,according to the theory before explained, give rise to an extremely hot climate—Origin of the transition and mountain limestones, coal-sandstones, and coal—Change in the physical geogpra^y of northern latitudes, between the eraof the formation of the carboniferous series and the lias — Character of organicremains, from the lias to the chalk induaiy^— State of the surface when thesedeposits originated ■ Great accession of land, and elevation of mountain-chainsbetween the eonso l i d a t ion of the newer secondary and older tertiary rocks-consequentrefrigeration of climate — Abrupt transition from the organic remainsof the secondary to those of the tertiary strata— Maastricht beds— Remarkson the thaoiy of the diminution of central heat • • 185Chapter ECTheory of the progressive development of organic life considered— £ridenoein its support wholly inconclusive — Vertebrated animals in the oldest strata —Differences between the organic remains of successive formations— Remarks onthe comparatively modem origin of the human race— The popular doctrine ofsuccessive development not confirmed by the admission that man is of modemor^in — In what manner the change in the system caused by the introductionof man affects the assumption of the uniformity of the past and future courseof physical events •(•••••• 144CHAPTER X.Division of the subject into changes of the organic and inorganic world-inorganiccauses of change divided into the aqueous and igneous — aqueousca use B Destroying and transporting power of running water — Sinuosities ofrivers — two streams when united do not occupy a bed of double smface^Heavy matter removed by torrents and floods — recent inundations in of ice in removing stones — erosion of chasms through hardrocks — Excavations in the lavas of Etna by Sicilian rivers — Gorge of theSimnel— Gradual recession of the cataracts of Niagara— Speculation aa tothe time required for their reaching Lake Erie • • 167CHAPTER XI.Action of running water, eimft'iiKeil— Course of the Po^Desertion of itsold channel — Artificial embankments of the Po, Adige, and other Italianrivtra— Basin of the Mississippi — Ita meanders-island— Shifting of itaiiii CONTENTS.course — graft of the Atchafalaya — Drift wood — New-fanned lakes in Louisiana— Earthquakes in the valley of the Mississippi — floods caused hy landslipsin the White mountains — bursting of a lake in Switzerland — Devastationscaused by the Anio at livoU • » • • 183CHAPTER XII.Difference between the transporting power of springs and rivers — manysprings carry matter from bebw upwards — ^Blineral ingredients most abundantin springs — Connexion of mineral waters with volcanic phenomenaCalcareous springes — traversing of the Elsa — baths of San Vignone, and ofSan Filippo, near Radicofani — Spheroidal sliuctm c in travertin as in Englishmagnesian limestone — ^Bulicami of Viteibo— Lake of the Solfataxa,near Rome— IVavertin at Cascade of Tivoli — Ferruginous springs— Cementingand colouring property of iron — brine springs — Carbonated springs—Disintegration of Auvergne granite — Caverns in limestone — Petroleumspringe— Pitch lake of Trinidad .« . 198CHAPTER Xii.Reproductive effects of running water — Division of deltas into lacustrinemediterranean, and oceanic — Lake deltas — Growth of the delta of the Rhonein the Lake of Geneva — Chronological computations of the age of deltas-recentdeposits in Lake Superior — Deltas of inland seas — rapid shallowingof the Baltic — arguments for and against the hypothesis of Celsius-elevatedbeaches on the coast of Sweden— Marine delta of the Rhone — variousproofs of its increase^Stony nature of its deposits — Delta of the Po Adige,l8<mzo, and other rivers entering the Adriatic — rapid conversion of thatgulf into land — mineral characters of the new deporitft-^Delta of the Nile—Its increase since the time of Homer-its growth why checked at present 220CHAPTER XIV.Oceanic del ta s Delta of the Oanges and Bnzrampooter — sits size, rate ofadvance, and nature of ita deposits— Formation and destruction of islandsAbundance of crocodiles— Inundations^Delta of the Mississippi — Depositsof drift wood — Gradual filling up of the Yellow Sea — ^Rennell's estimate ofthe mud carried down by the Ganges— Formation of valleys illustrated by thegrowth of ddtas^-Grouping of new strata in genenl — Convergence of deltasConglomerates — various causes of stratification — Direction of UminsB—Remarks on the interchange of land and sea , • # 240CONTENTS* IXPAQBCHAPTER XV.Destroying aad transporting effects of Tides and Currents— Shifting of theirposition — Differences in the rise of the tides — Causes of currents — action ofthe sea on the British coast — Shetland Islands— Large blocks removedEffects of lightning — breach caused in a mass of porphyry — Isles reducedto dusters of rocks — Orkney Isles — least coast of Scotland — Stones thrownnp on the Bell Rock—East coast of England— Waste of the cli£% of Holiness,Norfolk, and Suffolk — Silting up of Estuaries — Origin of submarineforests — yarmouth estuary — Submarine forests — Suffolk coast — Munich—Essex coast — Estuary of the Thames — Goodwin Sands— Coast of Kent —Formation of Straits of Dover— Coast of Hands— Coast of Dorset— PortlandOrigin of the Chisel Bank— Cornwall— Lionnesse tradition — Coast ofBrittany •.••• . 256CHAPTER XVI.Action of Tides and Currents, eonimued-^laroadB of the sea upon the deltaof the Rhine in Holland — Changes in the arms of the Rhine — Estuary ofthe Bies Bosch, formed in 1421-formation of the Zuyder Zee, in the 13thcentury — islands destroyed — Delta of the Ems converted into a bay — Estuaryof the DoUart formed — encroachment of the sea on the coast of Sleswick^Inroads on the eastern shores of North America — Tidal wave called the Bore—Influence of tides and currents on the mean level of seas — Action ofcurrents on inland lakes and seas — Baltic — Cimbrian deluge — Straits ofGibraltar — Under currents— Shores of Mediterranean — Rocks transported onfloating icebergs — Dunes of blown sand — Sands of the Libyan Desert — DeLne's natural chronometers • • • • . 285CHAPTER XVn.Reproductive effects of Tides and Cunrenla — Silting up of Estuaries doesnot compensate the loss of land on the borders of the ocean — Bed of theGerman Oceaxi— Composition and extent of its sandbanks — Strata formedby currents on the southern and eastern shores of the Mediterranean — transportationby currents of the sediment of the Amazon, Orinoco, and Mississippi— Stratification — Concluding remarks 303CHAPTER XVIII.Division of igneous agents into the volcano and the earthquake— Distinctregions of subterranean disturbance— Region of the Andes System of volcanosextending from the Aleuti«m Isles to the Moluccas Polynesian arch*X CONTENTS.ProbpeUgo— Volcanic region extending from the Caspian Sea to the AxoTe»—Former connexion of the Caspian with Lake Aral and the Sea of Azof — slowStepped skirting these seas — tradition of deluges on the shores of the Bosphocis, Hellespont, and the Grecian archipelago— Periodical alternation ofearthquakes in Syria and Southern Italy — wester limits of the Europeanregion — Earthquakes rarer and more feeble in proportion as we recede fromthe centres of volcanic action — Extinct volcanos not to be included in linesofactiTeyents ••••.•» 319CHAPTER XIX.History of the volcanic eruptions in the district round Naples— Early convulsionsin the island of Ischia — numerous cones thrown up there — Epomeonot an habitual volcano^Lake Avernus— The Solfatara — Renewal of theeruptions of Vesuvius A.D. 79-^Pliny's description of the phenomena — remarkson his silence respecting the destruction of Herculaneum and Pompeiisubsequent history of Vesuvius— Lava discharged in Ischia in 1302 —Pause in the eruptions of Vesuvius — Monte Nuovo thrown up— Uniformityof the volcanic operations of Vesuvius and the Phlegm Fields in ancientand modem times .••••• 326CHAPTER XX.Dimensions and stricture of the cone of Vesuvius— Dikes in the recentcone, how formed— Section through Vesuvius and Somma—Vesuvian lavasand minerals — ^Efibcts of decomposition of lava — ^Alluvbns called " aqueouslavas*' — Origin and composition of the matter enveloping Herculaneum andPompeii — Controversies on the subject— Condition and contents of the buriedcities Proofs of their having suffered by an earthquake — Small number ofskeletons — State of preservation of animal and vegetable substances— Rollsof Papyros-.>Ph>bability of future discoveries of MSS. — Stable — stone delGreco— Concluding remarks on the destroying and renovating agency of theCampaniann volcanos •••••• 340CHAPTER XXI.Eictemal physiognomy of Etna — Minor cones produced by lateral eruptions—Successive obliteration of these cones-Early eruptions of Etna — MonthRossi thrown up in 1669 — Great fissure of S. Lio— Towns overflowed bylava— Part of Catania destroyed Mode of the advance of a current of lavaCONTENTS. XiProbExeaTatkm of a chmch under lata — Series of subterranean caverns—Linear faction of cones formed in 1811 and 1819 — Flood produced in 1755by the acting of snow dung an eruption — ^A glacier covered Ins a lava.stream on Etna — Volcanic eruptions in Iceland — new island thrown up in1783 — Two lava-currents of Skapt&r Jokul in the same year — their immensevohmi»— Eruption of Jorullo in Mexico— Humboldt llieorj respecting theconvent of the Plain of Malpais • • • • 361CHAPTER XXII.Volcanic Archipelago — ^^The Canaries— Eruptions of ^^The Peak of Tenerifie—Cones thrown up in Lancerote in 1730-36— Pretended distinction betweenancient and modem lavas — recent formation of oolitic travertine in Lancelote " O r c can Archipelago — Santorin and its contiguous isles— VonBocfa's Thmarf of " Elevation Craters " considered— New islands thrown upin the Gulf of Santorin— Supposed <' Crater of Elevation" in the Isle ofFauna— Description of the Caldera of Palma-barren island in the Bay ofBengal— Origin of the deep gorge on the side of *' Elevation Craters*—Stratification of submarine volcanic products — Causes of the great sise ofthe crater of submarine volcanos^Gone of Somma, formed in the samemanner as that of Vesuvius ■ Mineral composition of volcanic productsrespecting the nature of igneous rocks produced at great depthsby modem Toleaaaoanqitioiis • • • • • 380CHAPTER XXIII.Earthquakes and tfadr fifes— Deficiency of ancient accounts— Ordinaryatmospheric phenomena — changes produced by earthquakes in modem timesconsidered in chronological order — earthquake in Murcia, 1829 — ^Bogota in1827— Chili in 1822— Great extent of country elevated— Aleppo in 1822—Ionian Isles in 1820 — Island of Sumbawa in 1815 — ^Townof Tomboro submerged— earthquake of Cutcfa in 181 9-— Subsidence of the delta of theIndus — Earthquake of Caraccas in 1812 — South Carolina in 1811— Geographicalchanges in the valley of the Mississippi — volcanic convulsions inthe Aleutian Islands in 1806 — reflections on the earthquakes of the eighteenthcentury— Earthquake in Quito, 1797 — Cumana, 1797 — Caraccas,1790— Sicily, 1790— Java, 1786— Sinking down of large tracts • 398CHAPTER XXIV.Earthquake in Calabria, February 5th, 1783— Shocks continued to the endof the year 1786— Authorities— Extent of the area convulsed— GeologicalXU CONTENTS.Pagestructure of the districts-Difficulty of ascertaining changes of relative leveleven on the seacoast — Subsidence of the quay at Messina — Shift or fault inthe Round Tower of Terranuova — Movement in the stones of two obelisks —Alternate opening and closing of fissures — Cause of this phenomenon — Largeedifices engulphed — Dimensions of new caverns and fissures — Gradual closingin of rents — Bounding of detached masses into the air — Landslips — Buildingstransported entire, to grit distances-formation of fifty new lakes — Currentsof mud — Small funnel-shaped hollows in alluvial plains — Fall of diffalong the sea-coast — Shore near Sdlla inundated — State of Stromboli andEtna during the shocks — Illustration afforded by this earthquake of themode in which valleys are formed , « , , 412CHAPTER XXV.Earthquakes of the eighteenth century, continued — Java, 1772— Truncationof a lofty cone— Caucasus, 1772^Java, 1771— Colombia, 1766— Chili, 1760-s Azores, 1757 — Lisbon, 1755 — Sinking down of the quay to the depth ofsix hundred feet — Shocks felt throughout Europe, Northern Africa, and theWest Indies — Great wave — Shocks felt at sea — St Domingo, 1751 — ConceptionBay, 1750 — permanent elevation of the bed of the sea to the heightof twenty-four f eei— Peru, 1 746— Kamtschatka, 1 737— Martinique, 1 727—Iceland, 1725— Tenerifie, 1706— Java, 1699— Landslips obstruct the Bataviaand Tangaran rivers — Quito, 1698 — Sicily, 1693 — Subsidence of landMoluccas, 1693 — Jamaica, 1692 — Large tracts engulphed — portion of PortRoyal sunk from twenty to fifty feet under water — ^^The Blue Mountainsshattered — Reflections on the anoint of change in the last one hundred andforty years — proofs of elevation and subsidence of land on the coast of the Bayof Baifls— Evidence of the same afforded by the present state of the Temple ofSerapis ••••••• 436CHAPTER XXVI.Magnitude of the subterranean changes produced by earthquakes at greatdepths below the surface — Obscurity of geological phenomena no proof ofwant of uniformity in the system, because subterranean processes are but littleunderstood — reasons for presuming the earthquake and volcano to have acommon origin — probable analogy between the agency of steam in theIcelandic geysers, and in volcanos during eruptions — effects of hydrostaticpressure of high columns of lava — Of the condensation of vapours in theinterior of the earth — that some earthquakes may be abortive eruptions-whyall volcanos are in islands or meantime tracts-Gases evolved fromCONTENTS. xiiiPagefoktnos— Regular discharge of heat and of gaseous and eaiifay matter fromthe subterranean regions — Cause of the wave-like motion and of the retreat offile sea daring earthquakes — difference of dramutances of heat and pressureat great depths — Inferences from the superficial changes brought about byr'T*^'y^TT — In what matter the r^air of land destroyed by aqueous causestakes piscw Roots that the sinking in of the earth's crust somewhat exceedsthe fiffdng out by earthquakes— Geological consequences of this hypothesis,that there is no ground for presuming that the degree of force exerted bysubterranean movements in a given time has diminished — Concluding£Errata.Paff9 35lintfrom top, for orread and85bottom, — AlpAIpi150top. — lewlaws154Udow, — OfIn190fcaadiof — LoxntUAUDLoUItlAlCASMdo, — DeltaDlLTAlawbottom — PI. 3PL 9.LIST OF PLATES AND WOOD-CUTSINTHp FIRST VOLUME.PLATES.Fnmtitpieeei — This representation of the present state of the Temple of Serapishas been carefully reduced from that given by the Canonical Andrea daOrigin his 'Ricerche sul Tempo di Seaside, in PuuuolL' Napoli 1820,Plate 1*,^. 1.^— Shewing that a chain of Tolcamc vents surrounds the AsiaticIslands, in the same manner as a continuation of the same line shirts theeastern borders of the continent of Asia. This plate is copied from plate13 of Von Buch's Phys. Bench. der Canarischen Inseln. Berlin, 1825.The position however of some of the volcanos, and the outline of severalof the islands, has been corrected.Fig, 2. — Shewing the direction of the trachytic islands from New. toSee. parallel to the principal mountain-chains of Greece, as also to theGrecian islands which constitute a continuation of the mountains of themain-land, and are of the same mineral composition. This plate is alsocopied from Von Buch, plate 12, p. 318.Plate 2, Jig, l.-^View of the islands of Ischia and Prodda, with part of the coastof Misenum, taken from part of plate 17 of Sir W. Hamilton's CampiPhlegrsBi.Fig, 2. — Map of the Volcanic district of Naples. This map is copiedfrom one • constructed by 6. P. Scrope, Esq., to illustrate a memoir inthe Geol. IVans. vol. ii., part 3, from unpublished maps of Captain SmytfayR.N.,p.326.WOOD-CUTS.No. Prob1. Transverse section of the Italian peninsula • • « 1362. Diagpwnezplanatoiy of the sinuosity of river^ourses • • 1703. Diagram shewing the recent excavation of lava at the foot of Etna by theriver Simeto . • • • • .ITS4. Section of travertin of San Vignone , , , ,202PRINCIPLES OF GEOLOGYCHAPTER I.Geology defined — Compared to History — Its relation to other Physical SciencesIts distinctness from all — not to be confounded with Cosmogony.Geology is the science which investigates the successivechanges that have taken, place in the organic and inorganickingdoms of nature; it enquires into the causes of thesechanges, and the influence which they have exerted in modifyingthe surface and external structure of our planet.By these researches into the state of the earth and its inhabitantsat former periods, we acquire a more perfect knowledgeof its present condition, and more comprehensive views concerningthe laws now governing its animate and inanimateproductions. When we study history, we obtain a more profoundinsight into human nature, by instituting a comparisonbetween the present and former states of society. We tracethe long series of events which have gradually led to theactual posture of affairs ; and thy connecting effects with theircauses, we are enabled to classify and retain in the memory amultitude of complicated relations — the various peculiaritiesof national character — the different degrees of moral andintellectual refinement, and numerous other circumstances,which, without historical associations, would be uninterestingor imperfectly understood. As the present condition ofnations is the result of many antecedent changes, some extremelyremote and others recent, some gradual, otherssudden and violent, so the state of the natural world is theresult of a long succession of events, and if we would enlargeour experience of the present economy of nature, we must investigatethe effects of her operations in former epochs.Vol. I. B• -•2 . CS^OLOGY COMPARED TO HISTORY.We often* ;diScover with surprise, on looking back into thechronicles of nations, how the fortune of some battle has influencedtb^.lbte of millions of our contemporaries, when it haslong be^n forgotten by the mass of the population. With thisremote extent we may find inseparably connected the geographicalboundaries of a great state, the language now spokenby*thc inhabitants, their peculiar manners, laws, and religious'opinions. But far more astonishing and unexpected are the'connexions brought to light, when we carry back our re-\ '/ searches into the history of nature. The form of a coast, theconfiguration of the interior of a country, the existence andextent of lakes, valleys, and mountains, can often be traced tothe former prevalence of earthquakes and volcanoes, in r^onswhich have long been undisturbed. To these remote convulsionsthe present fertility of some districts, the sterile characterof others, the elevation of land above the sea, the climate, andvarious peculiarities, may be distinctly referred. On the otherhand, many distinguishing features of the surface may oftenbe ascribed to the operation at a remote era of slow and tranquilcauses — to the gradual deposition of sediment in a lake orinthe ocean, or to the prolific growth in the same of coralsand testacea. To select another example, we find in certainlocalities subterranean deposits of coal, consisting of vegetablematter, formerly drifted into seas and lakes. These seas andlakes have since been filled up, the lands whereon the forestsgrew have disappeared or changed their form, the rivers andcurrents which floated the vegetable masses can no longer betraced, and the plants belonged to species which for ages havepassed away from the surface of our planet. Yet the commercialprosperity, and numerical strength of a nation, maynow be mainly dependant on the local distribution of fueldetermined by that ancient state of things.Geology is intimately related to almost all the physicalsciences, as is history to the moral. An historian shouldn'tpossible, be at once profoundly acquainted with ethics, politics,jurisprudence, the military art, theology ; in a word, with allbranches of knowledge, whereby any insight into human affairs,or into the moral and intellectual nature of man, can be obtained.It would be no less desirable that a geologist shouldbe well versed in chemistry, natural philosophy, mineralogy.ITS Relation TO Other PHYSICAL SCIENCES. 3zoology, comparative anatomy* botany ; in shcHt, in everyscience relating to organic and inorganic nature. With theseaccomplishments the historian and geologist would rarely failto draw correct and philosophical conclusions from the variousmonuments transmitted to them c^ former occurrences. Theywould know to what combination of causes analogous effectswere referable, and they would often be enabled to supply byinference, information concerning many events unrecorded inthe defective archives of former ages. But the brief durationof human life, and our limited powers, are so far from permittingus to aspire to such extensive acquisitions, that excelhence even in one department is within the reach of few, andthose individuals most effectually promote the general progress,who concentrate their thoughts on a limited portion of thefield of inquiry. As it is necessary that the historian and thecultivators of moral or political science should reciprocally aideach other* so the geologist and those who study natural historyor physics stand in equal need of mutual assistance. Acomparative anatomist may derive some accession of knowledgefrom the bare inspection of the remains of an extinct quadruped,but the relic throws much greater light upon his ownscience, when he is informed to what relative era it belonged,what plants and animals were its contemporaries, in whatdegree of latitude it once existed, and other historical details.A fossil shell may interest a conchologist, though he be ignorantof the locality from which it came ; but it will be of morevalue when he learns with what other species it was associated,whether they were marine or fresh-water, whether the stratacontaining them were at a certain elevation above the sea, andwhat relative position they held in regard to other groups ofstrata, with many other particulars determinable by an experiencedgeologist alone. On the other hand, the skill of thecomparative anatomist and conchologist are often indispensableto those engaged in geological research, although it will rarelyhappen that the geologist will himself combine these differentqualifications in his own person.Some remains of former organic beings, like the ancienttemple, statue, or picture, may have both their intrinsic andtheir historical value, while there are others which can neverbe expected to attract attention for their own sake, AB 24 GEOLOGY DISTINCT FROM COSMOGONY.painter, sculptor, or architect, would often neglect manycurious relics of antiquity, as devoid of beauty and uninstructivewith relation to their own art, however illustrative ofthe progress of refinement in some ancient nation. It hastherefore been found desirable that the antiquary shouldunite his labours to those of the historian, and similar co-operationhas become necessary in geology. The field of inquiryin living nature being inexhaustible, the zoologist and botanistcan rarely be induced to sacrifice time in exploring the imperfectremains of lost species of animals and plants, while thosestill existing afford constant matter of novelty. They mustentertain a desire of promoting geology by such investigations,and some knowledge of its objects must guide and direct theirstudies. According to the different opportunities, tastes, andtalents of individuals, they may employ themselves in collectingparticular kinds of minerals, rocks, or organic remains, andthese, when well examined and explained, aflbrd data to thegeologist, as do coins, medals, and inscriptions to the historian.It was long ere the distinct nature and legitimate objects ofgeology were fully recognized, and it was at first confoundedwith many other branches of inquiry, just as the limits of history,poetry, and mythology were ill-defined in the infancy ofcivilization. Werner appears to have regarded geology aslittle other than a subordinate department of mineralogy, andDesmarest included it under the head of Physical Geography.But the identification of its objects with those of Cosmogonyhas been the most common and serious source of confusion.The first who endeavoured to draw a clear line of demarcationbetween these distinct departments, was Hutton, who declaredthat geology was in no ways concerned '^ with questions as tothe origin of things*' But his doctrine on this head wasvehemently opposed at first, and although it has graduallygained ground, and will ultimately prevail, it is yet far frombeing established. We shall attempt in the sequel of thiswork to demonstrate that geology differs as widely from cosmogony,as speculations concerning the creation of man differfrom history. But before we enter more at large on this controvertedquestion, we shall endeavour to trace the progress ofopinion on this topic, from the earliest ages to the commencementof the present century.CHAPTER II.Oriental Cosmogony — Doctrine of the successive destruction and renovation ofthe world — Origin of this doctrine — Common to the Egyptians — Adopted bythe Greeks — System of Pythagoras — Of Aristotle^Dogmas concerning theextinction and reproduction of genera and species~-Strabo*s theory of elevationby earthquakes— Pliny — Concluding Remarks on the knowledge of theAncients.The earliest doctrines of the Indian and Egyptian schools ofphilosophy, agreed in ascribing the first creation of the worldto an omnipotent and infinite Being. They concurred also inrepresenting this Being, who had existed from all eternity, ashaving repeatedly destroyed and reproduced the world andall its inhabitants. In the ^' Institutes of Menu' the sacredvolume of the Hindoo, to which, in its present form, SirWilliam Jones ascribes an antiquity of at least eight hundredand eighty years before Christ, we find this system of thealternate destruction and renovation of the world, proposed inthe following remarkable verses.** The Being, whose powers are incomprehensible, havingcreated me (Menu) and this universe, again became absorbedin the supreme spirit, changing the time of energy for thehour of repose.When that power awakes, then has this world its fullexpansion ; but when he slumbers with a tranquil spirit, thenthe whole system fades away For while he reposesas it were, embodied spirits endowed with principles of actiondepart from their several acts, and the mind itself becomesinert." .Menu then describes the absorption of all beings into theSupreme essence, and the Divine soul itself is said to slumber'and to remain for a time immersed in '^ the first idea, or indarkness." He then proceeds, (verse fifty-seven,) ** Thus thatimmutable power, by waking and reposing alternately, revivifiesand destroys, in eternal succession, this whole assemblageof locomotive and immoveable creatures."//6 INSTITUTES OF MENU.It is then declared that there has been a long succession ofmanwantaras^ or periods, each of the duration of many thousandages, and —** There are creations also, and destructions of worlds innumerable: the Being, supremely exalted, performs all this withas much ease as if in sport, again and again for the sake ofconferring happiness ♦•''The compilation of the ordinances of Menu was not all thework of one author nor of one period, and to this circumstancesome of the remarkable inequalities of style and matter areprobably attributable. There are many passages, however,wherein the attributes and acts of the *' Infinite and IncomprehensibleBeing*' are spoken of with much grandeur ofconception and sublimity of diction, as some of the passagesabove cited, though sufficiently mysterious, may serve toexemplify. There are at the same time such puerile conceitsand monstrous absurdities in the same cosmogony, that somemay impute to mere accident any slight approximation totruth, or apparent coincidence between the oriental dogmas andobserved facts. This pretended revelation, however, was notpurely an effort of the unassisted imagination, nor inventedwithout regard to the opinions and observations of naturalists.There are introduced into the same chapter, certain astronomicaltheories, evidently derived from observation and reasoning.Thus for instance, it is declared that, at the North Pole, theyear was divided into a long day and night, and that theirlong day was the northern, and their night the southern courseof the sun ;* and to the inhabitants of the moon it is said, oneday is equal in length to one month of mortals f . If suchstatements cannot be resolved into mere conjectures, we haveno right to refer, to mere chance, the prevailing notion, that theearth and its inhabitants had formerly undergone a successionof revolutions and catastrophes, interrupted by long intervalsof tranquillity.Now there are two sources in which such a theory mayInstitutes of Hindoo Law, or the Ordinances of Menu, from the Saaierit,translated by Sir William Jones, 1796.t Menai Inst. c i. 66 and 67.Oriental COSMOGONY. 7have originated. The marks of former convulsions on everypart of the surface of our planet are obvious and striking.The remains of marine animals imbedded in the solid strata areso abundant, that they may be expected to force themselves onthe observation of every people who have made some progressin refinement ; and especially where one class of men are expresslyset apart from the rest for study and contemplation.If these appearances are once recognized, it seems natural thatthe mind should come to the conclusion, not only of mightychanges in past ages, but of alternate periods of repose anddisorder — of repose when the fossil animals lived, grew, andmultiplied— of disorder, when the strata wherein they wereburied became transferred from the sea to the interior of continents,and entered into high mountain chains. Those modernwriters, who are disposed to disparage the former intellectualadvancement and civilization of eastern nations, might concedesome foundation of observed facts for the curious theories nowunder consideration, without indulging in exaggerated opinionsof the progress of science ; especially as universal catastrophesof the world, and exterminations of organic beings,in the sense in which they were understood by the Brahmin,are untenable doctrines. We know that the Egyptian priestswere aware, not only that the soil beneath the plains of theNile, but that also the hills bounding the great valley, containedmarine shells ; and it could hardly have escaped the observationof Eastern philosophers, that some soils were filledwith fossil remains, since so many national works were executedon a magnificent scale by oriental monarchs in veryremote eras. Great canals and tanks required extensive excavations;and we know that in more recent times (the fourteenthcentury of our era) the removal of soil necessary forsuch undertakings, brought to light geological phenomena,which attracted the attention of a people less civilized thanwere many of the older nations of the East *•This circumstance is mentioned in a Persian MS. copy of the historian Ferishta,ia tbs library of the East India Company) relating to the rise and progress of themahometan Empire in India, and procured from the library of Tippoo Sultan ia1799 ; and has been recently referred to at some length by Dr. Buckland. — (QtoLTrans. '2d Series, vol. il part iii. p 389.)— It is sated That, in the year 762, (or1360 of our era) the king employed fifty thousand labourers in cutting through a8 ORIENTAL COSMOGONY.But although we believe the Brahmins, like the priests ofEgypt, to have been acquainted with the existence of fossilremains in the strata, it is probable that the doctrine of successivedestructions and renovations of the world merely receivedcorroboration from such proofs; and that it was originallyhanded down, like the religious dogmas of most nations, froma ruder state of society. The true source of the system mustbe sought for in the exaggerated traditions of those partial,but often dreadful catastrophes, which are sometimes occasionedby various combinations of natural causes. Floods and volcaniceruptions, the agency of water and fire, are the chief instrumentsof devastation on our globe. We shall point out in the sequelthe extent of these calamities, recurring at distant intervals oftime, in the present course of nature ; and shall only observehere, that they are so peculiarly calculated to inspire a lastingterror, and are so often fatal in their consequences to greatmultitudes of people, that it scarcely requires the passion forthe marvellous, so characteristic of rude and half-civilizednations, still less the exuberant imagination of eastern writers,to augment them into general cataclysms and conflagrations.Humboldt relates the interesting fact, that after the annihilationof a large part of the inhabitants of Cumana, by anearthquake in 1766, a season of extraordinary fertility ensued,in consequence of the great rains which accompanied the subterraneanconvulsions. •' The Indians he says, " celebrated,after the ideas of an antique superstition, by festivals anddancing, the destruction of the world and the approachingepoch of its regeneration*.**^The existence of such rites among the rude nations of SouthAmerica is most important, for it shews what effects may beproduced by great catastrophes of this nature, recurring atdistant intervals of time, on the minds of a barbarous and uncultivatedrace. The superstitions of a savage tribe are transmittedthrough all the progressive stages of society, till theyexert a powerful influence on the mind of the philosopher. Hemound, so as to form a junction between the riven Selim and Sutluj, and in thismound were found the bones of elephants and men, some of them petrified, andsome of them resembling bone. The gigantic dimensions attributed to the humanbones shew them to have belonged to some of the larger pachydexmata.Humboldt et BonpUmd, Voy. Relat. Hist, vol i. p. 30EGYPTIAN COSMOGONY. 9may find, in the monuments of former changes on the earth'ssurfaces an apparent confirmation of tenets handed downthrough successive generations, from the rude hunter, whoseterrified imagination drew a false picture of those awful visitationsof floods and earthquakes, whereby the whole earth asknown to him was simultaneously devastated.Respecting the cosmogony of the Egyptian priests, wegather much information from writers of the Grecian sects,who borrowed almost all their tenets from Egypt, and amongstothers that of the former successive destruction and renovationof the world*. We learn from Plutarch, that this wasthe theme of one of the hymns of Orpheus, so celebrated in thefabulous ages of Greece. It was brought by him from thebanks of the Nile ; and we even find in his verses, as in theIndian systems, a definite period assigned for the duration ofeach successive world 'I'. The returns of great catastropheswere determined by the period of the Annus Magnus, or greatyear, a cycle composed of the revolutions of the sun, moon,and planets, and terminating when these return together to thesame sign whence they were supposed at some remote epoch tohave set out. The duration of this great cycle was variouslyestimated. According to Orpheus, it was 120,000 years; accordingto others, 300,000 ; and by Cassandra it was taken tobe 360,000 years J. We learn particularly from the Timesof Plato, that the Egyptians believed the world to be subjectto occasional conflagrations and deluges, whereby the godsarrested the career of human wickedness, and purified theearth from guilt. After each regeneration, mankind were inastate of virtue and happiness, from which they graduallydegenerated again into vice and immorality. From this Egyptiandoctrine, the poets derived the fable of the decline from thegolden to the iron age. The sect of Stoics adopted most fullythe system of catastrophes destined at certain intervals to destroythe world. These they taught were of two kinds — theCataclysm, or destruction by deluge, which sweeps away the• Richard's Egypt. MythoL p. 177.f Plus de Defect Oraculonim, cap. 12. Censorinus de die Nat See alsoRichard's Egypt Mythol. p. 183.I Richards Egypt. Mythol. p. 182.10 Egyptian Cosmogony.whole human race, and annihilates all the animal and vegetableproduction of nature ; and the Ecpyroeia, or conflagration,which dissolves the globe itself. From the Egyptians alsothey derived the doctrine of the gradual debasement of manfrom a state of innocence. Towards the termination of eachera the gods could no longer bear with the wickedness of meo,and a shock of the elements or a dduge overwhelmed them ;after which calamity, Astrea again descended on the earth torenew the golden age *.The connexion between the doctrine of successive catastrophesand repeated deteriorations in the moral character of thehuman race, is more intimate and natural than might at first beimagined. For, in a rude state of society, all great calamitiesare regarded by the people, as judgments of God on the wickednessof man. Thus, in our own time, the priests persuadeda large part of the population of Chili, and perhaps believedthemselves, that the great earthquake of 18S2 was a sign ofthe wrath of heaven for the great political revolution just thenconsummated in South America, In like manner, in the accountgiven to Solon by the Egyptian priests, of the submersionof the island of Atlantis under the waters of the ocean, afterrepeated shocks of an earthquake, we find that the event happenedwhen Jupiter had seen the moral depravity of the inha^botanist. Now, when the notion bad once gained ground,whether from causes before suggested or not, that the earthhad been destroyed by several general catastrophes, it wouldnext be inferred that the human race had been as often destroyedand renovated. And, since every extermination wasassumed to be penal it could only be reconciled with divinejustice, by the supposition that man, at each successive creation,was regenerated in a state of purity and innocence.A very large portion of Asia, inhabited by the earliestnations whose traditions have come down to us, has beenalways subject to tremendous earthquakes. Of the geographicalboundaries of these, and - their effects, we shall, ihthe proper place, have occasion to speak. Egypt has, forthe most part, been exempt from this scourge, and the trapRichard's Egypt. MythoL p. 193. f Plato*fe Timon.XOTPTXAN COSMOGONY, 11ditkm of catastrophes ia that country was perhaps derivedfrom the East.One extraordinary fiction of the Egyptian mythology wasthe supposed intervention of a macula-feminine principle, towhich was assigned the development of the embryo world,somewhat in the way of incubation. For the doctrine was,that when the first chaotic mass had been produced, in theform of an egg, by a self-dependent and eternal Being, itrequired the mysterious functions of this macula-femininedemi-urges to reduce the component elements into organizedforms. Although it is scarcely possible to recall to mind thisconceit without smiling, it does not seem to differ essentially inprinciple from some cosmological notions of men of greatgenius and science in modern Europe. The Egyptian philosophersventured on the perilous task of seeking out someanalogy to the mode of operation employed by the Author ofNature in the first creation of organized beings, and theycompared it to that which governs the birth of new individualsby generation. To suppose that some general rules might beobserved in the first origin of created beings, or the first introductionof new species into our system, was not absurd, norinconsistent with anything known to us in the economy of theuniverse. But the hypothesis, that there was any analogybetween such laws, and those employed in the continual reproductionof species once created, was purely gratuitous. Inlike manner, it is not unreasonable or derogatory to the attributesof Omnipotence, to imagine that some general laws maybeobserved in the creation of new worlds ; and if man couldwitness the birth of such worlds, he might reason by inductionupon the origin of his own. But in the absence of such data,an attempt has been made to fancy some analogy between theagents now employed to destroy, renovate, and perpetuallyvary the earth's surface, and those whereby the first chaoticmass was formed, and brought by supposed nascent energyfrom the embryo to the habitable state. By how many shadesthe elaborate systems, constructed on these principles, maydiffer from the mysteries of the '^ Mundane Egg " of Egyptianfable, we shall not inquire. It would, perhaps, be dangerousground, and some of our contemporaries might not sit aspatiently as the Athenian audience, when the fiction of the12 PYTHAGOREAN SYSTEM.chaotic egg, engrafted by Orpheus upon their own mythology,was turned into ridicule by Aristophanes. That comedianintroduced his birds singing, in a solemn hymn, '^ Howsable-plumaged night conceived in the boundless bosom of£rebus, and laid an egg, from which, in the revolution ofages, sprung Love, resplendent with golden pinions. Lovefecundated the dark winged chaos, and gave origin to the raceof birds *."Pythagoras, who resided for more than twenty years inEgypt, and, according to Cicero, had visited the East, andconversed with the Persian philosophers, introduced into hisown country, on his return, the doctrine of the gradual deteriorationof the human race from an original state of virtueand happiness ; but if we are to judge of his theory concerningthe destruction and renovation of the earth, from thesketch given by Ovid, we must concede it to have been farmore philosophical than any known version of the etymologiesof Oriental or Egyptian sects. Although Pythagoras is introducedby the poet as delivering his doctrine in person, some ofthe illustrations are derived from natural events which happenedafter the death of the philosopher. But notwithstandingthese anachronisms, we may regard the account as a true pictureof the tenets of the Pythagorean school in the Augustanage ; and although perhaps partially modified, it must havecontained the substance of the original scheme. Thus considered,it is extremely curious and instructive ; for we herefind a comprehensive and masterly summary of almost all thegreat causes of change now in activity on the globe, and theseadduced in confirmation of a principle of perpetual and gradualrevolution inherent in the nature of our terrestrial system.These doctrines, it is true, are not directly applied to theexplanation of geological phenomena; or, in other words, noattempt is made to estimate what may have been, in past ages,or what may hereafter be, the aggregate amount of changebrought about by such never-ending fluctuations. Had this beenthe case, we might have been called upon to admire so extraordinaryan anticipation with no less interest than astronomers,when they endeavour to divine by what means the SamianAristophanes' Birds, 694.PYTHAGOREAN SYSTEM. 13philosopher came to the knowledge of the Copernican theory.Let us now examine the celebrated passages to which we havebeen adverting • : —** Nothing perishes in this world ; but things merely varyand change their form. To be born, means simply that athing bons to be something different from what it was before ;and dying, is ceasing to be the same thing. Yet, although nothingretains long the same image, the sum of the whole remainsconstant' These general propositions are then confirmed bya series of examples, all derived from natural appearances,except the first, which refers to the golden age giving place tothe age of iron. The illustrations ' are thus consecutivelyadduced.1. Solid land has been converted into sea.S. Sea has been changed into land. Marine shells lie fardistant Ax)m the deep, and the anchor has been found on thesummit of hills.S. Valleys have been excavated by running water, and floodshave washed down hills into the sea f .4. Marshes have become dry ground.5. Dry lands have been changed into stagnant pools.6. During earthquakes some springs have been closed up,and new ones have broken out. Rivers have deserted theirchannels, and have been re-born elsewhere ; as the Erasmusin Greece, and Mysus in Asia.7. The waters of some rivers, formerly sweet, have becomebitter, as those of the Tigris in Greece, &c. }8. Islands have become connected with the main land by thegrowth of deltas and new deposits, as in the case of Anticsjoined to Lesbos, Pharos to Egypt, &c.9. Peninsulas have been divided from the main land, andhave become islands, as Leucadia ; and according to traditionSicily, the sea having carried away the isthmus.10. Land has been submerged by earthquakes: the GrecianOxides Metftmor. lib. 15.f Elurie mons est deduces in osquor, ▼. 267. The meaning of this lastrene is somewhat obscure, but taken with the context, may be supposed to alludeto the abrading power of floods, torrents, and rivers.I The impregnation from new mineral springs, caused by earthquakes in volcaniccountries, is, perhaps, here alluded to.14 Pythagorean 8T8TBM.cities of Helice and Burns, for examples are to be seen underthe sea, "with their walls inclined.11. Plains have been upheaved into hills by the confinedair seeking vent, as at Trsezen in the Peloponnese.12. The temperature of some springs varies at differentperiods.19. The waters of others are inflammable *.14. Extraordinary medicinal and deleterious effects areproduced by the water of different lakes and springs f .15. Some rocks and islands, after floating, and having beensubject to violent movements, have at length become stationaryand immoveable, as Delos and the Canaan Isles j:.16. Volcanic vents shift their position; there was a timewhen Etna was not a burning mountain, and the time willcome when it will cease to bum. Whether it be that somecaverns become closed up by the movements of the earth, andothers opened, or whether the fuel is finally exhausted, &c. arc.The various causes of change in the inanimate world havingbeen thus enumerated, the doctrine of equivocal generationis next propounded, as illustrating a corresponding perpetualflux in the animate creation §.This it probably an allusion to the eieape of inflammable gai, like that in thedistrict of Baku, west of the Caspian ; at Pietrarmala, in the Duncan Aprnninotiand several other places.f Many of those described seem fanciful fictions, like the virtues still so commonlyattributed to mineral waters.I Raspe, in a learned and judicious essay (chap. 19, de nevis italia), hasmade it appear extremely probable that all the traditions of certain islands in(he Mediterranean having at some former time frequently shifted their position,and at length become stationary, originated in the great change produced in theirform by earthquakes and submarine eruptions of which there have been modemexamples in the new islands raised in the time of history. When the series of convulsionsended, the island was said to become fixed.§ It is not inconsistent with the Hindoo mythology to suppose, that Pythagorasmight have found in the East not only the system of universal and violent catastrophesand periods of repose in endless succession, but also that of periodicalrevolutions, effected by the continued agency of ordinary causes. For BrahmaVishnu, and Siva, the first, second, and third persons of the Hindoo triad, severallyrepresented the Creative, the Preserving, and the Destroying powers of the Deity.The co-existence of these three attributes, all in simultaneous operation, might wdlaccord with the notion of perpetual but partial alterations finally bringing about acomplete change. But the fiction expressed in the verses before quoted fromMend, of eternal vicissitudes in the vigils and slumbers of the Infinite Being'seems accommodated to the system of great general catastrophes followed by newcreations and periods of repose.Aristotelian 8T8TB1C. 15Tn the Egyptian and Eastern ooemogonies, and in the Greekvernon of them, no very definite meaning can, in general, beattached to the term <* destruction of the worlds for sometimesit would seem almost to imply the annihilation of our planetarysystem and at others a mere revolution of the surface ofthe earth.Prom the works now extant of Aristotle, and from thesystem of Pythagoras, as above exposed, we might certainlyinfer that these philosophers considered the agents of. changelM>w operating in Nature, as capable of bringing about in thelapse of ages a complete revolution ; and the Stagyrite evenconsiders occasional catastrophes, happening at distant intervalsof time, as part of the regular and ordinary course ofNature. The deluge of Deucalion, he says, affected Greeceonly, and principally the part called Hellas, and it arose fromgreat inundations of rivers during a rainy winter. But suchextraordinary winters, he says, though after a certain periodthey return, do not always revisit the same places** Censoriousquotes it as Aristotle's opinion, that there were generalinundations of the globe, and that they alternated with conflagrations,and that the flood constituted the winter of the greatyear, or astronomical cycle, while the conflagration, or destructionby fire, is the summer or period of greatest heats •If this passage, as Gipsies supposes, be an amplification byCensorinus, of what is written in *' the Meteoric, ' it is a grossmisrepresentation of the doctrine of the Stagyrite, for thegeneral bearing of his reasoning in that treatise tends clearlyin an opposite direction. He refers to many examples ofchanges now constantly going on, and insists emphatically ondie great results which they must produce in the lapse of ages.He instances particular cases of lakes that had dried up, anddeserts that had at length become watered by rivers and fertilized.He points to the growth of the Nilotic delta since thetime of Homer, to the swallowing of the Falls Masons withinsixty years from his own time and although, in the same chapter,he says nothing of earthquakes, yet in others of the same;, he shews himself not unacquainted with their effects*• Meteor, lib. i. cap. xii. f De Die* Nat.I Lib. ii. cftp. 14, 15, and 16.16 Aristotelian System.He alludes for exampk, to the beating of one of the Eolianislands, previous to a volcanic eruption. ^* The changes of theearth, he says, are so slow in comparison to the duration of ourlives, that they areoveriooked (XenBenu) ; and the migrations ofpeople after great catastrophes, and their removal to otherregions, cause the event to be forgotten." When we considerthe acquaintance displayed by Aristotle with the destroyingand renovating powers of nature in his various works, theintroductory and concluding passages of the twelfth chapter ofhis ^* Meteoric" are certainly very remarkable. In the firstsentence he says, ** the distribution of land and sea in particularregions does not endure throughout all time, but itbecomes sea in those parts where it was land, and again itbecomes land where it was sea, and there is reason for thinkingthat these changes take place according to a certain system,and within a certain period." The concluding observation isas follows : '^ As time never fails, and the universe is eternal,neither the Tanais, nor the Nile, can have flowed for ever.The places where they rise were once dry, and there is a limit totheir operations, but there is none to time. So also of all otherrivers, they spring up and they perish, and the sea also continuallydeserts some lands and invades others. The sametracts, therefore, of the earth are not some always sea, andothers always continents, but every thing changes in the courseof time'It seems, then, that the Greeks had not only derived frompreceding nations, but had also, in some degree, deduced fromtheir own observations, the theory of great periodical revolutionsin the inorganic world, but there is no ground for imaginingthat they contemplated former changes in the races ofanimals and plants. Even the fact, that marine remains wereinclosed in solid rocks, although observed by many, and evenmade the groundwork of geological speculation, never stimulatedthe industry or guided the inquiries of naturalists. It isnot impossible that the theory of equivocal generation mighthave engendered some indifference on this subject, and that abelief in the spontaneous production of living beings from theearth, or corrupt matter, might have caused the organic worldLib. ii. cap. 14, 15, and 16.ftE-CREATION OF SPECIES. 17to appear so unstable and fluctuating, that phenomena indicativeof former changes would not awaken intense curiosity.The Egyptians, it is true had taught, and the Stoics had re*seated that the earth had once given birth to some monstrousanimals which existed no longer ; but the prevailing opinionseems to have been, that after each great catastrophe thesame species of animals were created over again. This tenetis implied in a passage of Seneca, where, speaking of a futuredeluge, he says, " Every animal shall be generatedanew, and men free from guilt shall be even to the earth."An old Arabian version of the doctrine of the successiverevolutions of the globe, translated by Abraham Eccles*lensis-|-, seems to form a singular exception to the generalrule, for here we find the idea of different genera and specieshaving been created. The Gerbanites, a sect of astronomerswho flourished some centuries before the Christian era, taughtas follows : — '* That after every period of thirty-six thousandyears, there were produced twenty-five pair of every species ofanimals, male and female, from whom animals might be propagatedand inhabit this lower world. But when a circulationof the heavenly orbs was completed, which is finished in thatspace of years, other genera and species of animals are propagated,as also of plants and other things, and the first orderis destroyed, and so it goes on for ever and ever J."Omne ex negro animal generality, dabiturquc terris homo Lucius scelenira.Quest Nat. iii.c. 29.f This author was Regius Professor of Syriac and Arabic at Paris, where, in 1685,he published a Latin translation of many Arabian MSS. on different departmentsof philosophy. His work has always been considered of high authority.} Germania docebant singular triginia sex mille anno quadringentos, vigintiquinque bin ex singular animation species produce, mare scilicet ac seminal,ex quibus animals propagate, unique inferior insolent orbcm. Absoluteautem cflelestium orbium circulation, qusB illo annum confucius spatio, iterumalia producuntur animation genera et species, quem admodum et plantain altarnunque enim, et primus dcstruitur ordo, sicque in infinitum producing. — history.Orient Suppl. per Abraham Ecchellensum, Serum Maronites, cap. 7 et 8. adcakes Chronic Oriental. Parishes, e Typ. regia 1685. fol.Portia fell into a singular mistake in rendering this passage, imagining that thenumber twenty-five referred not to the pairs of every animal created, but to theinner of new species created at one time ', and hence the doctrine of the Arabiansect appeared to coincide somewhat with his own views ; and, to be consistent withhis hypothesis, that man and some species of animals and plants are more modemthan other— Fortis, Mem. sur I'Hist. Nat de ritchie, vol. i. p. 202.Vol. I. C18 THBORT OF STRABO.As we learn much of the tenets of the Egyptian and Orientalschools in the writings of the Greeks, so many speculations ofthe early Greek authors are made known to us in the works ofthe Augustan and later ages. Strabo in particular, enterslargely, in the Second Book of his Geography, into the opinionsof Eratosthenes and other Greeks on one of the mostdifficult problems in geology, vir., by what causes marine shellscame to be plentifully buried in the earth at such great eleventons and distances from the sea. He notices, amongst othersthe explanation of Xanthus the Lydian, who said that theseas had once been more extensive, and that they had afterwardsbeen partially dried up, as in his own time many lakes,rivers, and wells in Asia had failed during a season of drought.Treating this conjecture with merited disregard, Strabo passeson to the hypothesis of Strato, the natural philosopher whohad observed that the quantity of mud brought down byrivers into the Euxine was so great, that its bed must be graduallyraised, while the rivers still continued to pour in an undiminishedquantity of water. He therefore conceived, that, originally,when the Euxine was an inland sea, it's level had by thismeans become so much elevated that it burst its barrier nearByzantium, and formed a communication with the Propontis,and this partial drainage had already, he supposed, convertedthe left side into marshy ground, and that, at last, the wholewould be choked up with soil. So, it was argued, the Mediterraneanhad once opened a passage for itself by the Columnsof Hercules into the Atlantic, and perhaps the abundance ofsea-shells in Africa, near the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, mightalso be the deposit of some former inland sea, which had atlength forced a passage and escaped. But Strabo rejects thistheory as insufficient to account for all the phenomena, and heproposes one of his own, the profoundness of which modemgeologists are only beginning to appreciate. " It is not," hesays, ^* because the lands covered by seas were originally at differentaltitudes, that the waters have risen, or subsided, or recededfrom some parts and inundated others. But the reasonis, that the same land is sometimes raised up and sometimes depressed,and the sea also is simultaneously raised and depressed,so that it either overflows, or returns into its own place again.We must therefore ascribe the cause to the ground, either toTHEORY OF 8TRAB0. 19that ground which is under the eea^ or to that which becomesflooded by it, but rather to that which lies beneath the sea, forthis is more moveable, and, on account of its humidity, can bealtered with greater celerity*. ** It is properest he observes incontinuation *' to derive our explanations from things whichare obvious and in some measure of daily occurrence, such asdeluges 9 earthquakes ^ volcanic eruptions f and sudden swellingsof the land beneath the sea ; for the last raise up the sea alsoand when the same lands subside again, tbqr occasion the seatobe let down. And it is not merely the small, but the largeislands also, and not merely the islands but the continentswhich can be lifted up together with the sea ; and both large andsmall tracts may subside, for habitations and cities, like BureBison, and many others, have been engulfed by earthquakes'*In another place, this learned geographer, in alluding to thetradition that Sicily had been separated by a convulsion fromItaly, remarks, that at present the land near the sea in thoseparts was rarely shaken by earthquakes, since there were nowopen orifices whereby fire and ignited matters and watersescaped ; but formerly, when the volcanoes of Etna, the LipariIslands, Ischia, and others, were closed up, the imprisoned fireand wind might have produced far more vehement movements.The doctrine, therefore, that volcanoes are safety-valves, andthat the subterranean convulsions are probably most violentwhen first the volcanic energy shifts itself to a new quarter, isnot modem.We learn from a passage in Strabo {, that it was a dogmaof the Gaulish Druids that the universe was immortal, butdestined to survive catastrophes both of fire and water. Thatthis doctrine was communicated to them from the East, withmuch of their learning, cannot be doubted. Cesare, it willbe remembered, says, that they made use of Greek letters inarithmetical computations.• » Quod enim hoc attoUitur aut subside, et vel inimdat quaedam local, vel ablis recent, ejus rei causa non est, quod alia alias sola humiliora sint aut action ;sed quod idem solum motu attoiUhir mod deprimituTi simulate etiam mod attol-Utur modo imprimatur mare : itaque vel exundat vel in suum redit locum."Fofltei^ p. 88. '^ Restat, ut causa adscribamus solo, sive quod man surestsive quod inundated; potius tamen ei quod mari surest. Hoc enim multa estmobiliufl et quod ob bumiditatem celerity mutari posset"— Strabo, lib. ii.t strabo, lib. vi. p. 396. % Book iv. ( 1. vi. ch. 13.C220 KNOWLEDGE OF THE ANCIENTS.Pliny had no theoretical opinions of his own, concerningchanges of the earth's surface ; and in this department, as inothers, be restricted himself to the task of a compiler, withoutreasoning on the facts stated by him, or attempting to digestthem into regular order. His enumeration of the new islandswhich had been formed in the Mediterranean, and of other convulsions,shew that the ancients had not been inattentive observersof the changes which had taken place on the earthwithin the memory of man.We shall now conclude our remarks on the opinions entertainedbefore the Christian era, concerning the past revolutionsof our globe. No particular investigations appear to have beenmade for the express purpose of interpreting the monumentsleft by nature of ancient changes, but they were too obvious tobe entirely disregarded ; and the observation of the presentcourse of nature presented too many proofs of alterations continuallyin progress on the earth to allow philosophers to believethat nature was in a state of rest, or that the surface had remained,and would continue to remain, unaltered. But theyhad never compared attentively the results of the destroyingand reproductive operations of modem times with those of remoteeras, nor had they ever entertained so much as a conjectureconcerning the comparative antiquity of the human race,and living species of animals and plants, with those belongingto former conditions of the organic world. They had studiedthe movements and positions of the heavenly bodies with laboriousindustry, and made some progress in investigating theanimal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms ; but the ancient historyof the globe was to them a sealed book, and, althoughwritten in characters of the most striking and imposing kindthey were unconscious even of its existence*LCHAPTER III.Arabia writers of the Tenth century — persecution of Omar — Cosmogony of theKoran — nearly Italian writers^-Fracastoro— Controversy as to the real natureof organized fossils — Fossil shells attributed to the Mosaic deluge — ^Palissy—Steno— Sdlla— Quirini — Boyle-Plot — Hooke's Theory of Elevation byearthquakes — His speculations on lost species of animals — Ray — ^Physico-theological writers — Woodward's Diluvial Theory — Burnet Whiston —Hutchinson — Leibnitz — ^Vallisneru— Lazzoro Moro — Generelli — Bu£R)n —His theory condemned by the Sorbonne as unorthodox — buffon's declarationTargioni — Arduino — Sfichell •— Catcott — Raspe -^ Fortis .^ Testa —Whitehunt— Pallas — Saussure.After the decline of the Roman empire, the cultivation ofphysical science was first revived with some success by theSaracens about the middle of the eighth century of our era.The works of the most eminent classic writers were purchasedat great expense from the Christians, and translated intoArabic; and AI Mamvin, son of the famous Harun-al-Rashid,the contemporary of Charlemagne, received with marks of distinction,at his court at Bagdad, astronomers and men of learningfrom different countries. This caliph, and some of his sue*lessons, encountered much opposition and jealousy from the doctorsof the Mahometan law, who wished the Moslems to confinetheir studies to the Koran, dreading the effects of the diffusionof a taste for the physical sciences '*'. Almost all the works ofthe early Arabian writers are lost. Amongst those of the tenthcentury, of which fragments are now extant, is a system ofmineralogy by Avicenna, a physician, in whose arrangementthere is considerable merit. In the same century also, Omar,summed "El Aalem,"^ or " the Learned," wrote a work on*^ the Retreat of the Sea"" It appears that on comparing thecharts of his own time with those made by the Indian and Persianastronomers two thousand years before, he had satisfiedhimself that important changes had taken place since the timesof history in the form of the coasts of Asia, and that the extensionof the sea had been greater at some former periods,Mod. Univ. List. vol. ii. chap. iv. section iii.22 OMAR — THE KORAN.He was confirmed in this opinion by the numerous salt springsand marshes in the interior of Asia ; a phenomenon from whichPallas, in more recent times, has drawn the same inference.Von Hoff has suggested, with great probability, that thechanges in the level of the Caspian, (some of which there is reasonto believe have happened within the historical era,) and thegeological appearances in that district, indicating the desertionby that sea of its ancient bed, had probably led Omar to histheory of a general subsidence. But whatever may have beenthe proofs relied on, his system was declared contradictory tocertain passages in the Koran, and he was called upon publiclyto recant his errors ; to avoid which persecution he went intovoluntary banishment from Samarkand *•The cosmological opinions expressed in the Koran are few,and merely introduced incidentally ; so that it is not easy tounderstand how they could have interfered so seriously withfree discussion on the former changes of the globe. The Prophetdeclared that the earth was created in two days, and themountains were then placed on it ; and during these, and twoadditional days, the inhabitants of the earth were formed ; andin two more the seven heavens -f*. ' There is no more detail ofcircumstances; and the deluge, which is also mentioned, isdiscussed with equal brevity. The waters are represented tohave poured out of an oven ; a strange fable, said to be borrowedfrom the Persian Magi, who represented them as issuingfrom the oven of an old woman \. All men were drowned,save Noah and his family ; and then God said, ** O earth,swallow up thy waters; and thou, O heaven, withhold thyrain ;'* and immediately the waters abated §.• Von Hofl^ Geschichte der Verttnderangen der Erdoberflltehe, voL i. p. 406,who cites Devise, bey Hissmann Welt-und Volkergeschichte. Alter Gesch. 1*"^Their. 9. 234d — ^^The Arabian persecutions for heretical dogmas in ^^Theology were oftenvery sanguinary. In the same ages wherein learning was most in esteem, the Mahometanwere divided into two sects, one of whom maintained that the Koran wasincrease, and had subsisted in the very essence of God from all eternity ; and theother the Motazalites, who, admitting that the Koran was instituted by God, conceivedit to have been first made when revealed to the Prophet at Mecca, andaccused their opponents of believing in two eternal beings. The opinions of eachof these sects were taken up by different caliphs in succession, and the followers ofeach sometimes submitted to be beheaded, or flogged till at the point of death,rather than renounce their creeds — mod. Univ. List vol. ii, chap. 4.f Koran, chap. 41.I Sale's Koran, chap. 11, see note. } Ibid.FRACASTORO. 23We may suppose Omar to have represented the desertionof the land by the sea to have been gradual, and that Iii hypothesisrequired a greater lapse of ages than was consistentwith Moslem orthodoxy; for it is to be inferred from theKoran, that man and this planet were created at the sametime; and although Mahomet did not limit expressly theantiquity of the human race, yet he gave an implied sanctionto the Mosaic chronology by the veneration expressed by himfor the Hebrew Patriarchs *•We must now pass over an interval of five centuries,wherein darkness enveloped almost every department of science,and buried in profound oblivion all prior investigations intothe earth's history and structure. It was not till the earlierpart of the sixteenth century that geological phenomena beganto attract the attention of the Christian nations. At thatperiod a very animated controversy sprung up in Italy, concerningthe true nature and origin of marine shells, and otherorganized fossils, found abundantly in the strata of the peninsulaf. The excavations made in 1517, for repairing the cityof Verona, brought to light a multitude of curious petrifaction,and furnished matter for speculation to different authors,and among the rest to Fracastoro |, who declared hisopinion, that fosdl shells had all belonged to living animals,which had formerly lived and multiplied, where their exuviaenow found. He exposed the absurdity of having recourseto a certain '* plastic forces* which it. was sud had power tofashion stones into organic forms ; and, with no less cogent arguments,demonstrated the futility of attributing the situationof the shells in question to the Mosaic deluge, a theory obstinatelydefended by some. That inundation, he observed, wastoo transient, it consisted principally of fluviatile waters ; and,if it had transported shells to great distances, must havestrewed them over the surface, not buried them at vast depthsin the interior of mountains. His dear exposition of theKoBu, appointed master to the Caliph Al Mama, was author of a book, entitled," The History of the Patriarchs and Prophet, fawn the Created of theWord" — Mod. UniT. Hist. vol. ii. chap. 4.f See Brooches Discourse on the Progress of the Study of Fossil Conchologyin ltaly« when soma of the following notices on Italian writers will be found moreat Urge.X JLvmrnm CalceoL24 ANTIQUITY OF THE EARTH.evidence would have terminated the discussion for ever, if thepassions of mankind had not been enlisted in the dispute ; andeven though doubts should for a time have remained in someminds, they would speedily have been removed by the freshinformation obtained almost immediately afterwards, respectingthe structure of fossil remains, and of their living analogues.But; the clear and philosophical views of Fracastorowere disregarded, and the talent and argumentative powers ofthe learned were doomed for three centuries to be wasted inthe discussion of these two simple and preliminary questions :first, whether fossil remus had ever belonged to living creatures; and, secondly, whether, if this be admitted, all the phenomenacould be explained by the Noachian deluge. It hadbeen the consistent belief of the Christian world, down to theperiod now under consideration, that the origin of this planetwas not more remote than a few thousand years ; and thatsince the creation the deluge was the only great catastrophe bywhich considerable change had been wrought on the earth'ssurface. On the other hand, the opinion was scarcely lessgeneral, that the final dissolution of our system was an eventto be looked for at no distant period. The era, it is true, ofthe expected millennium had passed away ; and for five hundredyears after the fatal hour, when the annihilation of theplanet had been looked for, the monks remained in undisturbedenjoyment of rich grants of land bequeathed to themby pious donors, who, in the preamble of deeds bending** appropinquante mundi termino" '* appropinquantemagna judicii die,^^ left lasting monuments of the populardelusion .But although in the sixteenth century it had become necessaryto interpret the prophecies more liberally, and to assignamore distant date to the future conflagration of the world,we find, in the speculations of the early geologists, perpetualallusion to such an approaching catastrophe; while, in all thatregarded the antiquity of the earth, no modification whateverof the opinions of the dark ages had been effected. Considerablealarm was at first excited when the attempt was made toIn the monasteries of Sicily in particular, the title-deeds of many valuablegrants of land are headed by such preambles, composed by the testators about thoperiod when the good King Roger was expelling the Saracens from that island.NATURE OP ORGANIZED FOSSILS. 25invalidate by physical proofs an article of faith so generallyreceived, but there was sufficient spirit of toleration and candouramongst the Italian ecclesiastics, to allow the subject tobe canvassed with much freedom. They entered warmlythemselves into the controversy, often favouring different sidesof the question ; and however much we may deplore the loss oftime and labour devoted to the defence of untenable positionsit must be conceded that they displayed far less polemic bitternessthan certain writers who followed them ^^ beyond theAlps,'** two centuries and a half later.The system of scholastic disputations encouraged in theUniversities of the middle ages had unfortunately trainedmen to habits of indefinite argumentation and they often preferredabsurd and extravagant propositions, because greaterskill was required to maintain them ; the end and object ofsuch intellectual combats being victory and not truth, ^otheory could be too far-fetched or fantastical not to attractsome followers, provided it fell in with popular notions ; andas cosmologists were not at all restricted in building theirsystems, to the agency of known causes, the opponents ofFracastoro met his arguments by feigning imaginary causeswhich differed from each other rather in name than in substance.Andrea Mattioli, for instance, an eminent botanist, theillustrator of Dioscorides, embraced the notion of Agricola,a German miner, that a certain ^* materia penguins" or *^ fattymatter," set into fermentation by heat, gave birth to fossilorganic shapes. Yet Mattioli had come to the conclusionfrom his own observations that porous bodies such as bonesand shells, might be converted into stone, as being permeableto what he termed the ** lapidifying juice." In like manner,Falloppio o{ Padua conceived that petrified shells had beengenerated by fermentation in the spots where they were found,or that they had in some cases acquired their form from ^< thetumultuous movements of terrestrial exhalations' Althoughnot an unskilful professor of anatomy, he taught that certaintusks of elephants dug up in his time at Puglia were mereearthy concretions, and, consistently with these principles, heeven went so far as to consider it not improbable, that the vasesof Monte Testaceous at Bone were natural impressions stamped26 NATVRB OP Organized Fossil.in the soil.* In the same spirit Mercator, who punished, in1574, faithful figures of the fossil shells preserved by PopeSixtus V. in the Museum of the Vatican, expressed anopinion that they were mere stones which had assumed theirpeculiar configuration from the influence of the heavenlybodies; and Olivi of Cremona, who described the focalremains of a rich Museum at Verona, was satisfied with consideringthem mere ** sports of nature."The title of a work of Cardan's, published in 1552^ ** DeDebilitate," (corresponding to what would now be called,Transcendent Philosophy,) would lead us to expect in thechapter on minerals, many far-fetched theories characteristicof that age ; but, when treating of petrified shells, he decidedthat they clearly indicated the former sojourn of the sea uponthe mountains*Some of the fanciful notions of those times were deemedless unreasonable, as bdng somewhat in harmony with theAristotelian theory of spontaneous generation, then taught inall the schools. For men who had been instructed in earlyyouth, that a large proportion of living animals and plantswere formed from the fortuitous concourse of atoms, or hadsprung from the corruption of organic matter, might easilypersuade themselves, that organic shapes, often imperfectlypreserved in the interior of solid rocks, owed their existence tocauses equally obscure and mysterious*But there were not wanting some, who at the close of thiscentury expressed more sound and sober opinions. CesaUpine, a celebrated botanist, conceived that fossil shells hadbeen left on the land by the retiring sea, and had concretedinto stone during the consolidation of the soil ^ ; and in thefollowing year (1697), Simeon Majors went still further,and, coinciding for the most part with the views of Cisalpine,suggested that the shells and submarine matter of the Veronese,and other districts, might have been cast up, upon the land,by volcanic explodes, like those which gave rise, in 1588, to• De FoMiUb. p. 109 and 176.t Brocchi, CoilFom. Subiqp. Disc tui IVog. vol. p. 5.X De Metallic. f Diei Canicularei.Papist— IITBNO. 27Monte Nuovo, near Pusauoli. — This hint was the first imperfectattempt to connect the position of fossil shells with theagency of volcanoes, a system afterwards more fully developedby Hooke, Lazssoro Moro, Hutton, and other writers.Two years afterwards, Imperial advocated the animal originof fossilized shells, yet admitted that stones could vegetate byforce of *' an internal principle C^ and, as evidence of this, hereferred to the teeth of fish, and spines of echini found petrified*.Palissy, a French writer on ** the Origin of Springs fromRain-water" and of other scientific worlds, undertook, in 1680,to combat the notions of many of his contemporaries in Italy,that petrified shells had all been deposited by the universaldeluge. '* He was the first said Fontenelle, when, in theFrench Academy, he pronounced his eulogy more than fiftyyears afterwards, ^^ who dared assert*' in Paris, that fossilremits of testacea and fish had once belonged to marineanimals.To enumerate the multitude of Italian writers, who advancedvarious hypotheses, all equally fantastical, in the earlypart of the seventeenth century, would be unprofitably tedious,but Fabio Colonia deserves to be distinguished ; for, althoughhe gave way to the dogma, that all fossil remains were to bereferred to the Noachian deluge, he resisted the absurd theoryof Stelluti, who taught that fossil wood and ammonites weremere day, altered into such forms by sulphureous waters andsubterranean heat ; and he pointed out the different states ofshells buried in the strata, distinguishing between, first, themere mould or impression ; secondly, the cast or nucleus ;and thirdly, the remains of the shell itself. He had also themerit of being the first to point out, that some of the fossilshad belonged to marine, and some to terrestrial testaceaf .But the most remarkable work of that period was publishedby Steno, a Dane, once professor of anatomy at Padua, andwho afterwards resided many years at the court of the GrandDuke of Tuscany. The treatise bears the quaint title of '< DeSolido intra Solidum content naturalised, (1669,)^ by whichthe author intended to express '^ On Gems, Crystals, and organicPetrifaction inclosed within solid Rocks." This workAstoria Nature. f Osaerv^ lugli Animals aquae e terre. 1626.28 sterno.attests the'priority of the Italian school in geological research ;exemplifying at the same time the powerful obstacles opposed,in that age, to the general reception of enlarged views in thescience. Steno had compared the fossil shells with tharrecent analogues, and traced the various gradations from thestate of mere calcination, when their natural gluten only waslost to the perfect substitution of stony matter* He demonstratedthat many fossil teeth found in Tuscany belonged toa species of shark ; and he dissected, for the purpose of comparison,one of these fish recently taken from the Mediterranean.That the remains of shells and marine animals foundpetrified were not of animal origin was still a favouritedogma of many who were unwilling to believe, that the earthcould have been inhabited by living beings, long before manyof the mountains were formed. By way of compromise, as itwere, for dissenting from this opinion, Steno conceded asFabio Colonia had done before him, that all marine fossilsmight have been transported into their present situation atthe time of the Noachian deluge. He maintained that fossilvegetables had been once living plants, and he hinted thatthey might, in some instances, indicate the distinction betweenfluviatile and marine deposits. He also inferred thatthe present mountains had not existed ever since the originof things, suggesting that many strata of submarine originhad been accumulated in the interval between the creationand deluge. Here he displayed his great anxiety to reconcilehis theory with the Scriptures ; for he at the same time advancedan opinion which does not seem very consistent withsuch a doctrine, viz, that there was a wide distinction betweenthe shelly, and nearly horizontal beds at the foot of the Apennines,and the older mountains of highly inclined stratification.Both he observed, were of sedimentary origin ; and aconsiderable interval of time must have separated their formation.Tuscany, according to him, had successively pastthrough six different states; and to explain these mightychanges, he called in the agency of inundations, earthquakes,and subterranean fires.His generalizations were for the most part comprehendand just ; but such was his awe of popular prejudice, that heonly ventured to throw them out as mere conjectures, and theSCILLA— ^DILUVIAL THEORY. 29timid reserve of his expressions must have raised doubts as tohis own confidence in his opinions, and deprived them ofsome of the authority due to Diem.Scilla a Sicilian painter, published, in 1670, a work on thefossils of Calabria, illustrated by good engravings. This waswritten in Latin, with great spirit and elegance, and it provesthe continued ascendancy of dogmas often refuted ; for we findthe wit and eloquence of the author chiefly directed against theobstinate incredulity of naturalists, as to the organic nature offossil shells*. like many eminent naturalists of his day, Scillagave way to the popular persuasion that all fossil shells werethe effects and proofs of the Mosaic deluge. It may be doubtedwhether he was perfectly sincere, and some of his contemporarieswho took the same course were certainly not so. But so eagerwere they to root out what they justly considered an absurdprejudice respecting the nature of organized fossils, that theyseem to have been ready to make any concessions, in order toestablish this p.«Utn>nary point. Such a compromising policywas short-sighted, since it was to little purpose that the natureof the documents should at length be correctly understood, ifmen were to be prevented from deducing fair conclusions fromthem.The theologians who now entered the field in Italy, Germany,France and England, were innumerable ; and henceforward,they who refused to subscribe to the position, that allmarine organic remains were proofs of the Mosaic deluge,were exposed to the imputation of disbelieving the whole ofthe sacred writings. Scarcely any step had been made inapproximating to sound theories since the time of Fracastoro,more than a hundred years having been lost, in writing downthe dogma that organized fossils were mere sports of nature.An additional period of a century and a half was now destinedto be consumed in exploding the hypothesis, that organizedfossils had all been buried in the solid strata, by the Noachianflood. Never did a theoretical fallacy, in any branch of science,• SdlU quotes the remark of Cicero on the story that a stone in Chios hadbeen deal open, and presented the head of Priscus in relief— '^ I believes' saidthe orator, "that the figure lore some resemblance to Priscus, hut not such thatyou would have deemed it sculptured by Scopas, for chance never perfectlyhnitatet the truth."90 Alluvial Theory.interfere more seriously with accurate observation and thesystematic classification of facts. In recent times, we mayattribute our rapid progress chiefly to the careful determinationof the order of succession in mineral masses, by means oftheir different organic contents, and their r^ular superposition.But the old diluvialists were induced by their system to confoundall the groups of strata together instead of discriminating,—-to refer all appearances to one cause and to one briefperiod, not to a variety of causes acting throughout a longsuccession of epochs. They saw the phenomena only as theydesired to see them, sometimes misrepresenting facts, and atother times deducing false conclusions from correct data.Under the influence of such prejudices, three centuries were ofas little avail, as the same number of years in our own times,when we are no longer required to propel the vessel againstthe force of an adverse current.It may be well to forewarn our readers, that in tracing thehistory of geology from the close of the seventeenth to theend of the eighteenth century, they must expect to be occupiedwith accounts of the retardation, as well as of the advanceof the science. It will be our irksome task to point outthe frequent revival of exploded errors, and the relapse fromsound to the most absurd opinions. It will be necessary todwell on futile reasoning and visionary hypothesis, becausethe most extravagant systems were often invented or controvertedby men of acknowledged talent. A sketch of theprogress of Geology is the history of a constant and violentstruggle between new opinions and ancient doctrines, sanctionedby the implicit faith of many generations, and supposedto rest on . scriptural authority. The inquiry, therefore, althoughhighly interesting to one who studies the philosophyof the human mind, is singularly barren of instruction to himwho searches for truths in physical science.Quirini, in 1676 *, contended, in opposition to Scilla, thatthe diluvian waters could not have conveyed heavy bodies tothe summit of mountains, since the agitation of the sea never(as Boyle had demonstrated) extended to great depths , andDe Testicles fossilibus Mus. Sectarian.f The opinions of Boyle, alluded to by Quirini, were published a few jresnOVTRIHI — LliTSR-hooks. 31still less could the testacea, as some pretended have lived inthese diluvial waters, for ** the duration of the flood wasbri, and the heavy rairis must ha/oe destroyed the saltnessof the sea r* He was the first writer who ventured tomaintain that the universality of theNoachian cataclysm oughtnot to be insisted upon. As to the nature of petrified shells,be conceived that as earthy particles united Jn the sea to formthe shells of mollusca, the same crystallizing process might beeffected on the land and that, in the latter case, the germs ofthe animals might have been disseminated through the substanceof the rocks, and afterwards developed by virtue of humidity.Visionary as was this doctrine, it gained many proselyteseven amongst the more sober reasoners of Italy andGermany, for it conceded both that fossil bodies were organic,and that the diluvial theory could not account for them.In the mean time, the doctrine that fossil shells had neverbelonged to real animals, maintained its ground in England,where the agitation of the question began at a much laterperiod. Dr. Plot, in his " Natural History of Oxfordshire,"(1677,) attributed to " a plastic virtue latent in the earth" theorigin of fossil shells and fishes ; and Lister, to his accurateaccount of British shells, in 1678, added the fossil species, underthe appellation of turbinated and bivalve stones. ** Either,"said he, *' these were ferruginous, or, if otherwise, the animalsthey so exactly represent have become extinct This writerappears to have been the first who was aware of the continuityover large districts of the principal groups of strata in theBritish series, and who proposed the construction of regulargeological maps.The " Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke, M.D.," wellknown as a great mathematician and natural philosopher,befm«i in a short aHicle entitled "On the bottom of the Sea." From observationscollected from the divers of the pearl fishery, Boyle had ascertained thatwhen the waves were six or seven feet high above the surface of the water, therewere no signs of agitation at the depth of fifteen fathoms ; and that even duringheavy gales of wind, the motion of the water was exceedingly diminished at thedepth of twelve or fifteen feet He had also learnt from some of his informants,that there were currents running in opposite directions at defiant depths— Boyle'sWorks, vol. iii. p. 110. London, 1744. The reader will see, in our chapter on*< Marine Currents," that Boyle's doctrine must be received with some modification.32 Moore ON EXTINCT 8PECIE9.appeared in 1705^ containing, ** A Discourse of Earthquakes'which, we are informed by his editor, was written in 1668, butrevised at subsequent periods *. Hooke frequently refers tothe best Italian and English authors who wrote before his timeon geological subjects ; but there are no passages in his worksimplying that he participated in the enlarged views of Stenoand Lister, or of his contemporary Woodward, in regard tothe geographical extent of certain groups of strata. His treatise,however, is the most philosophical production of that age, inregard to the causes of former changes in the organic and inorganickingdoms of nature.However trivial a thing," he says, *' a rotten shell mayappear to some, yet these monuments of nature are more certaintokens of antiquity than coins or medals, since the best ofthose may be counterfeited or made by art and design, as mayalso books, manuscripts, and inscriptions, as all the learned arenow sufficiently satisfied has often been actually practised**&c. ; '< and though it must be granted that it is very difficultto read them (the records of nature) and to raise a chronologyout of them f and to state the intervals of the time wherein suchor such catastrophes and mutations have happened, yet it isnot impossible' &c. f Respecting the extinction of species,Hooke was aware that the fossil ammonites, nautili, and manyother shells and fossil skeletons found in England, were ofdifferent species from any then known; but he doubted whetherthe species had become extinct, observing that the knowledgeof naturalists of all the marine species, especially those inhabitingthe deep' sea, was very deficient. In some parts of his writings,however, he leans to the opinion that species had been lost ; and,in speculating on this subject, he even suggests that there mightbe some connection between the disappearance of certain kindsof animals and plants, and the changes wrought by earthquakesin former ages : for some species, he observes withgreat sagacity, are ^* peculiar to certain places and not to befound elsewhere. If, then, such a place had been swallowedup, it is not improbable but that those animate beings mayBetween the year 1688 and his death, in 1703, he read several memoirs tothe Royal Society, and delivered lectures on various subjects, relating to fossil remainsand the effects of earthquakes.t Pott. Works, Lecture Feb. 29, 1688.Moore ON EXTINCT SPECIES. 33have been destroyed with it ; and this may be true both of aerialand aquatic animals : for those animated bodies, whether vegetablesor animals, which were naturally nourished or refreshedby the air, would be destroyed by the water," &c. Turtles,he adds, and such large ammonites as are found in Portland,seem to have been the productions of the seas of hotter countries,and it is necessary to suppose that England once lay underike sea within the torrid zone ! To explain this and similarphenomena, he indulges in a variety of speculations concerningchanges in the position of the axis of the earth's rotation, ashifting of the earth^s centre of gravity, '^ analogous to therevolutions of the magnetic pole"* &c. None of these conjectures,however, are proposed dogmatically, but rather in thehope of promoting fresh inquiries and experiments.In opposition to the prejudices of his age, we find him arguingthat nature had not formed fossil bodies, '* for no otherend than to play the mimic in the mineral kingdoms — thatfigured stones were '^ really the several bodies they represent,or the mouldings of them petrified,'^ and ^^ not, as some haveimagined, a ^ lusus nature,' sporting herself in the needlessformation of useless beings f."It was objected to Hooke, that his doctrine of the extinctionof species derogated from the wisdom and power of theOmnipotent Creator ; but he answered, that, as individuals die,there may be some termination to the duration of a species;and his opinions, he declared, were not repugnant to HolyWrit : for the Scriptures taught that our system was dege-• PoitiuWorks, p.327.t Post. Works, Lecture Feb. 15, 1688. Hooke explained, with considerabledearness, the different modes wherein organic substances may become lapidified ;and, among other illustrations, he mentions some silicified palm-wood brought fromAfrica, on which M. de la Hire had read a memoir to the Royal Academy ofFrance, (Jamie, 1692,) wherein he had pointed out not only the tubes running thelength of the trunks but the roots at one extremity. De la Hire, says Hooke, alsotreated of certain trees found petrified in "the river that passes by Bakan, in thekingdom iXAva, and which has for the space of ten leagues the virtue of petrifyingwood," It is an interesting fact, that the silicified wood of the Irawadi shouldhave attracted attention more than one hundred years ago. Remarkable discoverieshave been recently made there of fossil animals and vegetables by Mr. crawfordand Dr. Wallich.-^See GeoL Trans, vol ii. port 3, p. 377, Second Series.De la Hire dies Father Ducats, in the second volume of <^ Observations madein the Indies by the Jesuits**Vol. I. D34 Hooks ON Earthquakes.neratiDg, and tending to its final dissolution ; *^ and as, whenthat shall happen, all the species will be lost, why not some atonetime and some at another * ?^'But his principal object was to account for the manner inwhich shells had been conveyed into the higher parts of '^ theAlps, Apennines, and Pyrenean hills, and the interior of continentsin general." lliese and other appearances, he said,might have been brought about by earthquakes, ** which haveturned plains into mountains, and mountains into plains, seasinto land, and land into seas, made rivers where there werenone before, and swallowed up others that formerly were&C. &c.; and which, since the creation of the world, havewrought many great changes on the superficial parts of theearth, and have been the instruments of placing shells, bones,plants, fishes, and the like, in those places, where, with muchastonishment, we find them f." This doctrine, it is true, hadbeen laid down in terms almost equally explicit by Strabo, toexplain the occurrence of fossil shells in the interior of continents,and to that geographer, and other writers of antiquity,Hooke frequently refers; but the revival and development ofthe system was an important step in the progress of modemscience.He enumerated all the examples known to him of subterraneandisturbance, from '* the sad catastrophe of Sodom andGomorrah' down to the Chilian earthquake of 1646. Theelevating of the bottom of the sea, the sinking and submersionof the land, and most of the inequalities of the earth's surface,might, he said, be accounted for by the agency of these subterraneancauses. He mentions that the coast near Napleswas raised during the eruption of Monte Nuovo ; and that, in1591, land rose in the island of St. Michael, during an eruption; and although it would be more difficult, he says, toprove, he does not doubt but that there had been as manyearthquakes in the parts of the earth under the ocean as inthe parts of the dry land ; in confirmation of which he mentionsthe immeasurable depth of the sea near some volcanoes.To attest the extent of simultaneous subterranean movements,he refers to an earthquake in the West Indies, in 1690, where• Post. Works, Lecture May 29, 1689. f Pott. WorlcB, p. 312.1100KB.— RAT. 35the space of earth raised, or " struck upwards" by the shock,exceeded the length of the Alps or the Pyrenees*As Hooke declared the favourite hypothesis of the day {** thatmarine focal bodies were to be referred to Noah^s flood") tobe wholly untenable, he appears to have felt himself calledupon to substitute a diluvial theory of his own, and thus hebecame involved in countless difficulties and contradictions.'< During the great catastrophe," he said, *^ there might havebeen a changing of that part which was before dry land intosea by taking, and of that which was sea into dry land byraising, and marine bodies might have been buried in sedimentbeneath the ocean, in the interval between the creationand the deluge *." Then followed a disquisition on the separationof the land from the waters, mentioned in Genesis :during which operation some places of the shell of the earthwere forced outwards, and others pressed downwards or inwards,&c. His diluvial hypothesis very much resembled thatof Steno, and was entirely opposed to the fundamental principlesprofessed by him, that he would explain the formerchanges of the earth in a more natural manner than othersbad done. When, in despite of this declaration, he required afonder " crisis of natures and taught that earthquakes hadbecome debilitated* and that the Alp, Andes, and other chtuns,had been lifted up in a few months, his machinery was asextravagant and visionary as that of his most fanciful predecessors;and for this reason, perhaps, his whole theory ofearthquakes met with very undeserved neglect.One of his contemporaries, the celebrated naturalist, Ray,participated in the same desire to explain geological phenomena,by reference to causes less hypothetical than thoseusually resorted to-f*. In his Essay on *^ Chaos and Creation"he proposed a system , agreeing in its outline, and in many of itsdetails, with that of Hooke; but his knowledge of naturalhistory enabled him to elucidate the subject with various originalobservations. Earthquakes, he suggested, might have• Poftii. Works, p. 410.f Ray*B Phyidco-theological Discourses were of somewhat later date thanHooke's great work on earthquakes. He speaks of Hooke as one " whom for hislearning and deep insight into the mysteries of nature he deservedly honoured.'hae Dcimge^ chap. 4.D 23G RAY. — WOODWARD.been the second causes employed at the creation, in separatingthe land from the waters and in gathering the waters togetherinto one place. He mentions, like Hooke, the earthquakeof 1646, which had violently shaken the Andes for somehundreds of leagues, and made many alterations therein. Inassigning a cause for the general deluge, he preferred a changein the earth^s centre of gravity to the introduction of earthquakes.Some unknown cause, he said, might have forced thesubterranean waters outwards, as was, perhaps, indicated bythe breaking up of the fountains of the great deep."Ray was one of the first of our writers who enlarged uponthe effects of running water upon the land, and of the encroachmentof the sea upon the shores. So important did he considerthe agency of these causes, that he saw in them an indicationof the tendency of our system to its final dissolution ;and he wondered why the earth did not proceed njpre^rapidiytowards a general submersion beneath the sea wheifso muchmatter was carried down by rivers, or undermined in the sea-cliffs.We perceive clearly from his writings, that the gradualdecline of our system, and its future consummation by fire,was held to be as necessary an article of faith by the orthodox,as was the recent origin of our planet. His Discourses,like those of Hooke, are highly interesting, as attesting thefamiliar association in the minds of philosophers, in the age ofNewton, of questions in physics and divinity. Bay gave aaunequivocal proof of the sincerity of his mind, by sacrificinghis preferment in the church, rather than take an oath against theCovenanters, which he could not reconcile with his conscience.His reputation, moreover, in the scientific world placed him highabove the temptation of courting popularity, by pandering to thephysico-theological taste of his age. It is, therefore, curiousto meet with so many citations from the Christian fathers andprophets in his essays on physical science — to find him in onepage proceeding by the strict rules of induction, to explain theformer changes of the globe, and in the next gravely entertainingthe question, whether the sun and stars, and the wholeheavens shall be annihilated, together with the earth, at theera of the grand conflagration.Among the contemporaries of Hooke and Ray, Woodward,a professor of medicine, had acquired the most extensive informBURNET. 37nation refipecUng the geological structure of the crust of theearth. He had examined many parts of the British stratawith minute attention ; and his systematic collection of specimens,bequeathed to the University of Cambridge, and stillpreserved there as arranged by him, shews how far he hadadvanced in ascertaining the order of superposition. From thegreat number of facts collected by him we might have expectedhis theoretical views to be more sound and enlargedthan those of his contemporaries ; but in his anxiety to accommodateall observed phenomena to the scriptural account ofthe Creation and Deluge, he arrived at most erroneous results.He conceived '' the whole terrestrial globe to havebeen taken to pieces and dissolved at the flood, and the stratato have settled down from this promiscuous mass as any earthysediment from a fluid *.'^ In corroboration of these views, heinsisted upon the fact, that '* marine bodies are lodged in thestrata according to the order of their gravity, the heaviershells in stone, the lighter in chalk, and so of the rest -f" Bayimmediately exposed the unfounded nature of this assertion,remarking truly, that fossil bodies ^^ are often mingled, heavywith light, in the same stratum ;'' and he even went so far as tosay, that Woodward <' must have invented the phenomena forthe sake of confirming his bold and strange hypothesis ^'^ — astrong expression from the pen of a contemporary.At the same time Burnet published his <* Theory of theEarth §." The title is most characteristic of the age, — •" TheSacred Theory of the Earth, containing an Account of theOriginal of the Earthy and of all the general Changes whichit hath already undergone, or is to undergo, till the Consummationof all Things Even Milton had scarcely venturedin his poem to indulge his imagination so freely in paintingscenes of the Creation and Deluge, Paradise and Chaos, as thiswriter, who set forth pretensions to profound philosophy. Heexplained why the primeval earth enjoyed a perpetual springbefore the flood ! shewed how the crust of the globe was fissuredby '* the sun's rays'' so that it burst, and thus the dieu*• Easy towards a Natural History of the Earth, 1695. Preface.f Ibid. Preface.t Consequences of the Deluge, p. 165.^ First puhUsbed in Latin, between the years 16S0 and 1690,38 BURNET. — WniSTON.•vial waters were let loose from a supposed central abyss. Notsatisfied with these themes, he derived from the books of theinspired writers and even from heathen authorities, propheticviews of the future revolutions of the globe, gave a mostterrific description of the general conflagration, and provedthat a new heaven and a new earth will rise out of a secondchao — after which will follow the blessed millennium.The reader should be informed, that according to the opinionof many respectable writers of that age, there was goodscriptural ground for presuming that the garden bestowedupon our first parents was not on the earth itself, but abovethe clouds, in the middle region between our planet and themoon. Burnet approaches with becoming gravity the discus*don of so important a topic. He was willing to noticed thatthe geographical position of Paradise was not in Mesopotamia,yet he maintained that it was upon the earth, and in the southeyhemisphere, near the equinoctial line. Butler selectedthis conceit as a fair mark for his satire, when, amongst thenumerous accomplishments of Hudibras, he says —He knew the seat of Paradise,Could tell in what degree it lies ;And as he was disposed, would prove itBelow the moon, or else above it.Yet the same monarch, who is said never to have slept withoutButlers poem under his pillow, was so great an admirer andpatron of Burnet's book, that he ordered it to be translatedfrom the Latin into English. The style of the ** SacredTheory" was eloquent, and displayed powers of invention ofno ordinary stamp. It was, in fact, a fine historical romance,as Bufibn afterwards declared ; but it was treated as a work ofprofound science in the time of its author, and was panegyrizedby Addison in a Latin ode, while Steele praised it in the ^^ Spectator,"and Wanton, in his ** Essay on Pope," discovered thatBurnet united the faculty of judgment with powers of imagination.Another production of the same school, and equally characteristicof the times, was that of Whiston, entitled, •* A NewTheory of the Earth, wherein the Creation of the World in sixDays, the Universal Deluge, and the General Conflagration, aslaid down in the Holy Scriptures, are shewn to be perfectlyWharton. — ^HtJTCHINBON. 39agreeable to Reason and Philosopher's He was at first a followerof Burnet, but his faith in the infallibility of that writerwas shaken by the declared opinion of Newton, that there wasevery presumption in astronomy against any former change inthe inclination of the earth's axis. This was a leading dogmain Burnett system, though not original, for it was borrowedfrom an Italian, Alexandre degli Alexandre, who had suggestedit in the beginning of the fifteenth century, to accountfor the former occupation of the present continents by the sea.La Place has since strengthened the arguments of Newton,against the probability of any former revolution of this kind.The remarkable comet of 1680 was fresh in the memory ofevery one, when Whiston first began his cosmological studies,and the principal novelty of his speculations consisted in attributingthe deluge to the near approach to the earth of one ofthese oTHtic bodies. Having ascribed an increase of the watersto this source, he adopted Woodwards theory, supposing allstratified deposits to have resulted from the '' chaotic sedimentof the flood." Whiston was one of the first who ventured topropose that the text of Genesis should be interpreted differentlyfixim its ordinary acceptation, so that the doctrine of theearth having existed long previous to the creation of manmight no longer be regarded as unorthodox. He had the artto throw an air of plausibility over the most improbable parts<yf his theory, and seemed to be proceeding in the most sobermanner, and by the aid of mathematical demonstration, to theestablishment of his various propositions. Locke pronounceda panegyric on his theory, commending him for having explainedso many wonderful and before inexplicable things.His book, as well as Burnet's, was attacked and refuted byKdil^. Like all who introduced purely hypothetical causesto account for natural phenomena, he retarded the progress oftruth, diverting men from the investigation of the laws of sublunarynature, and inducing them to waste time in speculationson the power of comets to drag the waters of the ocean overthe land— on the condensation of the vapours of their tails intowater, and other matters equally edifying.John Hutchinson, who had been employed by WoodwardAn Examination of Dr. Burnet's Theory, &c. 2d edition, 1734.40 LEIBNITZ. CELSIUS.in inducing his collection of fossils, published afterwards, in 1724,the first part of his " Moses's Principia," wherein he ridiculedWoodwards hypothesis. He and his numerous followers wereaccustomed to declaim loudly against human learning, andthey maintained that the Hebrew scriptures, when rightlytranslated, comprised a perfect system of natural philosophy,for which reason they objected to the Newtonian theory of gravitation.Leibnitz, the great mathematician, published his ^< in 1680. He imagined this planet to have been originallya burning luminous mass, and that ever since its creationit has been undergoing gradual refrigeration. Nearly all thematter of the earth was at first encompassed by fire. Whenthe outer crust had at length cooled down sufficiently to allowthe vapours to be condensed, they fell and formed a universalocean, investing the globe, and covering the loftiest mountains.Further consolidation produced rents, vacuities, and subterraneancaverns, and the ocean, rushing in to fill them, was graduallylowered. The principal feature of this theory, the gradualdiminution of the original heat, and of an ancient universalocean, were adopted by Buffon and De Luc, and entered,under different modifications, into a great number of succeedingsystems.Andrea Celsius, the Swedish astronomer, published, aboutthis time, his remarks on the gradual diminution of the watersin the Baltic, which sea, he imagined, had been sinking fromtime immemorial at the rate of forty-five inches in a century.His opinions gave rise to a controversy which has lasted evento our own days, and to which we are indebted for correctobservations of a variety of facts concerning the gradual fillingup of the Baltic by fluviatile and marine sediment. Linnaeus *favoured the views of Celsius, because they fell in with his ownnotions concerning a Paradise, where all the animals werecreated, and from whence they passed into all other parts ofthe earth, as these became dry in succession.In Germany, in the mean time, Chercher laboured toprove, in a work entitled the " Complaint of the Fishes'*(1708,) that the earth had been remodelled at the deluge.De Tellers hobitabiliB Incremento, 1743.ITALIAN GEOLOGISTS— Palliser. 41Pluche also, in 17SS, wrote to the same effect, while Holbach,in 1753, after considering the various attempts to refer all theancient formations to the Noachian flood, exposed the insufficiencyof the cause.We return with pleasure to the geologists of Italy, who preceded,as we before saw, the naturalists of other countries intheir investigations into the ancient history of the earth, andwho still maintained a decided pre-eminence. They refutedand ridiculed the physico-theological systems of Burnet,Whiston, and Woodward*, while Vallisneri f, in his commentson the Woodwardian theory, remarked how much the interestsof religion as well as those of sound philosophy had suffered,by perpetually mixing up the sacred writings with questionsin physical science. The works of this author were rich inoriginal observations. He attempted the first general sketchof the marine deposits of Italy, their geographical extent andmost characteristic organic remains. In his treatise *^ On theOrigin of Springs," he explained their dependence on theorder, and often on the dislocations of the strata, and reasonedphilosophically against the opinions of those who regarded thedisordered state of the earth's crust as exhibiting signs of thewrath of Grot for the sins of man. He found himself underthe necessity of contending in his preliminary chapter againstSt. Jerome, and four other principal interpreters of scripture,besides several professors of divinity, ** that springs did notflow by subterranean syphons and cavities from the sea upwardslosing their saltness in the passage," for this theoryhad been made to rest on the infallible testimony of HolyWrit.Although reluctant to generalize on the rich materials accumulatedin his travels, Vallisneri had been so much struckwith the remarkable continuity of the more recent marinestrata, from one end of Italy to the other, that he came to theconclusion that the ocean formerly extended over the wholeearth, and abode there for a long time. This opinion, even asserted, That the ideas of Burnet were mainly borrowedfrom a dialogue of one Patricii ; but Brocchi, after reading that dialogue, assizesu% that there was scarcely any other correspondence between these systems, exceptthat both were equally whimsical.f Dei Corps marine, Letter criticise; &C 1721.42 LAZZORO MORO.ever untenable, waB a great step beyond Woodward's diluvianhypothesis, against which Vallisneri, and after him all theTuscan geologists, uniformly contended, while it was warmlysupported by the members of the Institute of Bologna*.Among others of that day, Spada, a priest of Grezzana, in17S7, wrote to prove that the petrified marine bodies nearVerona were not diluvian f. Rattan drew similar inference,from the shells of Volterra, and other places ; while Constantine,on the other hand, whose observations on the valley of theBrentaa and other districts were not without value, undertookto vindicate the truth of the deluge, as also to prove that Italyhad been peopled by the descendants of Japhet;]:.Lazzoro Moro, in his work (published in 1740), ** On theMarine Bodies which are found in the Mountains §," attemptedto apply the theory of earthquakes, as expounded by Strabo,Pliny, and other ancient authors, with whom he was familiar,to the geological phenomena described by Vallisneri||. Hisattention was awakened to the elevating power of subterraneanforces, by a remarkable phenomenon which happenedin his own time, and which had also been noticed by Videlisncri in his letters. A new island rose in 1707, from a deeppart of the sea near Santorino in the Mediterranean, duringcontinued shocks of an earthquake, and increasing rapidlyin size grew in less than a month to be half a mile in circumference,and about twenty*five feet above high*water mark.It was soon afterwards covered by volcanic ejections, but whenfirst examined it was found to be a white rock, bearing on itssurface living oysters and Crustacea. In order to ridicule thevarious theories then in vogue, Moro ingeniously supposes thearrival on this new isle of a party of naturalists ignorant of itsrecent origin. One immediately points to the marine shellsas proofs of the universal deluge ; another argues, that theydemons^te the former residence of the sea upon the mountains;a third dismisses them as mere spare of nature;• Brocchi, p. 28. f Ibid. p. 33. t ^^ P* 3^-} Sui Crustacea ed altri Corps maria che si trojan sui Month.II Moro does nol cite the works of Hooke and Ray, and alfhoogli so many ofhis views were in accordance with theirs, he waa probably ignorant of their writ.ingSy for they had not been translated. As he always refers to the Latin editionof Burnet, and a French translation of Woodward, we may presume that hadid not read English.LAZZORO MORO. GBNERBLLI. 43while a fourth afBrins, that they were born and nourished withinthe rock in ancient caverns, into which salt water had beenraised in the shape of vapour, by the action of subterranean heat.Moro pointed with great judgment to the faults and dislocationsof the strata described by Vallisneri, in the Alps andother chains, in confirmation of his doctrine, that the continentshad been heaved up by subterranean movements. He objected,on solid grounds, to the hypotheses of Burnet and of Woodward; yet he ventured so far to disregard the protest of Vallisneri,as to undertake the adaptation of every part of his ownsystem to the Mosaic account of the creation. On the thirdday, he said the globe was every where covered to the samedepth by fresh theater, and when it pleased the Supreme Beingthat the dry land should appear, volcanic explosions broke upthe smooth and r^ular surface of the earth composed of primaryrocks. These rose in mountain masses above the waves,and allowed melted metals and salts to ascend through fissures.The sea gradually acquired its saltness from volcanic exhalationsand while it became more circumscribed in area, increasedin depth. Sand and ashes ejected by volcanoes were regularlydisposed along the bottom of the ocean and formed the secondarystrata, which in their turn were lifted up by earthquakes.We shall not attempt to follow him in tracing the progress of thecreation of vegetables, and animals on the other days of creation; but, upon the whole, we may remark that few of the oldetymological theories had been conceived with so little violationof known analogies.The style of Moro was extremely prolix, and, like Hutton,who, at a later period, advanced many of the same views, hestood in need of an illustrator. The Scotch geologist was notmore fortunate in the advocacy of Playfair, than was Moro innumbering amongst his admirers Civilly General, who, nineyears afterwards, delivered at a netting of Academicians atCremona a spirited exposition of his theory. This learnedCanadian friar does not pretend to have been an originalobserver, but he had studied sufficiently to be enabled to confirmthe opinions of Moro by arguments from other writers ;and his selection of the doctrines then best established is sojudicious, that we shall present a brief abstract of them to ourreaders, as illustrating the state of geology in Europe, and in44 OENERELLf S EXPOSITION OFItaly in particular, before the middle of the last century. Thebowels of the earth, says he have carefully preserved the memorialsof past events and this truth the marine productionsso frequent in the hills attest. From the reflections of Las*toro Moro we may assure ourselves, that these are the effectsof earthquakes in past times, which have changed vast spacesof sea into terra firma, and inhabited lands into seas. In this,more than in any other department of physics, are observationsand experiments indispensable, and we must diligently considerfacts. The land is known, wherever we make excavations,to be composed of different strata or soils placed one above theother, some of sand, some of rock, some of chalk, others ofmarl coal, pumice, gypsum, lime, and the rest. These ingredientsare sometimes pure, and sometimes confusedly intermixed.Within are often imprisoned different marine fishes,like dried mummies, and more frequently shells, Crustacea,corals, plants, &c., not only in Italy, but in France, Germany,England, Africa, Asia, and America. Sometimes in the lowest,sometimes in the loftiest beds of the earth, some upon themountains, some in deep mines, others near the sea, and othershundreds of miles distant from it. But there are in some districtsrocks, wherein no marine bodies are found. The remainsof animals consist chiefly of their more solid parts, and themost rocky strata must have been soft when such exuviae wereinclosed in them. Vegetable productions are found in differentstates of maturity, indicating that they were imbedded indifferentseasons. Elephants elks, and other terrestrial quadrupedshave been found in England and elsewhere, in superficialstrata, never covered by the sea. Alternations are rare,yet not without example, of marine strata, and those whichcontain marshy and terrestrial productions. Marine animalsare arranged in the subterraneous beds with admirableorder, in distinct groups, oysters here, dental, or coralsthere, &c., as now, according to Marsilli*, on the shores ofthe Adriatic. We must abandon the doctrine circe so popular,that organized fossils have not been derived from living beings,and we cannot account for their present position by theancient theory of Strato, nor by that of Leibnitz, nor by theSaggio 6sico intomo alia Astoria del Mare part i p. 24.LAZZORO Moons THEORY. 45universal deluge, as explained by Woodward and others, " noris it reasonable to call the Deity capriciously upon the stage,and to make him work miracles, for the sake of confirming ourpreconceived hypotheses—" I hold in utter abomination, mostlearned Academicians ! those systems which are built with theirfoundations in the air, and cannot be propped up without amiracle; and I undertake, with the assistance of Moro, toexplain to you, how these marine animals were transportedinto the mountains by natural causes*.^ A brief abstract thenfollows of Moons theory, by which, say Generally, we mayexplain all the phenomena, as Vallisneri so ardently desired,*^ ufUhout violence, without fictions without hypotheses with"novi miracferf'.^ The Carmelite then proceeds to struggleagainst an obvious objection to Moro's system considered as amethod of explaining the revolutions of the earth, naturally.If earthquakes have been the agents of such mighty changes,how does it happen that their effects since the times of historyhave been so inconsiderable ? This same difficulty had, as wehave seen, presented itself to Hooke, half a century before,and forced him to resort to a former " crisis of nature ;" butGenerelli defended his position by shewing how numerous werethe accounts of eruptions and earthquakes, of new islands,and of elevations and subsidences of land, and yet how muchgreater a number of like events must have been unattested andunrecorded during the last six thousand years. He alsoappealed to Vallisneri as an authority to prove that the mineralmasses containing shells bore, upon the whole, but a small proportionto those rocks which were destitute of organic remains ;and the latter says the learned monk, might have been createdas they now exist, in the beginning* He then describes thecontinual waste of mountains and continents, by the action ofrivers and torrents, and concludes with these eloquent and originalobservations : ^^ Is it possible that this waste should havecontinued for six thousand, and perhaps a greater number ofyears, and that the mountains should remain so great, unlesstheir ruins have been repaired ? Is it credible that the Author ofAbbomino al somno qoalsivoglia systema, che asia di planta fabricate in aria ;massive quando d tale, che non posse listeners senza un miracles &c, De* Crop*tam e di autre procul. del Mare, &c. 1749.f Senza violences senza finzionii senza 8iipposti| senza miracoli^^ J(.46 LA2ZORO M0RO«-GBNBRBLLT.nature should have founded the world upon such hiss as thatthe dry land should for ever be growing smaller, and at lastbecome wholly submerged beneath the waters? Is it crediblethat, amid so many created things, the mountains alone shouldduly diminish in number and bulk, without there being anyrepair of their losses ? This'would be contrary to that orderof Providence which is seen to reign in all other things in theuniverse. Wherefore I deem it just to conclude, that thesame cause which, in the banning of time, raised mountingfrom the abyss, has, down to the present day, continued toproduce others, in order to restore from time to time the lossesof all such as sink down in different places, or are rent asunder,or in other ways suffer disintegration. If this be admitted, wecan easily understand why there should now be found uponn«ny niLtdns so great a number of Crustacea ^ J^:.marine animals."The reader will remark, that although this admirable essayembraces so large a portion of the principal objects of geologicalresearch, it makes no allusion to the extinction of certainclasses of animals ; and it is evident that no opinions on thishead had, at that time, gained a firm footing in Italy. ThatLister and other English naturalists should long before havedeclared in favour of the loss of species, while Scilla and moatof his countrymen hesitated, was natural, since the Italianmuseums were filled with fossil shells, belonging ^o species ofwhich a great portion did actually exist in the Mediterranean,whereas the English collectors could obtain no recent spedeafrom that own strata.The weakest point in Moro's system consisted in derivingaU the stratified rocks from volcanic ejections, an absurditywhich his opponents took care to expose, especially VitoAmid*. Moro seems to have been misled by his anxiousdesire to represent the formation of secondary rocks as havingoccupied an extremely short period, while at the sametime he wished to employ known agents in nature. Toimagine torrents, rivers, currents, partial floods, and all theoperations of moving water, to have gone on exerting anenergy many thousand times greater than at present, wouldhave appeared preposterous and incredible, and would have• SuiTestiuKideUaSicilia.DONATl.— ^BUPPON. 47required a hundred violent hypotheses ; but we are so unacquaintedwith the true sources of subterranean disturbances,that their former violence may in theory be multiplied indefi->nicely, without its bdng possible to prove the same manifestcontradiction or absurdity in the conjecture. For this reason,perhaps, Moro preferred to derive the materials of the stratafrom volcanic ejecdons, rather than from transportation byrunning water.Marli, in the work above alluded to by Generelli, hadbeen prompted to institute inquiries into the bed of theAdriatic, by discovering in the territory of Parma, (what Spadahad observed near Verona, and Schiavo in Sicily,) that fossilshells were not scattered through the rocks at random, butdisposed in regular order, according to families. But with aview of throwing further light upon these questions, Donation1750, undertook a more extensive investigation of the Adriatic,and discovered, by numerous soundings, that deposits ofsand, marl, and tufaceous incrustations, most strictly analogousto those of the Subapennine hills, were in the act of accumulatingthere. He ascertained that there were no shells in someof the submarine tracts, while in other places they lived togetherin families, particularly the genera Area, Pecten, Venus,Mures, and some others. A contemporary naturalist, Ballasthad shewn the same grouping of organic remains in thetertiary marls of the Sienese territory.buffon first made known his theoretical views concerningthe former changes of the earth in his Natural History, publishedin 1749. His opinions were directly opposed to thesystems of Hooke, Ray, and Moro, for he attributed no influencewhatever to subterranean movements and volcanoes, butreturned to the universal ocean of Leibnitz. By this aqueousenvelope the highest mountains were once covered. Marinecurrents then acted violently, and formed horizontal strata, bywashing away land in some parts, and depositing it in others ;they also excavated deep submarine valleys. He was greatlyat a loss for some machinery to depress the level of theocean, and cause the land to be left dry. He thereforespeculated on the possibility of subterranean caverns havingopened, into which the water entered, so that he involuntarilyapproximated to Hooked theory of subsidences by earthquakes.48 Buffon DECLARATION.Buffon had never profited , like Moro, by the observations ofVallisneri^ or he never could have imagined that the strata weregenerally horizontal, and that those which contain organicremains had never been disturbed since the era of their formation.He was conscious of the great power annually exertedby rivers and marine currents in transporting earthy materialsto lower levels and he even contemplated the period when theywould destroy all the present continents. Although in geologyhe was not an original observer, his genius enabled him torender his hypothesis attractive; and by the eloquence of hisstyle, and the boldness of his speculations, he awakened curiosityand provoked a spirit of inquiry amongst his countrymen.Soon inter the publication of his '* Natural History," inwhich was included his <* Theory of the Earths' he receivedan official letter (dated January, 1751), from the Sorbonne orFaculty of Theology in Paris, informing him that fourteenpropositions in his works ** were reprehensible and contraryto Uie creed of the church." The first of these obnoxiouspassages, and the only one relating to geology, was as follows.*^ The waters of the sea have produced the mountains andvalleys of the land — the waters of the heavens, reducing all to alevel, will at last deliver the whole land over to the sea, and thesea, successively prevailing over the land, will leave dry new continentslike those which we inhabits' Buffon was invited by theCollege in very courteous terms, to send in an explanation, orrather a recantation, of his unorthodox opinions. To this hesubmitted, and a general assembly of the Faculty having approvedof his ** Declaration," he was required to publish it inhis next work. The document begins with these words — '' Ideclare that I had no intention to contradict the text of Scripture; that I believe most firmly all therein related about thecreation, both as to order of time and matter of fact ; andI abandon everything in my book respecting the formation ofthe earthy and generally all which may be contrary to thenarration of Moses."The grand principle which Buffon was called upon to renouncewas simply this, '< that the present mountains andvalleys of the earth are due to secondary causes, and thatthe same causes will in time destroy all the continents, hills• Hist Nat. torn. v. Ed. de I'lmp. Royale, Paris, 1769.Bellman — TAROIONI-arguing* 49and valleys, and reproduce others like themes Now, whatevermay be the defects of many of his views, it is no longer controverted,that the present continents are of secondary origin.The doctrine is as firmly established as the earth's rotation onits axis ; and that the lind now elevated above the level of thesea will not endure for ever, is an opinion which gains grounddaily, in proportion as we enlarge our experience of thechanges now in progress.Holman was the author of a Memoir in the Transactionsof the Royal Society of Gottingen in 1753, wherein he proposedan hypothesis closely corresponding to the opinions ofBufibn ; and devoted the rest of his work to refuting certaindiluvial theories of his day.Targioni, in his voluminous ^' Travels in Tuscany, 1751 and1754^" laboured to fill up the sketch of the geology of thatregion, left by Steno sixty years before. Notwithstanding awant of arrangement and condensation in his memoirs, theycontained a rich store of faithful observations. He has notindulged in many general views, but in regard to the orion ofvalleys he was opposed to the theory of Bufibn, who attributedthem principally to submarine currents. The Tuscan naturalistlaboured to shew that both the larger and smaller valleysof the Apennines were excavated by rivers, and floods,caused by the bursting of the barriers of lakes, after the retreatof the ocean. He also maintained that the elephants, and otherquadrupeds so frequent in the lacustrine and alluvial depositsof Italy, had inhabited that peninsula; and had not beentransported thither, as some had conceived, by Hannibal, orthe Romans, nor by what they were pleased to term '^ a catastropheof nature."Arduino*, in his memoirs on the mountains of PaduaVicenza, and Verona, first recognized the distinction betweenprimary, secondary, and tertiary rocks, and shewed that inthose districts there had been a succession of submarine volcaniceruptions. In the very same year the treatise of Lehman f,a German mineralogist, and director of the Prussian mines,appeared, who also divided mountains into three classes : the• * Giomale del GFriaelini, 1759.t Eittt d*u&e Hist Nat. de Couches de la Terre, 1759.VOL. I. B50 Mitchell-catgut.first, which were formed with the world and prior to thetion of animals, and which contained no fragments of otherrocks ; the second class, of mountains which resulted from thepartial destruction of the primary rocks by a general revolution ;and the third class, which resulted from local revolutions, and,in part, from the Noachian deluge.In the following year (1760) the Rev. John Michell, WoodwardianProfessor of Mineralogy at Cambridge, published inthe Philosophical Transactions, an Essay on the Cause andPhenomena of Earthquakes. His attention had been drawnto this subject by the great earthquake of Lisbon in 1755.He advanced many original and philosophical views respectingthe propagation of subterranean movements, and the cavernsand fissures wherein steam might be generated. In order topoint out the application of his theory to the structure of theglobe, he was led to describe the arrangement and disturbanceof the strata, their usual horizontality in low countries, andtheir contortions and fractured state in the neighbourhood ofmountain chains. He also explained, with surprising accuracy,the relations of the central ridges of older rocks to the ** longnarrow slips of similar earths, stones, and minerals' which areparallel to these ridges. In his generalizations derived ingreat part from his own observations on the geological structureof Yorkshire, he anticipated many of the views more fullydeveloped by later naturalists *.Michell's papers were entirely free from all physico>theolo-gical disquisitions, but some of his contemporaries were stillearnestly engaged in defending or impugning the Woodwardianhypothesis. We find many of these writings referred to byCatcott, an Hutchinsonian, who published a ^* Treatise on theDeluge' in 1761. He laboured particularly to refute an explanationoffered by his contemporary. Bishop Clayton, of theMosaic writings. That prelate had declared that the Deluge<^ could not be literally true, save in respect to that part whereNoah lived before the floods' Catcott insisted on the universeof Michell's observations anticipate in so remarkable a manner 0mtheories established forty years afterwards, that his writings would probably haveformed an era in the science, if his researches had been uninterrupted. He held,however, his professorship only eight yean, when he succeeded to a benefice, andfrom that time he appear to have entirely discontinued hit sdfiitifie ponies.ODOABDI — THEORY OP Rape. 51sanity of the deluge, and referred to traditions of inundationsmentioned by ancient writers, or by travellers in the East-indies,China, South America, and other countries. This partof his book is valuable, although it is not easy to see whatbearing the traditions have, if admitted to be authentic, on theBishop's argument, since no evidence is adduced to provethat the catastrophes were contemporaneous events, whilesome of them are expressly represented by andent authors tohave occurred in succession.The doctrines of Arduino, above adverted to, were afterwardsconfirmed by Fortis and Desmarest, in their travels inthe same country, and they, as well as Baldassari, laboured tocomplete the history of the Subapennine strata. In the workof Odoardi ^^ there was also a clear argument in favour of thedistinct ages of the older Apennine strata, and the Subapennineformations of more recent origin. He pointed out that thestrata of these two groups were uncomfortable and must havebeen the deposits of different seas at distant periods of time.A history of the new islands by Raspe, an Hanoverian, appearedin 176S, in Latin. In this work, all the authenticaccounts of earthquakes which had produced permanent changeson the solid parts of the earth were collected together and examinedwith judicious criticism. The best systems which hadbeen proposed concerning the ancient history of the globe, bothby ancient and modem writers, are reviewed. The merits anddefects of the systems of Hooke, Ray, Moro, Buffon, and others,,are fairly estimated. Great admiration is expressed for the hypothesisof Hooke, and his explanation of the origin of the stratais shewn to have been more correct than Morose while theirtheory of the effects of earthquakes was the same. Raspe hadnot seen Michell's memoir, and his views concerning the geologicalstructure of the earth were perhaps less enlarged, yethe was able 'to add many additional arguments in favour ofHooke's theory, and to render it, as he said, a nearer approachto what Hooke would have written had he lived in later times.As to the periods wherein all the earthquakes happened, towhich we owe the elevation of various parts of our continentsand islands, Raspe says he pretends not to assign their duration• Sui Coipi liarim del Feltrino, 1761.E 252 BRANDBR-— Soldan.sell less to defend Hooke's suggestion, that the (xmvuUonsalmost all took place during the Noachian deluge. He advertsto the apparent indications of the former tropical heat of theclimate of Europe, and the changes in the species of animalsand plants, as among the most obscure and difficult problems ingeology. In regard to the islands raised from the sea withinthe times of history or tradition, he declares that some of themwere composed of strata containing organic remains, and thatthey were not, as Buffon had asserted, made of mere volcanicmatter. His work concludes with an eloquent exhortation tonaturalists, to examine the isles which rose in 1707, in theGrecian Archipelago, and in 1720 in the Azores, and not toneglect such splendid opportunities of studying nature ** in theact of parturition' That Hooke's writings should have beenneglected for more than half a century, was matter of astonishmentto Raspe ; but, it is still more wonderful that his ownluminous exposition of that theory should, for more than anotherhalf century, have excited so little interest.Gustavus Brander published, in 1766, his '* Fossil containing excellent figures of fossil shells from themore modem marine strata of our island. *' Various opinions,"he says in the preface, ** had been entertained concerning thetime when and how these bodies became deposited. Some thereare who conceive that it might have been effected in a wonderfullength of time by a gradual changing and shifting of thesea, &c. But the most common cause assigned is that of ** thedeluges This conjecture, he says, even if the universality ofthe flood be not called in question, is purely hypothetical. Inhis opinion fossil animals and testacea were, for the most part,of unknown species, and of such as were known, the livinganalogues now belonged to southern latitudes.Soldanii * applied successfully his knowledge of zoology toIllustrate the history of stratified masses. He explained thatmicroscopic testacea and zoophytes inhabited the depths of theMediterranean, and that the fossil species were, in like manner,found in those deposits wherein the fineness of their particlesand the absence of pebbles, implied that they were accumulatedin a deep sea far from any shore. This author first remarkedthe alternation of marine and fresh-water strata in the Paris• Soggio orittografico; &c 1780^ and oilier Works.FORTIS TESTA —-^HITBHURST. 53A lively controversy arose between Fortis and anotherItalian naturalist, Testa, concerning the fish of Monte Bolca, in179S. Their letters*, written with great spirit and elegance,shew that they were aware that a large proportion of the Sub-apennineshells were identical with living species and some ofthem with species now living in the torrid zone. Fortis conjecturedthat when the volcanos of the Vicentin were burning,the waters of the Adriatic had a higher temperature; and inthis manner, he said that the shells of warmer regions may oncehave peopled their own seas. But Testa was disposed to think,that these species of testacea were still common to their ownand to equinoctial seas, for many, he said, once supposed to beconfined to hotter regions, had been afterwards discovered inthe Mediterranean f.While these Italian naturalists, together with Cortes andSpallanzani, were busily engaged in pointing out the analogybetween the deposits of modern and ancient seas, and the habitsand arrangement of their organic inhabitants, and while someprogress was making in the same country, in investigating theancient and modern volcanic rocks, the most original observersamong the English and German writers, Galleries and Whitehurst If were wasting their strength in contending, according tothe old Woodwardian hypothesis, that all the strata wereformed by the Noachian deluge. But Whitehurst's descriptionof the rocks of Derbyshire was most faithful, and he atoned forfalse theoretical views, by providing data for their refutation.The mathematician, Boscovich, of Ragusa in Dalmatia, inhis letters, published at Venice in 177^, declared his persuasion,that the effects of earthquakes, although insensible in thecourse of a few years, do nevertheless raise, from time to time,• Lett, stir Pesci Fossil di Bolca. Jl/tVan, 1793.t This argument of Testa has been strengthened of late years by the discovery,that dealers in shells had long been in the habit of selling Mediterranean speciesas shells of more southern and distant latitudes, for the soke of enhancing theirnice. It appears, moreover, from several hundred experiments made by that distinguishedhydrographer Captain Smyth, on the water within eight fathoms ofthe surface, that Uie temperature of the Mediterranean is on an average 3J* ofFahrenheit higher than the western part of the Atlantic ocean ; an important factwhich in some degree may help to explain why many species are common to tropicallatitudes, and to the Mediterranean.I Inquiry into the Original State and Formation of the Earth. 1778.and Ut down different parts of the cnut of our globe, andflometuiies fold and twist them. Like Hooke, Ray, and Moro,be conceived the subterranean movements to have acted withgreater energy at former epochs.Towards the close of the eighteenth century, the idea c^ distinguishingthe mineral masses on our globe into separategroups, and studying their [relations, began to be generallydiffused. Pallas and Saussure were among the most celebratedwhose labours contributed to this end. After an attentiveexamination of the two great mountain chains of Siberia, Pallasannounced the result that the granitic rocks wife in the middle,the sdiistose at their sides, and the limestones again on theoutside of these ; and this he conceived would prove a generallaw in the formation of all chains composed chiefly of primaryrocks*.In his '' Travels in Russia," in 179S and 1794, he mademany geological observations on the recent strata near theVolga and the Caspian, and adduced proofs of the greaterextent of the latter sea at no distant era in the earth's history.His memoir on the fossil bones of Siberia attracted attentionto some of the most remarkable phenomena in geology. Hestated that he had found a rhinoceros entire in the frozen soil,with its skin and flesh : an elephant, found afterwards in amass of ice on the shore of the north sea, removed all doubtas to the accuracy of so wonderful a discovery f.The subjects relating to natural history which engaged theattention of Pallas were too multifarious to admit of his devotinga large share of his labours exclusively to geology* Saussure,on the other hand, employed the chief portion of histime in studying the structure of the Alps and Jura, and heprovided valuable data for those who followed him. We cannotenter into the details of these observations, and he did notpretend to have arrived at any general system. The few theoreticalobservations which escaped from him are, like those ofPallas, mere modifications of the old cosmological doctrines.• ObMTT. on the Foundation of Mountains, Aci^Petrop. ann. 1 778, part i.t Nov. comm. Per. XVII. Cuvier, Elope de Pallas.CHAPTER IV.Werner application of Geology to the art of Mining — ^Ezeurnre character of hitL octurca - E nthuiiain of hia pupils — this authority — ^Hii theoretical errorsDaamareet'e Hap and Description of Auvergne— Controversy between theVulcaiiiata and Neptoniita — Intemperance of the rival Sects. — Hutlott*iTlwofy of the Earth— Hia discovery of Granite Veina—Originality of hiaViews— Why opposed. — ^Playfair's Illustrations — Influence of VoltaireVTfitinga on Geobgy — Imputations cast on the Huttonians by Williams,Kirwan, and De Luc — Smith's Map of England — Geological Society of London— progress of the Science in France— Growing Importance of the Studyof Organic Remains.The art of mining has long been taught in France, Germany,and Hungary, in scientific institutions established for that purpose,where mineralogy has always been a principal branch ofinstruction *.Werner was named, in 1775, professor of that science in the•* School of Mines' at Freyberg in Saxony. He directed hisattention not merely to the composition and external charactersof minerals, but also to what he termed " geognosy," or thenatural position of minerals in particular rocks, together withthe grouping of those rocks, their geographical distribution,and various relations. The phenomena observed in the structureof the globe had hitherto served for little else than tofurnish interesting topics for philosophical discussion; butwhen Werner pointed out their application to the practical purposesof mining, they were instantly regarded by a large class ofmen as an essential part of their professional education, andfrom that time the science was cultivated in Europe moreardently and systematically. Werner's mind was at once imamOvr miners have been left to themselves, almost without the assistance of scientificworks in the English language, and without any *< school of mines," tobhmdcr their own way into a certain degree of practical skill. The inconvenienceof this want of system in a country where so much capital is expended, and oftenwasted, in mining adventures, has been well exposed by an eminent practical<« prospects of a School of Mines in Cornwall, by J. Taylor, 1825."56 WERNER.native and richly stored with miscellaneous knowledge. Heassociated everything with his favourite science, and in hisexcursive lectures he pointed out all the economical uses ofminerals, and their application to medicine ; the influence of themineral composition of rocks upon the soil, and of the soil uponthe resources, wealth, and civilization of man. The vastsandy pliuns of Tartary and Africa he would say retainedtheir inhabitants in the shape of wandering shepherds; thegranitic mountains and the low calcareous and alluvial plainsgave rise to different manners, degrees of wealth and intelligence.The history even of languages,' and the migrations oftribes had, according to him, been determined by the directionof particular strata. The qualities of certain stones used' inbuilding would lead him to descant on the architecture of differentages and nations, and the physical geography of a countryfrequently invited him to treat of military tactics. Thecharm of his manners and his eloquence kindled enthusiasm inthe minds of all his pupils, many of whom only intended atfirst to acquire a slight knowledge of mineralogy ; but, whenthey had once heard him, they devoted themselves to it as thebusiness of their lives. In a few years a small school of mines,before unheard of in Europe, was raised to the rank of a greatuniversity, and men already distinguished in science studied theGerman language, and came from the most distant countriesto hear the great oracle of geology *.Werner had a great antipathy to the mechanical labour ofwriting, and he could never be persuaded to pen more than afew brief memoirs, and those containing no development of hisgeneral views. Although the natural modesty of his dispositionwas excessive, approaching even to timidity, he indulgedin the most bold and sweeping generalizations, and he inspiredall his scholars with a most implicit faith in his doctrines.Their admiration of his genius, and the feelings of gratitudeand friendship which they all felt for him, were not undeserved ;but the supreme authority usurped by him over the opinionsof his contemporaries, was eventually prejudicial to the progressof the science, so much so, as greatly to counterbalancethe advantages which it derived from his exertions. If it betrue that delivery be the first, second, and third requisite in a• Cuvier, Elope de Werner.WERNER. 57popular orator, it is no less certain that to travel is of threefoldimportance to those who desire to originate just and comprehensiveviews concerning the structure of our globe, andWerner had never travelled to distant countries. He hadmerely explored a small portion of Germany, and conceived,and persuaded others to believe, that the whole surface of ourplanet, and all the mountain chains in the world, were madeafter the model of his own province. It was a ruling object ofambition in the minds of his pupils to confirm the generalizationsof their great master, and to discover in the most distant partsof the globe his ^' universal formations," which he supposedhad been each in succession simultaneously precipitated over thewhole earth from a common menstruum, or *' chaotic fluid."Unfortunately, the limited district examined by the Saxon professorwas no type of the world, nor even of Europe ; and,what was still more deplorable, when the ingenuity of his scholarshad tortured the phenomena of distant countries, and evenof another hemisphere, into conformity with his theoreticalstandard, it was discovered that '< the masters had misinterpretedmany of the appearances in the immediate neighbourhoodof Freyberg.Thus, for example, within a day's journey of his school,the porphyry, called by him primitive, has been found not onlyto send forth veins or dikes through strata of the coal formation,but to overlie them in mass. The granite of the Hartsmountains, on the other hand, which he supposed to be thenucleus of the chain, is now well known to traverse andbreach the other beds, penetrating even into the plain (as nearGoslar) ; and nearer Freyberg, in the Erzgebirge, the micaslate does not mantle round the granite, as the professor supposed,but abuts abruptly against it. But it is still moreremarkable, that in the Harts mountains all his flotz rocks,which he represented as horizontal, are highly inclined, andoften nearly vertical, as the chalk at Goslar, and the green sandnear Brandenburg.The principal merit of Wemer^s system of instruction consistedin steadily directing the attention of his scholars to theconstant relations of certain mineral groups, and their regularorder of superstition. But he had been anticipated, as we haveshewn in the last chapter, in the discovery of this general law,fajsefciml geologists in Italy and elsewhere; and his leading divisionsof the seooodaiy strata were at the same time made thebasis of an arrangement of the British strata by our countrymanWilliam Smith, to whose work we shall return by-and-by.In regard to basalt and other igneous rocks, Werener^s theory was original* but it was also extremely erroneous.The basalts of Saxony and Hesse, to which his observationswere chiefly confined, consisted of tabular masses capping thehills, and not connected with the levels of existing valleys, likemany in Auvergne and the Vivarais. These basalts, and allother rocks of the same family in other countries, were, accordingto him, conical precipitates from water. He denied thatthey were the products of submarine volcanos, and even taughtthat, in the primeval ages of the wcnrld, there were no volcanos.His theory was opposed, in a two-fold sense, to the doctrineof uniformity in the course of nature ; fcv not only did he introduce,without scruple, many imaginary causes supposed tohave once effected great revolutions in the earth, and then tohave become extinct, but new ones also were feigned to havecome into play in modem times; and, above all, that mostviolent instrument of change, the agency of subterranean fire.So early as 1768, before Werner had commenced his mineralogicalstudies, Raspe had truly characterized the basalts of Hesseas of igneous origin. Arduino, as we have already seen, hadpointed out numerous varieties of trap-rock in the Viceotin, asanalogous to volcanic products, and as distinctly referable toancient submarine eruptions. Desmarest, as we stated, had, incompany with Fortis, examined the Vicentin in 1766^ and confinedArduino's views. In 1772, Banks, Solander, and Toilscompared the columnar basalt of Hecla with that of the Hebrides.Colin, in 1774, recognised the true nature of the igne*OUB rocks on the Rhine, between Andemach and Bona. la1775, Guettard visited the Vivarais, and established the relationof basaltic currents to lavas. Lastly, in 1779^ Faujas publishedhis description of the volcanos of the Vivarais and Delay, andshewed how the streams of basalt had poured out from craterswhich still remain in a perfect state "*.When sound opinions had for twenty years prevailed inEurope concerning the true nature of the ancient trap-rocksCuvier, Eioge de Deimareitdesiubbst's map op aotbbone. 59Werner bj his dictum caused a retrograde movement, and notonly overturned the true theory, but substituted for it one ofthe most unphilosophical ever advanced in any science. Thecontinued ascendancy of his dogmas on this subject was themore astonishing, because a variety of new and striking factswere daily accumulated in favour of the correct opinions firstestablished. Desmarest, after a careful examination of Auvergne,pointed out first the most recent volcanos which hadtheir craters still entire, and their streams of lava conformingto the level of the present river-courses. He then shewed thatthere were others of an intermediate epoch, whose craters werenearly effaced, and whose lavas were less intimately connectedwith the present valleys ; and, lastly, that there were volcanicrocks still more ancient without any discernible craters orscoriae, and bearing the closest analogy to rocks in other partsof Europe, the igneous origin of which was denied by theschool of Freyberg *.Desmaresfs map of Auvergne was a work of uncommonmerit. He first made a trigonometrical survey of the district,and delineated its physical geography with minute accuracyand admirable graphic power. He contrived, at the sametime to express, without the aid of colours, a vast quantity ofgeological detail, the different ages, and sometimes even thestructure of the volcanic rocks, distinguishing them from thefresh-water and the granitic. They alone who have carefullystudied Auvergne, and traced the different lava streams fromtheir craters to their termination, — the various isolated basaltictapping, — the relation of some lavas to the present valleys, —the absence of such relations in others,— can appreciate theextraordinary fidelity of this elaborate work. No other districtof equal dimensions in Europe exhibits, perhaps, so beautifuland varied a series of phenomena; and, fortunately,Desmarest possessed at once the mathematical knowledge requiredfor the construction of a map, skill in mineralogy, anda power of original generalization.Dolomieu, another of Werner's contemporaries, had foundasiatic basalts among the ancient lavas of Etna, and in 1784• Joan. de Phys., voL xiii. p. 115 ; and Mem. de I'lnsi, Sdencefl, Mathtoaict Fbyt., ToL vi. p. 219.60 NBPTUNIBT8 AND TULCANISTS.had observed the alterations of siibmariiie and calcareous santain the Val di Notoo in Sicily *. In 1790, he also described similarphenomena in the Vioentin and in the Tyrol -|*. Montloaer alsopublished, in 1788, an devant and spirited essay mi the Volcanosof Auvergne combining accurate local observations with comprehensiveviews. In opposition to this mass of evidence* thescholars of Werner were prepared to support his opinions to theirutmost extent, maintaining in the fulness of th faith that evenobsidian was an aqueous precipitate. As they were blinded bytheir veneration for the great teacher, they were impatient o£opposition, and soon imbibed the spirit of a faction ; and theiropponents, the Vulcanists, were not long in becoming contaminatedwith the same intemperate zeal. Ridicule and ironywere weapons more frequently employed than argument by therival sects, till at last the controversy was carried on with adree of bitterness, almost unprecedented in questions ofphysical science. Desmarest alone, who had long before providedample materials for refuting such a theory, kept alooffrom the strife, and whenever a zealous Neptunist wished todraw the old man into an argument, he was satisfied with replying,'* Go and see. %*'It would be contrary to all analogy, in matters of graverimport, that a war should rage with such fury on the continent,and that the inhabitants of our island should not minglein the affray. Although in England the personal influence ofWerner was wanting to stimulate men to the defence of theweaker side of the question, they contrived to find good reasonfor espousing the Wemerian errors with great enthusiasm.In order to explain the peculiar motives which led many toenter, even with party feeling, into this contest, we must presentthe reader with a sketch of the views unfolded by Hutton,a contemporary of the Saxon geologist. That naturalist hadbeen educated as a physician, but, declining the practice ofmedicine, he resolved, when young, to remus content with thesmall independence inherited from his father, and thenceforthto give his undivided attention to scientific pursuits. Heresided at Edinburgh, where he enjoyed the society of manyJourn. de Fhy«.; torn. zxr. p. 191. f Ib^ torn, zzxrii. port ii. p. 200.\ Cuvier Kbg« de Dearest.HtnrONlAN THEORY. 61men of high attainments, who loved him for the simplicity ofhis manners and the sincerity of his character. His applicationwas unwearied and he made frequent tours through differentparts of England and Scotland, acquiring considerable skill asamineralogist, and constantly arriving at grand and comprehensiveviews in geology. He communicated the results ofhis observations unreservedly, and with the fearless spirit ofone who was conscious that love of truth was the sole stimulusof all his exertions. When at length he had matured hisviews, he published, in 1788, his** Theory of the Earths*'and the same, afterwards more fully developed in a separatework, in 1795. This treatise was the first in which geologywas declared to be in no way concerned about *^ questions asto the origin of things;'^ the first in which an attempt wasmade to dispense entirely with all hypothetical causes, and toexplain the former changes of the earth^s crust, by referenceexclusively to natural agents. Hutton laboured to give fixedprinciples to geology, as Newton had succeeded in doing toastronomy ; but in the former science too little progress hadbeen made towards furnishing the necessary data to enableany philosopher, however great his genius, to realize so noble aproject.*< The ruins of an older world," said Hutton, '* are visiblein the present structure of our planet, and the strata whichnow compose our continents have been once beneath thesea, and were formed out of the waste of pre-existing continents.The same forces are still destroying, by chemical decompositionor mechanical violence, even the hardest rocks,and transporting the materials to the sea, where they are spreadout, and form strata analogous to those of ^ more ancient date.Although loosely deposited along the bottom of the ocean,they become afterwards altered and consolidated by volcanicheat, and then heaved up, fractured and contorted' AlthoughHutton had never explored any region of active volcanos,he had convinced himself that basalt and many othertrap-rocks were of igneous origin, and that many of them hadbeen injected in a melted state through fissures in the olderstrata. The compactness of these rocks, and their different• Ed. FhiL Trans, 17S8.62 BmrroviAN thbokt.aspect from that of ordinary lava, he attributed to their havingcooled down under the pressure of the sea, and in order toremove the objections started against this theory, his friendSir James Hall instituted a most curious and instructive seriesof chemical experiments, illustrating the crystalline arrangementand texture assumed by melted matter cooled down underhigh pressure. The absence of stratification in granite, andits analogy in mineral character to rocks which he deemed ofigneous origin, led Hutton to conclude that granite must alsohave been formed from matter in fusion, and this inference hefelt could not be fully confirmed, unless he discovered at thecontact of granite and other strata a repetition of the phenomenaexhibited so constantly by the trap-rocks. Resolved totry his theory by this test, he went to the Grampianss andsurveyed the line of junction of the granite and superincumbentstratified masses, and found in Glen Tilt in 1785 the most dearand unequivocal proofs in support of his views. Veins of redgranite are there seen branching out from the principal mass,and traversing the black micaceous schist and primary limestone.The intersected stratified rocks are so distinct in colourand appearance as to render the example in that locality moststriking, and the alteration of the limestone in contact was veryanalogous to that produced by trap veins on calcareous strata.This verification of his system filled him with delight » andcalled forth such marks of joy and exultation, that the guideswho accompanied him, says his biographer, were convincedthat he must have discovered a vein of silver or gold *. Hewas aware that the same theory would not explain the originof the primary schists, but these he called primary, gettingthe term primitive, and was disposed to consider them as sedimentaryrocks altered by heat, and that they originated in someother form from the waste of previously existing rocks.By this important discovery of granite veins to which he hadbeen led by fair induction from an Independent class of factsHutton prepared the way for the greatest innovation on the systemsof his predecessors. Vallisneri had pointed out the generalfact, that there were certain fundamental rocks which containedno organic remains, and which he supposed to have been formed• Fky£kir't Works, vol w., p. 75. •UUTiONIW THXORT* 63bcfiire the creation of living beings. Moro, Generelli, andother Italian writers embraced the same doctrine, and Lehmanregarded the mountains called by him primitive, as parts ofthe original nucleus of the globe. The same tenet was anarticle of faith in the school of Freyberg ; and if any one even*tared to doubt the possibility of our being enabled to carryback our researches to the creation of the present order «ifthings, the granitic rocks were triumphantly appealed to. Onthem seemed written in legible characters, the memorableinscriptionDenarii a me non fur erie createSe non eteme,and no small sensation was excited when Hutton seemed, withunhallowed hand, desirous to erase characters already regardedby many as sacred. ** In the economy of the worlds said theScotch geologist, '^ I can find no traces of a beginning, noprospect of an end ;" and the declaration was the more startlingwhen coupled with the doctrine, that all past changes on theglobe had been brought about by the slow agency of existingcauses. The imagination was first fatigued and overpoweredby endeavouring to conceive the immensity of time requiredfor the annihilation of whole continents by so insensible a process.Yet when the thoughts had wandered through theseinterminable periods, no resting place was assigned in theremotest distance. The oldest rocks were represented to be ofa derivative nature, the last of an antecedent series, and thatperhaps one of many pre-existing worlds. Such views of theimmensity of past time, like those unfolded by the Newtonianphilosophy in regard to space were too vast to awaken ideas ofsublimity unmixed with a painful sense of our incapacity toconceive a plan of such infinite extent. Worlds are seenbeyond worlds immeasurably distant from each other, andbeyond them all innumerable other systems are faintly tracedOD the confines of the visible universe.The characteristic feature of the Huttonian theory was, asbefore hinted, the exclusion of all causes not supposed to belongto the present order of nature. Its greatest defect consisted inthe undue influence attributed to subterranean heat, which wasSupposed necessary for the consolidation of all submarinedeposits. Hutton made no step beyond Hooke Moro and64 HUTTONIAN THEORY.Raspe, in poinding out ia what manner the laws now governingearthquakes* might bring about geological changes, if sufficienttime be allowed. On the contrary, he seems to have fallen farshort of some of their views. He imagined that the continentswere first gradually destroyed, and when their ruins had furnishedmaterials for new continents, they were upheaved byviolent and paroxysmal convulsions. He therefore requiredalternate periods of disturbance and repose, and such he believedhad been, and would for ever be, the course of nature. Generelli,in his exposition of Moro's system, had made a far nearerapproximation towards reconciling geological appearances withthe state of nature as known to us, for while he agreed withHutton, that the decay and reproduction of rocks were alwaysin progress, proceeding with the utmost uniformity, the learnedCarmelite represented the repairs of mountains by elevationfrom below, to be effected by an equally constant and synchronousoperation. Neither of these theories considered singlysatisfies all the conditions of the great problem, which a geologist,who rejects cosmological causes, is called upon to solve ; but theyprobably contain together the germs of a perfect system . Therecan be no doubt, that periods of disturbance and repose have followedeach other in succession in every region of the globe, but itmay be equally true, that the energy of the subterranean movementshas been always uniform as regards the whole earth.The force of earthquakes may for a cycle of years have beeninvariably confined, as it is now, to large but determinate spaces,and may then have gradually shifted its position, so that anotherregion, which had for ages been at rest, became in its turn thegrand theatre of action.Although Buttons knowledge of mineralogy and chemistrywas considerable, he possessed but little information concerningorganic remains. They merely served him as they did Wernerto characterize certain strata, and to prove their marineorigin. The theory of former revolutions in organic life wasnot yet fully recognized, and without this class of proofs insupport of the antiquity of the globe, the indefinite periodsdemanded by the Huttonian hypothesis appeared visionary tomany, and some, who deemed the doctrine inconsistent withrevealed truths, indulged very uncharitable suspicions of themotives of its author. They accused him of a deliberateMayfair VOLTAIRE. 65design of reviving the heathen dogma of an ^^ eternal succession,"and of denying that this world ever had a beginning.Playfair, in the biography of his friend, has the followingcomment on this part of their theory : — '* In the planetarymotions, where geometry has carried the eye so far, both intothe future and the past, we discover no mark either of thecommencement or termination of the present order. It is unreasonable,indeed, to suppose that such marks should anywhereexist The Author of nature has not given laws to theuniverse, which, like the institutions of men, carry in themselvesthe elements of their own destruction. He has not permittedin His works any symptom of infancy or of old age, orany sign by which we may estimate either their future or theirpast duration. He may pat an end as he no dottbt gave abeginning, to the present system at some determinate period oftime ; but we may rest assured that this great catastrophe willnot be brought about by the laws now existing, and that it isnot indicated by any thing which we perceive."The party feeling excited against the Huttonian doctrines,and the open disregard of candour and temper in the controversy,will hardly be credited by our readers, unless we recallto their recollection that the mind of the English public wasat that time in a state of feverish excitement. A class of writersin France had been labouring industriously for many years, todiminish the influence of the clergy, by sapping the foundationof the Christian faith, and their success, and the consequencesof the Revolution, had alarmed the most resoluteminds, while the imagination' of the more timid was continuallyhaunted by dread of innovation, as by the phantom ofsome fearful dream.Voltaire had used the modern discoveries in physics as one ofthe numerous weapons of attack and ridicule directed by himagainst the Scriptures. He found that the most popular systemsof geology were accommodated to the sacred writings,and that much ingenuity had been employed to make everyfact coincide exactly with the Mosaic account of the creationand deluge. It was, therefore, with no friendly feelings, thatbe contemplated the cultivators of geology in general, regardingthe science as one which had been successfully enlisted by• Mayfair*! World vol. iy. p. 55.Soul, F66 Voltaire.theologians as an ally in their cause *. He knew that themajority of those who were aware of the abundance of fossilshells in the interior of continents, were still persuaded thatthey were proofs of the universal deluge ; and as the readiestway of shaking this article of faith, he endeavoured to inculcatescepticism, as to the real nature of such shells, andto recall from contempt the exploded dogma of the sixteenthcentury, that they were sports of nature. He also pretendedthat vegetable impressions were not those of real plants -f".Yet he was perfectly convinced that the shells had reallybelonged to living testacea, as may be seen in his essay ,^' On the formation of Mountains |.^' He would sometimes,in defiance of all consistency, shift his ground when addressing;the vulgar ; and admitting the true nature of the shells collectedin the Alps, and other places, pretend that they wereeastern species, which had fallen from the hats of pilgrimscoming from Syria. The numerous essays written by himon geological subjects were all calculated to strengthen prejudicespartly because he was ignorant of the real state of thescience, and partly from his bad faith §. On the other hand,they who knew that his attacks were directed by a desire tainvalidate scripture, and who were unacquainted with the truemerits of the question, might well deem the old diluvian hypothesisincontrovertible, if Voltaire could adduce no betterargument against it, than to deny the true nature of organicremains.« In allusion to the theories of Burnet, Woodward, and other physico-theolo-gical writers, he declared that they were as fond of changes of scene on the faceof the globe, as were the populace at a play. " Every one of them destroys andrenovates the earth after his own fashion, as Descartes framed it : for philosophersput themselves without ceremony in the place of God, and think to create a universewith a word." — Dissertation envoys il V Academic de Bologna, sur les change-mensarrives dans notre Globe. Unfortunately this and similar ridicule directedagainst the cosmologists was too well deserved.t See the chapter on " Des pierres figortes.'*} In that essay he lays it down " that all naturalists are now agreed that depositsof shells in the midst of the continents, are monuments of the continuedoccupation of these districts by the ocean." In another place also, when speakingof the fossil shells of Touraine, he admits their true origin.} As an instance of his desire to throw doubt indiscriminately on all geologicaldata, we may recall the passage, where he says that " the bones of a rein-deer andhippopotamus discovered near Examples, did not prove, as some would have it,that Lapland and the Nile were once on a tour from Paris to Oiieans^ but merelythat a lover of curiosities once preserved them in his cabinet"Intolerance OF THE NEPTUNISTS. 67It is only by careful attention to impediments originatingin extrinsic causes, that we can explain the slow and reluctantadoption of the simplest truths in geology. Firsts we findmany able naturalists adducing the fossil remains of marineanimals, as proofs of an event related in Scripture. The evidenceis deemed conclusive by the multitude for a century ormore; for it favours opinions which they entertained before,and they are gratified by supposing them confirmed by freshand unexpected proofs. Many, who see through the fiEdlacy,have no wish to undeceive those who are influenced by it, approvingthe effect of the delusion, and conniving at it as apious fraud ; until finally, an opposite party, who are hostileto the sacred writings, labour to explode the erroneous opinion,by substituting for it another dogma which they knowto be equally unsound.The heretical vulcanists were now openly assailed in England,by imputations of the most illiberal kind. We cannotestimate the malevolence of such a persecution, by the painwhich similar insinuations might now inflict; for althoughcharges of infidelity and atheism must always be odious, theywere injurious in the extreme at that moment of political excitement; and it was better perhaps for a man's good reception insociety, that his moral character should have been traduced,than that he should become a mark for these poisoned weapons.We shall pass over the works of numerous divines,who may be excused for sensitiveness on points which thenexcited so much uneasiness in the public mind ; and we shallsay nothing of the amiable poet Cowper *, who could hardlybe expected to have inquired into the merits of doctrines inphysics. But we find in the foremost ranks of the intolerant,several laymen who had high claims to scientific reputation.Amongst these, appears Williams, a mineral surveyor of Edinburgh,who published a ^* Natural History of the MineralKingdom's in 1789, a work of great merit for that day, and ofpractical utility, as containing the best account of the coalstrata. In his preface he misrepresents Hutton's theory altogether,and charges him with considering all rocks to be lavasof different colours and structure ; and also with ** warping• The Talk, book iii. " The Garden*'F 268 KIRWAN — ^DE LUC,every thing to support the eternity of the worlds'* Hedescants on the pernicious influence of such sceptical notions, asleading to downright infidelity and atheism, '^ and as bdngnothing less than to depose the Almighty Creator of the uni*Terse from his office f ."Eirwan, president of the Royal Academy of Dublin, a chemistand mineralogist of some merit, but who-possessed muchgreater authority in the scientific world than he was entitled byhis talents to enjoy, in the introduction to his ^^ Geological Essays,1799,^' said <* that sound geology graduated into religion,and was required to dispel certain systems of atheism or infidelity,of which they had had recent experienced." He was anuncompromising defender of the aqueous theory of ail rocks,and was scarcely surpassed by Burnet and Whiston, in his deareto adduce the Mosaic writings in confirmation of his opinions.De Luc, in the preliminary discourse to his Treatise onGeology §, says *^ the weapons have been changed by whichrevealed religion is attacked ; it is now assailed by geology,and this science has become essential to theologians' Heimputes the failure of former geological systems to their havingbeen anti-musical, and directed against a *^ sublime trade*tion/' These and similar imputations, reiterated in theworks of De Luc, seem to have been taken for granted bysome modem writers : it is therefore necessary to state, injusticeto the numerous geologists of different nations, whoseworks we have considered, that none of them were guilty ofendeavouring, by arguments drawn from physics, to invalidatescriptural tenets. On the contrary, the majority of them, whowere fortunate enough ** to discover the true causes of things,"did not deserve another part of the poet's panegyric, *^ Atquemeals omnes stAjecit pedibusJ^ The caution, and even timidreserve, of many eminent Italian authors of the earlier periodis very apparent ; and there can hardly be a doubt that theysubscribed to certain dogmas, and particularly to the firstdiluvian theory, out of deference to popular prejudices, ratherthan from conviction. If they were guilty of dissimulation,we must not blame their want of mord courage, but reserveour condemnation for the intolerance of the times, and• p. 577. t P- 59. I Intro. p. 2. } London, 1809.INTOLERANCE OF THE NEFTUNISTS. 69that inquisitorial power which forced Galileo to abjure andthe two Jesuits to disclaim the theory of Newton *.Hutton answered Kirwan's attacks with great warmth, andwith the indignation excited by unmerited reproach. He hadalways displayed, says Play fair, ^' the utmost disposition toadmire the beneficent design manifested in the structure of theworld, and he contemplated with delight those parts of histheory which made the greatest additions to our knowledge offinal causes We may say with equal truth, that in no seen*tific works in our language can more eloquent passages befound, concerning the fitness, harmony, and grandeur of allparts of the creation, than in those of Playfair. They are evidentlythe unaffected expressions of a mind, which contemplatedthe study of nature, as best calculated to elevate ourconceptions of the attributes of the First Cause. At any othertime the force and elegance of Flayfsur^s style must have insuredpopularity to the Huttonian doctrines; but, by a singularcoincidence, neptunianism and orthodoxy were now associated inthe same creed ; and the tide of prejudice ran so strong, that themajority were carried far away into the chaotic fluid, and othercosmological inventions of Werner. These fictions the SaxonProfessor had borrowed with little modification, and without anyimprovement, from his predecessors. They had not the smallestfoundation, either in Scripture, or in common sense, but wereperhaps approved of by many as being so ideal and unsubstantial,that they could never come into violent collision with anypreconceived opinions.The great object of De Lucas writings was to disprove theI observe that, in a most able and interesting article " the Life of Galileo' recentlypublished in the " Library of Useful Knowledge' it is asserted that bothGalileo's work, and the book of Copernicus " Nisi corrigatur/* were still to be seenon the forbidden list of the Index at Rome in 1 828. But I was assured in the samepear, by Professor Scarpellini, at Rome, that Pius VII., a pontiff distinguished forhis loTe of science, procured in 1818 a repeal of the edicts against Galileo and theCopernican system. He assembled the Congregation, and the late cardinalTorioszi, assessor of the Sacred Office, proposed '* that they should wipe off thisifitpfiftl from the church." The repeal was carried, with the dissentient voice ofone Dominican only. Long before this time the Newtonian theory had beentaught in the Sapiens, and all catholic universities in Europe (with the exception,I am told, of Salamanca) ; but it was always required of professors, in deference tothe decrees of the church, to use the term hjfpothetiB^ instead of theory. They nowspeak of the Copernican theory.70 BinrH's map of England.high antiquity attributed by Hutton to our present oontbentSyand particularly to seek out some cause for the excavation ofvalleys more speedy and violent than the action of ordinaryrivers. Hutton had said, that the erosion of rivers, and suchfloods as occur in the usual course of nature, might progressively,if time be allowed, hollow out great valleys, but he hadalso observed, ** that on our continents there is no spot on whicha river may not formerly have run**^ De Luc generallyreasoned against him as if he had said, that the existing riversflowing at their present levels had caused all these inequalitiesof the earth^s surface ; and Playfair, in his zeal to prove howmuch De Luc underrated the force of running water, did notsufficiently expose his misstatement of the Huttonian proposition.But we must defer the full consideration of this controvertedquestion for the present.While the tenets of the rival schools of Freybeig andEdinburgh were warmly espoused by devoted partisans, thelabours of an individual, unassisted by the advantages of wealthor station in society, were almost unheeded. Mr. WilliamSmith, an English surveyor, published his '^ Tabular View ofthe British Strata" in 1790, wherein he proposed a classificationof the secondary formations in the west of England.Although he had not communicated with Werner, it appearedby this work that he had arrived at the same views respectingthe laws of superposition of stratified rocks ; that he was awarethat the order of succession of different groups was never inverted; and that they might be identified at very distant pointsby their peculiar organized fossils.From the time of the appearance of the " Tabular View," helaboured to construct a geological map of the whole of England,and, with the greatest disinterestedness of mind, communicatedthe results of his investigations to all who desired information,giving such publicity to his original views, as to enablehis contemporaries almost to compete with him in the race.The execution of his map was completed in 1815, and remainsa lasting monument of original talent and extraordinary perseverance,for he had explored the whole country on foot withoutthe guidance of previous observers, or the aid of fellow-laboursTheory of the Earth, vol. ii. p. 296 ,• and PUyfair»s « lUostraUoM," note 16,p. 352. . .Sloth— GEOLOGICAL Society. 71era, and had succeeded in throwing into natural divisions thewhole complicated series of British rocks*. D^Aubuisson, adistinguished pupil of Werner, paid a just tribute of praise tothis remarkable performance, observing that ^^ what many celebratedmineralogists had only accomplished for a small part ofGermany in the course of half a century, had been effected by atingle individual for the whole of England'sWe have now arrived at the era of living authors, and shallbring to a conclusion our sketch of the progress of opinion ingeology. The contention of the rival factions of the Vulcanistsand Neptunists had been carried to such a height, that thesenames had become terms of reproach, and the two parties hadbeen less occupied in searching for truth, than for such argumentsas might strengthen their own cause, or serve to annoy theirantagonists. A new school at last arose who professed the strictestneutrality, and the utmost indifference to the systems ofWerner and Hutton, and who were resolved diligently to devotetheir labours to observation. The reaction, provoked by thetemperance of the conflicting parties, now produced a tendencyto extreme caution. Speculative views were discountenanced,and through fear of exposing themselves to the suspicion of abias towards the dogmas of a party, some geologists becameanxious to entertain no opinion whatever on the causes of phenomena,and were inclined to scepticism even where the conclusionsdeducible from observed facts scarcely admitted of reasonabledoubt. But although the reluctance to theorize was carriedsomewhat to excess, no measure could be more salutary at sucha moment than a suspension of all attempts to form what weretermed ^^ theories of the earths A great body of new data wererequired, and the Geological Society of London, founded inISOTy conduced greatly to the attainment of this desirable end.To multiply and record observations, and patiently to awaitthe result at some future period, was the object proposed bythem, and it was their favourite maxim that the time was notWerner intended a new langage to express his divisions of rocks, and someof bis technical terms, such as grauwacke, gneiss, and osiers, passed current inevery country in Europe. Smith adopted for the most part English provincialterms, often of barbarous sound, such as gault, cornbrash, clunch clay, &c., andaffixed them to subdivisions of the British series. Many of these still retain theirplies in oqr Kieatifie classifications sad attest his priority of arrangement72 STUDY OF ORGANIC REMAINS.yet come for a general system of geology, but that all must becontent for many years to be exclusively engaged in furnishingmaterials for future generalizations. By acting up to theseprinciples with consistency, they in a tew years disarmed allprejudice, and rescued the science from the imputation of beinga dangerous, or at best but a visionary pursuit.Inquiries were at the same time prosecuted with greatsuccess by the French naturalists, who devoted their attentionespecially to the study of organic remains. They shewedthat the specific characters of fossil shells and vertebrated animalsmight be determined with the utmost precision, and bytheir exertions a degree of accuracy was introduced into thisdepartment of science, of which it had never bdbre been deemedsusceptible. It was found that, by the careful discrimination ofthe fossil contents of strata, the contemporary origin of differentgroups could often be established, even where all identity ofmineralogical character was wanting, and where no light couldbe derived from the order of superposition. The minute investigation,moreover, of the relics of the animate creation offormer ages, had a powerful effect in dispelling the illusionwhich had long prevailed concerning the absence of analogybetween the ancient and modern state of our planet. A closecomparison of the recent and fossil species, and the inferencesdrawn in regard to their habits, accustomed the geologist tocontemplate the earth as having been at successive periods thedwelling place of animals and plants of different races, someof which were discovered to have been terrestrial and othersaquatic — some fitted to live in seas, others in the waters oflakes and rivers. By the consideration of these topics, themind was slowly and insensibly withdrawn from imaginarypictures of catastrophes and chaotic confusion, such as hauntedthe imagination of the early cosmogonists. Numerous proofswere discovered of the tranquil deposition of sedimentary matterand the slow development of organic life. If many stillcontinued to maintain, that " the thread of induction wasbroken," yet in reasoning by the strict rules of induction fromrecent to fossil species, they virtually disclosed the dogmawhich in theory they professed. The adoption of the samegeneric, and, in some cases, even the same specific names forthe exuviae of fossil animals and their living analogues, was aaMODERN Progress OF GEOLOGY. 73important step towards familiarizing the mind with the idea ofthe identity and unity of the system in distant eras. It wasan acknowledgment, as it were, that a considerable part of theancient memorials of nature were written in a living language.The growing importance then of the natural history of organicremains, and its general application to geology, may be pointedoat as the characteristic feature of the progress of the scienceduring the present century. This branch of knowledge hasahead become an instrument of great power in the discoveryof truths in geology, and is continuing daily to unfold newdata for grand and enlarged views respecting the formerchanges of the earth.When we compare the result of observations in the lastthirty years with those of the three preceding centuries, wecannot but look forward with the most sanguine expectationsto the degree of excellence to which geology may be carried,even by the labours of the present generation. Never, perhaps,did any science, with the exception of astronomy, unfold, in anequally brief period, so many novel and unexpected truths, andoverturn so many preconceived opinions. The senses had foragesdeclared the earth to be at rest, until the astronomertaught that it was carried through space with inconceivablerapidity. In like manner was the surface of this planet regardedas having remained unaltered since its creation, untilthe geologist proved that it had been the theatre of reiteratedchange, and was still the subject of slow but never endingfluctuations. The discovery of other systems in the boundlessregions of space was the triumph of astronomy — to trace thesame system through various transformations — to behold it atsuccessive eras adorned with different hills and valleys, lakesand seas, and peopled with new inhabitants, was the delightfulmeed of geological research. By the geometer were measuredthe regions of space, and the relative distances of theheavenly bodies — by the geologist myriads of ages werereckoned, not by arithmetical computation, but by a train ofphysical events — a succession of phenomena in the animate andinanimate worlds — signs which convey to our minds moredefinite ideas than figures can do, of the immensity of time.Whether our investigation of the earth's history and structurewill eventually be productive of as great practical benefits to74 Progress OF GEOLOGY.'mankind as a knowledge of the distant heavens, must remainfor the decision of posterity. It was not till astronomy hadbeen enriched by the observations of many centuries, and hadmade its way against popular prejudices to the establishmentof a sound theory, that its application to the useful arts wasmost conspicuous. The cultivation of geology began at alater period ; and in every step which it has hitherto madetowards sound theoretical principles, it has had to containagainst more violent prepossessions. The practical advantagesalready derived from it have not been inconsiderable : but ourgeneralizations are yet imperfect, and they who follow may beexpected to reap the most valuable fruits of our labour. Meaneswile the charm of first discovery is our own, and as we explorethis magnificent field of inquiry, the sentiment of a great historianof our times may continuity be present to our minds, that*^ he who calls what has vanished back again into being, enjoysa bliss like that of creating."• Niebuhr*! Hist of Borne, vol u p. 5. Hare and DiixhraU'i tianaUtioii.CHAPTER V.Beriew of the causes which have retarded the progress of Geology — Ejects ofprepossessions in regard to the duration of past time — Of prejudices arisingfrom our peculiar position as inhabitants of the land — Of those occasioned byour not seeing subterranean changes now in progress — sall these causes com-Une to make the former course of Nature appear different from the present -pSeveral objections to the assumption, that hasting causes have produced thefonder changes of the earth's surface, removed by modem discoveries.We have seen that, during the progress of geology there havebeen great fluctuations of opinion respecting the nature of thecauses to which all former changes of the earth^s surface arereferable. The first observers conceived that the monumentswhich the geologist endeavours to decipher, relate to a periodwhen the physical constitution of the earth differed entirelyfrom the present and that, even after the creation of livingbeings, there have been causes in action distinct in kind ordegree from those now forming part of the economy of nature.These views have been gradually modified, and some of thementirely abandoned in proportion as observations have beenmultiplied 9 and the signs of former mutations more skilfullyinterpreted. Many appearances, which for a long time wereregarded as indicating mysterious and extraordinary agency,are finally recognized as the necessary result of the laws nowgoverning the material world ; and the discovery of this unlookedfor conformity has induced some geologists to inferthat there has never been any interruption to the same uniformorder of physical events. The same assemblage of generalcauses, they conceive, may have been sufficient to produce, bytheir various combinations, the endless diversity of effects, ofwhich the shell of the earth has preserved the memorials, andconsistently with these principles, the recurrence of analogouschanges is expected by them in time to come.Whether we coincide or not in this doctrine, we must admitthat the gradual progress of opinion concerning the succession ofphenomena in remote eras, resembles in a singular number that76 . CAUSES OF ERROR INwhich accompanies the growing intelligence of every people, inregard to the economy of nature in modem times. In an earlystage of advancement, when a great number of natural appearancesare unintelligible, an eclipse, an earthquake, a flood, orthe approach of a comet, with many other occurrences afterwardsfound to belong to the regular course of events, areregarded as prodigies. The same delusion prevails as to moralphenomena, and many of these are ascribed to the interventionof demons, ghosts, witches, and other immaterial and supernaturalagents. By degrees, many of the enigmas of the moraland physical world are explained, and, instead of being due toextrinsic and irregular causes, they are found to depend onfixed and invariable laws. The philosopher at last becomesconvinced of the undeviating uniformity of secondary causes,and, guided by his faith in this principle, he determines theprobability of accounts transmitted to him of former occurrences,and often rejects the fabulous tales of former ages, onthe ground of their being irreconcilable with the experience ofmore enlightened ages.As a belief in want of conformity in the physical constitutionof the earth, in ancient and modern times, was for a long timeuniversally prevalent, and that too amongst men who were convincedthat the order of nature is now uniform, and has continuedso for several thousand years ; every circumstance whichcould have influenced their minds and given an undue bias totheir opinions deserves particular attention. Now the readermay easily satisfy himself, that, however undeviating the courseof nature may have been from the earliest epochs, it was impossiblefor the first cultivators of geology to come to such a conclusion,so long as they were under a delusion as to the age ofthe world, and the date of the first creation of animate beings.However fantastical some theories of the sixteenth century maynow appear to us, — however unworthy of men of great talentand sound judgment, we may rest assured that, if the samemisconceptions now prevailed in regard to the memorials ofhuman transactions, it would give rise to a similar train of absurdities.Let us imagine, for example, that Champion, andthe French and Tuscan literati now engaged in exploring theantiquities of Egypt, had visited that country with a firm beliefthat the banks of the Nile were never peopled by the humanGeological. Theories. 77race before the beginning of the nineteenth century, and thattheir faith in this dogma was as difficult to shake as the opinionof our ancestors, that the earth was never the abode of livingbeings until the creation of the present continents and of thespecies now existing, — it is easy to perceive what extravagantsystems they wotdd frame while under the influence of thisdelusion, to account for the monuments discovered in Egypt.The sight of the pyramids, obelisks, colossal statues, andruined temples, would fill them with such astonishment, thatfor a time they would be as men spell-bound — wholly incapacitatedto reason with sobriety. They might incline at first torefer the construction of such stupendous works to some superhumanpowers of a primeval world. A system might beinvented resembling that so gravely advanced by Manetho^who relates that a dynasty of gods originally ruled in Egypt,of whom Vulcan, the first monarch, reigned nine thousand years.After them came Hercules and other demi-gods, who were atlast succeeded by human kings. When some fanciful speculationsof this kind had amused the imagination for a time,some vast repository of mummies would be discovered andwould immediately undeceive those antiquaries who enjoyedan opportunity of personally examining them, but the prejudicesof others at a distance, who were not eye-witnesses ofthe whole phenomena, would not be so easily overcome. Theconcurrent report of many travellers would indeed render itnecessary for them to accommodate ancient theories to some ofthe new facts, and much wit and ingenuity would be requiredto modify and defend their old positions. Each new inventionwould violate a greater number of known analogies ; for if atheory be required to embrace some false principle, it becomesmore visionary in proportion as facts are multiplied, as wouldbe the case if geometers were now required to form an astronomicalsystem on the assumption of the immobility of theearth.Amongst other fanciful conjectures concerning the history of£g3rpt, we may suppose some of the following to be started.As the banks of the Nile have been so recently colonized, thecurious substances called mummies could never in reality havebelonged to men. They may have been generated by some'pUuHc virtue residing in the interior of the earthy or they mayTS XAV8B8 OP XftROK IN<'be abortions of nature produced by her'indpient efforts in thework of creation. ' For if deformed beings are sometimes borneven now, when the scheme of the universe is fully developed< many more may have been ^* sent before their time, scarcehalf made up*' when the planet itself was in the embryo state.< But if these notions appear to derogate from the perfectionof the Divine attributes, and if these mummies be in all their'parts true representations of the human form, may we notrefer them to the future rather than the past ? May we not*■ be looking into the womb of nature, and not her grave? may< not these images be like the shades of the unborn in Virgil'sElysium — the archetypes of men not yet called into existence ?'These speculations, if advocated by coquet writers, wouldnot fail to attract many zealous votaries, for they would relievemen from the painful necessity of renouncing preconceivedopinions. Incredible as such scepticism may appear, it wouldbe rivalled by many systems of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,and among others by that of the learned Falloppio, whoregarded the tusks of fossil elephants as earthy concretions, andthe vases of Monte Testaceous, near Rome, as works of nature,and not of art. But when one generation had passed away,and another not compromised to the support of antiquateddogmas had succeeded, they would review the evidence affordedby mummies more impartially, and would no longer controvertthe preliminary question, that human beings had lived inEgypt before the nineteenth century : so that when a hundredyears perhaps had been lost, the industry and talents of thephilosopher would be at last directed to the elucidation ofpoints of real historical importance.But we have adverted to one only of many prejudices withwhich the earlier geologists had to contend. Even when theyconceded that the earth had been peopled with animate beingsat an earlier period than was at first supposed, they had noconception that the quantity of time bore so great a proportionto the historical era as is now generally conceded. How fatalevery error as to the quantity of time must prove to the introductionof rational views concerning the state of things in formerages, may be conceived by supposing that the annals of the civiland military transactions of a great nation were perused underthe impression that they occurred in a period of one hundredGBQXOOICAL TIUBOKIES. 79ftinstead of two thousand years. Such a portico of history wouldimmediately assume the air of a romance ; the events wouldseem devoid of credibility, and inconsistent with the presentcourse of human affairs. A crowd of incidents would followeach other in thick succession. Armies and fleets would appearto be assembled only to be destroyed, and cities built merelyto fall in ruins. There would be the most violent transitionsfrom foreign or intestine war to periods of profound peace, andthe works effected during the years of disorder or tranquillitywould be alike superhuman in magnitude.He who should study the monuments of the natural worldunder the influence of a similar infatuation, must draw a noless exaggerated picture of the energy and violence ofcauses, and must experience the same insurmountable difficultyin reconciling the former and present state of nature.If we could behold in one view all the volcanic overthrownup in Iceland, Italy, Sicily, and other parts ofEurope, during the last five thousand years, and could see thelavas which have flowed during the same period ; the dislocations,substances and elevations caused by earthquakes ; thelands added to various deltas, or devoured by the sea, togetherwith the effects of devastation by floods and imagine that allthese events had happened in one year, we must form mostexalted ideas of the activity of the agents, and the suddennessof the revolutions. Were an equal amount of change to passbefore our eyes in the next year, could we avoid the conclusionthat some great crisis of nature was at hand ? If geologists,therefore, have misinterpreted the signs of a succession ofevents, so as to conclude that centuries were implied wherethe characters imported thousands of years, and thousands ofyears where the language of nature signified millions, they couldnot, if they reasoned logically from such false premises, cometo any other conclusion, than that the system of the naturalworld had undergone a complete revolution.We should be warranted in ascribing the erection of thegreat pyramid to superhuman power, if we were convincedthat it was raised in one day ; and if we imagine in the samemanner, a mountain chain to have be^n elevated, during anequally small fraction of the time which was really occupiedin upheaving it we might then be justified in inferring, that80 CAUSES OF ERROR INthe subterranean movements were once far more energetic thanin our own times. We know that one earthquake may raisethe coast of Chili for a hundred miles to the average height ofabout five feet. A repetition of two thousand shocks of equalviolence might produce a mountain chain one hundred mileslong, and ten thousand feet high. Now should one only ofthese convulsions happen in a century, it would be consistentwith the order of events experienced by the Civilians from theearliest times ; but if the whole of them were to occur in the nexthundred years, the entire district must be depopulated, scarcelyany animals or plants could survive, and the surface would heone confused heap of ruin and desolation.One consequence of undervaluing greatly the quantity ofpast time is the apparent coincidence which it occasions of eventsnecessarily disconnected, or which are so unusual, that it wouldbe inconsistent with all calculation of chances to suppose themto happen at one and the same time. When the unlooked forassociation of such rare phenomena is witnessed in the presentcourse of nature, it scarcely ever fails to excite a suspicion ofthe preternatural in those minds which are not firmly convincedof the uniform agency of secondary causes ; — ^as if thedeath of some individual in whose fate they are interestedhappens to be accompanied by the appearance of a luminousmeteor, or a comet, or the shock of an earthquake. It wouldbe only necessary to multiply such coincidences indefinitelyand the mind of every philosopher would be disturbed. Nowit would be difficult to exaggerate the number of physicalevents, many of them most rare and unconnected in theirnature, which were imagined by the Woodwardian hypothesisto have happened in the course of a few months ; and numerousother examples might be found of popular geologicaltheories, which require us to inane that a long succession ofevents happened in a brief and almost momentary period.The sources of prejudice hitherto considered may be deemedas in a great degree peculiar to the infancy of the science, butothers are common to the first cultivators of geology and toourselves, and are all singularly calculated to produce the samedeception, and to strengthen our belief that the course ofnature in the earlier ages differed widely from that now established.Although we cannot fully explain all these circum*GEOLOGICAL THEORIES. 8Lstances, without assuming some things as proved, which it willbe the object of another part of this work to demonstrate, wemust briefly allude to them in this place.The first and greatest difficulty, then, consists in our habitualunconsciousness that our position as observers is essentially unfavourablewhen we endeavour to estimate the magnitude of thechanges now in progress. In consequence of our inattentionto this subject, we are liable to the greatest mistakes in contrastingthe present with former states of the globe. Weinhabit about a fourth part of the surface ; and that portion isalmost exclusively the theatre of decay and not of reproduction;We know, indeed, that new deposits are annually formed inseas and lakes, and that every year some new igneous rocks areproduced in the bowels of the earth, but we cannot watch theprogress of their formation ; and as they are only present to ourminds by the aid of reflection, it requires an effort both of thereason and the imagination to appreciate duly their importance.It is, therefore, not surprising that we imperfectly estimate theresult of operations invisible to us; and that, when analogousresults of some former epoch are presented to our inspection,we cannot recognise the analogy. He who has observedthe quarrying of stone from a rock, and has seen it shippedfor some distant port, and then endeavours to conceive whatkind of edifice will be raised by the materials, is in the samepredicament as a geologist, who, while he is confined to theland, sees the decomposition of rocks, and the transportation ofmatter by rivers to the sea, and then endeavours to picture tohimself the new strata which Nature is building beneath thewaters. Nor is his position less unfavourable when, beholdinga volcanic eruption, he tries to conceive what changes the columnof lava has produced, in its passage upwards, on theintersected strata ; or what form the melted matter may assumeat great depths on cooling down ; or what may be the extent ofthe subterranean rivers and reservoirs of liquid matter far beneaththe surface. It should, therefore, be remembered, that thetask imposed on those who study the earth^s history requiresno ordinary share of discretion, for we are precluded from collatingthe corresponding parts of a system existing at two differentperiods. If we were inhabitants of another element — ifthe great ocean were our domain, instead of the narrow limitsof the land, our difficulties would be considerably lessened ;Vou I. G82 CAUSES OF ERROR INwhile, on the other hand, there can be little doubt, althoughthe reader may, perhaps, smile at the bare suggestion of sadian idea, that an amphibious being, who should possess ourfaculties, would still more easily arrive at sound theoreticalopinions in geology, since he might behold, on the one hand,the decomposition of rocks in the atmosphere, and the transportationof matter by running water; and, on the other,examine the deposition of sediment in the sea, and the imbeddingof animal remains in new strata. He might ascertain, bydirect observation, the action of a mountain torrent, as well asof a marine current; might compare the products of volcanos onthe land with those poured out beneath the waters ; and mightmark, on the one hand, the growth of the forest, and on theother that of the coral reef. Yet, even with these advantage,he would be liable to fall into the greatest errors when endeavouringto reason on rocks of subterranean origin. He wouldseek in vain, within the sphere of his observation, for any directanalogy to the process of their formation, and would thereforebe in danger of attributing them, wherever they are upraisedto view, to some '^ primeval state of nature." But if we maybeallowed so far to indulge the imagination, as to suppose abeing, entirely confined to the nether world — some *^ duskymelancholy sprite," like Umbriel, who could ^* flit on sootypinions to the central earth," but who was never permitted to<' sully the fair face of light," and emerge into the regions ofwater and of air ; and if this being should busy himself ininvestigating the structure of the globe, he might frametheories the exact converse of those usually adopted by humanphilosophers. He might infer that the stratified rocks, containingshells and other organic remains, were the oldest ofcreated things, belonging to some original and nascent state ofthe planet. *• Of these masses," he might say, ** whether theyconsist of loose incoherent sand, soft clay, or solid rock, nonehave been formed in modem times. Every year some part ofthem are broken and shattered by earthquakes, or melted upby volcanic fire ; and, when they cool down slowly from a stateeffusion, they assume a crystalline form, perfectly distinct fromthose inexplicable rocks which are so regularly bedded, and containstones full of curious impressions and fantastic markings*This process cannot have been carried on for an indefinitetimcp for in that case all the stratified rocks would long ereGEOLOGICAL THEORIES. 83this laye been fused and crystallized. It is therefore probablethat the whole planet once consisted of thes curiously-beddedformations) at a time when the volcanic fire had notyet been brought into activity. Since that period there seemsto have been a gradual development of heat, and this augment*tati<Hi we may expect to continue till the whole globe shall bein a state of fluidity and incandescence."Such might be the system of the Gnome at the very sametime that the followers of Leibnitz reasoning on what theysaw on the outer surfaces would be teaching the doctrine ofgradual refrigeration, and averring that the earth had begunIts career as a fiery comedy and would hereafter become a frozenicy mass. The tenets of the schools of the nether and of theupper world would be directly opposed to each other, for bothwould partake of the prejudices inevitably resulting from thecontinual contemplation of one class of phenomena to the exdu*cion of another. Man observes the annual decomposition ofcrystalline and igneous rocks, and may sometimes see theirconversion into stratified deposits ; but he cannot witness thereconversion of the sedimentary into the crystalline by subterraneanfire. He is in the habit of regarding all the sedimentaryrocks as more recent than the unstratified, for the samereason that we may suppose him to fall into the opposite errorif he saw the origin of the igneous class only.It is only by becoming sensible of our natural disadvantagesthat we shall be roused to exertion, and prompted to seek outopportunities of discovering the operations now in progress,such as do not present themselves readily to view. We arecalled upon, in our researches into the state of the earth, as inour endeavours to comprehend the mechanism of the heavens, toinvent means for overcoming the limited range of our vision. Weareperpetually required to bring, as far as possible, within thesphere of observation things to which the eye, unassisted by art,could never obtain access. It was not an impossible contingencythat astronomers might have been placed at some period, in asituation* much resembling that in which the geologist seemsto stand at present. If the Italians, for example, in theearly part of the twelfth century, had discovered at Amalphi,instead of the pandects of Justinian, some ancient manuscriptsfilled with astronomical observations relating to a period ofthree thousand years, and made by some ancient .geometers284 CAUSES OF ERROR INwho possessed optical instruments as perfect as any in modemEurope, they would probably, on consulting these memorials,have come to a conclusion that there had been a great revolutionin the solar and sidereal systems. '^ Many primary andsecondary planets," they might say, '* are enumerated in thesetables, which exist no longer. Their positions are assignedwith such precision, that we may assure ourselves that thereis nothing in their, place at present but the blue ether. Whereone star is visible to us, these documents represent severalthousands. Some of those which are now single, consistedthen of two separate bodies, often distinguished by different colours,and revolving periodically round a common centre ofgravity. There is no analogy to them in the universe at present,for they were neither fixed stars nor planets, but stoodin the mutual relation of sun and planet to each other. Wemust conclude, therefore, that there has occurred, at no distantperiod, a tremendous catastrophe, whereby thousands of worldshave been annihilated at once, and some heavenly bodiesabsorbed into the substance of others." When such doctrineshad prevailed for ages, the discovery of one of the worlds, supposedto have been lost, by aid of the first rude telescope,would not dissipate the delusion, for the whole burden of proofwould now be thrown on those who insisted on the stabilityof the system from the beginning of time, and these philosopherswould be required to demonstrate the existence of all theworlds said to have been annihilated. Such popular prejudiceswould be most unfavourable to the advancement of astronomy ;for, instead of persevering in the attempt to improve their instruments,and laboriously to make and record observations, thegreater number would despair of verifying the continued existenceof the heavenly bodies not visible to the naked eye.Instead of confessing the extent of their ignorance, and strivingto remove it by bringing to light new facts, they would beengaged in the indolent employment of framing imaginarytheories concerning catastrophes and mighty revolutions in thesystem of the universe.For more than two centuries the shelly strata of the Sub-apenninehills afforded matter of speculation to the early geologistsof Italy, and few of them had any suspicion that similardeposits were then forming in the neighbouring sea. Theywere as unconscious of the continued action of causes still proGEOLOGICAL THEORIES. 85during similar effects as the astronomers in the case supposedby us, of the existence of certain heavenly bodies stillgiving and reflecting light, and performing their movementsas in the olden time. Some imagined that the strata, sorich in organic remains, instead of being due to secondaryagents, had been so created in the beginning of things by thefiat of the Almighty ; and others ascribed the imbedded fossilbodies to some plastic power which resided in the earth in theearly ages of the world. At length Donati explored the bedof the Adriatic, and found the closest resemblance between thenew deposits there forming, and those which constituted hillsabove a thousand feet high in various parts of the peninsula.He ascertained that certain genera of living testacea weregrouped together at the bottom of the sea in precisely thesame manner as were their fossil analogues in the strata of thehills, and that some species were common to the recent andfossil world. Beds of shells, moreover, in the Adriatic, were becomingincrusted with calcareous rock; and others were recentlyenclosed in deposits of sand and clay, precisely as fossil shellswere found in the hills. This splendid discovery of the identityof modern and ancient submarine operations was not madewithout the aid of artificial instruments, which, like the telescope,brought phenomena into view not otherwise within thesphere of human observation.In like manner, in the Vicentin, a great series of volcanicand marine sedimentary rocks were examined in the earlypart of the last century ; but no geologist suspected, beforethe time of Arduino, that these were partly composed of ancientsubmarine lavas. If, when these enquiries were firstmade, geologists had been told that the mode of formation ofsuch rocks might be fully elucidated by the study of processesthen going on in certain parts of the Mediterranean, theywould have been as incredulous as geometers would have beenbefore the time of Newton, if any one had informed them that,by making experiments on the motion of bodies on the earth,they might discover the laws which regulated the movementsof distant planets.The establishment, from time to time; of numerous points ofidentification, drew at length from geologists a reluctant admission,that there was more correspondence between the physicalconstitution of the globe, and more uniformity in the laws re-86 UNIFORMITY IN THErelating the changes of its surface, from the most remote erasto the present, than they at first imagined. If, in this state ofthe science, they still despaired of reconciling every class ofgeological phenomena to the operations' of ordinary causes,even by straining analogy to the utmost limits of credibility,we might have expected, that the balance of probability atleast would now have been presumed to incline towards theidentity of the causes. But, after repeated experience of thefailure of attempts to speculate on different classes of geologicalphenomena, as belonging to a distinct order of things, each newsect persevered systematically in the principles adopted by theirpredecessors. They invariably began, as each new problempresented itself, whether relating to the animate or inanimateworld, to assume in their theories, that the economy of naturewas formerly governed by rules quite independent of thosenow established. Whether they endeavoured to account forthe orion of certain igneous rocks, or to explain the forceswhich elevated hills or excavated valleys, or the causes whichled to the extinction of certain races of animals, they first presupposedan original and dissimilar order of nature ; and whenat length they approximated, or entirely came round to anopposite opinion, it was always with the feeling, that they concededwhat they were justified d priori in deeming improbable.In a word, the same men who, as natural philosophers, wouldhave been greatly surprised to find any deviation fix>m theusual course of Nature in their own Hie, were equally surprised,as geologists, not to find such deviations at every periodof the past.The Huttonians were conscious that no check could be givento the utmost licence of conjecture in speculating on the causesof geological phenomena, unless we can assume invariableconstancy in the order of Nature. But when they asserted thisuniformity without any limitation as to time, they were considered,by the majority of their contemporaries, to have beencarried too far, especially as they applied the same principleto the laws of the organic, as well as of the inanimate world *•Playfair,' after admitting the extinction of some species says, '^Tlie inhabitantsof the globe; then, like all other parts of it are subject to change. It is notonly the individual that perishes, but whole species, and even perhaps genera, areextinguished.'*——" A change in the animal kingdom seems to be a part of theorder o/ nature, and is visible in instances to which human jKmer cannot have extended."— Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory } 413.ORDER OF NATURE. 67We shall first advert briefly to many difficulties which formerlyappeared insurmountable, but which, in the last fortyyears, have been partially or entirely removed by the progressriddance ; and shall afterwards consider the objections that stillremain to the doctrine of absolute uniformity.In the first place, it was necessary for the supporters ofthis doctrine to take for granted incalculable periods of time,in order to explain the formation of sedimentary strata bycauses now in diurnal action. The time which they requiredtheoretically, is now granted, as it were, or hasbecome absolutely requisite, to account for another class ofphenomena brought to light by more recent investigations.It must always have been evident to unblessed minds, thatsuccessive strata, containing, in regular order of superior*dion, distinct beds of shells and corals, arranged in familiesas th grow at the bottom of the sea, could only havebeen formed by slow and insensible degrees in a great lapse ofages ; yet, until organic remains were minutely examined andspecifically determined, it was rarely possible to prove that theseries of deposits met with in one country was not formedsimultaneously with that found in another. But we are nowable to determine, in numerous instances the relative dates ofsedimentary rocks in distant regions, and to show, by theirorganic remains, that they were not of contemporary origin,but formed in succession. We often find, that where an interruptionin the consecutive formation in one district is indicatedby a sudden transition from one assemblage of fossil species toanother, the chasm is filled up, in some other district, by otherimportant groups of strata. The more attentively we studythe European continent, the greater we find the extension ofthe whole series of geological formations. No sooner doesthe calendar appear to be completed, and the signs of a successionof physical events arranged in chronological order, thanwe are called upon to interrogate, as it were, some new periodsof vast duration. A geologist, whose observations have beenconfined to England, is accustomed to consider the superiorand newer groups of marine strata in our island as modem, andsuch they are, comparatively speaking; but when he hastravelled through the Italian peninsula and in Sicily, and hasseen strata of more recent origin forming mountains several88 UNIFORMITY IN THEthousand feet high, and has marked a long series both of volcanicand submarine operations, all newer than any of theregular strata which enter largely into the physical structureof Great Britain, he returns with more exalted conceptions ofthe antiquity of some of those modem deposits, than he beforeentertained of the oldest of the British series. We cannotreflect on the concessions thus extorted from us, in regard to theduration of past time, without foreseeing that the period mayarrive when part of the Huttonian theory will be combated onthe ground of its departing too far from the assumption of uniformityin the order of nature. On a closer investigation of extinctvolcanos, we find proofs that they broke out at successiveeras, and that the eruptions of one group were often concludedlong before others had commenced their activity. Some wereburning when one class of organic beings were in existence,others came into action when different races of animals andplants existed, — it follows, therefore, that the convulsionscaused by subterranean movements, which are merely anotherportion of the volcanic phenomena, occurred also in succession,and their effects must be divided into separate sums, andassigned to separate periods of time ; and this is not all : — whenwe examine the volcanic products, whether they be lavaswhich flowed out under water or upon dry land, we find thatintervals of time, often of great length, intervened betweentheir formation, and that the effects of one eruption were notgreater in amount than that which now results during ordinaryvolcanic convulsions. The accompanying or precedingearthquakes, therefore, may be considered to have been alsosuccessive, and to have been in like manner interrupted by intervalsof time, and not to have exceeded in violence those now experiencedin the ordinary course of nature. Already, therefore,may we regard the doctrine of the sudden elevation of wholecontinents by paroxysmal eruptions as invalidated ; and therewas the greatest inconsistency in the adoption of such a tenet by ^the Huttonians, who were anxious to reconcile former changes tothe present economy of the world. It was contrary to analogyto suppose, that Nature had been at any former epoch parsimoniousof time and prodigal of violence — to imagine that onedistrict was not at rest while another was convulsed — that thedisturbing forces were not kept under subjection, so as neverORDER OF NATURE. 89to carry simultaneous havoc and desolation over the wholeearth, or even over one great r^on. If it could have beenshown, that a certain combination of circumstances would atsome future period produce a crisis in the subterranean action,we should certainly have had no right to oppose our experiencefor the last three thousand years as an argument againstthe probability of such occurrences in past ages ; but it is notpretended that such a combination can be foreseen. In speculatingon catastrophes by water, we may certainly anticipategreat floods in future, and we may therefore presume thatthey have happened again and again in past times. Theexistence of enormous seas of fresh-water, such as the NorthAmerican lakes, the largest of which is elevated more than sixhundred feet above the level of the ocean, and is in partstwelve hundred feet deep, is alone sufficient to assure us, thatthe time will come, however distant, when a deluge willlay waste a considerable part of the American continent. Nohypothetical agency is required to cause the sudden escape ofthe confined waters. Such changes of level, and opening offissures, as have accompanied earthquakes since the commencementof the present century, or such excavation of ravines asthe receding cataract of Niagara is now effecting, might breachthe barriers. Notwithstanding, therefore, that we have notwitnessed within the last three thousand years the devastationby deluge of a large continent, yet, as we may predict thefuture occurrence of such catastrophes, we are authorized toregard them as part of the present order of Nature, and theymay be introduced into geological speculations respecting thepast, provided we do not imagine them, to have been morefrequent or general than we expect them to be in time tocome.The great contrast in the aspect of the older and newerrocks, in their texture, structure, and in the derangement ofthe strata, appeared formerly one of the strongest grounds forpresuming that the causes to which they owed their originwere perfectly dissimilar from those now in operation. Butthis incongruity may now be regarded as the natural resultof subsequent modifications, since the difference of relative ageis demonstrated to have been so immense, that, however slowand insensible the change, it must have become important in the90 UNtPORtttTT IN THEcourse ot so many ages. In addition to volcanic heat to whichthe Vulcanists formerly attributed too much influence, we mustallow for the effect of mechanical pressure, of chemical affinity,of percolation by mineral waters, of permeation by elasticfluids and the action perhaps, of many other forces less understood,such as electricity and magnetism* In regard to the signsof upraising and sinking, of fracture and contortion in rocks,it is evident that newer strata cannot be shaken by earthquakes^unless the subjacent rocks are also affected ; so that thecontrast in the relative degree of disturbance in the moreancient and the newer strata, is one of many proofs that theconvulsions have happened in different eras, and the fact confirmsthe uniformity of the action of subterranean forces, insteadof their greater violence in the primeval ages.The popular doctrine of universal formations or the unlimitedgeographical extent of strata, distinguished by similarmineral characters, appeared for a long time to present insurmountableobjections to the supposition, that the earth's crusthad been formed by causes now acting. If it had merelybeen assumed, that rocks originating from fuskm by subterraneanfire presented in all parts of the 'globe a perfect correspondencein their mineral composition, the assumption wouldnot have been extravagant ; for, as the elementary substancesthat enter largely into the composition of rocks are few innumber, they may be expected to arrange themselves invariablyin the same forms, whenever the elementary particles arefreely exposed to the action of chemical affinities. But when itwas imagined that sedimentary mixtures, including animal andvegetable remains, and evidently formed in the beds of ancientseas, were of homogeneous nature throughout a whole, hemisphere,or event farther, the dogma precluded at once all hopeof recognizing the slightest analogy between the ancient andmodern causes of decay and reproduction. For we know thatexisting rivers carry down from different mountain-chainssediment of distinct colours and composition; where thechains are near the sea, coarse sand and gravel is swept in ;where they are distant, the finest mud. We know, also, that the.matter introduced by springs into lakes and seas is very diversifiedin mineral composition ; in shorty contemporaneous stratanow in the progress of formation are greatly varied in theirORDER OF NATURE. 91compositor, and could never afford formations of homogeneousmineral ingredients co-extensive with the greater part ofthe earth's surface. This theory, however, is as inapplicableto the effects of those operations to which the formation of theearth's crust is due, as to the effects of existing causes. Thefirst investigators of sedimentary rocks had never reflected onthe great areas occupied by modern deltas of large rivers ; stillless on the much greater areas over which marine currents,preying alike on river-deltas, and continuous lines of sea-coast,might be diffusing homogeneous mixtures. They were ignorantof the vast spaces over which calcareous and other mineralsprings abound upon the land and in the sea especially in andnear volcanic r^ons, and of the quantity of matter dischargedby them. Wh«i, therefore, they ascertained the extent of thegeographical distribution of certain groups of ancient strata— *-when they traced them continuously from one extremity of£un to the other, and found them flanking, throughouttheir entire range great mountain-chains, they were astonishedat so unexpected a discovery ; and, considering themselves atliberty to disregard aU modern analogy, they indulged in thesweeping generalization, that the law of continuity prevailedthroughout strata of contemporaneous origin over the wholeplanet. The difficulty of dissipating this delusion was extreme,because some rocks, formed under similar circumstancesat different epochs, present the same external characters, andoften the same internal composition ; and all these were assumedto be contemporaneous until the contrary could be shown,which, in the absence of evidence derived from direct superposition,and in the scarcity of organic remains, was oftenimpossible.Innumerable other false generalizations have been derivedfrom the same source ; such, for instance, as the former universalityof the ocean, now disproved by the discovery of the remainsof terrestrial vegetation, contemporary with every successiverace of marine animals ; but we shall dwell no longer onexploded errors, but proceed dt once to contend against weightier.objections, which will require more attentive consideration.CHAPTER VI.Proofs that the climate of the Northern hemisphere was formerly hotter — Directproofs from the organic remains of the Sicilian and Italian strata — proofsfrom analogy derived from extinct Quadrupeds — Imbedding of Animals inIcebergs — Siberian Mammoths — evidence in regard to temperature, fromthe fossil remains of tertiary and secondary rocks — From the Plants of theCoal formation.That the climate of the northern hemisphere has undergonean important change and that its mean annual temperaturemust once have resembled that now experienced within thetropics, was the opinion of some of the first naturalists whoinvestigated the contents of ancient strata. Their conjecturebecame more probable when the shells and corals of thesecondary rocks were more carefully examined, for theseorganic remains were found to be intimately connected bygeneric affinity with species now living in warmer latitudes.At a later period, many reptiles, such as turtles, tortoises, andlarge saurian animals were discovered in the European stratain great abundance; and they supplied new and powerfularguments, from analogy, in support of the doctrine, that theheat of the climate had been great when our secondary formationswere deposited. Lastly, when the botanist turned hisattention to the specific determination of fossil plants, the evildeuce acquired the fullest confirmation, for the flora of acountry is peculiarly influenced by temperature; and theancient vegetation of the earth might, more readily than theforms of animals, have afforded conflicting proofs, had thepopular theory been without foundation. When the examinationof animal and vegetable remains was extended to rocksin the most northern parts of Europe and North America,and even to the Arctic regions, indications of the same revolutionin climate were discovered.It cannot be said, that in this as in many other departmentsof geology, we have investigated the phenomena of formerCHANGE OF CLIMATE. 93eras* and neglected those of the present state of things. Onthe contrary, since the first agitation of this interesting question,the accessions to our knowledge of living animals andplants have been immense, and have far surpassed all the datapreviously obtained for generalizing, concerning the relationof certain types of organization to particular climates. The'tropical and temperate zones of South America and of Australiahave been explored ; and, on close comparison, it hasbeen found, that scarcely any of the species of the animatecreation in these extensive continents are identical with thoseinhabiting the old world. Yet the zoologist and botanist, wellacquainted with the geographical distribution of organic beingsin other parts of the globe, would have been able, if distinctgroups of species had been presented to them from theseregions, to recognise those which had been collected fromlatitudes within, and those which were brought from withoutthe tropics.Before we attempt to explain the probable causes of greatvicissitudes of temperature on the earth's surface, we shall takea rapid view of some of the principal data which appear towarrant, to the utmost extent, the popular opinions nowentertained on the subject. To insist on the soundnessof the inference, is the more necessary, because some zoologistshave of late undertaken to vindicate the uniformity ofthe laws of nature, not by accounting for former fluctuationsin climate, but by denying the value of the evidence on thissubject *.It is not merely by reasoning from analogy that we are ledto infer a diminution of temperature in the climate of Europe ;there are direct proofs in confirmation of the same doctrine, in theonly countries hitherto investigated by expert geologists wherewe could expect to meet with direct proofs. It is not in Englandor Northern France, but around the borders of the Mediterranean,from the South of Spain to Calabria, and in the islandsof the Mediterranean, that we must look for conclusive evidenceon this question; for it is not in strata, where theSee two articles by the Rev. Dr. Fleming, in the Edinburgh New Phil. Jour.No. 12, p. 277, April, 1829 ; and No. 15, p. 65, Jan. 1830.94 Canoe OP CLIMATEorganic remains belong to extinct spedes, but where livingspecies abound in a fossil state* that a theory of climate canbe subjected to the experiments crucis. In Sicily, Ischiaand Calabria, where the fossil testaoea of the more recentstrata belong almost entirely to species now known to inhabitthe Mediterranean, the conchologist remarks, that individualsin the inland deposits exceed in their average size their livinganalogues *• Yet no doubt can be entertained, on the groundof such difference in their dimensions, of their specific identitybecause the living individuals attain sometimes, though rarely,the average size of the fossils; and so perfect is the preservationof the latter, that they retain, in some instances, theircolour, which affords an additional element of comparison.As we proceed northwards in the Italian peninsula, and passfrom the region of active, to that of extinct volcanos — fromdistricts now violently convulsed from time to time, to thosewhich are comparatively undisturbed by earthquakes, we findthe assemblage of fool shells, in the modem (Subapennine)strata, to depart somewhat more widely from the type of theneighbouring seas. The proportion of species, identifiablewith those now living in the Mediterranean, is still considerable; but it no longer predominates, as in the South of Italy,over the unknown species. Although occurring in localitieswhich are removed several degrees farther from the equator(as at Sienna, Parma, Asti, &c.), the shells yield clear indicationsof a hotter climate. Many of them are common to theSubapennine hills, to the Mediterranean, and to the IndianOcean. Those in the fossil state, and their living analoguesfrom the tropics, correspond in size ; whereas the individualsof the same species from the Mediterranean are dwarfish and• I collected several hundred impedes of shells in Sicily, sono from an elevationof several thousand feet, and forty species or more in Ischia, partly from an elevationof above one thousand feet, and these were carefully compared with recentgulls proceed by Professor O. O. Costa, from the Neapolitan seas. Not onlywcro the fossil species for the roost part identical with those now living, but thorelative abundance in which defiant species occur iq the strata and in the seacorresponds in a remarkable manner. Yet the larger average sic of the fossilindividuals of many species was very striking. A comparison of the fossil slicesof the more modem strata of Calabria and Otranto; in the collection of ProfessorCosta, afforded similar results.IN THE Northern BBlf Sphere. 95degenerate, and stunted in their growth, for want of conditionswhich the Indian Ocean still supplies *.This evidence amounts to demonstration, and is not neutral*iced by any facts of a conflicting character; such for instance,as the association, in the same group, of individuals referableto spedes now confined to arctic regions. On the contrary,whenever any of the fossils shells are identified with livingspecies foreign to the Mediterranean, it is not in the NorthernOcean, but between the tropics, that they must be sought f.On the other hand, the associated unknown spedes belong,for the most part, to genera which are either exclusivelylimited to equinoctial regions, or are now most largely developedthere. Of the former, the genus Pleurotoma| is aremarkable example; of the latter, the genus Cyprian §.When we proceed to the central and noi^them parts of Europe,far from the modern theatres of volcanic action, andvrhere there is no evidence of considerable inequalities of theearth's surface having been produced since the present speciesProfessor Guidotti, of Parma, whose collection of Subapexmine shells is unrivalled,and who has obtained from the North of Italy above twelve hundredspecies, showed me numerous suites of specimens in a fossil state, as well as fromtime Mediterranean and Indian seas,' illustrating these views. Among other ex-^amples, the Bulla linaria a very common shell, is invariably found fossil of thesame magnitude as it now reaches in the Indian sea, and much smaller in a livingstate in the Mediterranean, The common Orthoceras of the Mediterranean, O.nphanista, attains larger average dimensions in a fossil, than in a recent state*ProleKor Corelli, of Turin, who has above eight hundred species of shells fromthe Subapennines in the public museum, pointed out to me many examples, inconfirmation of the same point.f Thus, for example, Rostellaria airvirostris, found fossil by Signor Corellinear Turin, is only known at present as an Indian shell. Murex comets, fossilst Asti, b now oily known recent in warmer latitudes, the only localities given byLinnaeus and Lamarck being the African and Great Indian Oceans. Oonuaantedihivianits cannot be distinguished from a shell now brought from Owhyhec.Among other familiar instances mentioned to me by Italian naturalists, in confirmationof the same point, Buccinum clathratinn, Lamas cited ; but Professor Costaassured me that this shell, although extremely rare, still occurs in the Mediterranean.I Of the genus Pleurotoma, no hiring representative has yet been found in theMediterranean ; yet no less than twenty«£ve ri|)ecies are now to be seen in themuseum at Turin, all procured by Professor Corelli from the Subapennine strataof nordiem Italy. In a fossil state, they are associated with many shells, specificcall identical with testacea, now hiring in the Mediterranean,§ Hie genus Cyprea is represented by many large fossil spedes in the Sub-apenninehills, with which are associated one small, and two minute species ofthe same genus, which alone are now found in the Mediterranean.96 CHANGE OP CLIMATEwere in existence, our opportunities are necessarily morelimited of procuring evidence from the contents of marinestrata. It is only in lacustrine deposits, or in ancient river-beds,or in the sand and gravel of laud-floods, or the stalagmiteof ancient caverns once inhabited by wild beasts, that wecan obtain access to proofs of the changes which animal lifeunderwent during those periods when the marine strataalready adverted to were deposited farther to the south. Asfar, however, as proofs from analogy can be depended upon,nothing can be more striking than the harmony of the testimonyderived from the last-mentioned sources. We oftenfind, in such situations, the remains of extinct species of quadrupedssuch as the elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, hyena,and tiger, which belong to genera now confined to warmerregions. Some of the accompanying fossil species, which areidentifiable with those now living, belong to animals whichinhabit the same latitudes at present. * It seems, therefore,fair to infer, that the same change of climate which hascaused certain Indian species of testacea to become rare, or todegenerate in size, or to disappear from the Mediterranean,and certain genera of the Subapennine hills, now exclusivelytropical, to retain no longer any representatives in the adjoiningseas, has also contributed to the annihilation of certaingenera of land-mammifera, which inhabited the continents atabout the same epoch. The mammoth (Elephant primigenius),and other extinct animals of the same era, may not haverequired the same temperature as their living congeners withinthe tropics ; but we may infer, that the climate was milderBones of the mammoth have been recently found at North Cliff, in the countyof York, in a lacustrine formation, in which all the land and fresh-water shells,thirteen in number, have been accurately identified with species and varieties nowexisting in that country. Bones of the Bison, an animal now inhabiting a coldor temperate climate, have also been found in the same place. Thai these quadrupeds,and tile indigenous species of testacea associated with them, were all contemporaryinhabitants of Yorkshire (a fact of the greatest importance in geobgy),has been established by unequivocal proofs, by the Rev. W. V. Vernon, whocaused a pit to be sunk to the depth of more than two hundred feet, through undisturbedstrata, in which the remains of the mammoth were found imbedded togetherwith the shells, in a deposit which had evidently resulted from tranquilwaters.— Phil. Mag. Sept. 1829, and Jan. 1830. These facts, as Mr. Vernonobserves, indicate that there has been little alteration in the temperature of theselatitudes since the mammoth lived there.SIBERIAN MAMMOTHS. 97than that' now experienced in some of the regions once inhabitedby them, because, in Northern Russia, where their bonesare found in immense numbers, it would be difficult, if notimpossible, for such animals to obtain subsistence at present,during an arctic winter *• It has been said, that as the modernnorthern animals migrate, the Siberian elephant may also haveshifted his place during the inclemency of the seasons 9 butthis conjecture seems forced, even in regard to the elephant,and still more so, when applied to the Siberian rhinoceros,found in the frozen gravel of that country ; as animals of thisgenus are heavy and slow in their motions, and can hardly besupposed to have accomplished great periodical migrations tosouthern latitudes. That the mammoth, however, continuedfor a long time to exist in Siberia after the winters had becomeextremely cold, is demonstrable, since their bones are found inicebergs, and in the frozen gravel, in such abundance as couldonly have been supplied by many successive generations. Somany skeletons could not have belonged to herds which livedat one time in the district, even if those northern countrieshad once been clothed with vegetation as luxuriant as that ofan Indian jungle. But, if we suppose the change to havebeen extremely slow, and to have consisted, not so much in adiminution of the mean annual temperature, as in an alterationfrom what has been termed an " insular ^^ to an " excessive"climate, from one in which the temperature of winter andsummer were nearly equalized to one wherein the seasons wereviolently contrasted, we may, perhaps, explain the phenomenon*Siberia and other arctic regions, after having possessed foragesa more uniform temperature, may, after certain changesin the form of the arctic land, have become occasionally exposedI fully agree with Dr. Fleming, that the kind of food which the existing speciesof elephant prefers will not enable us to determine, or even to offer a feasible conjecture,concerning that of the extinct species. No one, as he observes, acquaintedwith the gramineoos character of the food of our fallow-deer, stag, or roe, wouldhave assigned a lichen to the rein<lecr. But, admitting that the trees and herbageon which the fossil elephants and rhinoceroses may have fed were not of a tropicalcharacter, but such perhaps as now grow in the temperate zone, it is still highlyimprobable that the vegetation which nourished these great quadrupeds was asscanty as that of our arctic regions, or that it was covered during the grater part ofevery year by snow.f Dr. Fleming, Edin. New Phil. Joum. No. xii. p. 285. April, 1829.Vol. I. H98 SIBERIAN llAMlfOTHS.to extremely severe winters. When these first occurred atdistant intervals, the drift snow would fill the valleys, andherds of herbivorous quadrupeds would be surprised andburied in a frozen mass, as often happens to cattle and humanbeings, overwhelmed, in the Alpine valleys of Switzerland byavalanches. When valleys have become filled with ice, asthose of Spitsbergen, the contraction of the mass causes innumerabledeep rents such as are seen in the mer de glare onMont Blanc. These deep crevices usually become filled withloose snow, but sometimes a thin covering is drifted across themouth of the chasm capable of sustaining a certum weight.Such treacherous bridges are liable to give way when heavyanimals are crossing, which are then precipitated at once intothe body of a glacier, which slowly descends to the sea, andbecomes a floating iceberg *. As bears, foxes, and deer nowabound in Spitsbergen, we may confidently assume that theimbedding of animal remains in the glaciers of that island mustbe an event of almost annual occurrence t* The conversion ofdrift snow into permanent glaciers and icebergs, when it happensto become covered over with alluvial matter, transportedby torrents and floods, is by no means a rare phenomenon inthe arctic regions |. During a series of milder seasons interredDr. Lfttta'i aceoimi of hii escape, when the covering of a oeviee in aglacier of Spitsbergen gave way with him aa he passed. £d. New Phil. JounuNo. V. p. 95. June, 1827.f Dr. Richardson tells me, that in North America, about lat 65°, he fotmd thecarcase of a deer, which had fallen into a fissure in a rock. It had become buriedin snow, and the flesh, after the animal had been buried three months, had onlybecome slightly putrescent In the innumerable fissures, traversing a slipperyglacier, these accidents must be far more frequent, so often as herbivorous animalspass over them in their migrations, or when they hastily cross them when pursuedby beasts of prey.I Along the coast, in particular, E. and W. of the Mackenzie river, when theaea is frozen over, the drift snow from the land forms a talus abutting against aperpendicular cliff. On the melting of the snow, torrents rush down from theland, charged with gravel and soil, and, falling over the edge of the cliff, cover thesnow, which is often of considerable depth, with alluvium. Water, if any infiltrationtakes place, is frozen before it penetrates to the bottom of the mass, which isat last consolidated into a compact iceberg, protected from the heat of the sun, bya covering of alluvium, on which vegetation often flourishes. I am indebted toDr. Richardson for this information, who has seen permanent glacier, forming inthis manner, in districts of North America now inhabited by many large ho-MPorous animals. The same process must evidently take place under river cIi£Bi|as well as along the sea-shore.SIBERIAN MAMMOTHS. 99evening between the severe winters, the mammoths may haverecovered their numbers, and the rhinoceroses may have multipliedagain so that the repetition of such catastrophes may .have been indefinite. The increasing cold, and greater frequencyof inclement winters, would at last thin their numbers,and their final extirpation would be consummated by therapid augmentation of other herbivorous quadrupeds, morefitted for the new climate.That the greater part of the elephants lived in Siberia afterit had become subject to intense cold, is confirmed, among otherreasons, by the state of the ivory, which has been so largelyexported in commerce. Its perfect preservation indicates,that from the period when the individuals died, their remainswere either buried in a frozen soil, or at least were notexposed to decay in a warm atmosphere. The same conclusionmay be deduced from the clothing of the mammoth,of which the entire carcase was discovered by Mr. Adams onthe shores of the frozen ocean, near the mouth of the riverLena, inclosed in a mass of ice. The skin of that individualwas covered with long hair and with thick wool, about aninch in length. Bishop Hebe informs us, that along thelower range of the Himalaya mountains, in the north-easternborders of the Delhi territory, between lat. S9° and 30^, he sawan Indian elephant covered with shaggy hair. In that region,where, within a short space, a nearly tropical, and a coldclimate meet, dogs and horses become covered, in the courseof a winter or two, with shaggy hair, and many other speciesbecome, in as short a time, clothed with the same fine shortshawl-wool, which distinguishes the indigenous species of thecountry. Lions, tigers, hyaenas, are there found with elks,chamois, and other species of genera usually abundant incolder latitudes*.If we pass from the consideration of these more modemdeposits whether of marine or continental origin, in which existingspecies are intermixed with the extinct, to strata of somewhathigher antiquity, (older tertiary strata, Calcaire Grossier,London clay, fresh-water formations of Paris and Isle ofWight, &c* ,) we can only reason from analogy, smce the species,Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Provinces of India, toL u. pp.166—219.H 2100 FOSSIL COAL PLANTS.whether of mammary, reptiles, or testacea, are scarcely in anyinstance identifiable with any now in being *. In these strata,whether they were formed in seas or lakes, we find the remainsof many animals, analogous to those of hot climates, such as thecrocodile, turtle, and tortoise, and many large shells of the genusnautilus, and plants indicating such a temperature as is nowfound along the borders of the Mediterranean. A great intervalof time appears to have elapsed between the deposition ofthe last mentioned (tertiary) strata, and the secondary formations,which constitute the principal portion of the more elevatedland in Europe. In these secondary rocks a very distinctassemblage of organized fossils are entombed, all ofunknown species, and many of them referable to genera, andfamilies now most abundant between the tropics. Among themost remarkable, are many gigantic reptiles, some of themherbivorous, others carnivorous, and far exceeding in size anynow known even in the torrid zone. The genera are for themost part extinct, but some of them, as the crocodile andmonitor, have still representatives in the warmest parts of theearth. Coral reefs also were evidently numerous in the seasof the same period, and composed of species belonging togenera now characteristic of a tropical climate. The numberof immense chambered shells also leads us to infer an elevatedtemperature ; and the associated fossil plants, although imperfectlyknown, tend to the same conclusion, the Cycadeae constitutingthe most numerous family. But the study of thefossil flora of the coal deposits of still higher antiquity, hasyielded the most extraordinary evidence of an extremely hotclimate, for it consisted almost exclusively of large vascularcryptogamic plants. We learn, from the labours of M. Ad.Brongniart, that there existed, at that epoch, Equiseta upwardsof ten feet high, and from five to six inches in diameter ; treeIn the London clay, I believe no recent species are yet discovered. But oftwelve hundred species of shells, collected from the different fresh-water and marineformations of the Paris basin, M. Deshayes informs me, that there are some,)put not perhaps exceeding one in a hundred, which he regards as perfectly identicalwith living species. Among these are Melanopsis buccinoides, from Epemais,now living in the Grecian archipelago, and Melania iuquinata, now found betweenthe tropics in the Philippine islands. Venus divaricata is not uncommon in thecalcaire grossier at Grignon.- FOSSIL COAL PLANTS. 101ferns of from forty to fifty feet in height, nd .a,rborescentLycopodiaces, of from sixty to seventy feet higb'**-. Of theabove classes of vegetables, the species are all small ^t presentin cold climates ; while in tropical regions, there occur, togetherwith small species, many of a much greater size, tint theirdevelopment at present, even in the hottest parts of the globe,is inferior to that indicated by the petrified forms of thecoal formation. An elevated and uniform temperature, andgreat humidity in the air, are the causes most favourable forthe numerical predominance, and the great size of these plantswithin the torrid zone at present, f If the gigantic size andform of these fossil plants are remarkable, still more so is theextent of their geographical distribution ; for impressions ofarborescent ferns, such as characterize our English carboniferousstrata, have been brought from Melville island, inlatitude 15°%. The corals and chambered shells, which occurin beds inter stratified with the coal (as in mountain limestone),aiTord also indications of a warm climate, — the gigantic of this era being, to recent multilocular shells, what thefossil ferns, equiseta, and other plants of the coal strata, are incomparison with plants now growing within the tropics. Theseshdls also, like the vegetable impressions, have been broughtfrom rocks in very high latitudes in North America.Consid. G^ii£rale« sur la Nature de la Vegetation, &c. Ann. des Sci. Nat.Nov. 1828.f Humboldt in speaking of the vegetation of the present era, considers the lawswhich govern the distribution of vegetable forms to be sufficiently constant toenable a botanist, who is informed of the number of one class of plants, to conjecture,with tolerable accuracy, the relative number of all others. It is premature,perhaps, to apply this law of proportion to the fossil botany of strata, between thecoal formation and the chalk, as M. Adolph Brongniart has attempted, as thenumber of species hitherto procured is so inconsiderable, that the quotient would bematerially altered by the addition of one or two species. It may also be objected,that the fossil flora consists of such plants as may accidentally have been floatedinto seas, lakes, or estuaries, and may often, perhaps always, give a false representationof the numerical relations of families, then living on the land. Yet, afterallowing for all liability to error on these grounds, the argument founded on thecomparative numbers of the fossil plants of the carboniferous strata is very strong.Martins informs us, that on seeing the tesselated surface of the stems of arborescentferns in Brazil, he was reminded of their prototypes, in the impressionswhich he had seen in the coal-mines of Germany.I Ifr. Konig*s description of the rocks brought home by Captain Any, Joumof Science, voL xv. p. 20*102 '' FOSSIL COAL PLANTS*In vain.itikiurld we attempt to explain away the phenomenaof the c^Jb*o£iiferouB and other secondary formations, by supposing'that the plants were drifted from equatorial seas.Duiih;^ the accumulation, and consolidation of so many sedimentarydeposits, and the various movements and dislocationst9' Which they were subjected at different periods, rivers andXsfiirents must often have changed their direction, and wood^ '•.'Alight as often be floated from the arctic towards tropical seas,'.>' "as in an opposite direction. It is undeniable, that the mate^ ' rials for future beds of lignite and coal are now amassed inhigh latitudes far from the districts where the forests grew,and on shores where scarcely a stunted shrub can now exist.The Mackenzie, and other rivers of North America, carrypines with their roots attached for many hundred milestowards the north, into the arctic se, where they are imbeddedin deltas, and some of them drifted still farther, by currentstowards the pole. But such agency, although it might accountfor some partial anomalies in the admixture of vegetable remainsof different climes, can by no means weaken the argumentsdeduced from the general character of fossil vegetable remains.We cannot suppose the leaves of tree ferns to be transported bywater for thousands of miles, without being injured ; nor, if thiswere possible, would the same hypothesis explain the presence ofuninjured corals and multilocular shells of contemporary origin,for these must have lived in the same latitudes where they arenow inclosed in rocks. The plants, moreover, whose remainshave given rise to the coal beds must be supposed to havegrown upon the same land, the destruction of which proddedmaterials for the sandstones and conglomerates of that groupof strata. The coarseness of the particles of many of theserocks attests that they were not borne from very remote localities,but were most probably derived from islands in a vastsea, which was continuous, at that time, over a great part ofthe northern hemisphere, as is demonstrated by the greatextent of the mountain and transition limestone formations.The same observation is applicable to many secondary strataof a later epoch. There must have been dry land in theselatitudes, to provide materials by its disintegration for sandstones,—to afford a beach whereon the oviparous reptiles depositedtheir eggs, — to furnish an habitation for the opossum ofCHANGE OF CLIMATE. 103Stonesfield, and the insects of Solenhofen. The vegetation ofthe same lands, therefore, must in general have imparted tofossil floras their prevailing character.From the considerations above enumerated we must infer,that the remains both of the animal and vegetable kingdompreserved in strata of different ages, indicate that there hasbeen a great diminution of temperature throughout the northernhemisphere, in the latitudes now occupied by Europe,Asia, and America. The change has extended to the arcticcircle as well as to the temperate zone. The heat and humidityof the air and the uniformity of climate, appear to havebeen most remarkable when the oldest strata hitherto discoveredwere formed. The approximation to a climate similarto that now enjoyed in these latitudes, does not commence tillthe era of the formations termed tertiary, and while the differenttertiary rocks were deposited in succession, the temperatureseems to have been still farther lowered, and to have continuedto diminish gradually, even after the appearance of a greatportion of existing species upon the earth.CHAPTER VII.IOn the causes of vicissitudes in climate — Remarks on the present diffusion of heatover the globe — On the dependence of the mean temperature on the relativeposition of land and sea — Isothermal lines — Currents from equatorial regions— Drifting of Icebergs — Different temperature of Northern and Southeyhemispheres — Combination of causes which might produce the extremecold of which the earth's surface is susceptible — On the conditions necci)paryfor the production of the extreme of heat, and its probable effects on organicife.As the proofs enumerated in the last chapter indicate that theearth's surface has experienced great changes of climate sincethe deposition of the older sedimentary strata, we have next toinquire, how such vicissitudes can be reconciled with the existingorder of nature* The cosmogony has availed himself ofthis, as of every obscure problem in geology, to confirm hisviews concerning a period when the laws of the animate andinanimate world were wholly distinct from those now established; and he has in this, as in all other cases, succeeded sofar,as to divert attention from that class of facts, which, iffully understood, might probably lead to an explanationof the phenomenon. At first, it was imagined that the earth'saxis had been for ages perpendicular to the plane of the eclipticso that there was a perpetual equinox, and unity of seasonsthroughout the year : — that the planet enjoyed this * paradingstate until the era of the great flood ; but in that catastrophe,whether by the shock of a comet, or some other convulsion, itlost its equal poize, and hence the obliquity of its axis andwith that the varied seasons of the temperate zone, and the longnights and days of the polar circles. When the advancement ofastronomical science had exploded this theory, it was assumed,that the earth at its creation was in a state of fluidity, andred hot, and that ever since that era it had been cooling down,contracting its dimensions, and acquiring a solid crust, — sanhypothesis equally arbitrary, but more calculated for lastingLAWS Scorning THE DIFFUSION OF HEAT. 105popularity, because, by referring the mind directly to thebeginning of things, it requires no support from observations,nor frcMn any ulterior hypothesis. They who are satisfiedwith this solution are relieved from all necessity of inquiryinto the present laws which regulate the diffusion of heat overthe surface, for however well these may be ascertained, theycannot possibly afford a full and exact elucidation of the internalchanges of an embryo world. As well might an ornithologiststudy the plumage and external form of a full-fledgedbird, in the hope of divining the colour of its egg, or the mysteriousmetamorphoses of the yolk during incubation.But if, instead of vague conjectures as to what might havebeen the state of the planet at the era of its creation, we fixour thoughts steadily on the connection at present betweenclimate and the distribution of land and sea ; and if we thenconsider what influence former fluctuations in the physicalgeography of the earth must have had on superficial temperature,we may perhaps approximate to a true theory. Ifdoubt still remain, it should be ascribed to our ignorance of thelaws of Nature, not to. revolutions in her economy; — it shouldstimulate us to farther research, not tempt us to indulge ourfancies in framing imaginary systems for the government ofinfant worlds.In considering the laws which regulate the diffusion of heatover the globe, says Humboldt, we must beware not to regardthe climate of Europe as a type of the temperature which allcountries placed under the same latitudes enjoy. The physicalsciences, observes this philosopher, always bear the impressof the places where they began to be cultivated ; and, as ingeology, an attempt was at first made to refer all the volcanicphenomena to those of the volcanos in Italy, so in meteorology,a small part of the old world, the centre of the primitive civilizationof Europe, was for a long time considered a type towhich the climate of all corresponding latitudes might bereferred. But this region, constituting only one-seventh ofthe whole globe, proved eventually to be the exception to thegeneral rule; and for the same reason we may warn thegeologist to be on his guard, and not hastily to assume thatthe temperature of the earth in the present era is a type ofthat which most usually obtains, since he contemplates far106 OSPBKDBUCS or CUMATBmightier alterations in die position of land and tea, than thoacwhich now cause the climate of £unite to differ from that ofother countries in the same parallels.It is now well ascertained that zones of equal warmth, bothin the atmosphere and in the waters of the ocean, are neitherparallel to the equator nor to each other*. It is also discoveredthat the same mean annual temperature may exist intwo places which enjoy very different climates, for the seasonsmay be nearly equalized or violently contrasted. Thus thelines of equal winter temperature do not coincide with thelines of equal annual heat, or the isothermal lines. The deviationsof all these lines from the same parallel of latitude,are determined by a multitude of circumstances, among theprincipal of which are the position, direction, and elevation ofthe continents and islands, the position and depth of the sea,and the direction of currents and of winds.It is necessary to go northwards in Europe in order tofind the same mean quantity of annual heat as in North America.On comparing these two continents, it is found thatplaces situated in the same latitudes have sometimes a meandifference of temperature amounting to 11^ or even sometimes17® of Fahrenheit ; and places on the two continents whichhave the same mean temperature, have sometimes a differencein latitude of from T* to 13° f. The principal cause of greaterintensity of cold in corresponding latitudes of North Americaand Europe, is the connexion of the former country with thepolar circle, by a large tract of land, some of which is fromthree to five thousand feet in height, and, on the other hand, theseparation of Europe from the arctic circle by an ocean. Theocean has a tendency to preserve every where a mean temperature,which it communicates to the contiguous land, so that ittempers the climate, moderating alike an excess of heat orcold. The elevated land, on the other hand, rising to theWe are indebted to Baron Alex. Humboldt for collecting together in a beautifulessay, the scattered data on which some approximation to a true theory of the distributionof heat over the globe may be founded. Many of these data are derivedfrom the author's own observations, and many from the works of M. Provoston the radiation of heat, and other writers. See Humboldt on Isothermal Lines,M£moiresd*Arcueiil, tom. iil translated in the Edin.Phiil. Joum. vol. iiL July, 1S20.t Humboldt*! tables Essay on Isochronal Lines &cON THE POglTION OF LAND AND* Sea 107colder regions of the atmosphere, becomes a great reservoir ofhoe and snow, attracts, condenses, and congeals vapour, andcommunicates its cold to the adjoining country. For thisreason, Greenland, forming part of a continent which stretchesnorthward to the send degree of latitude, experiences underthe GOth parallel a more rigorous climate than Lapland underthe 72nd parallel.But if land be situated between the 40th parallel and theequator, it produces exactly the opposite effect, unless it be ofextreme height, for it then warms the tracts of land or sea thatintervene between it and the polar circle. For the surfacebeing in this case exposed to the vertical, or nearly verticalrays of the sun, absorbs a large quantity of heat, which it diffusesby radiation into the atmosphere. For this reason, thewestern parts of the old continent derive warmth from Africa,** which, like an immense furnace'" says Malte-Brun ♦, ** distributesits heat to Arabia, to Turkey in Asia, and to EuropeOn the contrary, Asia in its north-eastern extremity, experiencesin the same latitude extreme cold, for it has land onthe north between the 60th and 70th parallel, while to thesouth it is separated from the equator by the North Pacific.In consequence of the more equal temperature of the watersof the ocean, the climate of islands and coasts differs essentiallyfrom that of the interior of continents, the former being characterizedby mild winters and less temperate summers ; for thesea breezes moderate the cold of winter, as well as the summerheat. When, therefore, we trace round the globe those beltsin which the mean annual temperature is the same, we oftenfind great differences in climate ; for there arc insular climateswhere the seasons are nearly equalized, and excessive climatesas they have been termed, where the temperature of winterand summer is strongly contrasted. The whole of Europe,compared with the eastern parts of America and Asia, has aninsular climate. The northern part of China, and the Atlanticregion of the United States, exhibit " excessive climates."We find at New York, says Humboldt, the summer of Romeand the winter of Copenhagen; at Quebec, the summer ofParis and the winter of Petersburg. At Pekin, in China,Phys. Geog. Book xvii.108 GULF STREAM.\('here the mean temperature of the yf ar is that of the coastsof Brittany, the scorching heats of summer are greater than atCairo and the winters as rigorous as at Psal ♦.If lines be drawn round the globe through all those placeswhich have the same winter temperature, they are found todeviate from the terrestrial parallels much farther than thelines of equal mean annual heat. For the lines of equalwinter in Europe are often curved so as to reach parallels oflatitude 9° or 10** distant from each other, whereas the isothermallines only differ from 4° to 6**.Among other influential causes both of remarkable diversityin the mean annual heat, and of unequal division of heatin the different seasons, are the direction of currents and theaccumulation and drifting of ice in high latitudes. That mostpowerful current, the Gulf stream, after doubling the Cape ofGood Hope, flows to the northward along the western coast ofAfrica, then crosses the Atlantic, and accumulates in the Gulfof Mexico. It then issues through the Straits of Bahama,running northwards at the rate of four miles an hour, andretains in the parallel of 38°, nearly one thousand miles fromthe above strait, a temperature 10^ Fahr. warmer than the air.The general climate of Europe is materially affected by thevolume of warmer water thus borne northwards, for it mountainsan open sea free from ice in the meridian of East Greenlandand Spitsbergen, and thus moderates the cold of all thelands lying to the south. Until the waters of the great currentreach the circumpolar sea, their specific gravity is lessthan that of the lower strata of water ; but when they arrivenear Spitsbergen, they meet with the water of melted ice whichis still lighter, for it is a well known law of this fluid, that itpasses the point of greatest density when cooled down below40^, and between that and the freezing point expands again.The warmer current, therefore, being now the heavier, sinksbelow the surface, so that in the lower regions it is found tobe from 16° to 20° Fahrenheit, above the mean temperatureof the climate. The movements of the sea, however, causethis under current sometimes to appear at the surface, andgreatly to moderate the cold +.On Isothermal Lies. f Scoresbyby's Arctic Regions vol i. p. 210.TEMPERATURE OF THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE. 109The great glaciers generated in the valleys of Spitsbergenin the 79^ of north latitude, are almost all cut off at the beach,being melted by the feeble remnant of heat returned by the Gulfstream. In Baffin's Bay, on the contrary, on the east coast ofold Greenland, where the temperature of the sea is not mitigatedby the same cause and where there is no warmer under-current,the glaciers stretch out from the shore, and furnish repeatedcrops of mountainous masses of ice which float off into theocean *. The number and dimensions of these bergs is prodigious.Capt. Ross saw several of them together in Baffin's Bayaground in water fifteen hundred feet deep ! Many of themare driven down into Hudson's Bay, and, accumulating there,diffuse excessive cold over the neighbouring continent, so thatCaptain Franklin reports, that at the mouth of Hayes river,which lies in the same latitude as the north of Prussia or thesouth of Scotland, ice is found every where in digging wells atthe depth of four feet !When we compare the climate of the northern and southernhemispheres, we obtain still more instruction in regard to theinfluence of the distribution of land and sea on climate. Thedry land in the southern hemisphere is to that of the northernin the ratio only of one to three, excluding from our considerationthat part which lies between the pole and the 74° of southlatitude, which has hitherto proved inaccessible. Thereto*finance of ice in the antarctic over the arctic zone is verygreat ; for that which encircles the southern pole, extends [tolower latitudes by ten degrees than that around the northpole-)-. It is probable that this remarkable difference isparty attributable, as Cook conjectured, to the existenceof a considerable tract of high land between the 70thparallel of south latitude and the pole. There is, however,Seoresby's Arctic Region, sol. i. p. 208d — Dr. Latta'a observations on tbOlden of Spitsbergen, &c. Edin. New Phil. Joum. vol. iii. p. 97.f Captain Weddell, in 1823, reached 3° farther than Captain Cook and arrivedat 74* IS' longitude, 34" 17' west. After having passed through a sea strewed withnumerous ice-islands, he arrived, in that high latitude, at an open ocean ; but evenif he had tailed 6" farther south, he would not have penetrated to higher latitudesthan Captain Any in the arctic circle, who reached lat. 81° KK north. Theimportant discovery, therefore, of Captain Wedded, does not destroy the presumption,that the general prevalence of ice, in low latitudes in the southern hemisphere,tfisa from the esdstenco of greater tracts of-land in the antarctic, than ia the^zcticocaan^110 DIFFERENCE OF CLIMATE IN NORTHERNanother reason suggested by Humboldt, to which great weightis due, — the small quantity of land in the tropical and temperatezones south of the line. If Africa and New Holland extendedfarther to the south, a diminution of ice would takeplace in consequence of the radiation of heat from these continentsduring summer, which would warm the contiguous seaand rarefy the air. The heated aerial currents would thenascend and flow more rapidly towards the south pole, andmoderate the winter. In confirmation of these views, it isstated that the cap of ice, which extends as far as the GS" and71^ of south latitude, advances more towards the equatorwhenever it meets a free sea ; that is, wherever the extremitiesof the present continents are not opposite to it ; and this circumstanceseems explicable only on the principle above alludedto, of the radiation of heat from the lands so situated.Before the amount of difference between the temperature ofthe two hemispheres was ascertained, it was referred by astronomersto the acceleration of the earth's motion in its perihelion; in consequence of which the spring and summer ofthe southern hemisphere are shorter, by nearly eight days,than those seasons north of the equator. A sensible effect isprobably produced by this source of disturbance, but it isquite inadequate to explain the whole phenomenon. It is,however, of importance to the geologist to bear in mind, thatin consequence of the procession of the equinoxes the two hemispheresreceive alternately, each for a period of upwards of10,000 years, a greater share of solar light and heat. Thiscause may sometimes tend to counterbalance inequalities re*suiting from other circumstances of a far more influentialnature; but, on the other hand, it must sometimes tend toincrease the extreme of deviation which certain combinationsof causes produce at distant epochs. But, whatever maynow be the inferiority of heat in the temperate and arctic zonessouth of the line, it is quite evident that the cold would be farmore intense if there happened, instead of open sea, to be tractsof elevated land between the 55th and 70th parallel ; for, inSandwich land, in 54^ and 68° of south latitude, the perpetualsnow and ice reach to the sea beach ; and what is still moreastonishing, in the island of Georgia, which is in the 53^ southlatitude, or the same parallel as the central counties of England,the perpetual snow descends to the level of the ocean. WhenAND SOUTHERN HEMISPHERES. Illwe consider this fact, and then recollect that the highest mountainsin Scotland do not attain the limit of perpetual snow on thisside of the equator, we learn that latitude is one only of manypowerful causes, which determine the climate of particular regionsof the globe. The permanence of the snow in this instance,is partly due to the floating ice which chills the atmosphere andcondenses the vapour, so that in summer the sun cannot piercethrough the foggy air. The distance to which icebergs floatfrom the polar regions on the opposite sides of the line, is, asmight have been anticipated, very different. Their extremelimit in the northern hemisphere appears to be the Azores(north latitude 4^^) , to which isles they are sometimes driftedfrom Boffins Bay *. But in the other hemisphere they havebeen seen, within the last two years, at different points off theCape of Good Hope, between latitude 36^ and S9° t- One ofthese was two miles in circumference, and 150 feet high;.Others rose from 350 to 800 feet above the level of the sea, andwere, therefore, of great volume below, since it is ascertainedby experiments on the buoyancy of ice floating in sea-water,that for every solid foot seen above, there must at least be eightfeet below water §. If ice islands from the north polar regionsfloated as far, they might reach Cape St. Vincent, and, thenbeing drawn by the current that always sets in from the Atlanticthrough the Straits of Gibraltar, be drifted into the Mediterranean,where clouds and mists would immediately deformthe serene sky of spring and summer.The great extent of sea gives a particular character to climatessouth of the equator, the winters being mild, and thesummers cold. Thus, in Van Demands land, correspondingnearly in latitude to Rome, the winters are more mild than atNaples, and the summers not warmer than those at Paris,which is T farther from the equator ||. The effect on vegetationis very remarkable : — tree ferns, for instance, which requireabundance of moisture, and an equalization of the seasons,• Bnmplet will be given in Major Rennes's forthcoming work on Currents.f On Icebergs in low Latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere, by Captain HoseHydrographer to the East India Company ; read to the Royal Society,February, 1830.X Edin. New PhiL Joum. No. xir. p. 193 ; January, 1830.f &koreaby*s Arctic Regions, vol. L, p. 234. || Humboldt, ib.112 CAUSES OPare found in Van Demands land in latitude 42^, and in NewZealand in south latitude 45^. The orchideous parasites alsoadvance towards the 38"" and 42'' of south latitude *.Having offered these brief remarks on the diffusion of heatover the globe in the present state of the surface, we shall nowproceed to speculate on the vicissitudes of climate, which mustattend those endless variations in the geographical features ofour planets which are contemplated in geology. In order toconfine ourselves within the strict limits of analogy, we shallassume, 1st, That the proportion of dry land to sea continuesalways the same. 2dly, That the volume of the land rising abovethe level of the sea, is a constant quantity ; and not only thatits mean, but that its extreme height, are only liable to triflingvariations. 3dly, That both the mean and extreme depthof the sea are equal at every epoch ; and, 4tlily, It willbe consistent, with due caution, to assume, that the groupingtogether of the land in great continents is a necessary part ofthe economy of nature ; for it is possible, that the laws whichgovern the subterranean forces, and which act simultaneouslyalong certain lines, cannot but produce, at every epoch, continuousmountain-chains ; so that the subdivision of the wholeland into innumerable islands may be precluded. If it be objected,that the maximum of elevation of land and depth of seaare probably not constant, nor the gathering together of allthe lands in certain parts, nor even perhaps the relative extentof land and water; we reply, that the arguments which we shalladduce will be greatly strengthened, if, in these peculiarities ofthe surface, there be considerable deviations from the presenttype. If, for example, all other circumstances being the same,the land is at one time more divided into islands than at another,a greater uniformity of climate might be produced, the mean temperatureremaining unaltered ; or if, at another era, there weremountains higher than the Himalaya, these, when placed in highTliese forms of vegetation might perhaps he developed in still higher latitudes, ifthe ice in the antarctic circle did not extend farther from the pole than in the arcticHmnholdt ohsenres, that it is in the mountainous temperate hmnid, and shadyparts of the equatorial regions, that the family of ferns produces the greatest numberof species. As we know, therefore, that elevation often compensates the effectof latitude in plants, we may easily understand that a class of vegetables whichgrow at a certain height in the torrid sone, would flourish on the plains far fromthe equator, provided the temperature throughout the year was equally uniform.CHANGES OF TEMPERATURE. 113latitudes would cause a greater excess of cold. So if we suppose,that at certain periods no chain of hills in the world rosebeyond the height of 10,000 feet, a greater heat might thenhave prevailed than is compatible with the existence of mountainsthrice that elevation.However constant we believe the relative proportion of seaand land to . continue, we know that there is annually somesmall variation in their respective geographical positions, andthat in every century the land is in some parts raised, and inothers depressed by earthquakes, and so likewise is the bed ofthe sea. By these and other ceaseless changes, the configurationof the earth's surface has been remodelled again andagain since it was the habitation of organic beings, and thebed of the ocean has been lifted up to the height of some ofthe loftiest mountains. The imagination is apt to take alarm,when called upon to admit the formation of such irregularitiesof the crust of the earth, after it had become the habitation ofliving creatures ; but if time be allowed, the operation need notsubvert the ordinary repose of nature, and the result is insignificant,if we consider how slightly the highest mountainchains cause our globe to differ from a perfect sphere. Chimborazo,although it rises to more than 21,000 feet abovethe surface of the sea, would only be represented on an artificialglobe, of about six feet in diameter, by a grain of sandless than one twentieth of an inch in thickness *. The superficialinequalities of the earth, then, may be deemed minute inquantity, and their distribution at any particular epoch must beregarded in geology as temporary peculiarities, like the heightand outline of the cone of Vesuvius in the interval between twoeruptions. But, although the unevenness of the surface is sounimportant, in reference to the magnitude of the globe, it ison the position and direction of these small inequalities thatthe state of the atmosphere and both the local and generalclimate are mainly dependent.Before we consider the effect which a material change inthe distribution of land and sea must occasion, it may be wellto remark, how greatly organic life may be affected by thoseminor mutations, which need not in the least degree alter theMilte-Bnin'si System of Geography, book i. p. 6.Vol. I. I114 CA0SBS OFgeneral temperature. Thus, for example, if we suppose, by aseries of convulsions, a certain part of Greenland to becomesea, and, in compensation, a tract of land to rise and connectSpitsbergen with Lapland, — an accession not greater in amountthan one which the geologist can prove to have occurred incertaindistricts bordering the Mediterranean, within a comparativelymodern period, — this altered form of the landmight occasion an interchange between the climate of certainparts of North America and of Europe, which lie in correspondinglatitudes. Many European species wotdd probablyperish in consequence, because the mean temperature would begreatly lowered ; and others would fail in America because itwould there be raised. On the other hand, in places wherethe mean annual heat remained unaltered, some species whichflourish in Europe, where the seasons are more uniform, wouldbe unable to resist the great heat of the North American summer,or the intense cold of the winter ; while others, now fittedby their habits for the great contrast of the American seasons,would not be fitted for the insular climate of Europe*.Many plants, for instance, will endure a severe frost, butcannot ripen their seeds without a certain intensity of summerheat and a certain quantity of light; others cannot endurethe same intensity of heat or cold. It is now established,that many species of animals, which are at present the contemporariesof man, have survived great changes in thephysical geography of the globe. If such species be termedmodern, in comparison to races which preceded them, thirremains, nevertheless, enter into submarine deposits manyhundred miles in length, and which have since been raisedfrom the deep to no inconsiderable altitude. When, therefore,it is shewn that changes of the temperature of the atmospheremay be the consequence of such physical revolutions of thesurface, we ought no longer to wonder that we find the distributionof existing species to be locals in regard to longitudeas well as latitude. If all species were now, by an exertion ofcreative power, to be diffused uniformly throughout thosesones where there is an equal degree of heat, and in all respectsa similar climate, they would begin from this moment to• According to Humboldt, Uie Tine can be cultivated with advantage 10* fairther north in Europe, than in North America.CHANGES OF TEMPERATURE. 115depart more and more from their original distribution Aquaticlind terrestrial species would be displaced, as Hooke longago observed, so often as land and water exchanged places ; andthere would also, by the formation of new mountains and otherchanges, be transpositions of climate, contributing, in the mannerbefore alluded to, to the local extermination of species.If we now proceed to consider the circumstances requiredfor a general change of temperature, it will appear, from thefacts and principles already laid down, that whenever a greaterextent of high land is collected in the polar reasons, the coldwill augment ; and the same result will be produced when thereshall be more sea between or near the tropic ; while, on thecontrary, so often as the above conditions are reversed, theheat will be greater. If thb be admitted, it will follow as acorollary, that unless the superficial inequalities of the earthbe fixed and permanent, there must be never-ending fluctuationsin the mean temperature of every zone, and that theclimate of one era can no more be a type of every other, thanis one of our four seasons of all the rest. It has been wellsaid, that the earth is covered by an ocean, and in the midstof this ocean there are two great islands, and many smallerones ; for the whole of the continents and islands occupy anarea scarcely exceeding one-fourth of the whole superficies ofthe spheroid. Now, on a fair calculation, we may expectthat at any given epoch, there will not be more than aboutone-fourth dry land in a particular region ; such, for examplesas the arctic and antarctic circles. If, therefore, at presentthere should happen in the only one of these repos which wecan explore, to be much more than this average proportion ofland, and some of it above five thousand feet in height, thisalone affords ground for concluding, that in the present stateof things, the mean heat of the climate is below that which theearth's surface, in its more ordinary state, would enjoy. Thispresumption is heightened, when we remember that the meandepth of the Atlantic ocean is calculated to be about three miles,and that of the Pacific four miles * ; so that we might look notonly for more than two-thirds sea in the frigid zones, but for• See Young*! Nat. Phil. Let. 47. Laplace leenu often to have changed hitopinion, reasoning from the depth required to account for the phenomena of thetiidet 'f but hit final conclusion respecting the aea waa " que sa profondeur moyens• 12116 Cutis OFwater of great depth, which ooiild not readily be reduced to thefreezing point. The same opinion is farther confirmed, whenwe compare the quantity of land lying between the polesand the Both parallels c^ north and south latitude, and thequantity placed between those parallel and the equator; for itis clear, that at present we must have not only more than theusual degree of cold in the polar regions, but also kss than theaverage quantity of heat generated in the intertropical one.In order to simplify our view of the various changes in create,which different combinations of geographical circumstancesmay produce, we shall first consider the conditionsnecessary for bring about the extreme of cold, or what maybetermed the winter of the ** gnat year'' or geological cede,and afterwards, the conditions requisite fbr producing themaximum of heat, or the summer of the same year.To begin with the northern hemisphere. Let us supposethose hills of the Italian peninsula and of Sicily, which are ofcomparatively modem origin, and contain many fossil she'sIdentical with living species, to subside again into the sea, fromwhich they have been raised, and that an extent of land ofequal area and height (varying frcNn one to three thousandfeet) should rise up in the Arctic ocean, between Siberia andthe north pole. In speaking of such changes, we need notallude to ^ manner in which we conceive it possible that theymay be brought about, nor of the time required for theiraccomplishment, — preserving for a future occasion, not only theprocess that revolutions of equal magnitude have taken dace,but that analogous mutations are still in gradual progress.The alteration now supposed in the physical geography ofthe northern regions would cause additional snow and ice toaccumulate where now there is usually an open sea ; and thetemperature of the greater part of Europe would be somewhatlowered, so as to resemble more nearly that of correspondinglatitudes of North America ; or, in other words, it might benecessary to travel about 10^ farther south, in order to meetwith the same climate which we now enjoy. There would beno compensation derived fhmi the disappearance of land in theMediterranean countries ; for, on the contrary, the mean het ofest du meme ordre que la hauteur moyenne des continent et des Les au-dessus deson niveau, hauteur qui ne surpass pas mille metres (3280 ft)," Mec Celeste.Bk, U. St syst du Monde, p. 254.CHANGES OF TEMPERATURE. 117the soil so situated, is probably far above that which wouldbelong to the sea, by which we imagine it to be replaced. Butlet the configuration of the surface be still further varied, andlet some large district within or near the tropics, such asMexico for example, with its mountains rising to the height oftwelve thousand feet and upwards, be converted into sea,while lands of equal elevation and extent are transferred to thearctic circle. From this change there would, in the first place,result a sensible diminution of temperature near the tropic, forthe soil of Mexico would no longer be heated by the sun ; sothat the atmosphere would be less warm, as also the Atlantic,and the Gulf stream. On the other hand, the whole ofEurope, Northern Asia, and North America, would feel theinfluence of the enormous quantity of ice and snow, now generatedat vast heights on the new arctic continent. If, as wehave already seen, there are some points in the southern hemispherewhere snow is perpetual to the level of the sea, in latitudesas low as central England, such might now assuredly bethecase throughout a great part of Europe. If at present theextreme limits of drifted icebergs are the Azores, they mighteasily reach the equator after the changes above supposed.To pursue the subject still farther, let the Himalaya mountains,with the whole of Hindostan, sink down, and their placebe occupied by the Indian ocean, and then let an equal extentof territory and mountains, of the same vast height, stretchfrom North Greenland to the Orkney islands. It seems difficultto exaggerate the amount to which the climate of thenorthern hemisphere would now be cooled down. But, notwithstandingthe great refrigeration which would thus be produced,it is probable that the difference of mean temperaturebetween the arctic and equatorial latitudes would not beincreased in a very high ratio, for no great disturbance can bebrought about in the climate of a particular region, withoutimmediately affecting all other latitudes, however remote. Theheat and cold which surround the globe are in a state of constantand universal flux and reflux. The heated and rarefiedair is always rising and flowing from the equator towards thepoles in the higher regions of the atmosphere, and, in thelower, the colder air is flowing back to restore the equilibrium.That this circulation is constantly going on in the aerial curtisCAUSES OFrents is not disputed *, and that a corresponding interchangetakes place in the seas, is demonstrated, according to Humboldt,by the cold which is found to exist at great depthsbetween the tropics ; and, among other proofs, may be mentionedthe great volume of water which the Gulf stream isconstantly bearing northwards, while another current flowsfrom the north along the coast of Greenland and Labrador,and helps to restore the equilibrium currentsof heavier and colder water pass from the polestowards the equator, which cool the inferior parts of the ocean ;so that the heat of the torrid zone, and the cold of the polarcircle, balance each other. The refrigeration, therefore, of thepolar regions, resulting from the supposed alteration in thedistribution of land and sea, would be immediately communicatedto the tropics, and from them would extend to the antarcticcircle, where the atmosphere and the ocean would becooled, so that ice and snow would augment. Although themean temperature of higher latitudes in the southern hemisphereis, as we have stated, for the most part lower than thatof the same parallels in the northern, yet for a considerablespace on each side of the line, the mean annual heat of thewaters is found to be the same in corresponding parallels.When, therefore, by the new position of the land, the generatingof icebergs had become of frequent occurrence in the temperatezone, and when they were frequently drifted as far as theequator, the same degree of cold would immediately be communicatedas far as the tropic of Capricorn, and from thenceto the lands or ocean to the south. The freedom, then, of thecirculation of heat and cold from pole to pole being dulyconsidered, it will be evident that the mean quantity of heatThe trade wind continually blows with great force from the Island of St.Vincent to that of Barbadoes ; notwithstanding which, during the eruption of thevolcano in the Island of St. Vincent, in 1812, ashes fell in profusion from a greatheight in the atmosphere upon Barbadoes. This apparent transportation ofmatter against the wind, confirmed the opinion of the existence of a counterscarprent in the higher regions, which had previously rested on theoretical conclusions.Darrell's Meteorological Essays, &c., p. 103.f In speaking of the citation of air and water in this chapter, no allusion ismade to the trade winds, or to irregularities in the direction of currents, causedby the rotatory motion of the earth. These causes prevent the movements frombeing direct from north to south, or from south to north, but they do not afisctthe theory of a constant circulation.CHANGES OF TEMPERATURE. 119which at two different periods visits the same point, may differfour more widely than the mean quantity which any two pointsreceive in the same parallels of latitude, at one and the sameperiod. For the range of temperature in a given zone, or inother words, the curves of the isothermal lines, must always becircumscribed within narrow limits the climate of each placein that zone being controlled by the combined influence ofthe geographical peculiarities of all other parts of the earth.But, when we compare the state of things as existing at twodistinct epochs, a particular zone may at one-time be underthe influence of one class of disturbing causes, as for examplethose of a refrigerating nature, and at another time maybeaffected by a combination of opposite circumstances. Thelands to the north of Greenland cause the present climateof North America to be colder than that of Europe in thesame latitudes, but they also affect, to a certain extents thetemperature of the atmosphere in Europe; and the entireremoval from the northern hemisphere of that great source ofrefrigeration would not assimilate the mean temperature ofAmerica to that now experienced in Europe, but would renderthe continents on both sides of the Atlantic much warmer.To return to the state of the earth, after the changes beforesupposed by us, we must not omit to dwell on the importanteffects to which a wide expanse of perpetual snow would give rise.It is probable that nearly the whole sea, from the poles to theparallels of 45^ would be frozen over, for it is well known thatthe immediate proximity of land, is not essential to the formationand increase of field ice, provided there be in some partof the same zone a sufficient quantity of glaciers generatedon or near the land, to cool down the sea*. Field ice isalmost always covered with snow, through which the sun'srays are unable to penetrate f , and thus not only land asextensive as our existing continents, but immense tracts of seain the frigid and temperate zones, would now present aSee Seoresby's Arctic Regions, vol. i. p 320.f Captain Scomby, in hie account of the arctic regions, obeerree, that whenthe eun*s rays " fall upon the now-clad surface of the ice or land, they are inagreat measure reflected, without producing any material elevation of temperature; but when they impinge on the black exterior of a ship, the pitch on one sideOccasionally becomes fluid while ice is rapidly generated attire other." vol. i.p.d78.120 CAUSES OFsolid surface covered with snow, and reflecting the sun's raysfor the greater part of the year. Within the tropics, moreover,where we suppose the ocean to predominate, the skywould no longer be serene and clear, as in the present era ; butthe melting of floating ice would cause quick condensations ofvapour, and fogs and clouds would deprive the vertical raysof the sun of half their power. The whole planet, therefore,would receive annually a smaller proportion of solar influence,and the external crust would part, by radiation, with some ofthe heat which had been accumulated in it, during a differentstate of the surface. This heat would be dissipated into thespaces surrounding our atmosphere, which, according to thecalculations of M. Fourier, have a temperature much inferiorto that of freezing water.At this period, the climate of equinoctial lands might resemblethat of the present temperate zone, or perhaps be far morewintery. They who should then inhabit the small isles andcoral reefs, which are now seen in the Indian ocean and SouthPacific, would wonder that zoophytes of such large dimensionshad once been so prolific in those seas ; or if, perchance, theyfound the wood and fruit of the cocoa-nut tree or the palmsilicified by the waters of some mineral spring, or incrustedwith calcareous matter, they would muse on the revolutionsthat had annihilated such genera, and replaced them by theoak, the chestnut, and the pine. ' With equal admirationwould they compare the skeletons of their small lizards withthe bones of fossil alligators and crocodiles more than twentyfeet in length, which, at a former epoch, had multiplied betweenthe tropics ; and when they saw a pine included in an iceberg,drifted from latitudes which we now call temperate, they wouldbe astonished at the proof thus afforded, that forests had oncegrown where nothing could be seen in their own times but awilderness of snow.As we have not yet supposed any mutations to have takenplace in the relative position of land and sea in the southernhemisphere, we might still increase greatly the intensity ofcold, by transferring the land still remaining in the equatorialand contiguous regions, to higher southern latitudes ; but it isunnecessary to pursue the subject farther, as we are too ignorantof the laws governing the direction of subterranean forcesCHANGES OF TEMPERATURE. 121to determine whether such a crisis be within the limits of possibility.At the same time we may observe, that the distributionof land at present is so remarkably irregular, andappears so capricious, if we may so express ourselves, that thetwo extremes of terrestrial heat and cold are probably separatedvery widely from each other. The globe may now beequally divided, so that one hemisphere shall be entirelycovered with water, with the exception of some promontoriesand islands, while the other shall contain less water than land ;and what is still more extraordinary, on comparing the extra-tropicallands in the northern and southern hemispheres theformer are found to be to the latter in the proportion ofthirteen to one* ! To imagine all the lands, therefore, in high,and all the sea in low latitudes, would scarcely be a moreanomalous state of the surface.Let us now turn from the contemplation of the winter ofthe ** great year'' and consider the opposite train of circumstances,which would bring on the spring and summer.That some part of the vast ocean which forms theAtlantic and Pacific, should at certain periods occupy entirelyone or both of the polar regions, and should extend, interspersedwith islands, only to the parallels of 40°, and even 30°,is an event that may be supposed in the highest degree probable,in the course of many great geological revolutions. Inorder to estimate the degree to which the general temperaturewould then be elevated, we should begin by considering separatelythe effect of the diminution of certain portions of land, inhigh northern latitudes, which might cause the sea to be as openin every direction, as it is at present towards the north pole, inthe meridian of Spitsbergen. By transferring the same landsto the torrid zone, we might gain farther accessions of heat,and cause the ice towards the south pole to diminish. Wemight first continue these geographical mutations, until wehad produced as mild a climate in high latitudes as exists atthose points in the same parallel where the mean annual heatis now greatest. We should then endeavour to calculate whatfarther alterations would be required to double the amount ofchange ; and the great deviation of isothermal lines at presentHumboldt, on Isothermal Lines.122 CAUSEd OFseems to authorize us to infer, that without an entire revolutionof the surface, we might cause the mean temperature tovary to an extent equivalent to 9KP or even 30^ of latitude,—in other words, we might transfer the temperature of the torridzone, to the mean parallel, and of the latter, to the arcticregions. By additional transpositions, therefore, of land and seawe might bring about a still greater variation, so that, throughoutthe year, all signs of frost should disappear from the earth.The plane of congelation would rise in the atmosphere in alllatitudes ; and as our hypothesis would place all the highestmountains in the torrid zone, they would be clothed withrich vegetation to their summits. We must recollect thateven now it is necessary to ascend to the height of 15^000feet in the Andes under the line ; and in the Himalaya mountains,which are without the tropic, to 17,000 feet before wereach the limit of perpetual snow. When the absorption ofthe solar rays was unimpeded, even in winter, by a coat ofsnow, the mean heat of the earth's crust would augment toconsiderable depths, and springs, which we know to be anindex of the mean temperature of the climate, would be warmerin all latitudes. The waters of lakes, therefore, and rivers,would be much hotter in winter and would be never chilledin summer by the melting of snow. A remarkable uniformityof climate would prevail amid the numerous archipelagos of thepolar ocean, amongst which the tepid waters of equatorialcurrents would freely circulate. The general humidity of theatmosphere would far exceed that of the present period, forincreased heat would promote evaporation in all parts of theglobe. The winds would be first heated in their passageover the tropical plains, and would then gather moisture fromthe surface of the deep, till, charged with vapour, they wouldarrive at northern regions, and, encountering a cooler atmosphere,would discharge their burden in warm rain. If, duringthe long night of a polar winter, the snows should whiten thesummit of some arctic islands, and ice collect in the bays of theremotest Thule, they would be dissolved as rapidly by the returningsun, as are the snows of Etna by the blasts of thesirocco.We learn from those who have studied the geographicaldistribution of plants, that in very low latitudes, at presentCHANGES OF TEMPERATURE. 123the Station of small islands remote from continents has apeculiar character, and the ferns and allied families, in particular,bear a great proportion to the total number of otherStables. Other circumstances being the same, the moreremote the isles are from the continents, the greater does thisproportion become. Thus, in the continent of India, and thetropical parts of New Holland, the proportion of ferns to thephanerogamic plants is only as one to twenty-six ; whereas, inthe South Sea Islands, it is as one to four, or even as one tothree*. We might expect, therefore, in the summer of the*' great year," which we are now considering, that there wouldbe a great predominance of tree-ferns and plants allied topalms and arborescent grasses in the isles of the wide ocean,while the dicotyledonous plants and other forms now mostcommon in temperate regions would almost disappear from theearth. Then might those genera of animals return, of whichthe memorials are preserved in the ancient rocks of our am-talents.'^rhe huge iguanodon might reappear in the woods,and the ichthyosaur in the sea, while the pterodactyle mightflic again through umbrageous groves of tree-ferns. Coralreefs might be prolonged beyond the arctic circle, where thewhale and the narwal now abound. Turtles might deposittheir eggs in the sand of the sea beach, where now the walrussleeps, and where the seal is drifted on the ice-floe. .But, not to indulge these speculations farther, we may observe,in conclusion, that however great, in the lapse of ages,may be the vicissitudes of temperature in every zone, it accordswith our theory that the general climate should not experienceany sensible change in the course of a few thousand years,because that period is insufficient to affect the leading featuresof the physical geography of the globe. Notwithstanding theapparent uncertainty of the seasons, it is found that the meantemperature of particular localities is very constant, providedwe compare observations made at different periods for a seriesof years. Yet, there must be exceptions to this rule, and eventhe labours of man have, by the drainage of lakes and marshes,and the felling of extensive forests, caused such changesin the atmosphere as raise our conception of the importantAd. Brongmart, Consid. Generals but la Nat. de la V6g£t> &c. Ann. dotScience Nat, Not. 1828.124 VARIATIONS OF CLIMATE. .influence of those forces to which even the existence in certainlatitudes of land or water, hill or valley, lake or sea, mustbe ascribed. If we possessed accurate information of theamount of local fluctuation in climate in the course of twentycenturies, it would often, undoubtedly, be considerable. Certaintracts, for example, on the coast of Holland and of England,consisted of cultivated land in the time of the Romans,which the sea, by gradual encroachments, has at length occupied.Here an alteration has been effected ; for neither thedivision of heat in the different seasons, nor the mean annualheat of the atmosphere investing the sea is precisely the sameas that which rests on the land. In those countries alsowhere the earthquake and volcano are in full activity, a muchshorter period may produce a sensible variation. The climateof the once fertile plain of Malpais in Mexico must differmaterially from that which prevailed before the middle of thelast century ; for, since that time, six mountains, the highest ofthem rising 1700 feet above the plateau, have been thrown upby volcanic eruptions. It is by the repetition of an indefinitenumber of local revolutions due to volcanic and various othercauses, that a general change of climate is finally broughtabout.CHAPTER VIII.Geological proofs that the geographical features of the northern hemisphere, at theperiod of the deposition of the carboniferous strata, were such as would, accordingto the theory before explained, give rise to an extremely hot climateOrigin of the transition and mountain limestones, coal-sandstones, and coalChange in the physical geography of northern latitudes, between the era of the *formation of the carboniferous series and the lias — Character of organic remains,from the lias to the chalk inclusive — State of the surface when thesedeposits originated — Great accession of land, and elevation of mountainschains, between the consolidation of the newer secondary and older tertiaryrocks — Consequent refrigeration of climate — Abrupt transition from theorganic remains of the secondary to those of the tertiary strata — maastrichtbeds— Remarks on the theory of the diminution of central heat.We Stated, in the sixth chapter, our reasons for concluding thatthe mean annual temperature of the northern hemisphere wasconsiderably more elevated when the old carboniferous stratawere deposited ; as also that the climate had been modifiedmore than once since that epoch, and that it approximated bysuccessive changes more and more nearly to that now prevailingin the same latitudes. Further, we endeavoured, in thelast chapter, to prove that vicissitudes in climate of no less importancemay be expected to recur in future, if it be admittedthat causes now active in nature have power, in the lapse ofages, to vary to an unlimited extent the relative position ofland and sea. It next remains for us to inquire whether thealterations, which the geologist can prove to have actuallytaken place at former periods, in the geographical features ofthe northern hemisphere, coincide in their nature, and in thetime of their occurrence, with such revolutions in climate aswould naturally have followed, according to the meteorologicalprinciples already explained.We may select the great carboniferous series, including thetransition and mountain limestones, and the coal, as the oldestsystem of rocks of which the organic remains furnish any decisiveevidence as to climate. We have already insisted on theindications which they afford of great heat and uniformity of126 PROOFS OF FORMERtemperature, extending over a vast area, from about 45^ to 60%or perhaps, if we include Melville Island, to near 75° northlatitude ♦.When we attempt to restore in imagination the distributionof land and sea, as they existed at that remote epoch, we discoverthat our information is at present limited to latitudesnorth of the tropic of cancer, and we can only hope, therefore,to point out that the condition of the earth, so far as relates toour temperate and arctic zones, was such as the theory beforeoffered would have led us to anticipate. Now there is scarcelyany land hitherto examined in Europe, Noricum Asia, orNorth America, which has not been raised from the bosom ofthe deep, since the origin of the carboniferous rocks, or which,if previously raised, has not subsequently acquired additionalaltitude. If we were to submerge again all the marine strata,from the transition limestone to the most recent shelly bedsthe summits of some primary mountains alone would remainabove the waters. These facts, it is true, considered singly,are not conclusive as to the universality of the ancient ocean inthe northern hemisphere, because the movements of earthquakesoccasion the subsidence as well as the upraising of thesurface, and by the alternate rising and sinking of particularspaces, at successive periods, a great area may become entirelycovered with marine deposits, although the whole has neverbeen beneath the waters at one time, nay, even though therelative proportion of land and sea may have continued unalteredthroughout the whole period. There is, however, thehighest presumption against such an hypothesis, because theland in the northern hemisphere is now in great excess, andthis circumstance alone should induce us to suppose that,amidst the repeated changes which the surface has undergone,the sea has usually predominated in a much greater degree.But when we study the mineral composition and fossil contentsOur ancient coal-formation has not been found in Italy, Spain, Sicily, or any ofthe more southern countries of Europe. Whether any of the ammonitiferous linesstones of the Southern Apennines and Sicily (Carmina for example) can be consideredas of contemporaneous origin with our carboniferous series, is not yetdetermined ; but it is conjectured, from the general character of the organic nailsof the Apennine limestones, that they belong to sont part of our secondary wmm,from the lias to the chalk indite.CHANGES IN PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY. 127of the older strata, we find evidence of a more positive andunequivocal kind in confirmation of the same opinion.Calcareous rocks, containing the same class of organic remainsas our transition and mountain limestones, extend over a greatpart of the central and northern parts of Europe, are foundin the lake district of North America, and even appear tooccur in great abundance as far as the border of the Arcticsea *. The organic remains of these rocks consist principally ofmarine shells, corals, and the teeth and bones of fish ; and theirnature, as well as the continuity of the calcareous beds of homogeneousmineral composition, concur to prove that the wholeseries was formed in a deep and expansive ocean, in the midstof which, however, there were many isles. These isles werecomposed partly of primary and partly of volcanic rocks, whichbeing exposed to the erosive action of torrents, to the underminingpower of the waves beating against the cliffs, and toatmospheric decomposition, supplied materials for pebbles,sand, and shale, which, together with substances introduced bymineral springs and volcanos in frequent eruption, contributedthe inorganic parts of the carboniferous strata. The dispositionof the beds in that portion of this group which is of mechanicalorigin, and which incloses the coal, has been trulydescribed to be such as would result from the waste of smallislands placed in rows and forming the highest points ofridges of submarine mountains. The disintegration of suchclusters of isles would produce around and between themdetached deposits of various dimensions, which, when subsequentlyraised above the waters, would resemble the strataformed in a chain of lakes. The insular masses of primaryrock would preserve their original relative superiority of height,It appears from the observation of Dr. Richardson, made during the expeditionunder the command of Captain Franklin to the north-west coast of America,and from the specimens presented by him to the Geological Society of London,that, between the parallels of 60^ and 70^ north latitude, there is a great calcareousformation, stretching towards the mouth of the Mackenzie river, in which areincluded corallines, products, terebratulites, ftc, having a dose affinity in genericcharacters to those of our mountain limestone, of which the group has been consideredthe equivalent. There is also in the same region a newer series of strata,Uk which are shales with impressions of ferns, rhododendrons, and other vegetablesand also ammonites. These, it is supposed, may belong to the age of ouroolitic wmsB^^^Proceedingt of Geological Society, March 1828.128 PROOFS OF FORMERand would often surround the newer strata on several sideslike the boundary heights of lake basins.As might have been expected the zoophyte, and shellylimestones of the same era, (as the mountain limestone,) sometimesalternate with the rocks of mechanical origin, but appearto have been, in ordinary cases, diffused far and wide over thebottom of the sea remote from any islands, and where nograins of sand were transported by currents. The associatedvolcanic rocks resemble the products of submarine eruptions,the tuffs being sometimes inter stratified with calcareous shellybeds or with sandstones, just as might be expected if the sandand ejected matter of which they are probably composed had beenintermixed with the waters of the sea, and had then subsided likeother sediment. The lavas also often extend in spreading sheets,and must have been poured out on a surface rendered horizontalby sedimentary depositions. There is, moreover, a compactnessand general absence of porosity in these igneous rocks whichdistinguishes them from most of those which are produced onthe sides of Etna or Vesuvius, and other land-volcanos. Themodern submarine lavas of Sicily, which alternate with bedsof shells specifically identical with those now living in theMediterranean, have almost all their cavities filled with calcareousand other ingredients, and have been converted intoamygdaloid s, and this same change we must suppose such partsof the Etnean lava currents as enter the sea to be undergoingat present, because we know the water on the adjoining coastto be copiously charged with carbonate of lime in solution. Itis, therefore, one among many reasons for inferring the submarineorigin of our ancient trap rocks, that there are scarcelyany instances, in which the cellular hollows, left by bubblesof elastic fluid, have not subsequently been filled by calcareous,siliceous, or other mineral ingredients, such as now abound inthe hot springs of volcanic countries.If, on the other hand, we examine the fossil remains in thesestrata, we find the vegetation of the coal strata declared bybotanists to possess the characters of an insular, not a continentalflora, and we may suppose the carbonaceous matter toSee some ingenious remarks to this efiRict, in the work of M. Ad. Brongniart,Comdd. Gln^ralcs sur la Nat. dc la Veg^t. &c. Ann. des Sci. Nate Nov. 1828.CHANGES IN PHYSICAL Geography. 129have been derived partly from trees swept from the rock oytorrents into the sea, and partly from such peaty matter asoften discolours and blackens the rills flowing through marshygrounds in our temperate climate, where the vegetation is probablyless rank, and its decomposition less rapid than in themoist and hot climate of the era under consideration. Thereis only one instance yet on record of the remains of a sauriananimal having been found in a member of the carboniferousscries*. The larger oviparous reptiles usually inhabit riversof considerable size in warm latitudes and had crocodiles andother animals of that class been as abundant as in somesecondary formations, we must have inferred the existence ofmany rivers, which could only have drained large tracts of land.Nor have the bones of any terrestrial mammalia rewarded ourinvestigations. Had any of these, belonging to quadrupedsof large size, occurred, they would have supplied an argumentagainst the resemblance of the ancient northern archipelagosto those of the modem Pacific, since in the latter no greatindigenous quadrupeds have been met with. It is, indeed,a general character of small islands situated at a remote distancefrom continents, to be altogether destitute of land quadrupeds,except such as appear to have been conveyed to themby man. Kerguelen's land, which is of no inconsiderablesize, placed in a latitude corresponding to that of the Scillyislands, may be cited as an example, as may all the groups offertile islands in the Pacific ocean between the tropics, whereno quadrupeds have been found, except the dog, the hog, andthe rat, which have probably been brought to them by thenatives, and also bats, which may have made their way alongthe chain of islands which extend from the shores of NewGuinea far into the southern Pacific -f*. Even the isles of NewZealand, which may be compared to Ireland and Scotland• Amongst other fossils collected from the mountain-limestone of Mortuum*behind, the Rev. Charles V. Vernon has been fortunate enoughUnus sese dominus necesse lacertfle,having found a saurian vertebra together with patella and china spines, and animpression of a fern analogous to those of the coalMneasures in the mountain limestone.In the same district, coal of a good quality and in great abundanceoccurs in the lower part of the limestone series. Annual Report of the YorkshirePhil. Soc. for 1826, p. 14.f Richards Physical History of Man, vol. i., p. 75.Vok I. K130 CHANGES OF THE SURFACEin dimensions, appear to possess no indigenous quadrupeds,except the bat ; and this is rendered the more striking, whenwe recollect that the northern extremity of New Zealandstretches to latitude 34**, where the warmth of the climate mustgreatly favour the prolific development of organic life. Lastly,no instance has yet been discovered of a pure lacustrine formationof the carboniferous era ; although there are some instancesof shells, apparently fresh-water, which may have been washedin by small streams, and do not by any means imply a considerableextent of dry land. All circumstances, therefore,point to one conclusion; — the subaqueous character of theigneous products — the continuity of the calcareous strata overvast spaces — the marine nature of their organic remains — thebasin-shaped disposition of the mechanical rocks — the absenceof large fluviatile and of land quadrupeds — the non-existenceof pure lacustrine strata — the insular character of the flora,ill concur with wonderful harmony to establish the prevalencethroughout the northern hemisphere of a great ocean,interspersed with small isles. If we seek for points of analogyto this state of things, we must either turn to thenorth Pacific, and its numerous submarine or insular volcanosbetween Kamtschatka and New Guinea, or, in order to obtaina more perfect counterpart to the coralline and shelly limestones,we may explore the archipelagos of the south Pacific,between Australia and South America, where volcanos are notwanting, and where coral reefs, consisting in great part ofcompact limestone, are spread over an area not inferior, per-hiss, to that of our ancient calcareous rocks, though we supposethese to be prolonged from the lakes of North America tocentral Europe *.No geologists have ever denied, that when our oldest vociferousrocks were produced, great continents were wantingCaptain King found a continued line of coral reef seven hundred miles inlength, stretching from the Nee. coast of Australia towards New Guinea. Itwas interrupted only by a few intervals, not exceeding in all thirty miles. If w«pass from these calcareous formations to the Friendly Isles and Society Isles, wefind a succession of coral islands and submarine reefs ; and Captain Beechey informsme, that in Duchess Isle, W. long. 120*, he found the same formation in progre ss ,and there he ascertained that the corals were growing at the depth of one hundredand eighty feet. He also observed that compact limestone constitutes a large portionof recent reefs.AND CLIMATE, CONTEMPORANEOUS. 131in the temperate and arctic zones north of the equator ; butthey have even gone farther, and have been disposed to speculateon the universality of what they termed the primevalocean. As well might a new Zealander, who had surveyedand measured the quantity of land between the south pole andthe tropic of Capricorn, assume that the same proportion wouldbe found to exist between the tropic of Cancer and the northpole. By this generalization, he would imagine twelve out ofthirteen parts of the land of our temperate and arctic zones tobe submerged. Such theorists should be reminded, that if theocean was ever universal, its mean depth must have been inferior,and if so, the probability of deep water within the arcdccircle is much lessened, and the likelihood of a preponderanceof ice increased, and the heat of the ancient climate renderedmore marvellous. To this objection, however, they willanswer, that they do not profess to restrict themselves to existinganalogies, and they may suppose the volume of water inthe primeval ocean to have been greater. Besides, the hightemperature, say they, was caused by heat which emanatedfrom the interior of the new-born planet. In vain should wesuggest to such reasoners, that when the ocean was in excess inhigh latitudes, the land in all probability predominated withinthe tropics, where, being exposed to the direct rays of the sun,it may have heated the winds and currents which flowed fromlower to higher latitudes. In vain should we contend that agreater expanse of ocean, if general throughout the globe,would imply a comparative evenness of the superficial crust ofthe earth, and such an hypothesis would oblige us to concludethat the disturbances caused by subterranean movements inancient times were inferior to those of later date. Will thesearguments be met by the assumption, that earthquakes werefeebler in the earlier ages, or wholly unknown, — as accordingto Werner, there were no volcanos ? Such a doctrine wouldbe inconsistent with other popular prejudices respecting theextraordinary violence of the operations of nature in the oldentime; and it is probable, therefore, that refuge will betakoi in the old dogma of Lazzoro Moro, who imagined thatthe bed of the first ocean was as regular as its surface, and if8o, it may be contended that sufficient time did not elapsebetween the creation of the world and the origin of the car2132 CHANGES OF THE SURFACEvociferous strata, to allow the derangement necessary to producegreat continents and Alpine chains.But it would be idle to controvert, by reference to modemanalogies, the conjectures of those who think they can ascend intheir retrospect to the origin of our system. Let us, therefore,consider what changes the crust of die globe suffered after theconsolidation of that ancient series of rocks to which we haveadverted. Now, there is evidence that, before our secondarystrata were formed, those of older date (from the old red sandstoneto the coal inclusive) were fractured and contorted, andoften thrown into vertical positions. We cannot enter here intothe geological details by which it is demonstrable, that at an epochextremely remote, some parts of the carboniferous series werelifted above the level of the sea, others sunk to greater depths beneathit, and the former, being no longer protected by a cover*■ ing of water, were partially destroyed by torrents and the wavesof the sea, and supplied matter for newer horizontal beds.These were arranged on the truncated edges of the submarineportions of the more ancient series, and the fragments includedin the more modern conglomerates still retain their fossil shellsand corals, so as to enable us to determine the parent rocksfrom whence they were derived*. By such remodelling of thesurface the small islands of the first period increased in size, andnew land was introduced into northern regions, consisting partlyof primary and volcanic rocks and partly of the newly raisedcarboniferous strata. Among other proofs that earthquakeswere then governed by the same laws which now regulate thesubterranean forces, we find that they were restrained withinlimited areas, so that the site of Germany was not agitated,while that of some parts of England was convulsed. Theolder rocks, therefore, remained in some cases undisturbed atthe bottom of the ancient ocean, and in this case the strata ofThis, for example, on the banks of the Yon, in the Bristol coal-field, thedolomitic conglomerate, a rock of an age intermediate between the carboniferousseries and the lias, rests on the truncated edges of the coal and mountain limestone,and contains rolled and angular fragments of the latter, in which are seenthe characteristic mountain-limestone fossils. For accurate sections illustrating thedisturbances which rocks of the carboniferous series underwent before the newerred sandstone was formed, the reader should consult the admirable memoir on thesouth-western coal district of England, by Dr. Buckland and Mr. Ck>nybeare,Good Trans., vol. i., second series.AND CLIMATE, CONTEMPORANEOUS. 133the succeeding epoch were deposited upon them in conformableposition. By reference to groups largely developed on thecontinent, but which are some of them entirely wanting, andothers feebly represented in our own country, we find that theapparent interruption in the chain of events between the formationof our coal and the lias arises merely from local deficiencyin the suite of geological monuments. During thgreat interval which separated the formation of these groups,new species of animals and plants made their appearance,and in their turn became extinct ; volcanos broke out, andwere at length exhausted ; rocks were destroyed in one region,and others accumulated elsewhere, while, in the mean time, thegeographical condition of the northern hemisphere sufferedmaterial modifications. Yet the sea still extended over thgreater part of the area now occupied by the lands which weinhabit, and was even of considerable depth in many localitieswhere our highest mountain-chains now rise. The vegetation,during a part at least of this new period (from the lias to thechalk inclusive), appears to have approached to that of the largerislands of the equatorial zones. These islands appear to havebeen drained by rivers of considerable size, which were inhabitedby crocodiles and gigantic oviparous reptiles, both herbivorousand carnivorous, belonging for the most part to extinctgenera. Of the contemporary inhabitants of the land we haveas yet acquired but scanty information, but we know that therewere flying reptiles, insects, and small insectivorous mammifera,allied to the opossum. In farther confirmation of the opinionthat countries of considerable extent now rose above the seain the temperate zone, we may mention the discovery of a large'estuary formation in the south-west of England of higher antiquitythan the chalk, containing terrestrial plants and freshenmany parts of Grennany^the newer red sandstone, and other rocks of aboutthe same age, lie in conformable strata on the coal. In some districts, as in theThnringenrald, among others, there is an immense series of formations interveningbetween the coal and the lias ; one of these groups, called the mutchelkalkttein^which seems to have no existence in England, is of great thickness and full oforganic remains. See Professor Sedgwick's Memoir on the Geological relationsand internal structure of the Magnesian Limestone, &c. Gaol. IVaos., secondwrites, vol. iii., part 1, p. .121 .t Ad. Brongniart, Consid. G^nlrales sur la Nat de la Y^g^t. &c. Ann desSci. Nail Not. 1828.134 CHANGES OF THE SURFACEwater testaceai tortoises, and large reptiles — sin a word such aaassemblage as the delta of the Ganges, or a large river in a hotclimate might be expected to produce.In the present state of our knowledge we cannot pretend toinstitute a close comparison between the climate which prevailedduring the gradual deposition of our secondary formationsand that of die older carboniferous rocks, for the generaltemperature of the surface must at both epochs have been sodissimilar to that now experienced in the same or perhaps inany latitudes, that proofs from analogy lose much of theirvalue, and a larger body of facts is required to support theoreticalconclusions. If the signs of intense heat diminish, assome suppose, in the newer groups of this great series thereare nevertheless indications in the animal forms of the continuedprevalence of a climate which we might consider as tropicalin its character.We may now turn our attention to the phenomena of thetertiary strata, which afford evidence of an abrupt transitionfrom one description of climate to another. If this remarkablebreak in the regular sequence of physical events is merely apparent,arising from the present imperfect state of our knowledge,it nevertheless serves to set in a clearer point of viewthe intimate connexion between great changes in the physicalgeography of the earth, and revolutions in the mean temperatureof the air and water. We have already shewn that whenthe climate was hottest, the northern hemisphere was for themost part occupied by the ocean, and it remains for us to pointout, that the refrigeration did not become considerable, untila very large portion of that ocean was converted into land,nor even until it was in some parts replaced by high mountainchains. Nor did the cold reach its maximum until these chainsattained their full height and the lands their full extension.A glance at the best geological maps now constructed ofWe do not mean to compare the extent of the Wealden formation (from theWeald day to the Purbeck limestone indusiye) to that of the Ghmgetic delta, forwe shall afterwards see that the most modem addition made to the latter is equalin superficial area to North and South Wales. But, judging from the great continuityof some minor subdivisions of the Wealden g^up in our island, characterisedas they are throughout their whole range by certain fresh-water rwnaina,we may safely conduce that a considerable body of firth water must have beenpermanently supplied by a large river.AND CLIMATE, CONTEMPORANEOUS. 135various countries in the northern hemisphere, whether in NorthAmerica or Europe, will satisfy the inquirer that the greaterpart of the present land has been raised from the deep,either between the period of the deposition of the chalk andthat of the strata termed tertiary, or at subsequent periods,during which, various tertiary groups were formed in succession.For, as the secondary rocks from the lias to the chalkinclusive, are, with a few unimportant exceptions, marine, itfollows that every district now occupied by them has beenconverted into land since they originated. We may prove, byreference to the relative altitudes of the secondary and tertiarygroups, and several other circumstances, that a considerablepart of the elevation of the older series was accomplishedbefore the newer was formed. The Apennines, for example,as the Italian geologists hinted long before the time of Brocchi,and as that naturalist more clearly demonstrated, rose*several thousand feet above the level of the Mediterranean,before the deposition of the recent Subapennine beds whichflank them on either side. What now constitutes the centralcalcareous chin of the Apennines, must for a long time havebeen a narrow ridgy peninsula, branching off at its northernextremity from the Alps near Savanna. A line of volcanosafterwards burst out in the sea, parallel to the axis of the olderridge. These igneous vents were extremely numerous, andthe ruins of some of their cones and craters (as those in Tuscany,for example) indicate such a continued series of eruptions,almost all subsequent to the deposition of the Subapen-nine strata, that we cannot wonder at the vast changes in therelative level of land and sea which were produced. Howeverminute the effect of each earthquake which preceded or intervenedbetween such countless eruptions, the aggregate resultof their elevating or depressing operation may well be expectedto display itself in seas of great depth, and hills of considerablealtitude. Accordingly, the more recent shelly beds, whichoften contain rounded pebbles derived from the waste of contiguousparts of the older Apennine rocks, have been raisedfrom one to two thousand feet ; but they never attain the loftierThe greate number of Italia naturalists, and Brocchi among the rest, attributedth change of level to the lowering of the Mediterranean ; rejecting the^mortcorrect theory of Moro and his followers, that the land had been upheaved.Changes OP TUe Surfaceeminences of the Apennines, nor penetrate far into the higherand more ancient valleys ; for the whole peninsula was evidentlysubjected to the action of the same subterranean movements,and the older and newer groups of strata changed theirlevel, in relation to the eea, but not to each other.In the above diagram, exhibiting a transverse section of theItalian peninsula, the superior elevation oF the more ancientgroup, and its unconformable stratification in relation to themore recent beds is expressed. The latter, however, are oftenmuch more disturbed at the point of contact than is here represented,and in some cases they have suffered such derangementas to dip towards, instead of from, the more ancient chain.There is usually, moreover, a valley at the junction of theApennine and Subapenuine Etrats, owing to the greater degradationwhich the newer and softer beds hare undergone ; butthis intervening depression is not universal.These phenomena are exhibited in the Alps on a muchgrander scale ; those mounting being encircled by a greatzone of tertiary rocks of different ages, both on their southernflank towards the plains of the Po, and ou the side of Switzerlandand Austria *, and at their eastern termination towardsStyria and Hungary. This tertiary zone marks the positionof former seas or gulfs, like the Adriatic, which were manythousand feet deep, and wherein strata accumulated, some singlegroups of which are not inferior in thickness to the whole of oursecondary formations in England. These marine tertiary stratarise to the height of from two to four thousand feet and upwards,and consist of formations of different ages, characterized by diffa Memoir by Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Uurchixiii, Od Iba TertiusDeposit of Big Vote of Gosui, in the Salzburg Atpi, Proceedings of Oeol. SocNo. 13, Nov, 1929.AND CLIMATE, CONTEMPORANEOUS. 137fervent assemblages of organized fossils. The older tertiarygroups generally rise to greater heights, and form interior zonesDearest to the Alps. We may imagine some future convulsiononce more to upraise this stupendous chum, together with theadjoining bed of the sea, so that the greatest mountains ofEurope might rival the Andes in elevation, in nrhich case thedeltas of the Po, Adige, and Brentaa now encroaching upon theAdriatic, might be uplifted so as to form another exterior belt,of considerable height, around the south-eastern flank of theAlps. Although we have not yet ascertained the number ofdifferent periods at which the Alps gained accessions to theirheight and width, yet we can affirm, that the last series ofmovements occurred when the seas were inhabited by manyexisting species of animals ♦.There appears to be no sedimentary formations in the Alpsso ancient as the rocks of our carboniferous series ; while, onthe other hand, secondary strata as modern as the green sandof English geologists, and perhaps the chalky enter into someof the higher and central ridges. Down to the period, therefore,when the rocks, from our lias to tl^e chalk inclusive, weredeposited, there was sea where now the principal chin ofEurope extends, and that chain attained more than half itspresent elevation and breadth between the eras when ournewer secondary and oldest tertiary rocks originated. Theremainder of its growth, if we may so speak is of much morerecent date, some of the latest changes, as we have stated, havingbeen coeval with the existence of many animals belonging to speciesnow contemporary with man. The Pyrenees, also, haveacquired the whole of their present altitude, which in MontPerdu exceeds eleven thousand feet, since the origin of some ofBrocchi supposed the Subapennine beds to occur abundantly on both sides offlw pains of the Po ; but in this he was mistaken. The subalpine tertiary depositsare for the most part distinct and older formations. Professors Corelli andGiiidotti informed me, that they have recognized the Subapennine shells in one ortwo districts only north of the Po. They form in these cases, as might have beenanticipated, the outermost belt, as at Azolu, at the foot of the Alps near the plainsof Venice, and at Bassano, on the Brentaa. In the section given by Ifr. Hutchisonof the strata laid open by the Brentaa, between Bassano and the Alps above Cam.pes, it will be seen that the older chain must have partaken of the movementwhich raised the newest tertiary strata of the age of the Subapennines. Phil.Mag. and Amass, June, 1829.I138 CHANGES OF THE SURFACEthe newer members of our secondary series. The granitic axisof that chain does not rise so high as a ridge formed by marinecalcareous beds the organic remains of which shew them tobe the equivalents of our lower chalk, or a formation of aboutthat age *. The tertiary strata at the base of this great chainare only slightly raised above the sea, and retain a horizontalposition, without partaking of any of the disturbances to whichthe older series has been subjected so that the great barrierbetween France and Spain was almost entirely upheaved inthe interval between the deposition of the secondary andtertiary strata "f*. The Jura also, owe the greatest part oftheir present elevation to subterranean convulsions which happenedafter the deposition of certain tertiary groups ; at whichtime that portion which had been previously raised above thelevel of the sea underwent an entire alteration of form X* Iiother parts of the continent, as in France and England, wherethe newer rocks lie in basins surrounded by gently-rising hills,we find evidence that considerable spaces were redeemed fromthe original ocean and converted into dry land after the chalkwas formed, and before the origin of the tertiary deposits. Inthese cases, the secondary strata were not raised into loftymountain chains, like the Alps, Apennines, and Pyrenees, butthe proofs are not less clear of their partial conversion intoland anterior to the tertiary era. The chalk, for example, musthave originated in the sea in the form of sediment from tranquilwater ; but before the tertiary rocks of the Paris and Londonbasins were deposited, large portions of it had been so raisedas to be exposed to the destroying power of the elements.The layers of flint had been washed out by torrents and riversfrom their cretaceous matrix, rounded by attrition, and transportedto the sea, where oysters attached themselves, and insome localities grew to a full size, until covered by other bedsof flint*pebbies or sand. Tliese newer derivative depositaare found abundantly along the borders, and in the inferiorstrata of our tertiary basins, and they are often interstrati-find with lignite. We may surly infer, that the various trees• This observation, sint made by M. Boue, hat been once confirmed bj M.DufV^noy.t See a Memoir by M. EUe de Beaumont, Ann. dee sci. Nat, Not. 1829, p. SmitM. Else de Beaumont, ibid., Dec. 1829, p. 346.AND Climate CONTEMPORANEOUS. 139and plants which enter into the composition of this lignite, grewon the surface of the same chalk which was then wasting awayand affording to the torrents a constant supply of flint gravel.We cannot dwell longer on the distinct periods when thesecondary and various tertiary groups were upraised, withoutanticipating details which belong to other parts of this treatise ;but we may observe, that although geologists have neglectedto point out the relation of changes in the configuration of theearth's surface with fluctuations in general temperature, theydo not dispute the fact, that the sea covered the regions wherea great part of the land in Europe is now placed, until afterthe period when the newer groups of secondary rocks wereformed. There is therefore, confessedly a marked coincidencein point of time between the greatest alteration in climate andthe principal revolution in the physical geography of thenorthern hemisphere. It is very probable that the abruptnessof the transition from the organic remains of the secondaryto those of the tertiary epoch, may not be wholly ascribable tothe present deficiency of our information. We shall doubtlesshereafter discover many intermediate gradations, (and one ofthese may be recognized in the calcareous beds of Maestricht,)by which a passage was effected from one state of things to another; but it is not impossible that the interval between the chalkand tertiary formations constituted an era in the earth^s history,when the passage from one class of organic beings to anotherwas, comparatively speaking, rapid. For if the doctrines explainedby us in regard to vicissitudes of temperature are sound,it will follow that changes of equal magnitude in the geographicalfeatures of the globe, may at different periods producevery unequal effects on climate, and, so far as the existenceof certain animals and plants depends on climate, the durationof species may often be shortened or protracted, according tothe rate at which the change in temperature proceeded.Let us suppose that the laws which regulate the subterraneanforces are constant and uniform, (which we are entitledto assume, until some convincing proofs can be adduced to thecontrary ;) we may then infer, that a given amount of alterationin the superficial inequalities of the surface of the planetalways requires for its consummation nearly equal periods oftime. Let us then imagine the quantity of land between140 CHANGES OF THE Surfacethe equator and the tropic in one hemisphere to be to that iathe other as thirteen to one, which, as we before stated, representsthe unequal proportion of the extra-tropical lands in thetwo hemispheres at present. Then let the first geographicalchange consist in the shifting of this preponderance of land fromone side of the line to the other, from the southern hemisphere,for example, to the northern. Now this would not affect thegeneral temperature of the earth. But if, at another epoch,we suppose a continuance of the same agency to transfer anequal volume of land from the torrid zone to the temperateand arctic regions of the northern hemisphere, there might beso great a refrigeration of the mean temperature in all latitudes ,that scarcely any of the pre-existing races of animals wouldsurvive, and, unless it pleased the Author of Nature that theplanet should be uninhabited, new species would be substitutedin the room of the extinct. We ought not, therefore, to infer,that equal periods of time are always attended by an equalamount of change in organic life, since a great fluctuation inthe mean temperature of the earth, the most influential causewhich can be conceived in exterminating whole races of animalsand plants, must, in different epochs, require unequal portionsof time for its completion.The only geological monument yet discovered, which throwslight on the period immediately succeeding the deposition ofthe chalk, is the series of calcareous beds in St. Peter's Mountat Maestricht. The turtles and gigantic reptiles there found,seem to indicate that the hot climate of the secondary era hadnot then been greatly modified ; but as it seems that but asmall proportion of the fossil species hitherto discovered areidentical with known chalk fossils, there may perhaps havebeen a considerable lapse of ages between the consolidation ofour upper chalk, and the completion of the Maestricht group *•During these ages, part of the gradual rise of the Alps andPyrenees may have been accomplished ; for we know that earthappears from a Memoir by Dr. Fitton, read before the Geological Societyof London, Dec. 1829, that the Maestricht beds extend over a considerable area,presenting the same mineral characters and organic remains. Out of fifty speciesof shells and zoophytes collected by him, ten only could be identified with thecopious list of chalk fossils published by Mr. Mantel, in the GeoL Tnia^ yoLill part Iv second series, p. 201.AND CLIMATE, CONTEMPORANEOUS. 141quakes may work mighty changes during what we may call asmall portion of one zoological era, since there are hills inSicily which have gained more than three thousand feet inheight, while the assemblage of testacea and zoophytes inhabitingthe Mediterranean has only suffered slight alterations,and a large part of the countries bordering the Mediterraneanhave been remodelled since about one-third of the existing specieswere in being.Before we conclude this chapter, we may be expected to aoffer some remarks on the gradual diminution of the supposed /central heat of the globe, a doctrine which appears of late (years to have increased in popularity. Baron Fourier, aftermaking a curious series of experiments on the cooling ofincandescent bodies, has endeavoured by profound mathematicalcalculations to prove that the actual distribution of heatin the earth's envelope is precisely that which would havetaken place if the globe had been formed in a medium of a veryhigh temperature, and had afterwards been constantly cooled *.He supposes that the matter of our planet, as Leibnitz formerlyconjectured, was in an intensely heated state at the era of itscreation, and that the incandescent fluid nucleus has been partingever rince with portions of its original heat, thereby contractingits dimensions, — a process which has not yet entirelyceased. But it is admitted, that there are no positive facts insupport of this contraction; on the contrary. La Place hasshewn, by reference to astronomical observations made in thetime of Hipparchus, that in the last two thousand years therehas been no sensible contraction of the globe by cooling down,for had this been the case, even to an extremely small amount,the day would have been shortened in an appreciable degree.The reader will bear in mind, that the question as to theexistence of a central heat is very different from that of thegradual refrigeration of the interior of the earth. Many observationsand experiments appear to countenance the idea, thatin descending from the surface to those slight depths to whichman can penetrate, there is a progressive increase of heat ; butif this be established, and if, as some are not afraid to infer,• See a Memoir on the Temperature of the Terrestrial Globe, and the Plane*%uj Spaces, Ann. de Chimie et Phys torn, xxiii. p. 136. Oct, 1824,142 CHANGES OF THE SURFACEwe dwell on a thin cast which covers a centnd ocean of liquidincandescent lava, we ought still to be very reluctant to concedeon slight evidence that the internal heat is variable in quantity.In our ignorance of the sources and nature of volcanic fire itseems more consistent with philosophical caution to assume thatthere is no instability in this part of the terrestrial system. Weknow that different regions have been subject in succession toa series of vident subterranean convulsions, and that fissureshave opened from which hot vjqnurs, thermal springs, and atsome points red hot liquid lavas have issued to the surface.This evolution of heat often continues for ages after theextinction of volcanos and after the cessation of earthquakes, asin Central France, for example, and it seems perfectly natural,that each part of the earth's crust should, as M. Fourier statesto be the fact, present the appearance of a heated body slowlycooling down. This may be owing chiefly to the shifting ofthe volcanic foci ; but some effect may perhaps be due to thatunequal absorption of the solar rays to which we have alludedwhen speaking of the different temperature of the earth, accordingto the varying distribution of its superficial inequalities.M. Cordier announces as the result of his experiments andobservations on the temperature of the interior of the earthythat the heat increases rapidly with the depth, but the increasedoes not follow the same law over the whole earth, being twiceor three times as much in one country as in another, and thesedifferences not being in constant relation either with the latitudesor longitudes of places. All this is precisely what weshould have expected to arise from variations in the intensityof volcanic heat, and from that change of position, which theprincipal theatres of volcanic action have undergone at differentperiods, as the geologist can distinctly prove. But M.Cordier conjectures that there is a connexion between suchphenomena and the secular refrigeration and contraction of theinternal fluid mass, and that the changes of climate, of whichthere are geological proofs, favour this hypothesis *.We cannot help suspecting that if it had appeared that thesame species of animals and plants had continued to inhabit the• See M. Cordier^i Memoir on the Temperature of the Interior of the Earth,read to the Academy of Spencer, tui June, 1827. Edin. New Phil Joum, No.viii.; p. 273.AND CLIMATE, CONTEMPORANEOUS. 143seas, lakes, and continents, before and after the great physicalmutations which the northern hemisphere has undergone sincethe secondary strata were formed, the difficulty of explaining theancient climate of the globe would have appeared far more insurmountablethan at present. It would have been so contrary tothe elementary truths of meteorology to suppose no refrigerationto have followed from the rising of so many new mountain-chainsin northern latitudes, that recourse would probably havebeen had in that case also to cosmological speculations. Itmight have been argued with much plausibility, that as theaccession of high ridges covered with perpetual snow andglaciers had not occasioned any perceptible increase of cold, soas to affect the state of organic life, there must have been somenew source of heat which counterbalanced that refrigeratingcause. This, it might have been said, was the increased developmentof central fire issuing from innumerable fissures openedin the crust of the earth, when it was shaken by convulsionswhich raised the Alps and other colossal chains.But without entering into farther discussion on the meritsof the hypothesis of gradual refrigeration, let us hope thatexperiments will continue to be made, to ascertain whetherthere be internal heat in the globe, and what laws may governits distribution. When its existence has been incontrovertiblyestablished, it will be time to enquire whether it be subject tosecular variations. Should these also be confirmed, we maybegin to indulge speculations respecting the cause, but let usnot hastily assume that it has reference to. the original formationof the planet, with which it might be as unconnected aswith its final dissolution. In the mean time we know thatgreat changes in the external configuration of the earth's crusthave at various times taken place, and we may affirm that theymust have produced same effect on climate. The extent oftheir influence ought, therefore, to form a primary object ofenquiry, more especially as there seems an obvious coincidencebetween the eras at which the principal accessions of land inhigh latitudes were made and the successive periods when thediminution of temperature was most decided.CHAPTER IX.Tbeoiy of the progressive development of organic life considered— Evidence in itssupport woody inconclusive — ^Vertebnted animals in the oldest strata — Differencesbetween the organic remains of successive foundations — Remarks onthe comparatively modem origin of the human racfrr-The popular doctrine ofnceeaaive development not confirmed by Ibe admission that man is ofmodem origin — In what manner the change in Ie system caused by theintroduction of man affects the assumption of the uniformity of the past andfuture course of physical events.Wk have considered, in the preceding chapters, many of themost popular grounds of opposition to the doctrine, that allformer changes of the organic and inorganic creation are re-terrible to one uninterrupted succession of physical events,governed by the laws now in operation.As the principles of the science must always remain unsettledso long as no fixed opinions are entertained on this fundamentalquestion, we shall proceed to examine other objections whichhave been urged against the assumption of uniformity in theorder of nature. We shall cite the words of a late distinguishedwriter, who has formally advanced some of the weightiest ofthese objections. ** It is impossible," he affirms, *^ to defend theproposition, that the present order of things is the ancient andconstant order of nature only modified by existing laws — sinthose strata which are deepest, and which must, consequently,be supposed to be the earliest deposited forms, even of vegetablelife, are rare ; shells and vegetable remains are found in thenext order ; the bones of fishes and oviparous reptiles exist inthe following class ; the remains of birds, with those of the samegenera mentioned before, in the next order ; those of quadrupedsof extinct species in a still more recent class ; and it is only inthe loose and slightly-consolidated strata of gravel and sand,and which are usually called diluvian formations, that theremains of animals such as now people the globe are found,with others belonging to extinct species. But in none of theseUNIFORMITY OF PHYSICAL LAWS. 145formations, whether called secondary, tertiary, or diluvial,have the remains of man, or any of his works, been discovered ;and whoever dwells upon this subject must be convinced, thatthe present order of things, and the comparatively recentexistence of man as the master of the globe, is as certain asthe destruction of a former and a different order, and theextinction of a number of living forms which have no types inbeing. In the oldest secondary strata there are no remains ofsuch animals as now belong to the surface ; and in the rocks,which may be regarded as more recently deposited, theseremains occur but rarely, and with abundance of extinct species;— there seems, as it were, a gradual approach to the presentsystem of things, and a succession of destructions andcreations preparatory to the existence of manse''In the above passages, the author deduces two importantconclusions from geological data ; first, that in the successivegroups of strata, from the oldest to the most recent, there is aprogressive development of organic life, from the simplest tothe most complicated forms; — secondly, that man is of comparativelyrecent origin. It will be easy to shew that thefirst of these propositions, though very generally received, hasDO foundation in fact. The second, on the contrary, is indisputable,and it is important, therefore, to consider how farits admission is inconsistent with the assumption, that thesystem of tie natural world has been uniform from the beginning,or rather from the era when the oldest rocks hitherto discoveredwere formed.We shall first examine the geological proofs appealed to insupport of the theory of the successive development of animaland vegetable life, and their progressive advancement to amore perfect state. No geologists, who are in possession of allthe data now established respecting fossil remains, will for amoment contend for the doctrine in all its detail, as laid downby the great chemist to whose opinions we have referred. Butnaturalists, who are not unacquainted with recent discoveries,continue to defend the ancient doctrine in a somewhat modifiedform. They say that, in the first period of the world, (bywhich they mean the earliest of which we have yet procuredSir U. Davy, Consolations in Travel, Dialogue 3, " The Unknown."Vol. I. li146 THSORT OFany menials,) the vegetation consisted almost entirely ofcryptogamic plants, while the animals which co-existed werealmost entirely confined to zoophytes, testacea, and a fewfish. Plants of a less simple structure succeeded in the nextepoch, when oviparous reptiles began also to abound. Lastly,the terrestrial flora became most diversified and most perfectwhen the highest orders of animals, the mammifera and birdswere called into existence.Now, in the first place, we may observe, that many naturalistshave been gmlty of no small inconsistency in endeavouring toconnect the phenomena of the earliest vegetation with a nascentcondition of organic life, and at the same time to deduce, fromthe numerical predominance of certain types of form, the greaterheat of the ancient climate. The arguments in favour of thelatter conclusion are without any force, unless we can assumethat the rules followed by the Author of Nature in the creationand distribution of organic beings were the same formerly aanow ', and that as certain finishes of animals and plants arenow most abundant, or exdunvely confined to r^ons wherethere is a certain temperature a certain degree of humidity,intensity of light,*and other conditions, so also the same phenomenawere exhibited at every former era. If this postulate bedenied, and the prevalence of particular families be declared todepend on a certain order of precedence in the introduction ofdifferent classes into the earthy and if it be maintained that diestandard of organization was raised successively, we must thenascribe the numerical preponderance in the earlier ages of plantsof simpler structure, fwt to the heaij but to those different lawswhich reste organic life in newly created worlds. If,according to the laws of progressive development, cryptogamicplants always flourish for ages before the dicotyledonous ordercan be established, then is the small proportion of the latterfully explained ; for in this case, whatever may have been themildness or severity of the climate, they could not make thefarappearance. Before we can infer an devoted temperature inhigh latitudes, from the presence of arborescent Fems^ Lycopo-diocese, and other allied families, we must be permitted toassume, that at all times, past and future, a heated and moistatmosphere pervading the northern hemisphere has a tendencyto produce in the vegetation a predominance of analogousSuccessive DBYBLOPMBNt. 147types of form. We grants indeed, that there may be a connexionbetween an extraordinary profusion of monocotyle-donors plants, and a youthful condition of the world, if thedogma of certain ooemogonists be true, that planets, like certainprojectiles, are always red hot when they are first cast ; but tothis arbitrary hypotiieds we need not again revert.Between two and three hundred species of plants are nowenumerated as belonging to the carboniferous era, and, withvery few exceptions, not one of them are dicotyledonous *•But these exceptions are as fatal to the doctrine of successivedevelopment as if there were a thousand, although they donot by any means invalidate the ooncluuon in regard to thebeat of the ancient climate, for that depends on the numericalrelations of the different classes.The animal remains in the most ancient series of Europeansedimentary rocks (from the graywacke to the coal inclusive),consist chiefly of corals and testacea. Some estimate maygenerally be formed of the comparative extent of our informationconcerning the fossil remains of a particular era, by referenceto the number of species of shells obtained from a particulargroup of strata. Some of the rarest species cannot bediscovered, unless the more abundant ends have been foundagain and again $ and if the variety brought to light be veryconsiderable, it proves not only great diligence of research, butagood state of preservation of the organic contents of thatformation. In the older rocks, many causes of destructionhave operated, of which the influence has been rendered considerableby the immense lapse of ages during which they haveacted. Mechanical pressure, derangement by subterraneanmovements, the action of chemical affinity, the percolation ofarduous waters and other agencies, have obliterated, in agreater or less degree, all traces of organization in fossil bodies.Sometimes only obscure or unintelligible impressions are left,• Figment of dicotyledimoiit wood wbieh have evidently belonged to at 1^two different ipedet of trees, have been obtained from the coal-field of Fife,by Dr. Fleming, of Flick, and the tame gentleman haa shewn me a largedieotyledonoas stem which he procured from the graywacke of Cork. See amemoir by Dr. Fleming on the neighbourhood of Cork. (Trans, of Wen. Soe.Sin.) I am informed also by Dr. Bnddand, that he has received from the coal-oddof Northumberland another specimen of diootyledonoai wood, which is nowla the Oifoid Moseom.L2148 THEORY Oiand the magnifying process has often effaced not only thecharacters by which the species, but even those wherebythe class might be detennincxl. The number of organic formswhich have disappeared fix)m the oldest strata, may be conjecturedfrom the fact, that their former existence is in manycases merely revealed to us by the unequal weathering of anexposed face of rock, by which certain parts are made to standout in relief. As the number of spedes of shells found in theEnglish series, from the gray wacke to the coal inclusive, afterattentive examination, amounts only to between one and twohundred species, we cannot be surprised that so few examples ofvertebrate animals have as yet occurred. Therein of fish,however, appear in one of the lowest members of the group *,which entirely destroys the theory of the precedence of thesimplest forms of animals. The vertebra also of a saurian, aswe before stated, has been met with in the mountain limestoneof Northumberland *f-, so that the only negative fact reasoningin support of the doctrine of the imperfect development of thehigher orders of animals in remote ages, is the absence of birdsand mammalia. The former are generally wanting in depositsof all ages, even where the highest order of animals occurs inabundance. Land mammifera could not, as we have beforesuggested, be looked for in strata formed in an ocean interspersedwith isles, such as we must suppose to have existed in the northernhemisphere, when the carboniferous rocks were formed.Numerous scales of fish have been found by Dr. Fleming in quarries ofthe old red sandstone at Clashbinnie in Derbyshire, where I have myself collectedthem. These beds are decidedly older than the cool and mountain limestoneof Fifeshke.f I do not insist on the abundant occurrence of the scales of a tortoise nearlyallied to Trionyx, in the bituminous schists of Caithness, and in the same formationin the Orkneys in Scotland, as another example of a fossil reptile in rocks asold as the carboniferous series ; because the geological position of those schists isnot yet determined with precision. Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison indeedinfer, that they alternate with a sandstone of the age of the old red sandstone ;but this opinion wants confirmation. The numerous fish, and the tortoise of Caithness,are certainly in strata older than the lias, for that rock rests upon them unions; but as the strata between the schists and the granite contain no oceanicremains, and as no fossils of the carboniferous era have yet been foimd in the Caithnessbeds, the relative date of the tortoise cannot be determined with confidence.It might possibly be of the age of our magnesian limestone. See Geol. Trans,second series, vol. iii., part 1, p. 144, and for a representation of the scales of theTrionyiL, plate 16 of the same {lart.SUCCESSIVE DEVELOPMENT. 149As all are agreed that the ancient strata in question weresubaqueous and for the most part submarine, from what datawe may ask do naturalists infer the non-existence or even therarity of warm-blooded quadrupeds in the earlier ages ? Havethey dredged the bottom of the ocean throughout an area coextensivewith that now occupied by the carboniferous rocks,and have they found that with the number of between one andtwo hundred species of shells they always obtain the remains ofat least one land quadruped ? Suppose our mariners were toreport that on sounding in the Indian ocean near some coral reefs,and at some distance from the land, they drew up on hooksattached to their line portions of a leopard, elephant, or tapir ;should we not be sceptical as to the accuracy of their statements ;and if we had no doubt of their veracity, might we not suspectthem to be unskilful naturalists ? or, if the fact were unquestioned,should we not be disposed to believe that some vessel hadbeen wrecked on the spot ? The casualties must be rare indeedwhereby land quadrupeds are swept by rivers and torrentsinto the sea, and still rarer must be the contingency of such afloating body not being devoured by sharks or other predaceousfish, such as were those of which we find the teeth preservedin some of the carboniferous strata *. But if the carcase shouldescape and should happen to sink where sediment was in theact of accumulating, and if the numerous causes of subsequentdisintegration should not efface all traces of the body includedfor countless ages in solid rock, is it not contrary to all calculationof chances that we should hit upon the exact spot, — thatmere point in the bed of the ancient ocean, where the preciousrelic was entombed ? Can we expect for a moment that whenwe have only succeeded amidst several thousand fragments ofcorals and shells, in finding a few bones of aquatic or amphibiousanimals, that we should meet with a single skeleton of an inhabitantof the land ?Clarence, in his dream, saw ^' in the slimy bottom of the deeps^— a thousand fearful wrecks ;A thousand men, that fishes gnaVd upon ;Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl.Had he also beheld amid ^^ the dead bones that lay scatteredI have seen in the collection of Dr. Fleming, the teeth of eanutoront fishfrom the mountain limestone of Fife, which altonates with the coal*150 THEORY OFby 9^ the carcasses of lions, deer, and the other wild tenantsof the forest and the plain, the fiction would have beendeemed unworthy of the genius of Shakspeare. So daringa disregard of probability, so avowed a violation of analogy,would have been condemned as unpardonable evenwhere the poet was painting those incongruous images whichpresent themselves to a disturbed imagination during thevisions of the night. But the oosmogonist is not amenableeven in his waking hours, to these laws of criticism; forhe assumes either that the order of nature was formerly distinct,or that the globe was in a condition to which it cannever again be reduced by changes which the existing lawof nature can bring about. This assumption being onceadmitted, inexplicable anomalies and violations of analogy,instead of offending his judgment, give greater consistencyto his reveries.The organic contents of the secondary strata in general consistof corals and marine shells. Of the latter, the Britishstrata (from the inferior oolite to the chalk inclusive) haveyielded about six hundred species. Vertebrated animals arevery abundant, but they are almost entirely confined to fishand reptiles. But some remains of cetaoea have also been metwith in the oolitic series of England '^i and the bones of twospecies of warm-blooded quadrupeds of extinct genera allied tothe Opossum f* The occurrence of one individual of the higherclasses of mammalia, whether marine or terrestrial, in theseancient strata, is as fatal to the theory of successive ]development,as if several hundreds had been discovered.The tertiary strata, as will appear from what we have alreadystated, were deposited when the physical geography of the north*em hemisphere had been entirely altered. Large inland lakes• On the authority of Dr. Buckland. Trans. GeoL Soc vol i. part 2, secondseries, p. 394.t The mammiferous remains of the Stonesfield slate, near Ozfoid, consist ofLire or perhaps four jaws, one of which, now in the Oxford Museum, has beenexamined by M. Cuvier, and pronounced to belong to a species of Dideilphis.Another of these valuable fossils in the possession of my friend Mr. Broderappears to be not only specifically, but generically distinct, from that shewn toM. Cuvier. See Observations on the Jaw of a fossil Mammiferous Animal foundin the Stonesfield SUte, by W. J. Broderip, Esq., Sec G.a, F JLS., F.L.S., Ac,ZooL Jouzn., foL iik, p. 408 ; 1827.SUCCESSIVE DEVELOPMENT. Islandbecome numerous as in central France and many othercountries. There were gulfs of the sea into which large riversemptied themselves, where strata were formed like those of theParis basin. There were then also littoral formations inprogress, such as are indicated by the English Crag and theFoluns of the Loire. The state of preservation of the organicremains of this period is very different from that of fossils inthe older rocks, the colours of the shells, and even the cartilaginousligaments uniting the valves being in some casesretained. No less than twelve hundred species of testaceahave been found in the beds of the Paris basin, and an equalnumber in the more modem formations of the Subapenninehills ; and it is a most curious fact in natural history, that thezoologist has already acquired more extensive informationconcerning the testacea which inhabited the ancient seas ofnorthern latitudes at that era, than of those now living in thesame parallels in Europe. The strata of the Paris basin arepartly of fresh water origin, and filled with the spoils of theland. They have afforded a great number of skeletons of landquadrupeds, but these relics are confined almost entirely to onesmall member of the group, and their conservation may beconsidered as having arisen from some local and accidental combinationof circumstances. On the other hand, the scarcity ofterrestrial mammalia in submarine sediment is elucidated,in a striking manner, by the extremely small number of suchremains hitherto procured from the Subapennine hills. Thefacilities of investigation in these strata, which undergo rapiddisintegration, are perhaps unexampled in the rest of Europe,and they have been examined by collectors for three hundredyears. But, although they have already yielded twelve hundredspecies of testacea, the authenticated examples of associatedremains of terrestrial mammalia are extremely scanty ;and several of those which have been cited by earlier writers asbelonging to the elephant or rhinoceros, have since been declared,by able anatomists, to be the bones of whales and other cetacea.In about five or ten instances, perhaps, bones of the mastodonrhinoceros, and some other animals, have been observed inthis formation with marine shells attached. These must havebeen washed into the bed of the ancient sea when the strata152 THEORY OFwere forming, and they serve to attest the contiguity of landinhabited by large herbivora, which renders the rarity of suchexceptions more worthy of attention. On the contrary, thenumber of skeletons of existing animals in the upper Vald'Arno, which are usually considered to be referable to thesame age as the Subapennine beds, occur in a deposit whichwas formed entirely in an inland lake, surrounded by loftymountains.The inferior member of our oldest tertiary formations inEngland, usually termed the plastic clay, has hitherto provedas destitute of mammiferous remains, as our ancient coalstrata ; and this point of resemblance between these deposits isthe more worthy of observation, because the lignite, in theone case, and the coal in the other, are exclusively composedof terrestrial plants. From the London clay we have procuredthree or four hundred species of testacea, but the only bonesof vertebrated animals are those of reptiles and fish. On comparing,therefore, the contents of these strata with those of ouroolitic series, we find the supposed order of precedence inverted.In the more ancient system of rocks, mammalia, both of theland and sea, have been recognized, whereas in the newer, ifnegative evidence is to be our criterion, nature has made aretrograde, instead of a progressive, movement, and no animalsmore exalted in the scale of organization than reptiles are discoverable.Not a single bone of a quadrumanous animal has ever yetbeen discovered in a fossil state, and their absence has appeared,to some geologists, to countenance the idea that the type oforganization most nearly resembling the human came last inthe order of creation, and was scarcely perhaps anterior to thatof man. But the evidence on this point is quite inconclusive,for we know nothing, as yet, of the details of the various classesof the animal kingdom which inhabited the land up to the consolidationof the newest of the secondary strata ; and when alarge part of the tertiary formations were in progress, the climatedoes not appear to have been of such a tropical characteras seems necessary for the development of the tribe of apes,monkeys, and allied genera. Besides, it must not be forgotten,that almost all the animals which occur in subaqueous deposits.SUCCESSIVE DEVELOPMENT* 153are such as frequent marshes, rivers, or the borders of lakes, asthe rhinoceros, tapir, hippopotamus, ox, deer, pig, and others.On the other hand, species which Hve in trees are extremelyrare in a fossil state, and we have no data as yet for determininghow great a number of the one kind we ought to findbefore we have a right to expect a single individual of theother. If, therefore, we are led to infer, from the presence ofcrocodiles and turtles in the London clay, and from the cocoa-nutsand spices found in the isle of Sheppey, that at theperiod when our older tertiary strata were formed, the climatewas hot enough for the quadrumanous tribe, we neverthelesscould not hope to discover any of their skeletons until we hadmade considerable progress in ascertaining what were the contemporaryPachydermata ; and not one of these, as we havealready remarked, has been discovered as yet in any strataof this epoch in England *.It is, therefore, clear, that there is no foundation in geologicalfacts, for the popular theory of the successive developmentof the animal and vegetable world, from the simplest tothe most perfect forms ; and we shall now proceed to consideranother question, whether the recent origin of man lends anysupport to the same doctrine, or how far the influence of manmay be considered as such a deviation from the analogy of theorder of things previously established, as to weaken our confidencein the uniformity of the course of nature. We need notdwell on the proofs of the low antiquity of our species, for it isnot controverted by any geologist ; indeed, the real difficultywhich we experience consists in tracing back the signs of man^sexistence on the earth to that comparatively modem period whenspecies, now his contemporaries, began to predominate. If therebe a difference of opinion respecting the occurrence in certaindeposits of the remains of man and his works, it is always inreference to strata confessedly of the most modem order ; andThe only exception of which I have heard is the tooth of an Anoplotheriuxn,mentioned hy Dr. Buckland as having been found in the collection of Mr. Allan,labelled '* Binstead, Ite of Sight." The quarries of Binstead are entirely in thelower fresh-water formation, and such is undoubtedly the geological position inwhich we might look for the bones of such an animal. My friend BIr. Allan hasshewn me this tooth, to which, unfortunately, none of the matrix is attached, so thatit is still open to a captious sceptic to suspect that a Parisian fossil was so ticketedby mistake.154 UNIFORMITY OF THE 8T8TE1I.it is never pretended that our race oo-exiBted with assemblagesof animals and plants of which all the species are extinct.From the concurrent testimony of history and tradition welearn that parts of Europe, now the most fertile and most completelysubjected to the dominion of man, were, within less thanthree thousand years, covered with forests, and the abode of wildbeasts. The archives of nature are in perfect accordance withhistorical records ; and when we lay open the most superficialcovering of peat, we sometimes find therein the canoes of thesavage, together with huge antlers of the wild stag, or hornsof the wild bull. Of caves now open to the day in variousparts of Europe the bones of large beasts of prey occur inabundance ; and they indicate, that at periods extremely modemin the history of the globe, the ascendancy of man, if he existedat all, had scarcely been felt by the brutes.No inhabitant of the land exposes himself to so many dangerson the waters as man, whether in a savage or a civilized state,and there is no animal therefore, whose skeleton is so liable tobecome imbedded in lacustrine or submarine deposits ; nor canit be said, that his remains are more perishable than thoseof other animals for in ancient fields of battle, as Cuvier hasobserved, the bones of men have suffered as Kettle decompositionas those of horses which were buried in the same grave.But even if the more solid parts of our species had disappeared,the impression would have remained engraved on the rocks ashave the traces of the tenderest leaves of plants, and the integumentsof many animals. Works of art, moreover, composed ofthe most indestructible materials, Would have outlasted almostall the organic contents of sedimentary rocks; edifices, andeven entire cities have, within the times of history, been buriedunder volcanic ejections, or submerged beneath the sea or engulphedby earthquakes; and had these catastrophes beenrepeated throughout an indefinite lapse of ages, the high antiquityof man would have been inscribed in far more legiblecharacters on the frame-work of the globe, than are the formsof the ancient vegetation which once covered the isles of theWe shall discuss in a subsequent chapter, when treating of animal remains ineaves, the probable antiquity assignable to certain human bones and works of aitfound intermixed with remains of extinct animals in the cave of Bise and inserene localities in the department of Rebuilt, in France.RBCBNT Origin OF MAN. 155northern ocean, or of those gigantic reptiles, which at laterperiods peopled the seas and rivers of the northern hemisphere.Assuming, then, that man is, comparatively speaking, ofmodem origin, can his introduction be considered as one stepin a progressive system by which, as some suppose, the organicworld advanced slowly from a more simple to a more perfectstate ? To this question we may reply, that the superiority ofman depends not on those faculties and attributes which heshares in common with the inferior animals, but on his reasonby which he is distinguished from them.If the organization of man were such as would confer adecided pre-eminence upon him, even if he were deprived ofhis reasoning powers, and provided only with such Instincts asare possessed by the lower animals, he might then be supposedto be a link in a progressive chain, especially if it could beshewn that the successive development of the animal creationhad always proceeded from the more simple to the more compound,from species most remote from the human type to thosemost nearly approaching to it. But this is an hypothesiswhich, as we have seen, is wholly unsupported by geologicalevidence. On the other hand, we may admit, that man is ofhigher dignity than were any pre-existing beings on theearth, and yet question whether his coming was a step inthe gradual advancement of the organic world: for themost highly civilized people may sometimes degenerate instrength and stature, and become inferior in their physicalattributes to the stock of rude hunters from which theydescended. If then the physical organization of man mayremain stationary, or even become deteriorated, while the racemakes the greatest progress to higher rank and power in thescale of rational being, the animal creation also may be supposedto have made no progress by the addition to it of thehuman species, regarded merely as a part of the organic world.But, if this reasoning appear too metaphysical, let us waivethe argument altogether, and grant that the animal nature ofman, even considered ap^K from the intellectual, is of higherdignity than that of any other species ; still the introduction ata certain period of our race upon the earth, raises no presumptionwhatever that each former exertion of creative powerwas characterized by the successive development of irralUmal156 UNIFORMITY OF THE SYSTEM.animals of higher orders. The comparison here instituted isbetween things so dissimilar, that when we attempt to drawsuch inferences, we strain analogy beyond all reasonablebounds. We may easily conceive that there was a considerabledeparture from the succession of phenomena previouslyexhibited in the organic worlds when so new andex extraordinary a circumstance arose as the union, for the firsttime, of moral and intellectual faculties capable of indefiniteimprovement, with the animal nature. But we have no rightto expect that there were any similar deviations from analogy—any corresponding steps in a progressive scheme, at formerperiods, when no similar circumstances occurred.But another, and a far more difficult question may arise outof the admission that man is comparatively of modem origin.Is not the interference of the human species, it may be asked,such a deviation from the antecedent course of physical events,that the knowledge of such a fact tends to destroy all our confidencein the uniformity of the order of nature, both in regardto time past and future? If such an innovation could takeplace after the earth had been exclusively inhabited for thousandsof ages by inferior animals, why should not other changesas extraordinary and unprecedented happen from time to time ?If one new cause was permitted to supervene, differing in kindand energy from any before in operation, why may not othershave come into action at different epochs ? Or what securityhave we that they may not arise hereafter ? If such be thecase, how can the experience of one period, even though weareacquainted with all the possible effects of the then existingcauses, be a standard to which we can refer all natural phenomenaof other periods ?Now these objections would be unanswerable, if adducedagainst one, who was contending for the absolute uniformitythroughout all time of the succession of sublunary events — ^if,for example, he was disposed to indulge in the philosophicalreveries of some Egyptian and Greek sects, who representedall the changes both of the moral and material world asrepeated at distant intervals, so as to follow each other in theirformer connexion of place and time. For they compared thecourse of events on our globe to astronomical cycles, and notonly did they consider all sublunary affairs to be under thtlECENT ORIGIN OF MAN. l57influence of the celestial bodies, but they taught that on theearth, as well as in the heavens, the same identical phenomenarecurred again' and again in a perpetual vicissitude. The sameindividual men were doomed to be re-born, and to perform thesame actions as before ; the same arts were to be invented, andthe same cities built and destroyed. The Argonauts expeditionwas destined to sail again with the same heroes, and Achilleswith his Myrmidons to renew the combat before the walls ofTibi.Alter erst ham Tiphys et altera que vehat ArgoDirectors heroes ; grunt etiam altera bella,Atque iterum ad Trojan magnus mittetiir Achilles *.The geologist, however may condemn these tenets as absurd,without running into the opposite extreme, and denying thatthe order of nature has, from the earliest periods, been uniformin the same sense in which we believe it to be uniform at present.We have no reason to suppose, that when man firstbecame master of a small part of the globe, a greater changetook place in its physical condition than is now experiencedwhen districts, never before inhabited, become successivelyoccupied by new settlers. When a powerful European colonylands on the shores of Australia, and introduces at once thosearts which it has required many centuries to mature ; when itimports a multitude of plants and large animals from theopposite extremity of the earth, and begins rapidly to extirpatemany of the indigenous species, a mightier revolution is effectedin a brief period, than the first entrance of a savage horde, ortheir continued occupation of the country for many centuries,can possibly be imagined to have produced. If there be noimpropriety in assuming that the system is uniform when disturbancesso unprecedented occur in certain localities, we canwith n^uch greater confidence apply the same language tothose primeval ages when the aggregate number and power ofthe human race, or the rate of their advancement in civilization,must be supposed to have been far inferior.If the barren soil around Sidney had at once become fertileupon the landing of our first settlers ; if, like the happy islesVirgil, Clog. 4. For an account of tlicse doctrines, see Dugald Stewart'sElements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, vol ii. chap. 2, sect. 4, andRichard's Egypt. Myihol, p. \77.158 Uniformity OF THE SYSTEM.whereof the poets have given us such glowing descriptions, thosesandy tracts had begun to yield spontaneously an annual supplyof grain, we might then, indeed, have fancied alterations sellmore remarkable in the economy of nature to have attendedthe first coming of our species into the planet. Or if, when avolcanic island like Ischia was for the first time broughtunder cultivation by the enterprise and industry of a Greekcolony, the internal fire had become dormant, and the earthquakehad remitted its destructive violence, there would thaihave been some ground for speculating on the debilitation ofthe subterranean forces, when the earth was first placed underthe dominion of man. But after a long interval of rest, thevolcano bursts forth again with renewed energy, annihilatesone^half of the inhabitants, and compels the remainder to emigrate.Such exiles, like the modem natives of Cumana, Calabria,Sumbawa, and other districts, habitually convulsed byearthquakes, would probably form no very exalted estate ofthe sagacity of those geological theorists, who, contrasting thehuman with antecedent epochs, have characterized it as theperiod of repose.In reasoning on the state of the globe immediately beforeour species was called into existence, we may assume that allthe present causes were in operation, with the exception of man,until some geological arguments can be adduced to the contrary.We must be guided by the same rules of induction aswhen we speculate on the state of America in the interval thatelapsed between the period of the introduction of man intoAsia, the cradle of our race, and that of the arrival of the firstadventurers on the shores of the New World. In that interval,we imagine the state of things to have gone on according tothe order now observed in regions unoccupied by man.Even now, the waters of lakes, seas, and the great ocean,which teem with life, may be said to have no immediaterelation to the human race — sto be portions of the terrestrialsystem of which man has never taken, nor ever can take, possession,so that the greater part of the inhabited surface of theplanet remains still as insensible to our presence, as before anyisle or continent was appointed to be our residence.The variations in the external configuration of the earthy andthe successive changes in the races of animals and plants ina*EBCENT ORIGIN OF If AN. 159biting the land and sea, which the geologist beholds when herestores in imagination the scenes presented by certain regionsat former periods, are not more full of wonderful or inexplicablephenomena, than are those which a traveller wouldwitness who traversed the globe from pole to pole. Or ifthere be more to astonish and perplex us in searching therecords of the past, it is because one district may, in an indefinitelapse of ages, become the theatre of a greater number ofextraordinary events, than the whole face of the globe canexhibit at one time. However great the multiplicity of newappearances, and however unexpected the aspect of things indiffa«it parts of the present surface, the observer would neverimagine that he was transported from one system of things toanother, because there would always be too many points ofresemblance, and too much connexion between the characteristicfeatures of each country visited in succession, to permitany doubt to arise as to the continuity and identity of thewhole plan.^' In our globe," says Paley, *< new countries are continually<' discovered, but the old laws of nature are always found<* in them : new plants perhaps, or animals, but always in*' company with plants and animals which we already know,^ and always possessing many of the same general properties.<^ We never get amongst such original, or totally different modes'< of existence, as to indicate that we are come into the province^ <^ a different Creator, or under the direction of a different^ wilL In truth, the same order of things attends us wherever** we go *•" But the geologist is in danger of drawing a contraryinference, because he has the power of passing rapidly fromthe events of one period to those of another — of beholding, atoneglance, the effects of causes which may have happened atintervals of time incalculably remote, and during which, nevertheless,no local circumstances may have occurred to mark thatthere is a great chasm in the chronological series of nature'sarchives. In the vast interval of time which may really haveelapsed between the results of operations thus compared, thephysical condition of the earth may, by slow and insensiblemodifications, have become entirely altered, one or more racesNatural Ilieolog]r9 Ch zzv.160 UNIFORMITY OF tHE SYSTEM.of organic beings may have passed away, and yet have leftbehind, in the particular region under contemplation, no traceof their existence. To a mind unconscious of these intermediatelinks in the chain of events, the passage from one stateof things to another must appear so violent, that the idea ofrevolutions in the system inevitably suggests itself. Theimagination is as much perplexed by such errors as to time,as it would be if we could annihilate space, and by some power,such as we read of in tales of enchantment, could transfer aperson who had laid himself down to sleep in a snowy arcticwilderness, to a valley in a tropical region, where on awakinghe would find himself surrounded by birds of brilliant plumage,and all the luxuriance of animal and vegetable forms of whichnature is there so prodigal. The most reasonable supposition,perhaps, which a philosopher could make, if by the nero*mancer'sart he was placed in such a situation, would be, that hewas dreaming ; and if a geologist forms theories under a similardelusion, we should not expect him to preserve more consistencyin his speculations, than in the train of ideas in an ordinarydream.But if, instead of inverting the natural order of inquiry, wecautiously proceed in our investigations, from the known to theunknown, and begin by studying the most modern periodsof the earth's history, attempting afterwards to decipherthe monuments of more ancient changes, we can never sofarlose sight of analogy, as to suspect that we have arrivedat a new system, governed by different physical laws. Inmore recent formations, consisting often of strata of greatthickness, the shells of the present seas and lakes, and theremains of animals and plants now living on the land, areimbedded in great numbers. In those of more ancient date,many of the same species are found associated with others nowextinct. These unknown kinds again are observed in strataof still higher antiquity, connected with a great number ofothers which have also no living representatives, till at lengthwe arrive at periods of which the monuments contain exclusivelythe remains of species with many genera foreign to thepresent creation. But even in the oldest rocks which containorganic remains, some genera of marine animals are recognized,of which species still exist in our seas and these are repeatedRECENT Origin OF MAN. 161at different intervals in all the intermediate groups of strata,attesting that, amidst the great variety of revolutions of whichthe earth's surface has been the theatre, there has never beena departure from the conditions necessary for the existence ofcertain unaltered types of organization. The uniformity ofanimal instinct, observes Mr. Stewart, pre-supposes a correspondingregularity in the physical laws of the universe,*' insomuch that if the established order of the material worldwere to be essentially disturbed, (the instincts of the brutesremaining the same,) all their various tribes would inevitablyperish." Now, any naturalist will be convinced, on slight reflection,of the justice of this remark. He will also admit that thesame species have always retained the same instincts, andtherefore that all the strata wherein any of their remains occur,must have been formed when the phenomena of inanimatematter were the same as they are in the actual condition of theearth. The same conclusion must also be extended to theextinct animals with which the remains of these living speciesare associated ; and by these means we are enabled to establishthe permanence of the existing physical laws, throughout thewhole period when the tertiary deposits were formed. Wehave already stated that, during that vast period, a large proportionof all the lands in the northern hemisphere were raisedabove the level of the sea.The modifications in the system of which man is the instrument,do not, in all probability, constitute so great a deviationfrom analogy as we usually imagine ; we often, for example,form an exaggerated estimate of the extent of the powerdisplayed by man in extirpating some of the inferior animals,and causing others to multiply ; a power which is circumscribedwithin certain limits, and which, in all likelihood, isby no means exclusively exerted by our species. The growthof human population cannot take place without diminishing thenumbers, or causing the entire destruction of many animals.The larger carnivorous species give way before us, but otherquadrupeds of smaller size, and innumerable birds, insects, andplants, which are inimical to our interests, increase in spite ofus, some attacking our food, others our raiment and persons,and others interfering with our agricultural and horticulturalPhil, of the Human Mind, vol ii., p. 230.Vol. I. M162 UNIFORMITY OP THB 8T8TBM.labours. We force the ox and the horse to labour for ouradvantage, and lyre deprive the bee of his store ; but, on theother hand, we raise the rich harvest with the sweat of ourbrow, and behold it devoured by myriads of insects, and weareoften as incapable of arresting their depredations as ofstanding the shock of an earthquake, or the course of a streamof burning lava. The changes caused by other species, asthey gradually diffuse themselves over the globe, are inferiorprobably in magnitude, but are yet extremely analogous tothose which we occasion. The lion, for example, and themigratory locust, must necessarily, when they first made theirway into districts now occupied by them, have committedimmense havoc amongst the animals and plants which becametheir prey. They may have caused many species to diminish,perhaps wholly to disappear ; but they must also have enabledsome others greatly to augment in number, by removing thenatural enemies by which they had been previously kept down.It is probable from these, and many other considerations, thatas we enlarge our knowledge of the system, we shall becomemore and more convinced, that the alterations caused by thinterference of man deviate far less from the analogy of thoseeffected by other animals than we usually suppose* We areoften misled, when we institute such comparisons, by our knowledgeof the wide distinction between the instincts of animaland the reasoning power of man ; and we are apt hastily toinfer, that the effects of a rational and an irrational species,considered merely as physical agenUf will differ almost asmuch as the faculties by which their actions are directed. Agreat philosopher has observed, that we can only commandnature by obeying her laws, and this principle is true eveti tiregard to the astonishing changes which are superinduced inthe qualities of certain animals and plants by domesticationand garden culture. We can only effect such surprisingalterations by assisting the development of certain instincts,or by availing ourselves of that mysterious law of theirorganization, by which individual peculiarities are transmissiblefrom one generation to another.We are not, however, contending that a real departure fixmithe antecedent course of physical events cannot be traced inthe introduction of man. If that latitude of action whichftECSNT Priam OV HAN. 163enables the brutes to accommodate themselves in some measureto accidental circumstances, could be imagined to have bee^iat any former period so great, that the operations of instinctwere as much diversified as are those of human reason, itmight perhaps be contended, that the agency of man did notconstitute an anomalous deviation from the previously establishedorder of things. It might then have been said, thatthe earth^s becoming at a particular period the residence ofhuman beings, was an era in the moral, not in the physicalworld — that our study and contemplation of the earth, and thelaws which govern its animate productions, ought no more tobe considered in the light of a disturbance or deviation fromthe system, than the discovery of the satellites of Jupitershould be regarded as a physical event in the history of thoseheavenly bodies, however influential they may have becomefrom that time in advancing the progress of sound philosophyamong men, and in augmenting human resources by aidingnavigation and commerce. The distinctness, however, of thehuman, from all other species, considered merely as an efficientcause in the physical world, is real, for we stand in a relationto contemporary species of animals and plants, widely differentfrom that which other irrational animals can ever be supposedto have held to each other. We modify their instincts,relative numbers, and geographical distribution, in a mannersuperior in degree, and in some respects very different inkind from that in which any other species can t^ect the rest.Besides, the progressive movement of each successive generationof men causes the human species to differ more from itselfin power at two distant periods, than any one species of thehigher order of animals differs from another. The establish-iment, therefore, by geological evidence of the first interventionof such a peculiar and unprecedented agency, long afterother parts of the animate and inanimate world existed, affordsground for concluding that the experience during thousands ofages of all the events which may happen on this globe wouldnot enable a philosopher to speculate with confidence concerningfuture contingencies. If an intelligent being, therefore,after observing the order of events for an indefinite series ofages had witnessed at last so wonderful an innovation as this,to what extent would his belief in the regularity of the systemM2164 Uniform op the system.be weakened ? — would be cease to assume that there was permanencyin the laws of nature ? — would he no longer be guidedin his speculations by the strictest rules of induction? To thisquestion we may reply, that had be previously presumed todogmatize respecting the absolute uniformity of the order ofnature, he would undoubtedly be checked by witnessing thisnew and unexpected event, and would form a more just estimateof the limited range of his own knowledge, and theunbounded extent of the scheme of the universe. But hewould soon perceive that no one of the fixed and constant lawsof the animate or inanimate world was subverted bv humanagency, and that the modifications produced were on the occurrenceof new and extraordinary circumstances, and those notof a physical but a moral nature. The deviation permitted,would also appear to be as slight as was consistent with theaccomplishment of the new moral ends proposed, and to be inagreat degree temporary in its nature, so that whenever thepower of the new agent was withheld, even for a brief period,a relapse would take place to the ancient state of things ; thedomesticated animal, for example, recovering in a few generationsits wild instinct, and the garden-flower and fruit-treereverting to the likeness of the parent stock.Now, if it would be reasonable to draw such inferences withrespect to the future, we cannot but apply the same rules ofinduction to the past. It will scarcely be disputed that wehave no right to anticipate any modifications in the results ofexisting causes in time to come, which are not conformable toanalogy, unless they be produced by the progressive developmentof human power, or perhaps from some other new relationsbetween the moral and material worlds. In the samemanner we must concede, that when we speculate on the vicissitudesof the animate and inanimate creation in former ages,we have no ground for expecting any anomalous results, unlesswhere man has interfered, or unless clear indications appear ofsome other moral source of temporary derangement. Whenwe are unable to explain the monuments of past changes, it isalways more probable that the difficulty arises from our ignoranceof all the existing agents, or all their possible effects inan indefinite lapse of time, than that some cause was formerlyin operation which has ceased to act ; and if in any part ofRecent ORIGIN OF MAN. 165the globe the energy of a cause appears to have decreased, it isalways probable, that the diminution of intensity in its actionis merely local, and that its force is unimpaired , when thewhole globe is considered. But should we ever establishby unequivocal proofs, that certain agents have, at particularperiods of past time, been more potent instruments of changeover the entire surface of the earth than they now are, it willbe more consistent with philosophical caution to presume, thatafter an interval of quiescence they will recover their pristinevigour, than to regard them as worn out.The geologist who yields implicit assent to the truth of theseprinciples, will deem it incumbent on him to examine withminute attention all the changes now in progress on the earth,and will regard every fact collected respecting the causes indiurnal action, as aiSbrding him a key to the interpretation ofsome mystery in the archives of remote ages. Our estimate,indeed, of the value of all geological evidence, and the interestderived from the investigation of the earth^s history, mustdepend entirely on the degree of confidence which we feel inregard to the permanency of the laws of nature. Theirimmutable constancy alone can enable us to reason from analogy,by the strict rules of induction, respecting the events offormer ages, or, by a comparison of the state of things at twodistinct geological epochs, to arrive at the knowledge of generalprinciples in the economy of our terrestrial system.The uniformity of the plan being once assumed, events whichhave occurred at the most distant periods in the animate andinanimate world will be acknowledged to throw light on eachother, and the deficiency of our information respecting someof the most obscure parts of the present creation will beremoved. For as by studying the external configuration ofthe existing land and its inhabitants, we may restore in imaginationthe appearance of the ancient continents which havepassed away, so may we obtain from the deposits of ancientseas and lakes an insight into the nature of the subaqueousprocesses now in operation, and of many forms of organic lifewhich, though now existing, are veiled from our sight. Rocks,also produced by subterranean fire in former ages at greatdepths in the bowels of the earth, present us, when upraisedby gradual movements, and exposed to the light of heaven166 UNIFORMITY OF THE 8T8TBM.with an image of those changes which the deep-seated volcanomay now occasion in the nether regions. Thus, although wearemere sojourners on the surface of the planet chained toa mere point in space, enduring but for a moment of time,the human mind is not only enabled to number worlds beyondthe unassisted ken of mortal eye* but to trace the events of indefiniteages before the creation of our race, and is not even withheldfrom penetrating into the dark secrets of the ocean, or theinterior of the solid globe ; free, like the spirit which the poetdescribed as animating the universeire per omnesTenraaque inctusque nuuria^ ooBlumqne pfofundum.CHAPTER X.Division of the subject into changes of the organic and inorganic world — Inorganiccauses of change divided into the aqueous and igneous— Aqueous causesdestroying and transporting power of running water — Sinuosities of riversTwo streams when united do not occupy a bed of double surface— Heavymatter removed by Uni e uta and floods— Recent inundations in Soofland^-Fleets of ice in leaving st on es E rosin of chasms through hard rnrlrs ■Excavations in the lavas of Etna by Sicilian rivers— Gorge of the Siaetoi*Ondoal lecosrion ol the oataraeti of Niagara — Speculation as to the timefor tiMBT VMdmig Lake Erie.We defined geology to be the science which investigates theformer changes that have taken place in the organic, as well asin the inorganic kingdoms of nature ; and we now proceed toinquire what changes are now in progress in both these depart*intents. Vicissitudes in the inorganic world are most apparent,and as on them all fluctuations in the animate creation must inagreat measure depend, they may claim our first considerationsWe may divide the great agents of change in theinorganic world into two principal classes, the aqueous andthe igneous. To the former belong Rivers, T<»Tents, Springs,Currents, and Tides; to the latter, Volcanos and Earthquakes.Both these classes are instruments of decay as wellas of reproduction ; but they may be also regarded as antagonist£Does. The aqueous agents are incessantly labouringto reduce the inequalities of the earth's surface to alevel, while the iynetms^ on the other hand, are equally activein restoring the unevenness of the external crusty partlyby faeapii^ up new matter in certain localities, and partly bydepremang one portion, and forcing out another of the earth^senvelope. It is difficult, in a scientific arrangement to give anaccurate view of the combined effects of so many forces insimultaneous operation ; because, when we consider them separate,we cannot easily estimate either the extent oi theirefficacy, or the kind of results which they produce. We are in168 ACTION OF ftUKNlNG WATER*danger, therefore, when we attempt to ezamiiie the influenceexerted singly bj each, of overlooking the modifications whichthey produce on one another; and these are so complicated,that sometimes the igneous and aqueous forces co-operate toproduce a joint effect, to which neither of them unaided bythe other could give rise, — as when repeated earthquakes unitewith running water to widen a valley. Sometimes the organiccombine with the inorganic causes ; as when a reef, composedof shells and corals, protects one line of coast from the destroyingpower of tides or currents, and turns them against someother point ; or when drift timber floated into a lake, fills ahollow to which the stream would not have had sufficientvelocity to convey earthy sediment.It is necessary, however, to divide our observations on thesevarious causes, and to classify them systematically, endeavouringas much as possible to keep in view that the effects in natureare mixed, and not simple, as they may appear in an artificialarrangement.In treating, first, of the aqueous causes, we may considerthem under two divisions : first, those which are connected withthe circulation of water from the land to the sea, under whichare included all the phenomena of rivers and springs ; secondly,those which arise from the movements of water in lakes, seasand the ocean, wherein are comprised the phenomena of tidesand currents. In turning our first attention to the formerdivision, we find that the effects of rivers may be subdividedinto those of a destroying and those of a renovatingnature. In the former are included the erosion ofrocks and the transportation of matter to lower levels; inthe latter, the formation of sand-bars and deltas, the shallowingof seas, &c.Action of Running Water, — We shall begin, then, by describingthe destroying and transporting power of running water, asexhibited by torrents and rivers. It is well known that the landselevated above the sea attract in proportion to their volumeand density a larger quantity of that aqueous vapour whichthe heated atmosphere continually absorbs from the surfaceof lakes and seas. By this means, the higher regions becomeperpetual reservoirs of water, which descend and. irrigate theACTION OF RUNNING WATER. 169lower valleys and plains. In consequence of this provision,almost all the water is first carried to the highest regions, and isthen made to descend by steep declivities towards the sea; sothat it acquires superior velocity, and removes a greater quantityof soil than it would do if the rain had been distributed overthe low plains and high mountains equally in proportionto their relative areas. Almost all the water is also made bythese means to pass over the greatest distances which eachregion affords, before it can regain the sea. The rocks in thehigher regions are particularly exposed to atmospheric influencesto frosty rain, and vapour, and to great annual alternations,of moisture and desiccation — of cold and heat. Amongthe most powerful agents of decay may be mentioned themechanical action of water, which possesses the remarkableproperty of expanding during congelation. When water haspenetrated into crevices and cavities, it rends open, on freezingthe most solid rocks with the force of a lever, and for this reason,although in cold climates the comparative quantity of rain whichfalls is very inferior, and although it descends more graduallythan in tropical regions, yet the severity of frost, and the greaterinequalities of temperature, compensate for this diminishedpower of degradation, and cause it to proceed with equal, if notgreater rapidity than in high latitudes. The solvent power ofwater also is very great, and acts particularly on the calcareousand alkaline elements of stone, especially when it holds carbonicacid in solution, which is abundantly supplied to almostevery large river by springs, and is collected by rain from theatmosphere. The oxygen of the atmosphere is also graduallyabsorbed by all animal and vegetable productions, and byalmost all mineral masses exposed to the open air. It graduallydestroys the equilibrium of the elements of rocks, andtends to reduce into powder, and to render fit for soils, eventhe hardest aggregates belonging to our globe *. And as itis well known that almost every thing affected by rapid combustionmay also be affected gradually by the slow absorptionof oxygen, the surface of the hardest rocks exposed to the airmay be said to be slowly burning away.When earthy matter has once been intermixed with runningSir H. Day, Consolations in IVaTel^ p. 271.170 SDrcosiTr or bitbbs.water, a new nuyJmnical power is obtained by the attrition ofnd and pebbles, bcmie along with violence by a stieani.Burning water charged with foreign ingredients bdng thnywnagainst a rock, excavates it bj mechanical forces safqiing andiindennining till the superincumbent portico at leB^g;th pted^stated into the stream. The obstruction causa a temporaryincrease of the water, which then sweeps down the barrier. Bya repetition of these knd-slips, the ravine is widened into a small,narrow valley, in which sinuosities are caused by the deflexion ofthe stream first to one side and then to the other. The unequalhardness of the materials through which the chant is eroded,tends also to give new directions to the lateral force of excavationsWhen by these, or by accidental shifting of thealluvial matter in the chant, and numerous other causes thecurrent is made to cross its general line of descent, it eats out acurve in the opposite bank, or the side of the hill bounding thevalley, from which curve it is turned bad again at an equalangle, and recrossing the line of descent, it gradually hollowsout another curve lower down, in the opposite bank, till thewhole sides of the valley, or river-bed. present a sucoesnon ofsalient and retiring angles.Among the causes of deviation from a straight course bywhich torrents and rivers tend to widen the valleys throughwhich they flow, may be mentioned the confluence of lateraltcHTents, swoln irregularity at different seasons in mountainousregions by partial storms, and discharging at different timesunequal quantities of debris into the main channel.When the tortuous flexures of a river are extremely great,the aberration from the direct line of descent is often restoredby the river cutting through the isthmus which separates twoneighbouring curves. Thus, in the annexed diagram, theNo. 2.extreme sinuosity of the river has caused it to return for abrief space in a contrary direction to its main course, so thata peninsula is formed, and the isthmus (at o) is consumed■iNUosmr OF river. 171on both fidel by currents flowing in opposite directions. Inthis case an island is soon formed, — on either side of which aportion of the stream usually remains*. These windingsoccur not only in the channels of rivers flowing through flatalluvial plains, but large valleys also are excavated to a greatdepth through solid rocks in this serpentine form. In theValley of the Moselle, between Newcastle and Roam, which issunk to a depth of from six to eight hundred feet through anelevated platform of transition rocks, the curves are so considerablethat the river returns, after a course of seventeen milesin one instance, and nearly as much in two others, to within adistance of a few hundred yards of the spot it passed before f.The valley of the Meuse, near Give, and many others indifferent countries, osier similar windings. Mr. Scrope hasremarked, that these tortuous flexures are decisively opposedto the hypothesis, that any violent and transient rush of watersuddenly swept out such valleys ; for great floods would producestraight channels in the direction of the current, notsinuous excavations, wherein rivers flow back again in an oppositedirection to their general line of descent.Our present purpose, however, relates to the force of aqueouserosion, and the transportation of materials by running water,considered separately, and not to the question so much controvertedrespecting the formation of valleys in general. This subjectcannot be fully discussed without referring to all the powersto which the inequalities of the earth's surface, and the very existenceof land above the level of the sea, are due. Nor evenwhen we have described the influence of all the chemical and mechanicalagents which operate at one period in effecting changesin the external form of the land, shall we be enabled to presentthe reader with a comprehensive theory of the origin of the presentvalleys. It will be necessary to consider the complicatedeffects of all these causes at distinct geological epochs, and toinquire how particular regions, after having remained for agesin a state of comparative tranquillity,* and under the influenceof a certain state of the atmosphere, may be subsequentlyremodelled by another series of subterranean movements, — showSee a paper on the Ezeayaiion of Valleys, &c., by G. Poulet Scrapes Esq.Proceedings Geol.SoCiNo. 14; 1830.t Ibid.172 TRANSPORTING POWERthe new direction, volume, and velocity acquired by rivers andtorrents may modify the former surface, — what effects an importantdifference in the mean temperature of the climates orthe greater intensity of heat and cold at different seasons, mayproduce, — what pre-existing valleys, under a new configurationof the land, may cease to give passage to large bodies ofwater, or may become entirely dried up, — show far the relativelevel of certain districts in the more modem period may becomeprecisely the reverse of those which prevailed at the moreancient era. When these and other essential elements of theproblem are all duly appreciated, the reader will not be surprisedto learn, that amongst geologists who have neglectedthem there has prevailed a great contrariety of opinion on thesetopics. Some writers of distinguished talent have gone so faras to contend, that the origin of the greater number ofexisting valleys was simply due to the agency of one cause,and that it was consummated in a brief period of time. Butwithout discussing the merits of the general question, we mayobserve that we agree with the author before cited, that thesinuosity of deep valleys is one among many proofs that theyhave been shaped out progressively, and not by the simultaneousaction of one or many causes ; and when we considerother agents of change, we shall have opportunities of pointingout a multitude of striking facts in confirmation of the gradualnature of the process to which the inequalities of hill andvalley owe their origin.In regard to the transporting power of water, we are oftensurprised at the facility wherewith streams of a small size, andwhich descend a slight declivity, bear along coarse sand andgravel ; for we usually estimate the weight of rocks in air, anddo not reflect sufficiently on their comparative buoyancy whensubmerged in a denser fluid. The specific gravity of manyrocks is not more than twice that of water, and very rarelymore than thrice, so that almost all the fragments propelled bya stream have lost a third, and many of them half of what weusually term their weight.It has been proved by experiment, in contradiction to thetheories of the early writers on hydrostatics, to be a universallaw, regulating the motion of running water, that the velocityat the bottom of the stream is everywhere less than in any partabove it, and is greatest at the surface. Also that the superRUNNING WATER* 173filial particles in the middle of the stream move swifter thanthose at the sides. This retardation of the lowest and lateralcurrents is produced by friction, and when the velocity is sufficientlygreat the soil composing the sides and bottom givesway. A velocity of three inches per second is ascertained tobe sufficient to tear up fine clay, — six inches per second finesand, — twelve inches per second, fine gravel, — and three feetper second, stones of the size of an egg *.When this mechanical power of running water is considered,we are prepared for the transportation of large quantities ofgravel, sand and mud, by the torrents and rivers which descendwith great velocity from the mountainous regions.But a question naturally arises, how the more tranquil riversof the valleys and plains, flowing on comparatively levelground, can remove the prodigious burden which is dischargedinto them by their numerous tributaries, and by what meansthey are enabled to convey the whole mass to the sea. Ifthey had not this power, their channels would be annuallychoked up, and the lower valleys and districts adjoiningmountain-chains would be continually strewed over with fragmentsof rock and sterile sand. But this evil is preventedby a general law regulating the conduct of running water, thattwo equal streams do not occupy a bed of double surface. Inproportion, therefore, as the whole fluid mass increases thespace which it occupies decreases relatively to the volume ofwater ; and hence there is a smaller proportion of the wholeretarded by friction against the bottom and sides of thechannel. The portion thus unimpeded moves with great velocity,so that the main current is often accelerated in the lowercountry, notwithstanding that the slope of the channel islessened. It not unfrequently happens, as we shall afterwardsdemonstrate by examples, that two large rivers, after theirjunction, have only the surface which one of them had previously; and even in some cases their united waters are confinedin a narrower bed than each of them filled before. By this beautifuladjustment, the water which drains the interior country ismade continually to occupy less room as it approaches the sea ;and thus the most valuable part of our continents, the rich deltas,Encyd. Brit.— Art. Riven.174 TRANSPORTING POWERand great alluvial plains, are prevented from being constantlyunder water ♦.Many remarkable illustrations of the power of runningwater in moving stones and heavy materials were afforded bythe late storm and flood which occurred on the 3rd and 4th ofAugust 18S9, in Aberdeenshire and other counties, in Scotland,The floods extended almost simultaneously and in equalviolence over a space of about five thousand square miles, beingthat part of the north-east of Scotland which would be cut offby two lines drawn from the head of Lochrannoch, onetowards Inverness, and another to Stonehaven. All the riverswithin that space were flooded, and the destruction of roads,*lands, buildings, and crops along the courses of the streamswas very great. The elements during this storm assumed allthe characters which mark the tropical hurricanes : the windblowing in sudden gusts and whirlwinds, the lightning andthunder being such as is rarely witnessed in that climate, andheavy rain falling without intermission. The bridge over theDee at Ballad consisted of five arches, having upon the wholea water-way of two hundred and sixty feet. The bed of theriver on which the piers rested, was composed of rolled piecesof granite and gneiss. The bridge was built of granite, andhad stood uninjured for twenty years, but the different partswere swept away in succession by the flood, and the wholemass of masonry disappeared in the bed of the river +. " Theriver Don** observes Mr. Farquharson, in his account ofthe inundations, ^^ has upon my own premises forced a massof four or five hundred tons of stones, many of them twoor three hundred pounds weight, up an inclined plane,rising six feet in eight or ten yards; and left them in arectangular heap, about three feet deep on a flat ground ;and, singularly enough, the heap ends abruptly at its lowerextremity. A large stone, of three or four tons which Ihave known for many years in a deep pool of the river, hasbeen moved about one hundred. yards from its place J."The power even of a small rivulet, when swoln by rain, in removingheavy bodies, was lately exemplified in the College, a• See Article Riven, Envy. Brit.t From the account gpyen by the Rev. James Farquhar, in the QuarterlyJoum. of Sd.| &C., No. 12, new series, p. 328. X Ibid p. 331.OF Burning WATER. 175small stream which flows at a moderate debility from theeastern water-shed of the Cheviot-Hills. Several thousandtons weight of gravel and sand were transported to the plain ofthe Till, and a bridge then in progress of building was carriedaway, some of the arch-stones of which weighing from half tothree-quarters of a ton each were propelled two miles downthe rivulet* On the same occasion, the current tore away fromthe abutment of a mill-dam a large block of greenstone-porphyry, weighing nearly two tons, and transported the same tothe distance of a quarter of a mile. Instances are related asoccurring repeatedly, in which from one to three thousand tonsof gravel are in like manner removed to great distances in onedajr*.In the cases above adverted to, the waters of the river andtorrent were dammed back by the bridges which acted aspartial barriers, and illustrate the irresistible force of a currentwhen obstructed. Bridges are also liable to be destroyed bythe tendency of rivers to shift their course whereby the pier,or the rock on which the foundation stands, is undermined.When we consider how insignificant are the volume andvelocity of the rivers and streams in our island, when comparedto those of the Alps and other lofty chains, and how, duringthe various changes which the levels of different districts haveundergone the various contingencies which give rise to floods,must in the lapse of ages be multiplied, we may easily conceivethat the quantity of loose superficial matter distributedover Europe must be very considerable. That the positionalso of a great portion of these travelled materials should nowappear most irregular, and should often bear no relation tothe existing water-drainage of the country, is a necessary consequence,as we shall afterwards see, of the combined operationsof running water and subterranean movements.In mountainous regions and high northern latitudes, themoving of heat stones by water is greatly assisted by the icewhich adheres to them, and which forming together with therock a mass of less specific gravity t* is readily borne along.The glaciers also of alpine regions, formed of consolidated snow,See a paper by Mr. Muley, F.O.S., Proceedings of Get. Soc, No. 12, 1829.f BUlimaii'i Journal, No. 30^ p. 303.176 EROSION OF RAVINES.bear down upon their surface a prodigious burden of rock anusand mixed with ice. These materials are generally arrangedin long ridges which sometimes in the Alps are thirty or fortyfeet high, running parallel to the borders of the glacier, like somany lines of intrenchment. These mounds of debris aresometimes three or more deep, and have generally been broughtin by lateral glaciers : the whole accumulation is slowly conveyedto the lower valleys where, on the melting of the glacier,it is swept away by rivers*.The rapidity with which even the smallest streams hollowout deep channels in soft and destructible soils is remarkablyexemplified in volcanic countries, where the sand and half-consolidatedtuffs oppose but a slight resistance to the torrentswhich descend the mountain side. After the heavy rainswhich followed the eruption of Vesuvius is 182S, the waterflowing from the Atrio del Cavallo, cut in three days a newchasm through strata of tuff and volcanic ejected matter tothe depth of twenty-five feet. The old mule road was seen, in1828, intersected by this new ravine. But such facts aretrifling when compared to the great gorges which are excavatedin somewhat similar materials in the great plateau of Mexico,where an ancient system of valleys, originally worn out ofgranite and secondary rocks, has been subsequently filled withstrata of tuff, pumice, lava, and tracy tic conglomerate, to thethickness of several thousand feet. The rivers and torrentsannually swoln by tropical rains, are now actively employed inremoving these more recent deposits, and in re-excavating theancient water-courses f .The gradual erosion of deep chasms through some of thehardest rocks, by the constant passage of running water chargedwith foreign matter, is another phenomenon of which strikingexamples may be adduced. Some of the clearest illustrationsof this excavating power are presented by many valleys inCentral France, where the channels of rivers have been barredup by solid currents of lava, through which the streams havere-excavated a passage to the depth of from twenty to seventyfeet and upwards, and often of great width. In these casesSaussure, Voyage dans lea Alpes, torn. i.t I am indebted to Captain Vetch for this information, whose researches inMexico will, it is hoped, be soon communicated to the scientific world.AQUEOUS EROSION OF LAVAS. 177there are decisive proofs that neither the sea nor any denudingwave, or extraordinary body of water, have passed over the spotsince the invited lava was consolidated. Every hypothesis of theintervention of sudden and violent agency is entirely excluded,because the cones of loose scorise, out of which the lavasflowed, are oftentimes at no great elevation above the rivers,and have remained undisturbed during the whole periodwhich has been sufficient for the hollowing out of such enormousravines. But we shall reserve a more detailed accountof the volcanic district of Central France for another partof this work, and at present confine ourselves to examplesderived from events which have happened since the time ofhistory.Some lavas of Etna, produced by eruptions of which thedate is known, have flowed across two of the principal riversin Sicily ; and in both cases the streams, dispossessed of theirancient beds, have opened for themselves new channels. Aneruption from Mount Moro, an insulated cone at the northernbase of Etna, sent forth, in the year 396, B.C., in the reign ofDionysius I., a great lava-stream, which crossed the river in two places. The lowermost point of obstructionis seen on the eastern side of Etna, on the high road fromGuarding to Catania, where one pier of the bridge on eitherbank is based upon a remnant of the solid lava, which hasbeen breached by the river to the depth of fourteen feet. Butthe Caltabianca, although it has been at work for more thantwo and twenty centuries, has pot worn through the igneousrock so as to lay open the gravel of its ancient bed. The declivity,however, of the alluvial plain is very slight ; and as theextent of excavation in a given time depends on the volumeand velocity of the stream, and the destructibility of the rock,we must carefully ascertain all these circumstances before weattempt to deduce from such examples a measure of the forceof running water in a given period *.I omitted to visit the higher point near the village of Moro, where the Calta«bianca has cut through the lava. Some future traveller would probably derivemuch instruction from inspecting that spot, which is laid down in Gremmellaro*aQuatre Historic, &c dell' Etna, 1824. ,Vol. I. NLAVA Excavated BT THE SIUETO.Beceni Excavation of ^^The Simdo. — ^^The power of ragingwater to hollow out compact rock is exhibited, on a largerscale, at the western base of Etna, where a great currentof lava (a a, diagram 8). descending from near the summitNo. 3.J^y^^x*J^^\EU^f^;^^^^"^^p'^'yp^^Simatm'xyyO^-"-^ .^^ ^.^^^^3>^ ^''"'^^ .^ -^ y^ .J^of the great volcano, has flowed to the distance of five orsix miles, and then reached the alluvial plain of the Simeto,the largest of the Sicilian rivers which skirts the base of Etna,and falls into the sea a few miles south of Catania. The lavaentered the river about three miles above the town of Demandnot only occupied its channel for some distance, but, crossingto the opposite side of the valley, accumulated there in arocky mass. Gemmellaro gives the year 1603 as the date ofthe eruption *. The appearance of the current clearly provesthat it is one of the most modem of those of Etna, for it hasnot been covered or crossed by subsequent streams or ejections,and the olives on its surface are all of small size, yet older thanthe natural wood on the same lava. In the course, therefore, ofabout two centuries the Simeto has eroded a passage from fiftyto several hundred feet wide, and in some parts from forty tofifty feet deep.The portion of lava cut through is in no part porous orsooriaceous, but consists of a compact homogeneous mass ofhard blue rock, somewhat lighter than ordinary basalt, containingcrystals of olivine and glassy felspar. The general declivity ofthis part of the bed of the Simeto is not considerable, but, inconsequenceof the unequal waste of the lava, two waterfallsoccur at Pass Manzanelli, each about six feet in height. Herethe chasm (b, diagram No. S.) is about forty feet deep, and onlyfifty broad.Quatre Historic dell* Etna, 1824. Some doubts are entertained as to theexact date of this cumsnt by oflien, but all agree that it is not one of the (deer■treanui even of the historical cnuPALLS OF NIAGARA. 179The sand and pebbles in the river bed consist chiefly of abrown quartzose sandstone, derived from the upper country ;but the matter derived from the volcanic rock itself must havegreatly assisted the attrition. This river, like the Caltabianca,has not yet cut down to the ancient bed of which it was dispossessed,and of which we have indicated the probable position inthe annexed diagram (c. No. 8.)On entering the narrow ravine where the water foams downthe two cataracts, we are entirely shut out from all view of thesurrounding country; and a geologist who is accustomed to associatethe characteristic features of the landscape with the relativeage of certain rocks, can scarcely dissuade himself from thebelief that he is contemplating a scene in some rocky gorge ofa primary district. The external forms of the hard blue lavaare as massive as any of the most ancient trap-rocks of Scotland.The solid suT£Eu;e is in some parts smoothed and almostpolished by attrition, and covered in others with a white lichen,which imparts to it an air of extreme antiquity, so as greatlyto heighten the delusion. But the moment we reascend thecliff, the spell is broken ; for we scarcely recede a few paces,before the ravine and river disappear, and we stand on the blackand rugged surface of a vast current of lava, which seemsunbroken, and which we can trace up nearly to the distantsummit of that majestic cone which Pindar called ^^ the pillarof heavens and which still continues to send forth a fleecywreath of vapour, reminding us that its fires are not extinct,and that it may again give out a rocky stream, wherein otherscenes like that now described may present themselves to futureobservers.Falls of Niagara. — The falls of Niagara afford a magnificentexample of the progressive excavation of a deep valley in solidrock. That river flows from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario, theformer lake being three hundred and thirty feet above the latter,and the distance between them being thirty-two miles. On flowingout of the upper lake, the river is almost on a level with itsbanks; so that, if it should rise perpendicularly eight or ten feet,it would lay under water the adjacent flat country of UpperCanada on the West, and of the State of New York on theN 2n180 FALLS OF NIAGARA.East*. The river, where it issues, is about three quarters of amile in width. Before reaching the falls, it is propelled withgreat rapidity, being a mile broad, about twenty-five feet deep,and having a descent of fifty feet in half a mile. An islandat the very verge of the cataract divides it into two sheets ofwater; one of these, called the Horse-shoe Fall, is six hundredyards wide, and one hundred and fifty-eight feet perpendicular;the other, called the American Falls, is about two hundred yardsin width, and one hundred and sixty-four feet in height. Thebreadth of the island is about five hundred yards. This greatsheet of water is precipitated over a ledge of hard limestone, inhorizontal strata, below which is a somewhat greater thicknessof soft shale, which decays and crumbles away more rapidly, sothat the calcareous rock forms an overhanging mass, projectingforty feet or more above the hollow space below. The blastsof wind, charged with spray, which rise out of the pool intowhich this enormous cascade is projected, strike against theshale beds, so that their disintegration is constant; and the superincumbentlimestone, being left without a foundation, falls fromtime to time in rocky masses. When these enormous fragmentsdescend, a shock is felt at some distance, accompanied by a noiselike a distant clap of thunder. After the river has passed overthe falls, its character, observes Captain Hall, is immediately andcompletely changed. It then runs furiously along the bottomof a deep wall-sided valley, or huge trench, which has been cutinto the horizontal strata by the continued action of the streamduring the lapse of ages. The cliffs on both sides are in mostplaces perpendicular, and the ravine is only perceived on approachingthe edge of the precipice -f*.The waters which expand at the falls, where they are dividedby the island, are contracted again, after their union, into astream not more than one hundred and sixty yards broad. Inthe narrow channel, immediately below this immense rush ofwater, a boat can pass across the stream with ease. The pool,it is said, into which the cataract is precipitated, being one hundredand seventy feet deep, the descending water sinks downCaptain Halls Travel in North America, vol. i^ p. 179.t Ibid., pp. 195, 196,216.PALLS OF NL\GARA« 181and fons an under-current, while a superficial eddy carriesthe upper stratum back towards the main fall*. This is notimprobable; and we must also suppose, that the confluenceof two streams, which meet at a considerable angle, tendsmutually to neutralize their forces. The bed of the riverbelow die falls is strewed over with huge fragments whichhave been hurled down into the abyss. By the continueddestruction of the rocks, the falls have, within the last fortyyears, receded nearly fifty yards, or, in other words, theravine has been prolonged to that extent. Through this deepchasm the Niagara flows for about seven miles ; and then thetable-land, which is almost on a level with Lake Erie, suddenlybanks down at a town called Queenstown, and the riveremerges from the ravine into a plain which continues to theshores of Lake Ontario -f*.There seems good foundation for the general opinion, thatthe falls were once at Queenstown, and that they have graduallyretrograded from that place to their present position,about seven miles distant. If the ratio of recession had neverexceeded fifty yards in forty years, it must have requirednearly ten thousand years for the excavation of the wholeravine ; but no probable conjecture can be offered as to thequantity of time consumed in such an operation, because theretrograde movement may have been much more rapid whenthe whole current was confined within a space not exceedinga fourth or fifth of that which the falls now occupy. Shouldthe erosive action not be accelerated in future, it will requireupwards of thirty thousand years for the falls to reach LakeErie (twenty-five miles distant), to which they seem destinedto arrive in the course of time, unless some earthquakechanges the relative levels of the district. The table-land, extendingfrom Lake Erie, consists uniformly of the same geologicalformations as are now exposed to view at the falls. Theupper stratum is an ancient alluvial sand, varying in thicknessfrom ten to one hundred and forty feet ; below which is a bedSee Mr. Bakewell, jun on Falls of Niagara. London's Magazines No. 12^March, 1830.f The Memoir of Mr. Bakewell, jun. above referred to, contains two very illustxatiTe sketches of the physical geography of the country between Lake Ensand Ontario) including the Falls,182 FALLS OF NIAGARA.of hard limestone, about ninety feet in thickness, stretchingnearly in a horizontal direction over the whole country,and forming the bed of the river above the falls, as do the inferiorshales below The lower shale is nearly of the same thicknessas the limestone. Should Lake Erie remus in its presentstate until the period when the ravine recedes to its shores, theSudden escape of that great body of water would cause a tremendousdeluge ; for the ravine would be much more than sufficientto drain the whole lake, of which the average depthwas found, during the late survey, to be only ten or twelvefathoms. But, in consequence of its shallowness. Lake Erieis fast filling up with sediment, and the annual growth of thedeltas of many rivers and torrents which flow into it is remarkable.Long Point, for example, near the influx of 'Big CreekRiver, was observed, during the late survey, to advance threemiles in as many years. A question therefore arises, whetherLake Erie may not be converted into dry land before the Fallsof Niagara recede so far. In speculating on this contingency,we must not omit one important condition of the problem. Asthe surface of the lake is contracted in size, the loss of water byevaporation will diminish ; and unless the supply shall decreasein the same ratio (which seems scarcely probable), Niagara mustaugment continually in volume, and by this means its retrogrademovement may hereafter be much accelerated.CHAPTER XI.Action of naming water, continued — Course of the Po— Dentition of its old ehumd'Aiticial embankments of the Po, Adige, and other Italian rivers— Basin ofthe Mississippi — Its meanders — Islands— Shilling of its course— Rail of thoAtchafalaya — Drift wood — new-formed lakes in Louisiana — earthquakes inthe valley of the Mississippi — floods caused by land-slips in the Whitemountains — bursting of a lake in Switzerland — Devastations caused by theAnio at Tivoli.Course of the Po. — The Po affords a grand example of themanner in which a great river bears down to the sea thematter poured into it by a multitude of tributaries descendingfrom lofty chains of mountains. The changes graduallyeffected in the great plain of Northern Italy, since the timeof the Roman republic are very considerable. Extensivelakes and marshes have been gradually filled up, as thosenear Placentia, Parma, and Cremona, and many have beendrained naturally by the deepening of the beds of rivers.Deserted river-courses are not unfrequent, as that of the SermoMorton, which formerly fell into the Add, in Lombardy ; andthe Po itself has often deviated from its course. Subsequentlyto the year 1890, it deserted part of the territory of Cremonaand invaded that of Parma \ its old channel being still recognizable,and bearing the name of Po Morton. Bressello is oneof the towns of which the site was formerly on the left of thePo, but which is now on the right bank. There is also an oldchannel of the Po in the territory of Parma, called Po Vecchio,which was abandoned in the twelfth century, when a greatnumber of towns were destroyed. There are records ofparish-churches, as those of Vicobellignano, Agojolo, and Mar*iguana, having been pulled down and afterwards rebuilt at agreat: distance from the devouring stream. In the fifteenthcentury the main branch again resumed its deserted channel,and carried away a great island opposite Casalmaggiore. Atthe end of the same century it abandoned, a second time the184 EMBANKMENTS OF FO AND Adige.bed called " Po Vecchio," carrying away three streets of CanalsThe friars in the monastery de' Service took thealarm in 1471» demolished their buildings, and reconstructedthem at Fontana, whither they had transported the materials*In like manner, the church of S. Rocco was demolished in 1511.In the seventeenth century also the Po shifted its course for amile in the same district, causing great devastations *•To check these and similar aberrations, a general system ofembankment has been adopted ; and the Po, Adige, and almostall their tributaries, are now confined between high artificialbanks. The increased velocity acquired by streams thusclosed in, enables them to convey a much larger portion offoreign matter to the sea ; and consequently the deltas of thePo and Adige have gained far more rapidly on the Adriaticsince the practice of embankment became almost universal. Butalthough more sediment is borne to the sea, part of the sand,and mud, which in the natural state of things would be spreadout by annual inundations over the plain, now subsides in thebottom of the river-channels, and their capacity being therebydiminished, it is necessary, in order to prevent inundationsin the following spring, to extract matter from the bed, and toadd it to the banks of the river. Hence it has arisen that thesestreams now traverse the plain on the top of high mounds,like the waters of aqueducts, and the surface of the Po hasbecome more elevated than the roofs of the houses of the cityof Ferrara. The magnitude of these barriers is a subjectof increasing expense and anxiety, it having sometimes of lateyears been found necessary to give an additional height ofnearly one foot to the banks of the Adige and Po in aingle season. The practice of embankment was adoptedon some of the Italian rivers as early as the thirteenthcentury ; and Dante, writing in the beginning of the fourteenth,describes, in the seventh circle of hell, a rivuletof tears separated from a burning sandy desert by embankments'< like those which, between Ghent and Bruges, wereraised against the ocean, or those which the Papuans hadDeir Antic Con de* Fiumi Po, OgliO| ed Add dell' Giovanni RomaiiiiMan, 1828.t ^tonj, see Cuvier, Disc Ft^linLj p. 146«BASIN OF THE MISSISSIPPI. 185erected along the Brentaa to defend their villas on the meltingof the Alpine snows."Quale i Fiamminghi tra Guidance e Bruggia,Memento il giotto che in ver lor s* arena,Anno lo scheme, perche il mar si fuggia,quale i Cadogan lungs la Brentaa,Per defender lor yule e lor castella,Anti che Chiarentana il waldo sentii-*Jk/emo, Canto xr.Basin of the Mississippi, — The hydrographical basin of theMississippi displays on the grandest scale, the action ofrunning water on the surface of a vast continent. Thismagnificent river rises nearly in the forty-ninth parallel ofnorth latitude and flows to the Gulf of Mexico in thetwenty-ninth — a course, including its meanders, of nearlyfive thousand miles. It passes from a cold arctic climate,traverses the temperate regions, and discharges its watersinto the sea, in the region of the olive, the fig, and thesugar-cane *. No river affords a more striking illustration ofthe law before mentioned, that an augmentation of volumedoes not occasion a proportional increase of surface, nay, iseven sometimes attended with a narrowing of the channel. TheMississippi is a mile and a half wide at its junction with theMissouri, the latter being half a mile wide; yet the unitedwaters have only, from their confluence to the mouth of theOhio, a medial width of about three quarters of a mile. Thejunction of the Ohio seems also to produce no increase, butrather a decrease of surface f. The St. Francis, White,Arkansas, and Red rivers, are also absorbed by the mainstream with scarcely any apparent increase of its width ; and,on arriving near the sea at New Orleans, it is somewhat lessthan half a mile wide. Its depth there is very variable, thegreatest at high water being one hundred and sixty-eightfeet. The mean rate at which the whole body of water flows,is variously estimated. According to some, it does not exceedone mile an hour t. The alluvial plain of this great river isbounded on the east and west by great ranges of mountainsstretching along their respective oceans. Below the junctionFlint's Geography, vol. i., p. 21. f Ibid., p. 140.t HoU'b Travel in North America, toL iii., p. 330, who cites Darby.186 TRANSPORTATION OF MATTERof the Ohio, the plain is from thirty to fifty miles broad andafter that point it goes on increasing in width till the expanseis perhaps three times as great ! On the borders of this vastalluvial tract are perpendicular cliffs, or '^ bluffs^'^ as they arecalled, composed of limestone and other rocks. For a greatdistance the Mississippi washes the eastern " bluffs ;'^ and belowthe mouth of the Ohio, never once comes in contact with thewestern. The waters are thrown to the eastern side, becauseall the large tributary rivers enter from the west, and havefilled that side of the great valley with a sloping mass of clayand sand. For this reason, the eastern bluffs are continuallyundermined, and the Mississippi is slowly but incessantly progressingeastward*.The river traverses the plain in a meandering course,describing immense and uniform curves. After sweepinground the half of a circle, it is precipitated from the pointin a current diagonally across its own channel, to anothercurve of the same uniformity upon the opposite shore f.These curves are so regular that the boatmen and Indianscalculate distances by them. Opposite to each of them, thereis always a sand-bar, answering in the convexity of its form,to the concavity of " the bend," as it is called J, The river, bycontinually wearing these curves deeper, returns, like manyother streams before described, on its own tract, so that a vesselin some places, after sailing for twenty-five or thirty miles, isbrought round again to within a mile of the place whence itstarted. When the waters approach so near to each other, itoften happens at high floods that they burst through the smalltongue of land ; and, having insulated a portion, rush throughwhat is called the " cut off" with great velocity. At one spotcalled the " grand cut off," vessels now pass from one point toanother in half a mile, to a distance which it formerly requiredtwenty miles to reach §. After the flood season, when the riversubsides within its channel, it acts with destructive force uponthe alluvial banks, softened and diluted by the recent overflow.Several acres at a time, thickly covered with wood, are precipitatedinto the stream ; and the islands formed by the pix>-Geography. Describe. of the State of Louisiana, by W. Daily, Philadelphia,1816, p. 102.t riot's Geog., vol I, p. 152. t Ibid. § Ibid., vol L, p. 154.BT THE MISSISSIPPI. 187cess before described, lose large portions of their outer circum*^ Some years ago,^ observes Captain Hall, '* when theMississippi was regularly surveyed, all its islands were numbered,from the confluence of the Missouri to the sea; butevery season makes such revolutions, not only in the numberbut in the magnitude and situation of these islands,that this enumeration is now almost obsolete. Sometimeslarge islands are entirely melted away — at other places theyhave attached themselves to the main shore, or, which is themore correct statement, the interval has been filled up bymyriads of logs cemented together by mud and rubbish *."When the Mississippi and many of its great tributaries overflowtheir banks, the waters, being no longer borne down by themain current, and becoming impeded amongst the trees andbushes, deposit the sediment of mud and sand with whichthey are abundantly charged. Islands arrest the progress offloating trees, and they become in this manner reunited tothe land ; the rafts of trees, together with mud, constitutingat length a solid mass. The coarser portion subsides first,and the most copious deposition is found near the bankswhere the soil is most sandy. Finer particles are found atthe farthest distances from the river, where an impalpablemixture is deposited, forming a stifle unctuous black soil.Hence the alluvions of these rivers are highest directly on thehanks, and slope back like a natural '^ glacis towards therocky cliffs bounding the great valley f* The Mississippi,therefore, by the continual shifting of its course, sweeps away,during a great portion of the year, considerable tracts ofalluvium which were gradually accumulated by the overflowof former years, and the matter now left during the spring-floodswill be at some future time removed.One of the most interesting features in this basin is ** theraft' The dimensions of this mass of timber were given byDarby, in 1816, as ten miles in length, about two hundredand twenty yards wide, and eight feet deep, the whole of which .had accumulated, in consequence of some obstruction, duringTbrmb in North America, toL iil, p. 861.t VHai^nQmgmj/bj, toL i, p. 151.188 RAFT OF THE ATCHAFALATA.about thirty-eight years, in an arm of the Mississippi called theAtchafalaya, which is supposed to have been at some past timea channel of the Red River, before it intermingled its waterswith the main stream. This arm is in a direct line with thedirection of the Mississippi, and it catches a large portion ofthe drift wood annually brought down. The mass of timberin the raft is continually increasing, and the whole rises andfalls with the water. Although floating, it is covered withgreen bushes, like a tract of solid land, and its surface is enlivenedin the autumn by a variety of beautiful flowers.Notwithstanding the astonishing number of cubic feet of timbercollected here in so short a time, greater deposits have been inprogress at the extremity of the delta in the Bay of Mexico.'^ Unfortunately for the navigation of the Mississippi," observesCaptain Hall, " some of the largest trunks, after being castdown from the position on which they grew, get their rootsentangled with the bottom of the river, where they remainanchored, as it were, in the mud. The force of the currentnaturally gives their tops a tendency downwards, and by itsflowing past, soon strips them of their leaves and branches.These fixtures, called snags or planters, are extremely dangerousto the steam-vessels proceeding up the stream, in whichthey lie like a lance in rest, concealed beneath the water, withtheir sharp ends pointed direct against the bow of vesselscoming up. For the most part these formidable snags remainso still, that they can be detected only by a slight ripple abovethem, not perceptible to inexperienced eyes. Sometimes, however,they vibrate up and down, alternately showing theirheads above the surface and bathing them beneath it*.^ Soimminent is the danger caused by these obstructions, thatalmost all the boats on the Mississippi are constructed on aparticular plan, to guard against fatal accidents f .Travels in North America, vol. iii., p. 362.t the boats are fitted," says Captain Hall, <<with what is called a snag-chamber; a singer device, and highly characteristic of this peculiar navigation.At the distance of from twelve or fourteen feet from the stem of thevessel, a strong bulk-head is carried across the hold from side to side, as highas the deck, and reaching to the kelson. This partition, which is formed ofstout planks, is caulked, and made so effectually water-tight, that the foremostend of the vessel is cut off as entirely fire the rest of the hold as if itbelonged to another boat If the sfteam-TeMel hi^pea to num gainst a mag, andDRIFT WOOD OF THE MISSISSIPPI. 189The prodigious quantity of wood annually drifted down bythe Mississippi and its tributaries, is a subject of geological interest,not merely as illustrating the manner in which abundanceof vegetable matter becomes, in the ordinary course of Nature,imbedded in submarine and estuary deposits, but as attestingthe constant destruction of soil and transportation of matterto lower levels by the tendency of rivers to shift their courses.Each of these trees must have required many years, some ofthem many centuries, to attain their full size ; the soil, therefore,whereon they grew, after remaining undisturbed for longperiods, is ultimately torn up and swept away. Yet notwithstandingthis incessant destruction of land and up-rooting oftrees, the region which yields this never-ruling supply of driftwoodis densely clothed with noble forests, and is almost unrivalledin its power of supporting animal and vegetable life.Innumerable herds of wild deer and bisons feed on theluxuriant pastures of the plains. The jaguar, the wolf, andthe fox, are amongst the beasts of prey. The waters teemwith alligators and tortoises, and their surface is covered withmillions of migratory water-fowl, which perform their annualvoyage between the Canadian lakes and the shores of theMexican gulf. The power of man begins to be sensibly felt,and the wilderness to be replaced by towns, orchards, andgardens. The gilded steam-boat, like a moving city, nowstems the current with a steady pace — now shoots rapidly downthe descending stream through the solitudes of the forests andprairies. Already does the flourishing population of the greatvalley exceed that of the thirteen United States when first theydeclared their independence, and after a sanguinary strugglewere severed from the parent country *. Such is the state of acontinent where rocks and trees are hurried annually, by a thousandtorrents, from the mountains to the plains, and wheresand and finer matter are swept down by a vast current to thesea, together with the wreck of countless forests and the bonesof animals which perish in the inundations. When these materialsreach the Gulf, they do not render the waters unfit forthat a hole ia made in her bow, under the surface, this chamber merely fill withwater ; for the communication being cut off from the rest of the vessel, no furthermischief need ensue." Travels ia North America, toI. iiL, p. 363.Flint's Geography, Toi.190 NEW LAKES IN L0VI8LAND.aquatic animals ; but, on the contrary, the ocean here swarmswith life, as it generally does where the influx of a great riverfurnishes a copious supply of organic and mineral matter.Yet many geologists, when they behold the spoils of the landheaped in successive strata, and blended confusedly withthe remains of fishes, or interspersed with broken shells andcorals, imagine that they are viewing the signs of a turbulent,instead of a tranquil and settled state of the planet. Theyread in such phenomena the proof of chaotic disorder, andreiterated catastrophes, instead of indications of a surfaceas habitable as the most delicious and fertile districts nowtenanted by man. They are not content with disregarding theanalogy of the present course of Nature, when they speculateon the revolutions of past times, but they often draw conclusionsconcerning the former state of things directly the reverseof those to which a fair induction from facts would infalliblylead them.There is another striking feature in the basin of the Mississippi,illustrative of the changes now in progress, which wemust not omit to mention — the formation by natural causes ofgreat lakes, and the drainage of others. These are especiallyfrequent in the basin of the Red River in Louisiana, where thelargest of them, called Bistineau, is more than thirty miiea long,and has a medium depth of from fifteen to twenty feet. In thedeepest parts are seen numerous cypress-trees, of all sizes, nowdead, and most of them with their tops broken by the wind,yet standing erect under water. This tree resists the actionof air and water longer than any other, and, if not submergedthroughout the whole year, will retain life for an extraordinaryperiod *. Lake Bistineau, as well as Black Lake, Cato Lake,Spanish Lake, Natchitoches Lake, and many others, have beenformed, according to Darby, by the gradual elevation of thebed of Red River, in which the alluvial accumulations havebeen so great as to raise its channel, and cause its waters,during the flood season, to flow up the mouths of many tributaries,and to convert parts of their courses into lakes. InCaptains Clark and Lewis found a forest of pines standing erect under waterin the body of the Columbia River in North America, which they supposed, fromthe appearance of the trees, to laye been only submerged about twenty years.— Vol.iL,p.241.EARTHQUAKES IN BASIN OF MISSISSIPPI. 191the autumn, when the level of Red River is again depressed,the waters rush back again, and some lakes become grassymeadows, with streams meandering through them *. Thus,there is a periodical flux and reflux between Red Riverand some of these basins, which are merely reservoirs, alternatelyemptied and filled like our tide estuaries — with this difference,that in the one case the land is submerged for severalmonths continuously, and, in the other, twice in every twenty-fourhours. It has happened, in several cases, that a bar hasbeen thrown by Red River across some of the openings ofthese channels, and then the lakes become, like Bistineau, constantrepositories of water. But even in these cases, their levelis liable to annual elevation and depression, because the floodwhen at its height passes over the bar ; just as, where sand-hillsdose the entrance of an estuary on the Norfolk or Suffolkcoast, the sea, during some high tide or storm, has oftenbreached the barrier and inundated again the interior country.The frequent fluctuations in the direction of river-courses,and the activity exerted by running water in various parts of thebasin of the Mississippi, are partly, perhaps, to be ascribed tothe co-operation of subterranean movements, which alter fromtime to time the relative levels of various parts of the surface.So late as the year 1812, the whole valley, from the mouth ofthe Ohio to that of the St. Francis, including a front of threehundred miles, was convulsed to such a degree, as to createnew islands in the river, and lakes in the alluvial plain, someof which were twenty miles in extent. We shall allude to thisevent when we treat of earthquakes, but may state here thatthey happened exactly at the same time as the fatal convulsionsat Caraccas ; and the district shaken was nearly five degrees oflatitude farther removed from the great centre of volcanic disturbance,than the basin of the Red River, to which we beforealluded f. When countries are liable to be so extensively andpermanently affected by earthquakes, speculations concerningchanges in their hydrographical features must not be made with-darby'sLouisiana, p. 33.f Darby mentions beds of marine shells on the banks of Red River whichseem to indicate that Lower Louisiana is of recent formation : its elevation, perhaps,above the sea, may have been due to the same series of earthquakes whichoontiniiies to agitate equatorial America.192 Bloody BtmSTIKCf OF Lakes ETC.out regard to the igneous as well as the aqueous causes of change.It is scarcely necessary to observe that the inequalities producedeven by one shock, might render the study of the alluvialplain of the Mississippi, at some future period, most perplexingto a geologist who should reason on the distribution oftransported materials, without being aware that the configurationof the country had varied materially during the time whenthe excavating or removing power of the river was greatest.The region convulsed in 1812, of which New Madrid was thecentre, exceeded in length the whole basin of the Thames, andthe shocks were connected with active volcanos more distantfrom New Madrid than are the extinct craters of the Eyfel orof Auvergne from London. If, therefore, during the innumerableeruptions which formerly broke forth in succession in theparts of Europe last alluded to, the basin of the principalriver of our island was frequently agitated, and the relativelevels of its several parts altered (an hypothesis in perfectaccordance with modern analogy), the difficulties of sometheorists might, perhaps, be removed; and they might nolonger feel themselves under the necessity of resorting tocatastrophes out of the ordinary course of Nature, when theyendeavour to explain the alluvial phenomena of that district.FLOODS, BURSTING OF LAKES, &c.The power which running water may exert, in the lapse ofages, in widening and deepening a valley, does not so much dependon the volume and velocity of the stream usually flowingin it, as on the number and magnitude of the obstructionswhich have, at different periods, opposed its free passage. Ifa torrent, however small, be effectually dammed up, the sizeof the valley above the barrier, and its declivity below, will determinethe violence of the debate, and not the dimensions ofthe torrent. The most universal source of local delugesare land-slips, slides, or avalanches, as they are sometimescalled, when great masses of rock and soil, or sometimes iceand snow, are precipitated into the bed of a river, either bythe undermining of a cliff, by the loosening of a sub-stratumby springs, by the shock of an earthquake, or other causes.Volumes might be filled were we to enumerate all the instancesFLOODS IN NORTH AMERICA. 193which are on record of these terrific catastrophes : we maytherefore select a few examples of recent occurrence, the factsof which are well authenticated.Two dry seasons in the White Mountains, in New Hampshire,were followed by heavy rains on the 28th August, 18S^when from the steep and lofty declivities which rise abruptlyon both sides of the river Sacoo, innumerable rocks and stones,many of sufficient size to fill a common apartment, were detached,and in their descent swept down before them, in onepromiscuous and frightful ruin, forests, shrubs, and the earthwhich sustained them. No tradition existed of any similarslides at former times, and the growth of the forest on theflanks of the hills clearly shewed that for a long intervalnothing similar had occurred. One of these moving masseswas afterwards found to have slid three miles, with an averagebreadth of a quarter of a mile. The excavations commencedgenerally in a trench a few yards in depth and a few rodsin width, and descended the mountains, widening and deepeningtill they became vast chasms. At the base of suchhollow ravines was seen a wide and deep mass of ruins, consistingof transported earth, gravel, rocks, and trees. Forestsof spruce-fir and hemlock were prostrated with as much easeas if they had been fields of grain ; for, where they disputed theground, the torrent of mud and rock accumulated behind till itgathered sufficient force to burst the temporary barrier.The valleys of the Amonoosuck and Sacoo presented, formany miles, an uninterrupted scene of desolation, all the bridgesbeing carried away, as well as those over their tributary streams.In some places, the road was excavated to the depth of fromfifteen to twenty feet ; in others, it was covered with earth,rocks, and trees, to as great a height. The water flowed formany weeks after the flood, as densely charged with earth as itcould be without being changed into mud, and marks wereseen in various localities of its having risen on either side of thevalley to more than twenty-five feet above its ordinary level.Many sheep and cattle were swept away, and the Willedfamily, nine in number, who in alarm had deserted their house,were destroyed on the banks of the Sacoo: seven of theirmangled bodies were afterwards found near the river, buriedYou I, OOF A Larkbeneath drift-wood and moontaiii^niiiis *. It is almost superfluousto pcHot out to the reader that the lower alluvial phdnsare most exposed to such violent floods, and are at the sametime best fitted for the sustenance at herbivorous animals.If, therefore, any organic remains are found amidst the superficialheaps of transported matter, resulting born those catastrophes,at whatever periods they may have happened, andwhatever may have been the former configuration and relativelevels of the country, we may expect the imbedded fossil reliesto be principally referable to this class of mammalia.But these catastrophes are insignificant, when compared tothose which are occasioned by earthquakes, when the boundaryhills, for miles in length, are thrown down into the hollow of avalley. We shall have an opportunity of alluding to inundationsof this kind when treating of earthquakes, and shall contentourselves at present with selecting an example, of modemdate, of a flood caused by the bursting of a lake; the factshaving been described, with more than usual accuracy, by sd*enteric observers.Flood in the Valley ofBagnet, 1818.~The valley of Bagnesis one of the largest of the lateral' entrenchments of the mainvalley of the Rhone, above the Lake of Geneva. Its upperportion was, in 1818, converted into a lake by the dammingup of a narrow pass, in consequence of the fall of avalanchesof snow and ice, precipitated from an elevated glacier into thebed of the river Dranse. In the winter season, during continuedfrost, scarcely any water flows in the bed of this riverto preserve an open channel, so that the ioe*barrier remainedentire until the melting of the snows in spring, when a lakewas formed above, about half a league in length, whichfinally attained a depth of about two hundred feet in parts,and a width of about seven hundred feet. To prevent orlessen the mischief apprehended from the sudden bursting ofthe barrier, an artificial gallery, seven hundred feet in length,was cut through the ice, before the waters had risen to a greatheight. When at length they accumulated and flowed through• SiUimMi'i Journal pf Sci«ii«t, toI. xf^ No. 8« p. 816, Jta, I829tIN THE VAtLBT OP BAON128. 19Sthis tunnel they dissolved the ice, and thus deepened theirchannel, until nearly half of the whole contents of the lakewere slowly drained off. But, at length, on the approachof the hot season, the central portion of the remainingmass of ice gave way with a tremendous crash, and theresidue of the lake was emptied in half an hour. In the courseof its descent, the waters encountered several narrow gorges,and at each of these they rose to a great height, and thenburst, with new violence, into the next basin, sweeping alongrocks, forests, houses, bridges, and cultivated land. For thegreater part of its course the flood resembled a moving mass ofrock and mud, rather than of water. Some fragments of primaryrock, of enormous magnitude, and which, from theirdimensions, might be compared without exaggeration to houses,were torn out of a more ancient alluvion, and borne downfor a quarter of a mile. The velocity of the water, in thefirst part of its course, was thirty*three feet per second, whichdiminished to six feet before it reached the Lake of Geneva,where it arrived in six hours and a half, the distance beingforty-five miles *. This flood left behind it, on the plains ofMartigny, thousands of trees torn up by the roots, togetherwith the ruins of buildings. Some of the houses in thattown were filled with mud up to the second story. Afterexpanding in the plain of Martigny, it entered the Shone, anddid no further damage ; but some bodies of men, who had beendrowned above Martigny, were afterwards found at the distanceof about thirty miles, floating on the further side of theLake of Geneva, near Vevey. Inundations, precisely similar,are recorded to have occurred at former periods in this district,and from the same cause. In 1595, for example, a lake burst,and the waters, descending with irresistible fury, destroyedthe town of Martigny, where from sixty to eighty personsperished. In a similar flood, fifty years before, one hundredand forty persons were drowned. For several monthsafter the d^bicle of 1818, the Dranse, having no settled channel,shifted its position continually from one side to the otherof the valley, carrying away newly-erected bridges, underSee an account of the inundation of the Val de Magnet, in 1818, in Ed, Phil.Journ., Tol. i,, p. 187. Drawn up from the Memoir of M. Escher, with a uvO'lion, &c.196 FLOOD OF THE Anno AT TIVOLI.mining houses, and continuing to be charged with as large aquantity of earthy matter as the fluid could hold in suspension*.The waters, on escaping from the lake intermixed withmud and rock, swept along, for the first four miles, at therate of above twenty miles an hour; and Mr. Escher, theengineer, calculated that the flood furnished three hundredthousand cubic feet of water every second, — ^ai^ efflux which isfive times greater than that of the Rhine below Basle. Now,if part of the lake had not been gradually drained ofi^ theflood would have been nearly double, approaching in volume tosome of the largest rivers in the world. It is evident, therefore,that when we are speculating on the excavating forcewhich running water may have exerted in any particularvalley, the most important question is not the volume of theexisting stream, nor the present levels of the river-channel,nor the size of the gravel, but the probability of a successionof floods, at some period since the time when some of the landin question may have been first elevated above the bosom ofthe sea.Flood at Tivoli 1826. — We shall conclude with one moreexample, derived from a land of classic recollections, the ancientTibur, and which, like all the other inundations to which wehave alluded, occurred within the present century. Theyounger Pliny, it will be remembered, describes a flood onthe Anio, which destroyed woods, rocks, and houses, withthe most sumptuous villas and works of art f. For four orfive centuries consecutively, this headlong stream, as Horacetruly called it, has often remained within its bounds, and then,after such long intervals of rest, at different periods inundatedits banks again, and widened its channel. The last of thesecatastrophes happened 15th Nov. 1826, after heavy rains,such as produced the floods before alluded to in Scotland.The waters appear also to have been impeded by an artificialI visited this valley four months after the flood, and was witness to the sweepingaway of a bridge, and the undermining of part of a house. The greater partof the ice-barrier was then standing, presenting a vertical cliff, one hundred andfifty feet high, like the lava^cuirents of Etna or Auvergne, intersected by a river,t Lib. viii., Exist. 17.^FLOOD OF THE Anno AT Tivoli* 197dike bj which they were separated into two parts, a shortdistance above Tivoli. They broke through this dike, and,leaving the left trench dry, precipitated themselves, with theirwhole weight, on the right side. Here they undermined, inthe course of a few hours, a high cliff, and widened the river'schannel about fifteen paces. On this height stood the churchof St. Lucia, and about thirty-six houses of the town ofTivoli, which were all carried away, presenting, as they sankinto the roaring flood, a terrific scene of destruction to thespectators on the opposite bank *» As the foundations weregradually removed, each building, some of them edifices ofconsiderable height, was first traversed with numerous rents,which soon widened into large fissures, until at length theroofs fell in with a crash, and then the walls sank into the river,and were hurled down the cataract below.The destroying agency of the flood came within two hundredyards of the precipice on which the beautiful temple of Vestastands; but fortunately this precious relic of antiquity wasspared, while the wreck of modern structures was hurled downthe abyss. Vesta, it will be remembered, in the heathen mythology,personified the stability of the earth ; and when theSamian astronomer, Aristarchus, first taught that the earthrevolved on its axis, and round the sun, he was publicly accusedof impiety, •* for moving the everlasting Vesta from herplace." Play fair f observed, that when Hutton ascribed instabilityto the earth's surface, and represented the continentswhich we inhabit as the theatre of incessant change and movement,his antagonists, who regarded them as unalterable, assailedhim, in a similar manner, with accusations founded onreligious prejudices. We might appeal to the excavatingpower of the Anio as corroborative of one of the most controvertedparts of the Huttonian theory ; and if the days of omenshad not gone by, the geologists who now worship Vesta mightregard the late catastrophe as portentous. We may, at least,recommend the modem votaries of the goddess to lose no timein making sk pilgrimage to her shrine, for the next flood maynot respect the temple.When at Tivoli, in 1829, 1 received this account from eye-witnesses of theevent 't lustre. of HuH. Theory, § 3, p. 147.CHAPTER XII.DlflSirenee between the transporting power of springs and rivers — many springscarry matter from below upwards — mineral ingredients most abundant insprings — Connexion of mineral waters with volcanic phenomena — Calcareoussprings — traversing of the Elsa — Baths of San Vignone and of San Filippo,near Radicofani — Spheroidal structure in travertin, as in English magnesianlimestone — ^Bulicami of Viterbo — Lake of the Solfatara, near Rome — traversingat Cascade of Tivoli — Ferruginous Springs— Cementing and colouringproperty of iron — brine Springs — Carbonated Springs — Disintegration ofAuvergne granite — Caverns in limestone — Petroleum Springs — Pitch Lakeof Trinidad.Wk have hitherto considered the destroying and transportingpower of those atmospheric waters which circulate on the surfaceof the land ; but another portion which sink deep into theearth, present phenomena essentially different in character.Rivers, as we have seen, remove earthy matter from higher tolower levels, but springs not only effect this purpose, butsometimes, like volcanos, carry matter from below upwards.Almost all springs are impregnated with some foreign ingredients,which render them more agreeable to our taste, andmore nutritive than pure rain water ; but as their mineral contentsare in a state of chemical solution, they rarely, even whenin great abundance, affect the clearness of the water, and forthis reason, we are usually unconscious of the great instrumentalityof these agents in the transfer of solid matter fromone part of the globe to another. The specific gravity ofspring water being greater than that of rain, it augments thecarrying power of rivers, enabling them to bear down a greaterquantity of matter in mechanical suspension towards the sea.Springs, both cold and thermal, rise up beneath the waters oflakes and seas, as well as in different parts of the land, and mustoften greatly modify the mineral character of subaqueous deposits.The number of metals, earths, acids, and alkalies, held insolution by different springs, comprehends a considerable portionof all known substances, and recent observations havetended continually to augment the list ; but those alone which areORIGIN OF THERMAL SPRINGS. 199most abundant need be regarded as of geological importance.These are lime, iron, magnesia, silica, alumine, soda, and thecarbonic and sulphuric acids. Besides these, springs of petroleum,or liquid bitumen, and its various modifications, such asmineral pitch, naptba, and asphaltum are largely distributedover the surface of the earth, but usually in close connexionwith volcanos. The relation, indeed, of almost all springsimpregnated copiously with mineral matter, to the sources ofsubterranean heat, seems placed beyond all reasonable doubt byinodem research. Mineral waters as they have been termed,are most abundant in regions of active volcanos, or whereearthquakes are most frequent and violent. Their temperatureis often very high, and has been known to be permanentlyheightened or lowered by the shock of an earthquake. Thevolume of water also given out has been sometimes affectedby the same cause. With the exception of silica, the mineralsentering most abundantly into thermal waters do not seem todiffer from those in cold springs. There is, moreover, aStriking analogy between the earthy matters evolved in agaseous state by volcanos, and those wherewith springs in thesame region are impregnated ; and when we proceed from theflite of active to that of extinct volcanos, we find the latterabounding in precisely the same kind of springs. Wherethermal and mineral waters occur far from active or extinctvolcanos, some great internal derangement in the strata almostinvariably marks the site to have been at some period, howeverremote, the theatre of violent earthquakes.Springs, are in general, ascribable to the percolation of rainwaterthrough porous rocks, which, meeting at last with argillaceousstrata, is thrown out to the surface. But, in all likelihood,they sometimes descend by fissures, even to the regionsof subterranean heat. Michell, in 1760, suggested that thosepent-up volcanic vapours which cause earthquakes, penetratealso through rents and cavities, and drive up water impregnatedwith sulphurous and other matters, whereby springsare charged with their mineral ingredients. Nor is it by anymeans improbable, that the same power which when intenseis able to lift up a column of lava many thousand feet inheight, should even in its more languid state be capable offalling to that surface considerable quantities of water from the200 CALCAREOUS SPRINGS.interior. But as the geographical limits of mineral waters arenot confined to volcanic regions, being coextensive with the wholeglobe, as far as is hitherto known, we must consider them apart,and in their connexion with rivers rather than volcanos. Wemight divide the consideration of springs, like that of rivers,into their destroying and reproductive agency ; but the formerclass of effects being chiefly subterranean, are beyond the reachof our observation; while their reproductive power consistschiefly in augmenting the quantity of matter deposited byrivers in deltas, or at the bottom of the sea. We shall, therefore,arrange the facts of geological interest, respecting mineralsprings, under the head of the different ingredients which predominatein their waters.CALCAREOUS SPRINGS.OuB first attention is naturally directed to springs which arehighly charged with calcareous matter; for these produce a varietyof phenomena of much interest to the geologist. It is wellknown that rain-water has the property of dissolving the calcareousrocks over which it flows, and by these means, matter isoften supplied for the earthy secretions of testacea, and certainplants on which they feed, in the smallest ponds and rivulets.But many springs hold so much carbonic acid in solution, thatthey are enabled to dissolve a much larger quantity of calcareousmatter than rain-water ; and when the acid is dissipated in theatmosphere, the mineral ingredients are slowly thrown downin the form of tufa or travertin. Calcareous springs, althoughmost abundant in limestone districts, are by no means confinedto them, but flow out indiscriminately from all rock formations.In Central France, a district where the primary rocks are unusuallydestitute of limestone, springs copiously charged withcarbonate of lime rise up through the granite and gneiss.Some of these are thermal, and probably derive their originfrom the deep source of volcanic heat, once so active in thatregion. One of these springs, at the northern base of the hillupon which Clermont is built, issues from volcanic peering,which rests on granite. It has formed, by its incrustations,an elevated mound of sold travertin, or calc-sinter, as it ssometimes called two hundred and forty feet in length, and,at its termination sixteen feet high, and twelve wide. An-tuscanTRAVERTIN. 201other incrusting spring in the same department, situated atChaluzety near Pont Gibaud, rises in a gneiss country, at thefoot of a regular volcanic cone, at least twenty miles from anycalcareous rock. Some masses of tufaceous deposit, producedby this spring, have an oolitic texture.Valley of the Eha. — If we pass from the volcanic district of^ France to that which skirts the Apennines in the Italian peninsula,we meet with innumerable springs, which have precipitatedso much calcareous matter, that the whole ground in some partsof Tuscany is coated over with travertin, and sounds hollowbeneath the foot.In other places in the same country, compact rocks are seendescending the slanting sides of hills, very much in the mannerof lava-currents, except that they are of a white colour, andterminate abruptly when they reach the course of a river.These consist of the calcareous precipitate of springs, some ofthem still flowing, while others have disappeared or changedtheir position. Such masses are frequent on the slope of thehills which bound the valley of the Elsa^ one of the tributariesof the Arno, which flows near Colle, through a valley severalhundred feet deep, shaped out of a lacustrine formation, containingfossil shells of existing species. The travertin is unconformableto the lacustrine beds, and its inclination accords withthe slope of the sides of the valley*. The Sena, and severalother small rivulets which feed the £lsa, have the property oflapidifying wood and herbs ; and, in the bed of the Elsa itself,aquatic plants, such as charge, which absorb large quantities ofcarbonate of lime, are very abundant. Carbonic acid is alsoseen in the same valley, bubbling up from many springs, whereno precipitate of tufa is observable. Targioni, who in histravels has mentioned a great number of mineral waters inTuscany, found no difference between the deposits of cold andthermal springs. They issue sometimes from the older Apenninelimestone shale, and sandstone, while, in other places,they flow from more modem deposits ; but, even in the lattercase, their source may probably be in, or below the olderseries of strata.One of the finest ezaxnplei of these which I saW; was at the Molino delleHaldane, near Colla.TRAVERTIN OF BAN VIQMONE.Baths of San Vignone. — Those persons who have merelyseen the action of petrifying waters in our own country, willnot easily form an adequate conception of the scale on whichthe same process is exhibited in those regions which lie nearerto the modern centres of volcanic disturbance. One of themost striking examples of the rapid precipitation of carbonateof lime from thermal waters occurs in the hill of SanVignone in Tuscany, at a short distance from Radicofani, andonly a few hundred yards from the high-road between Siennaand Rome. The spring issues from near the summit of arocky hill, about one hundred feet in height. The top ofthe hill is flat, and stretches in a gently*inclined plateauto the foot of Mount Amiata, a lofty eminence, which consistsin great part of volcanic products. The fundamental rock,from which the spring issues, is a black slate, with serpentine(6. 6. 6^ diagram 4) belonging to the older Apennine of San Plffttone.nation. The water is hot has a strong taste and, when notin very small quantity, is of a bright green colour. So rapidis the deposition near the source, that in the bottom of a conduitpipe for carrying off the water to the baths, inclined at anangle of 30^, half a foot of solid travertin is formed everyyear. A more compact rock is produced where the water flowsslowly, and the precipitation in winter is said to be more solidand less in quantity by one-fourth than in summer. The rockis generally white : some parts of it are compact, and ring tothe hammer ; others are cellular and with such cavities as areseen in the carious part of bone or the siliceous meuli^ of theParis basin. A portion of it also below the village consists oflong vegetable tubes. Sometimes the travertin assumes preciselythe botanical and mammillary forms, compos to similar.TSATKRTIN Of SAN Filippo. ' 203deposits, ill Auvergne, of a niudh older date, hereafter to bementioned ; and like them it often scales off in thin slightlyundulating layers.A large mass of trayertin descends the hill from the pointwhere the spring issues* and reaches to the distance of abouthalf a mile east of San Vignone. The beds take the slopeof the hill at about an angle of 6"", and the planes of stratificationare perfectly parallel. One stratum, composed ofmany layers, is of a compact nature and fifteen feet thick ; itserves as an excellent building stone, and a mass of fifteen feetin length was, in 1828» cut out for the new bridge over theOrde. Another branch of it (a. a., diagram 4,) descends tothe west, for two hundred and fifty feet in length, of varyingthickness, but sometimes two hundred feet deep ; it is then cutoffby the small river Orcia, precisely as some glaciers in Switzerlanddescend into a valley till their progress is suddenly arrestedby a transverse stream of water. The abrupt termination ofthe mass of rock at the river, when its thickness is undiminishedclearly shews that it would proceed much farther if not arrestedby the stream, over which it impends slightly. But it cannotencroach upon the channel of the Orcia, being constantly undermined,so that its solid fragments are seen strewed amongstthe alluvial gravel. However enormous, therefore, the mass ofsolid rock may appear which has been given out by this singlespring, we may feel assured that it is insignificant in volume,when compared to that which has been carried to the sea sincethe time when it began to flow. What may have been the lengthof that period of time, we have no data for conjecturing. Inquarrying the travertin, Roman tiles have been sometimes foundat the depth of five or six feet.Bath of San Filippo. — On another hUl, not many milesfrom that last mentioned, and also connected with MountAmiata, the summit of which is about three miles distant,are the celebrated baths of San Filippo. The subjacentrocks consist of alternations of black slate, limestone, andserpentine, of highly inclined strata, belonging to the Apennineformation ; and, as at San Vignone, near the boundaryof a tertiary basin of marine origin, consisting chiefly ofblue argillaceous marl. There are three warm springs here.204 MEDALLIONS OF SAN nLIPPO.containing carbonate and sulphate of lime and sulphateof magnesia. The water which supplies the bath falls into apond, where it has been known to deposit a solid mass thirtyfeet thick in about twenty years*. A manufactory of medallionsin basso-relievo is carried on at these baths. The wateris conducted by canals into several pits, in which it depositstravertin and crystals of sulphate of lime. After being thusfreed from its grosser parts, it is conveyed by a tube to thesummit of a small chamber, and made to fall through a spaceof ten or twelve feet. The current is broken in its descent bynumerous crossed sticks by which the spray is dispersed aroundupon certain moulds, which are rubbed lightly over with asolution of soap, and a deposition of solid matter like marble isthe result, yielding a beautiful cast of the figures formed in themould. The geologist may derive from these experimentsconsiderable light, in regard to the high inclination at whichsome semi crystalline precipitations can be formed ; for someof the moulds are disposed almost perpendicularly, yet thedeposition is nearly equal in all parts.A hard stratum of stone, about a foot in thickness, is obtainedfrom the waters of San Filippo in four months ; and,as the springs are powerful, and almost uniform in thequantity given out, we are at no loss to comprehend themagnitude of the mass which descends the hill, which is amile and quarter in length and the third of a mile in breadth,in some places attaining a thickness of two hundred and fiftyfeet at least. To what length it might have reached, it isimpossible to conjecture, as it is cut off, like the travertin ofSan Vignone, by a small stream, where it terminates abruptly.The remainder of the matter held in solution is carried on probablyto the sea. But what renders this recent calcareo-mag-nesian limestone of peculiar interest to the geologist, is thespheroidal forms which it assumes, offering so striking an analogy,on the one hand, to the concentric structure displayed inthe calcareous travertin of the cascade of Tivoli, and, on theother to the spheroidal forms of the English magnesian limestoneof Sunderland. Between this latter and many of the• Dr. Grouse, on the Baths of San Filippo. Ed. Phil. Joum., v. 2, p. 292.t IWd., p. 297.SPHEROIDAL Structure 205appearances exhibited at San Filippo , and several other recentdeposits of the same kind in Italy, there is every feature ofresemblance ; the same combination of concentric and relatedstructure, with small undulations in each concentric ring, occasionalinterferences of one circle with another, and a smallglobular structure subordinate to the large spheroidal, withfrequent examples of laminae passing off from the external coatingof a spheroid into layers parallel to the general plane ofstratification. There are also cellular cavities and vacuities inthe rock, constituting what has been termed a honeycombedtexture. The lamination of some of the concentric masses ofSan Filippo is so minute, that sixty may be counted in the thicknessof an inch. Yet notwithstanding these marks of gradualand successive deposition, the symmetry and magnitude of manyof the spheroidal forms might convey the idea that the wholewas the result of chemical action, simultaneously operating ona great mass of matter. The concretionary forms of our magnesianlimestone have been supposed by some to have beensuperinduced after the component parts of the rock had beenbrought together in stratford masses ; but a careful comparisonof those older rocks with the numerous traversing now in progressof formation in Italy, leads the observer to a different conclusion.Such a structure seems to be the result of gradual precipitation,and not of subsequent re-arrangement of the particles*. Eachminute particle of foreign matter, a reed or the fragment of ashell, forms a nucleus, around which accessions of new laminaeare formed, until spheroids and elongated cones, from a fewinches to several feet in diameter, are produced; for, as the precipitateis arranged by the force of chemical affinity, and not ofThe structure of the English magnesian limestone has been described, in anelaborate and profound paper on that formation, by Professor Sedgwick. Geol.Trans vol. 3, second series, part i., p. 37. Examples of almost all the modificationsof concretionary arrangement, together with the brecciated and honeycombed structureto which he alludes, may be found either in the deposits of travertin springs invarious parts of Italy, or in the subaqueous traversing of Auvergne and Sicily, — theformer of lacustriue, the latter of submarine origin. These will be alluded to intheir proper places, and I shall merely observe here, that, after examining thesemore recent deposits, I visited Sunderland, and recognised a degree of identity inthe various and complicated forms there assumed by the magnesian limestone whichsatisfied me that the circumstances under which they were formed must have beenperfectly analagous to those wider which the mineral springs of volcanic countriesare now giving birth to calcareous calcareous-magnesian; and calcareo-Rliceoua locke.&06 CXLCAtiBOltS Precipitategravity, the different layers continue of the same thickness andpreserve the original form of the nucleus.Bulicami of Viierbo.-^We must not attempt toall the localities in Italy where the constant formation oflimestone may be seen, as on the Silaro, near Pactum, on theVelino at Semi, and near the Bulicami, or hot baths in thevicinity of Viterbo. About a mile and a half north of thelatter town, in the midst of a sterile plain of volcanic sand andashes, a monticule is seen, about twenty feet high and five hundredyards in circumference, entirely composed of concretionarytravertin. The laminae are extremely thin, and their minuteundulations are so arranged, that the whole mass has at oncea concentric and radiated structure. This macmillan hasbeen largely quarried for lime and much of it appears to havebeen removed. It seems to have been formed by a small jetor fountain of calcareous water, which continued to rise throughthe mound of travertin, which it gradually raised by overflowingfrom the summit. A spring of hot water still issues inthe neighbourhood, which is conveyed to an open tank, usedas a bath, the bottom and sides of which, as well as the openconduit which conveys the water, are encrusted with travertin.Campagna di Roma, — The country around Rome, like manyparts of the Tuscan States already referred to, has been at someformer period the site of numerous volcanic eruptions ; and thesprings are still copiously impregnated with lime, carbonic acid,and sulphuretted hydrogen. A hot spring has lately been discoverednear Civitas Vecchia, by Riccioli, which deposits alternatebeds of a yellowish travertin, and a white granular rock, notdistinguishable, in hand specimens either in grain, colour, orcomposition, from statuary marble. There is a passage betweenthis and ordinary travertin. The mass accumulated near thespring is in some places about six feet thick *.In the Campagna, between Rome and Tivoli, is the lake ofI did not visit iii spring myself, but Signor RiodoU, whose acquaintancewith the geology of th canons of Rome is well known, favoured me with aninspection of a suite of specimens collected from the qx)t. Bronchi, a few yeastbefore his death, visited the locality in company with Signor Ricciolii and was muchstruck with the phenomenon, of which he had intended to publish a description.OF. THE CAMPAGNA DI BOMA. 2C7the Solfatara, caned also Ago di Zolfo, (lacus albu1a») intowhich flows continually a stream of tepid water, from a smallerlake situated a few yards above it. The water is a saturatedsolution of carbonic acid gas, which escapes from it in suchquantities in some parts of its surface, that it has the appearanceof being actually in ebullition* " I have found by experiment,"says Sir Humphrey Davy, *^ that the water takenfrom the most tranquil part of the lake, even after beingagitated and exposed to the air, contained in solution morethan its own volume of carbonic acid gas, with a very smallquantity of sulphuretted hydrogen. Its high temperaturewhich is pretty constant at 80° of Fahr., and the quantity ofcarbonic acid that it contains, render it peculiarly fitted toafford nourishment to vegetable life. The banks of travertinare every where covered with reeds, lichen, conserves, andvarious kinds of aquatic vegetables ; and at the same time thatthe process of vegetable life is going on, the crystallizations ofthe calcareous matter, which is every where deposited in consequenceof the escape of carbonic acid, Likewise proceed. — thereia, I believe, no place in the world where there is a morestriking example of the opposition or contrast of the laws ofanimate and inanimate nature, of the forces of inorganic ole*'nicol affinity, and those of the powers of life*.^The same observer informs us, that he fixed a stick on a massof travertin covered by the water in May, and in the Aprilfollowing he had some difficulty in breaking, with a sharp*pointed hammer, the mass which adhered to the stick, and whichwas several inches in thickness. The upper part was a mixtureof light tufa, and the leaves of confers : below this was a darkerand more solid travertin, containing black and decomposedmasses of confervof; in the inferior part, the travertin wasmore solid, and of a grey colour, but with cavities probablyproduced by the decomposition of vegetable matter f. Thestream which flows out of this lake fills a canal about nine feetbroad, and four deep, and is conspicuous in the landscape bya line of vapour which rises from it. It deposits tufa in thischannel, and the Tibur probably receives from it, as well asfrom numerous other streams, much carbonate of lime in sola*• CooioUtioas in Travel, yp. 123— 125» f Ibid., p. l^.208 . TRAVERTIN OP Tivoli.tion, which contributes to the rapid growth of its delta. A largeportion of the most splendid edifices of ancient and modemRome are built of travertin, derived from the quarries of PonteLucan, where there has evidently been a lake at a remoteperiod, on the same plain as that already described. Iftut, asthe consideration of these would carry us beyond the times ofhistory, we shall conclude with one more example of the calcareousdeposits of this neighbourhood, — those on the Anio.Travertin of Tivoli. — The waters of the Anio incrust thereeds which grow on its banks, and the foam of the cataract ofTivoli forms beautiful pendant stalactites ; but, on the sidesof the deep chasm into which the cascade throws itself, thereis seen an extraordinary accumulation of horizontal beds oftufa and travertin, from four to five hundred feet in thickness.The following seems the most probable explanationof their formation in this singular position. The Anio flowsthrough a deep, irregular fissure or gorge in the Apenninelimestone, which may have originated from subterranean movements,like many others of which we shall speak when treatingof earthquakes. In this deep narrow channel there existedmany small lakes three of which have been destroyed sincethe time of history, by the erosive action of the torrent, thelast of them having remained down to the sixth century of ourera. We may suppose a similar lake of great depth to haveexisted at some remote period at Tivoli, and that, into this,the waters, charged with carbonate of lime, fell from a heightinferior to that of the present cascade. Having, in their passagethrough the upper lakes, parted with their sand, pebbles,and coarse sediment, they only introduced into this lower pod,drift-wood, leaves, and other buoyant substances. In seasonswhen the water was low, a deposit of ordinary tufa, or travertin,formed along the bottom ; but, at other times, when thetorrent was swollen, the pool must have been greatly agitated,and every small particle of carbonate of lime which was precipitated,must have been whirled round again [and again invarious eddies, until it acquired many concentric coats, so as toresemble oolitic grains. If the violence of the motion be sufficientto cause the globule to be suspended for a sufficientlength of time, it would grow to the size of a pea, or muchTRAVERTIN OF Tivoli Sislarger. Small fragments of vegetable stems being incrusted onthe sides of the stream, and then washed in, would form the nucleusof oval globules, and others of irregular shapes would beproduced by the resting of fragments for a time on the bottomof the basin, where, after acquiring an unequal thickness oftravertin on one side, they would again be set in motion.Sometimes globules, projecting above the general level of astratum, would attract, by chemical affinity, other matter inthe act of precipitation, and thus growing on all sides, withthe exception of the point of contact, might at length formspheroids nearly perfect and many feet in diameter. Massesmight increase above and below, so that a vertical sectionmight afterwards present the phenomenon so common atTivoli where the nucleus of some of the concentric circles210 TRAWRTTN OF TITOLT, ETC.has the appearance of having been suspended, without support,in the water, until it became a spheroidal mass of great dimensions.The section obtained of these deposits, about four hundredfeet thick, immediately under the temples of Vesta and theSibyl, displays some spheroids which are from six to eight feet indiameter f each concentric layer being about the eighth of an inchin thickness. The annexed diagram exhibits about fourteen feetof this immense mass as seen in the path cut out of the rock indescending from the temple of Vesta to the Grotto di Neptune*.The beds {a a, diagram No. 5) are of hard travertin and softtufa; below them is a polite (6), the globules being of differentsizes ; underneath this appears a mass of concretionary travertin(cc), some of the spheroids being of the above-mentionedextraordinary size. In some places (as at d), there is amass of amorphous limestone, or tufa, surrounded by concentriclayers. At the bottom is another bed of polite (6), in whichthe small nodules are about the size and shape of beans, andsome of them of filberts, intermixed with some smaller ooliticgrains. In the tufaceous strata, wood is seen converted into alight tufa. It is probable that the date of the greater portion ofthis calcareous formation may be anterior to the era of history,for we know that there was a great cascade at Tivoliin very ancient times ; but, in the upper part of the travertin,is shewn the hollow left by a wheel, in which the outer circleand the spokes have linen decomposed, and the spaces whichthey filled have been left void. It seems impossible to explainthe position of this mould, without supposing that the wheelwas imbedded before the lake was drained.Our limits do not permit us to enter into minute detailsrespecting the various limestones to which springs in differentcountries are continually giving birth. Pallas, in hisjourney along the Caucasus, a country now subject, from timeto time, to be rent and fissured by violent earthquakes, enumeratesa great many hot springs, which have deposited continuesof travertin precisely analogous in composition andI have not attempted to express, in this drawing, the innumerable thinlayers of which these magnificent spheroids are composed, but the lines givenmark some of the natural divisions into which they are separated by minute variationsin the size or colour of the latins. the undulations also are much smallerin proportion to the whole circumference, than is expressed in the diagram.Calcareous rvH. fellStructure to those of the baths of San Filippo, and otherlocalities in Italy. When speaking of the tophus-stone, as heterms these limestones, he often observes that it is mow-whitea description which is very applicable to the newer part of the depositat San Filippo, where it has not become darkened bj weathering.In many localities in the regions between the Caspianand Black seas, where subterranean convulsions are frequent,travellers mention calc-sinter as an abundant product of hotsprings. Near the shores of the Lake Urmia (or Martha),for example, a marble is rapidly deposited from a thertiialspring, which is much iised in ornamental architecture*.We might mention springs of the same kind in Calabriaand Sicily, and indeed in almost all regions of volcanos andearthquakes which have been carefully investigated. In thelimestone districts of England, as on Ingleborough Hill, ihYorkshire, we often see walls entirely constructed of calcareoustufa, enclosing terrestrial shells and vegetables, andsimilar tufa still continues to be formed in that district. Thegrowth of stalactites, also, and stalagmites in caverns andgrottos, is another familiar example of calcareous precipitates.To the solvent power of water, surcharged with carbonicacid and percolating various winding rents and fissures, wemay ascribe those innumerable subterranean cavities andwinding passages which traverse the limestone in our own andmany other countries.In the marshes of the great plains of Hungary, horizontalbeds of travertin, including recent fresh water shells, are continuallydeposited, and are sufficiently solid to serve for ,all the houses of Czeled being constructed of thismaterial f* To analogous deposits in the lakes of Forfarshire,in Scotland, we shall refer more particularly when speakingof the imbedding of plants and animals in recent deposits.The quantity of calcareous rock which results from mineralwaters in volcanic regions, conspicuous as it is, must be consideredas insignificant, in comparison to that which is conveyedby rivers to the sea ; and our inability to observe subaqueousaccumulations resulting from this source, is one of manyHoff, Geachichte, &c., vol. ii., p. 114.f Beudani, Voyage en Hongrie torn, ii, p. 353.Pa212 GYPSEOUS AND StLtCEOUS SPRINGS.causes of our inadequate conception of the changes now in progresson the earth^s surface. It has often been supposed, thatthe greater part of the coral reefs in the Indian and Pacificoceans were based on submarine volcanos, — which seems indicatedby the circular shape so frequently assumed by them ;but perhaps a still stronger argument in favour of this theorymight be deduced from the great abundance of carbonate oflime required for the rapid growth of zoophyte and shellylimestones, — san abundance which could only be looked forwhere there are active volcanos and frequent earthquakes, asamongst the isles of the South Pacific. We may confidentlyinfer, that the development of organic life would be promotedin corals, sponges, and testaceous mollusca, by the heat, carbonicacid, lime, silica, and other mineral ingredients in a stateof solution, given out by submarine springs, in the same manneras the vegetation is quickened in the lake of the Solfatara,in the Campagna di Roma, before described.Gypseous springs. — All other mineral ingredients wherewithsprings in general are impregnated are insignificant inquantity in comparison to lime, and this earth is most frequentlycombined with carbonic acid. But as sulphuric acidand sulphuretted hydrogen are very frequently supplied bysprings, we must presume that gypsum is now deposited largelyin many seas and lakes. The gypseous precipitates, however,hitherto known on the land, appear to be confined to a veryfew springs. Those at Baden, near Vienna, which feed thepublic bath, may be cited as examples. Some of these supply,singly, from six hundred to one thousand cubic feet of waterper hour, and deposit a fine powder, composed of a mixtureof sulphate of lime, with sulphur and muriate of lime *.SILICEOUS SPRINGS.Azores. — In order that water should hold a very largequantity of silica in solution, it seems necessary that it shouldbe raised to a high temperature f ; and as it may retain agreater heat under the pressure of the sea than in the atmosphere,submarine springs may perhaps be more chargedProvost, Essai sur la Constitution Physique du Bassin do Vienne, p. 10.f Daubeny, on Volcanos, p. 222.GEYSERS OF ICELAND. 213with silex than any to which we have access. The hotsprings of the Valle cas Furnas, in the Island of St. Michaelrising through volcanic rocks precipitate vast quantities of siliceoussinter, as it is usually termed. Around the circular basinof the largest spring, called <^ the Caldeira,'^ which is betweentwenty and thirty feet in diameter, alternate layers are seen ofa coarser variety of sinter mixed with clay, including grass,ferns, and reeds, in different states of petrifaction. Whereverthe water has flowed, sinter is found rising in some places eightor ten inches above the ordinary level of the stream. The herbageand leaves more or less incrusted with silex, exhibit allthe successive steps of petrifaction, from the soft state to a completeconversion into stone ; but in some instances, aluminawhich is likewise deposited from the hot waters, is the material. Branches of the same ferns which now flourishin the island, are found completely petrified, preserving thesame appearance as when vegetating, except that they acquirean ash-grey colour. Fragments of wood, and one entire bedfrom three to five feet in depth, composed of reeds now commonin the island have become completely mineralized. The mostabundant variety of siliceous sinter occurs in layers from aquarter to half an inch in thickness, accumulated on each otheroften to the height of a foot and upwards, and constitutingparallel, and for the most part horizontal, strata many yards inextent. This sinter has often a beautiful semi-opalescent lustre.One of the varieties differs from that of Iceland and Ischia inthe larger proportion of water it contains, and in the absenceof alumina and lime. A recent breccia is also in the act of forming,composed of obsidian, pumice, and scoriae cemented bysiliceous sinter*.Geysers of Iceland. — But the hot springs in various partsof Iceland, particularly the celebrated geysers, afford the mostremarkable example of the deposition of silex. The circularreservoirs into which the geysers fall, are filled in the middlewith a variety of opal, and round the edges with sinter. Theplants, encrusted with the latter substance, have much the sameappearance as those encrusted with calcareous tufa in our ownDr. Webster, on the Hot Springs of Furnas, Ed. FhiL Journey vol. vi., p. 306.J214 Ferruginous 8PAIN€>8.i^untFy . The solution of the silex is supposed to be promotedby the presence of some mineral alkali. In some of the thermalwaters of Iceland a vesicular rock is formed, containing portionsof vegetables, more or less completely solidified. Amongstthe various products also of springs in this island, is that admixtureof clay and silica, called tripoli.It has been found, by recent analysis, that several of the thermalwaters of Ischia are impregnated with a certain proportionof silica. Some of the hot vapours qf that island are above thetemperature of boiling water ; and many fissures, near MonteVico, through which the hot steam passes, are coated with asiliceous incrustation, first noticed by Dr. Thompson under thename of forte.In some places where signification is in progress, the sourcesfrom whence the mineral matter is derived are as yet unknown.Thus the Danube has converted the external part of the pilesof Trajan's bridge into silex ; and the Irawadi, in Ava, hasbeen supposed, ever since the time of the Jesuit Padre Ducats,to have the same petrifying power, as has also Lough Neagh,in Ireland. Modern researches, however, in the Burmaempire, have not confirmed, but have rather thrown doubtupon the lapidifying property of the Ava river ♦. The constantflow of mineral waters, even when charged with a smallproportion of silica, as those of Ischia, may supply certespecies of corals and sponges with matter for their siliceoussecretions ; but when in a volcanic archipelago, or a regionof submarine volcanos, there are springs so saturated with silica*ses those of Iceland and the Azores, we may expect beds of chertor layers and nodules of silex, to be spread out far and wideover the bed of the sea, and inter stratified with shelly and calcareousdeposits, which may be forming there, or with matterderived from the wasting cliffs or volcanic ejections,ferruginous Springs. — The waters of almost all springs containsome iron in solution ; and it is a fact familiar to all, thatmany of them are so copiously impregnated with this metal, asto stain the rocks or herbage through which they pass, and tobind together sand and gravel into solid masses. We may• Dr. Buckland, Geol. Trans., second series, yol. ii., part 3, p. 384.BitlNE 8PBIN08. 215naturally, therefore, conclude that this iron which is constantlyconveyed into lakes and seas from the interior of the earth, andnot returned again to the land by evaporation in the atmosphericwaters, must act as a colouring and cementing principle in thesubaqueous deposits now in progress. When we find, therefore,that so many sandstones and other rocks in the sedimentarystrata of ancient lakes and seas are bound together or colouredby iron, it presents us with a striking point of analogy betweenthe state of things at very different epochs. In the older formationswe meet with great abundance of carbonate and sulkplate of iron ; and in chalybeate waters at present, this metalis most frequently in the stiite of a carbonate, as in those ofTunbridge, for example. Sulphuric acid, however, is often thesolvent, which is in many cases derived from the decompositionof pyrites.Brine Sprifigs.-^So great is the quantity of muriate of sodain some springs, that they yield one-fourth of their weight insalt* They are rarely, however, so saturated, and generallycontain, intermixed with salt, carbonate and sulphate of lime,magnesia, and other mineral ingredients. The brine springs ofCheshire are the richest in our country ; those of Barton andNorthwich being almost fully saturated. These brine springsrise up through strata of sandstone and red marl, which containlarge beds of rock-salt. The origin of the brine, therefore, maybederived in this and many other instances from beds of fossilsalt ; but as muriate of soda is one of the products of volcanicemanations and of springs in volcanic regions, the originalsource of salt may be as deep seated as that of lava.The waters of the Dead Sea contain scarcely anything, exceptmuriatic salts, which lends countenance, observes Dr. Daubed,to the volcanic origin of the surrounding country, thesesalts being frequent products of volcanic eruptions. Manysprings in Sicily contain muriate of soda, and the *' fiume salso,^in particular, is impregnated with so large a quantity, that cattlerefuse to drink of it. If rivers or springs, thus impregnated,enter a lake or estuary, it is evident that they may give rise topartial precipitates of salt.A hot spring, rising through granite, at Saint Nectar, inAuvergne, may be mentioned as one of many, containing a\-216 CARBONATED SPRINGS.large proportion of muriate of soda together with magnesiaand other ingredients *.Carbonated Springs. — Carbonic acid gas is very plentifullydisengaged from springs in almost all countries, but particularlynear active or extinct volcanos. This elastic fluid has the propertyof decomposing many of the hardest rocks with which itcomes in contact, particularly that numerous class in whose compositionfelspar is an ingredient. It renders the oxide of ironsoluble in water, and contributes, as was before stated, tothe solution of calcareous matter. In volcanic districts, thesegaseous emanations are not confined to springs, but rise up in thestate of pure gas from the soil in various places. The Grottodelle Cane, near Naples, affords an example, and prodigiousquantities are now annually disengaged from every part of theLimagne auvergne, where it appears to have been developedin equal quantity from time immemorial. As the acid is invisible,it is not observed, except an excavation be made, whereinit immediately accumulates so that it will extinguish a candle.There are some springs in this district, sphere the water is seenbubbling and boiling up with much noise, in consequence of theabundant disengagement of this gas. The whole vegetation isaffected, and many trees, such as the walnut, flourish more luxuriantlythan they would otherwise do in the same soil andclimate, — the leaves probably absorbing carbonic acid. Thisgas is found in springs rising through the granite near Clement,as well as in the tertiary limestones of the Limagne -f*.In the environs of Pont-Gibaud, not far from Clermont, a rockbelonging to the gneiss formation, in which lead-mines areworked, has been found to be quite saturated with carbonicacid gas, which is constantly disengaged. The carbonates ofiron, lime, and manganese are so dissolved, that the rock isrendered soft, and the quartz alone remains unattacked|.Not far off is the small volcanic cone of Chalet, which oncebroke up through the gneiss, and sent forth a lava stream.The disintegration of granite is a striking feature of largedistricts in Auvergne, especially in the neighbourhood of Clerkde T Auvergne, torn, i., p. 234.f Le Coq, Annales de 1' Auvergne, torn. L, p. 217. May, 1828.f Ann. Scions. de auvergne, torn, ii., June, 1929.CAftBONATED SPRINGS. 217moot. This decay was called, by Dokmieu, ^' la maladie dugranites and the rock may with propriety be said to have thtroff for it crumbles to pieces in the hand. The phenomenonmay, without doubt, be ascribed to the continual disengagementof carbonic add gas from numerous fissures. In theplains of the Po, between Verona and Parma, especially atVilla Franca, south of Mantua, I observed great beds ofalluvium, consisting chiefly of primary pebbles percolated byspring water, charged with carbonate of lime and carbonic acidin great abundance. They are, for the most part, encrustedwith calc-sinter ; and the rounded blocks of gneiss, which haveall the appearance of solidity, have been so disintegrated bythe carbonic add-as readily to fall to pieces. The Po andother rivers, in winding through this plain, might now removewith ease those masses which, at a more remote period, thestream was unable to carry farther towards the sea ; and in thisexample we may perceive how necessary it is, in reasoning onthe transporting power of running water, to consider all thenumerous agents which may co-operate, in the lapse of ages,in conveying the wreck of mountains to the sea. A graniteblock might remain stationary for ages, and defy the power ofa large river ; till at length a small spring may break out,surcharged with carbonic acid, — the rock may be decomposedand a streamlet may transport the whole mass to the ocean.The subtraction of many of the elements of rocks by thesolvent power of carbonic add, ascending both in a gaseousstate and mixed with spring-water in the crevices of rocks,must be one of the most powerful sources of those internalchanges and re-arrangements of particles so often observed instrata of every age. The calcareous matter, for example, ofshells is often entirely removed and replaced by carbonateof iron, pyrites, or silex, or some other ingredient, such asmineral waters usually contain in solution. It rarely happens,except in limestone rocks, that the carbonic add can %dissolve all the constituent parts of the mass ; and for thisreason, probably, calcareous rocks are almost the only onesin which great caverns and long winding passages aise found.The grottos and subterranean passages, in certain lava-currents,are due to a different cause, and will be spoken of inanother place.2X9 PIST&OLEUll Spines,Petroleum Spring, — Springs impregnated with petroleum,and the various minerals allied to it as bitumen, naphtha,fisphaltum, and pitch, are very numerous, and are in manycases, undoubtedly connected with subterranean fires, whichraise or sublime the more subtle parts of the bituminous matterscontained in rocks. Many springs in the territory ofModena and Parma, in Sicily, produce petroleum in abundance; but the most powerful, perhaps, yet known, are thoseon the Irawadi, in the Burma empire. In one locality thereare said to be five hundred and twenty wells, which yieldannually four hundred thousand hogsheads of petroleum *.Fluid bitumen is seen to ooze from the bottom of the sea,on both sides of the island of Trinidaad, aad to rise up to thesurface of the water. Near Cape La Braye there is a vortexwhich, in stormy weather, according to Captain Mallet, gushesout, raising the water five or six feet, and covers the surfacefor a considerable space with petroleum, or tar ; and the sameauthor quotes Camilla, as stating in his *' Description of theOrinoco' that, about seventy years ago, a spot of land on thewestern coast of Trinidad, near half-way between the capitaland Indian village, sank suddenly, and was immediately replacedby a small lake of pitch, to the great terror of theinhabitants t* It is probable, that the great pitch-lake ofTrinidad owes its origin to a similar cause, and Dr. Nugenthas justly remarked, that in that district all the circumstancesare now combined from which deposits of pitch may haveoriginated. The Orinoco has, for ages, been rolling downgreat quantities of woody and vegetable bodies into the surroundingsea, where, by the influence of currents and eddies,they may be arrested and accumulated in particular places.The frequent occurrence of earthquakes and other indicationsof volcanic action in those parts, lend countenance to the opinion,that these vegetable substances may have undergone, bythe agency of subterranean fire, those transformations andchemical changes which produce petroleum, and may, by thesame causes, be forced up to the surface, where, by exposure• Sykes, £mt>awy to Ava, toI ii.-»6eol. IVaiis., Noon leriM, toL ii.,part 3, p. 388.t Dr. Nugent, Qeol. IVaiis., vol. i., p. 69.PETROLEUM SPRINGS. 219to the air, it becomes inspissated, and forms the differentvarieties of pure and earthy pitch, or asphaltum, so abundantin the island '*'.The bituminous shales, so common in geological formationsof different ages, as well as many stratified deposits of bitumenand pitch, seem clearly to attest that, at former periods,springs, in various parts of the world, were as commonly impregnatedas now with bituminous matter, which was carrieddown by rivers into lakes and seas. We may indeed remarkgenerally, that a large portion of the finer particles and the morecrystalline substances found in sedimentary rocks of differentages, are composed of the same elements tea are now held insolution by springs, while the coarser materials bear an equallystrong resemblance to the alluvial matter in the beds of existingtorrents and rivers.Dr. Nugstit, QeoL TnoB^ vol I, p. 67.CHAPTER XIII.Reproductive effects of grinning water — Division of deltas into lacustrine, mediterraneanand oceanic — Lake deltas — Growth of the delta of the Rhone inthe Lake of Geneva — Chronological computations of the age of ddtas —Recent deposits in Lake Superior — Deltas of inland seas — rapid shallowingof the Baltic — arguments for and against the hypothesis of Celsius — elevatedbeaches on the coast of Sweden — Maurine delta of the Rhone — various proofsof Hh increase — Stony nature of its deposits — Delta of the Po, Adige, Isonzo,and other rivers entering the Adriatic — Rapid conversion of that gulf intoland — Mineral characters of the new deposits— Delta of the Nile— Its increasesince the time of Homer — Its growth why checked at present.We have hitherto considered the destroying agency of runningwater as exhibited in the disintegration of rocks and transportationof matter from higher to lower levels. It remains for usto examine the reproductive effects of the same cause. Theaggregate amount of matter accumulated in a given time atthe mouths of rivers, where they enter lakes or seas, affordsclearer data for estimating the energy of the excavating powerof running water on the land, than the separate study of theoperations of the same cause in the countless ramifications intowhich every great system of valleys is divided. We shallproceed to select some of the leading facts at present ascertainedrespecting the growth of deltas, and shall then offersome general observations on the quantity of subaqueoussediment transported by rivers, and on the manner of itsdistribution. Deltas may be divided into, first, those whichare formed in lakes ; secondly, those formed in inland seas ;and thirdly, those formed on the borders of the ocean. Themost characteristic distinction between the lacustrine and marinedeltas consists in the nature of the organic remains, whichbecome imbedded in their deposits ; for, in the case of a lake,it is obvious that these must consist exclusively of such generaof animals as inhabit the land or the waters of a river or lake ;whereas, in the other case, there will be an admixture and mostfrequently a predominance of animals which inhabit salt water.In regard, however, to the distribution of inorganic matter, thetAKE OF GENEVA. 221deposits of lakes and inland seas are formed under veryanalogous circumstances, and may be contra-distinguishedfrom those on the shores of the great ocean where the tidesco-operating with currents give rise to a distinct class of phenomena.In lakes and inland seas, even of the largest dimensionsthe tides are almost insensible, and the currents are, forthe most part, inconsiderable* although some striking exceptionsto this rule will be mentioned when we treat of tides andcurrents.DELTAS IN LAKES.Ixdee of Geneva. — It is natural to begin our examinationwith an inquiry into the new deposits in lakes, as they exemplifythe first reproductive operations in which rivers are engagedwhen they convey the detritus of rocks and the ingredientsof mineral springs from mountainous regions. Theaccession of new land at the mouth of the Rhone, at the upperend of the Lake of Geneva, or the Leman Lake, presents uswith an example of a considerable thickness of strata, whichhave accumulated since the historical era. This sheet o.water is about thirty-seven miles long, and its breadth is fromtwo to eight miles. The shape of the bottom is very irregular,the depth having been found, by late measurements, tovary from twenty to one hundred and sixty fathoms *. TheRhone, where it enters at the upper end, is turbid and discoloured; but its waters, where it issues at the town of Geneva,are beautifully clear and transparent. An ancient town, calledPort Valais, (Portus Valerian of the Romans,) once situated atthe water's edge, at the upper end, is now more than a mile and ahalf inland, — this intervening alluvial tract having been acquiredin about eight centuries. The remainder of the delta consistsof a flat alluvial plain, about five or six miles in length, composedof sand and mud, a little raised above the level of theriver, and full of marshes.Mr. De la Beche found, after numerous soundings in allparts of the lake, that there was a pretty uniform depth offrom one hundred and twenty to one hundred and sixty fathomsthroughout the central region, and, on approaching the delta,• De la Beche, Ed. Phil. Journ., vol. u^ p. 1 07, Jon. 1820222 DELTA OP The llHONBthe shallowing of the bottom began to be very sensible at adistance of about a mile and three-quarters from the mouth ofthe Rhone ; for a line drawn from St. Gingoulph to Vevejr, »gives a mean depth of somewhat less thai six hundred feet,and from that part to the Rhone, the fluviatile mud is alwaysfound along the bottom *. We may state, therefore, that thestrata annually produced are about two miles in length : sothat, notwithstanding the great depth of the lake, the toedeposits are not inclined at a high angle ; the dip of the beds,indeed, is so slight, that they would be termed, in ordinarygeological language horizontal. The strata probably consistsof alternations of finer and coarser particles for during thehotter months from April to August, when the snows meltthe volume and velocity df the river are greatest and largequantities of sand, mud vegetable matter, and drift wood areintroduced ; but, during the rest of the year, the influx is comparativelyfeeble, so much so, that the whole lake, accordingto Saussure, stands six feet lower* If then, we could obtain asection of the accumulation formed in the last eight centuries,we should see a great series of strata, probably i>om six to ninehundred feet thick, and nearly two miles in length, inclined ata Very slight angle. In the mean time, a great number ofsmaller deltas are growing around the borders of the lake, atthe mouths of rapid torrents, which pour in large masses ofsftnd and pebbles. Th body of water in these torrents is toosmall to enable them to spread out the transported matter overso extensive an area as the Rhone. Thus, for example, thereis a depth of eighty fathoms within half a mile of the shore,immediately opposite the great torrent which enters east ofRipaille, so that the dip of the strata in that delta is aboutfour times as great as those deposited by the main river at theupper extremity of the lake.The capacity of this basin being now ascertained, it would beaninteresting subject of inquiry, to determine in what number ofyears the Leman Lake will be converted into dry land. It wouldnot be very difficult to obtain the elements for such a calculation,so as to approximate at least to the quantity of time required forthe accomplishment of this result. The number of cubic feet of^ Do la Beche, Mes. f Ibid*IN THE LAKfi OF GENEVA.^water annually discharged by the river into the lake beingestimated, experiments might be made in the winter and summermonths to determine the proportion of matter held insuspension or in chemical solution by the Rhone. It wouldbe also necessary to allow for the heavier matter drifted alongat the bottom, which might be estimated on hydrostaticalprinciples, when the average size of the gravel and the volumeand velocity of the stream at different seasons were known.Supposing all these observations to have been made, it wouldbe more easy to calculate the future than the former progressof the delta because it would be a laborious task to ascertain,with any degree of precision, the original depth and extent ofthat part of the lake which is already filled up. Even if thisinformation were accurately obtained by brings, it would onlyenable us to approximate within a certain number of centuriesto the time when the Rhone began to form its present delta ; butthis would not give us the date of the origin of the Leman Lakein its present form, because the river may have flowed into it forthousands of years, without importing any sediment whatever.Such would have been the case, if the waters had first passedthrough a chain of upper lakes ; and that this was actuallythe fact, is indicated both by the course of the Rhone betweenMartigny and the Lake of Geneva, and still more decidedlyby the channels of many of its principal feeders.If we ascend, for example, the valley through which theDranse flows, we find that it consists of a succession of basins,one above the other, in each of which there is a wide expanse offlat alluvial lands, separated from the next basin by a rockygorge, once evidently the barrier of a lake. The river hasfilled the lake, and partially cut through the barrier, which itis still gradually eroding to a greater depth. The examinationof almost all valleys in mountainous districts affordsabundant proofs of the obliteration of a series of lakes, bythe filling up of hollows and the cutting through of rockybarriers — a process by which running water ever labours toproduce a more uniform declivity. Before, therefore, wecan pretend even to hazard a conjecture as to the era at whichany particular delta commenced, we must be thoroughlyacquainted with the geological history of the whole system ofhigher valleys which communicate with the main stream, and all224 chronological computations oi?the changes which they have undergone since the last series ofconvulsions which agitated and altered the face of the country.The probability, therefore, of error in our chronological computations,where we omit to pay due attention to these circumstances,increases in proportion to the time that may haveelapsed since the last disturbance of the country by subterraneanmovements, and in proportion to the extent of the hydrographicalbasin on which we may happen to speculate. TheAlpine rivers of Valais are prevented at present from contributingtheir sedimentary contingent to the delta of theRhone in the Mediterranean, because they are intercepted bythe Leman Lake ; but when this is filled, they will transportas much, or nearly as much, matter to the sea as they nowpour into that lake. They will then flow through a long, flat,alluvial plain, between Villeneuve and Geneva, from two toeight miles in breadth, which will present no superficial marksof the existence of a thickness of more than one thousand feetof recent sediment below. Many hundred alluvial tracts ofequal, and some of much greater area, may be seen if wefollow up the Rhone from its mouth, or explore the valleys ofmany of its principal tributaries.What, then, shall we think of the presumption of De Luc,Kirwan, and their followers, who confidently deduced fromthe phenomena of modern deltas the recent origin of the presentform of our continents without pretending to have collectedany one of the numerous data by which so complicateda problem can be solved'' Had they, after making all thenecessary investigations, succeeded in proving, as they desired,that the delta of the Rhone, and the new deposits at themouths of all other rivers, whether in lakes or seas, had requiredabout four thousand years to attain their present dimensions,the conclusion would have been fatal to the chronologicaltheories, which they were anxious to confirm. Thepopular reception of these, and similar sophisms, respectingthe effects of causes in diurnal action, has hitherto thrownstumbling-blocks in the way of those geologists who desireto pursue the science according to the rules of inductivephilosophy. If speculations so vague and visionary can beproposed concerning natural operations now passing beforeour eyes — if authors may thus dogmatize, with impunity,ttiB AGE OF DELTAS « 225on subjects capable of being determined with considerabledegree of precision, can we be surprised that they who reasonon the more obscure phenomena of remote ages, shouldwander in a maze of error and inconsistency * ?The Leman Lake fills a great cavity in rocky strata, composedof a tertiary conglomerate and sand, which constitutes itsbottom, almost ail its northern banks, and a great part of itssouthern or Alpine side. It has often been asked, why thiscavity has not been filled up by the detritus of rocks, removedfrom the numerous valleys now drained by the waters whichenter the lake ? In order to remove this difficulty, it would benecessary to enter into a description of the strata of differentages composing the Alps and the Subalpine districts; to pointout the distinct periods of their elevation above the sea, and thepre-existence of many mountain valleys, even to the formationof those deposits wherein the Lake of Geneva is contained. Itwould be premature, therefore, to enter upon this subject atpresent, to which we shall revert when we have described thephenomena of some of the ancient strata.Lake Superior. — Lake Superior is the largest body of freshwaterin the world, being about one thousand five hundredgeographical miles in circumference, if we follow the sinuositiesof its coasts, its length, on a curved line through its centre,being about three hundred and sixty, and its extreme breadthone hundred and forty geographical miles. Its average depthvaries from eighty to one hundred and fifty fathoms; but, accordingto Captain Hatfield, there is reason to think that itsgreatest depth would not be overrated at two hundred fathoms,so that its bottom is, in some parts, nearly six hundred feet belowthe level of the Atlantic, as its surface is about as much aboveit. There are appearances in different parts of this, as of theIt is an encouraging circumstance, that the cultivator of the science in ourown country have begun to appreciate the true value of the principles of reasoningmost usually applied to geological questions. While writing this chapter (April,1830), I happened to attend a meeting of the Geological Society of London, wherethe president, in his address, made use of the expression, a geological logician. Asmile was seen on the countenances of some of the audience, while many of themembers, like Cicero's augurs, could not resist laughing ; bo ludicrous appearedthe association of Geology and Logic.t Tims. of Lit. and Hist. Soc. of Quebec, vol i., p. 5, 1829.Vol. I. Q226 DELTA OP LAKE SUPERIOR.other Canadian lakes leading us to infer that its waters have finemerely occupied a much higher level than they reach at present ;for at a considerable distance from the present shores, parallellines of rolled stones and shells are seen rising one above theother, like the seats of an amphitheatre. These ancient lines ofshingle are exactly similar to the present beaches in most bityiiand they often attain an elevation of forty or fifty feet above thepresent level As the heaviest gales of wind do not raise thewaters more than three or four feet *, the elevated beaches musteither be referred to the subsidence of the lake at former periods,in consequence of the wearing down of its barrier, or to the upraisingof the shores by earthquakes* like those which have producedsimilar phenomena on the coast of Chili But there seemto be no facts which lend countenance to the latter hypothesis,in reference to the North American lakes. The streams whichdischarge their waters into Lake Superior are several hundredIn number, without reckoning those of smaller sise ; and thequantity of water supplied by them is many times greater thanthat discharged at the Falls of St Mary, the only outlet. Theevaporation, therefore, is very great, and such as might beexpected from so vast an extent of surface.On the northern side, which is encircled by primary mountains,the rivers sweep in many large boulders with smallergravel and sand, chiefly composed of granitic and trap rocks.There are also currents in the lake, in various directions, causedby the continued prevalence of strong winds, and to their influencewe may attribute the diffusion of finer mud far and wideover great areas ; for, by numerous soundings made during thelate survey, it was ascertained that the bottom consists generallyof a very adhesive clay, containing shells of the species at presentexisting in the lake. When exposed to the air, this clayimmediately becomes indurated in so* great a dree, as to requirea smart blow to break it. It effervesces slightly with dilutednitric acid, and is of different colours in different parts ofthe lake ; in one district blue, in another red, and in a thirdGaptaiii Buyfield remain, that Dr. Bigsby, to whom we are indeed for wteral«ommumeatioiui respecting the geology of the Canadian lake, was informed bythe stir trade in regard to the extraordinary height (twmty or thirty feet) to whichhe asserts that the autumnal gales will raise the water of Lake Superiors IVwm^of Lit. and Hist. Ek>c. of Quebec, toL i., p. 7, 1829*DELTAS OP THE BALTIC. 227white, hardening into a substance resembling pipe-clay *• Fromthese statements, the geologist will not fail to remark how closelythese recent lacustrine formations in America resemble the tertiaryargillaceous and calcareous marls of lacustrine origin inCentral France. In both cases, many of the genera of shellsmost abundant, as Linea and Planorbis, are the same; andin regard to other classes of organic remains, there must be theclosest analogy, as we shall endeavour more fully to explainwhen speaking of the imbedding of plants and animals in recentdeposits*DELTAS OF INLAND seas.Deltas of the Baltic. — Having offered these few remarks onlacustrine deltas now in progress, we may next turn our attentionto those of inland seas.The shallowing and conversion into land of many parts ofthe Baltic, especially the Gulfs of Bothnia and Finland, havebeen demonstrated by a series of accurate observations, for whichwe are in a great measure indebted to the animated controversywhich has been kept up, since the middle of the last century,concerning the gradual lowering of the level of the Baltic.Celsius, the Swedish astronomer, first originated the idea thatfrom the earliest times there had been a progressive fall of aboutforty-five inches in a century, in the mean level of the watersof that sea. He contended that this change rested not only onmodem observations, but on the authority of the ancient geographers,who stated that Scandinavia was formerly an island.By the gradual depression of the sea, he said, that great islandbecame connected with the continent ; and that this event happenedafter the time of Pliny, and before the ninth century ofour era. To the arguments urged in support of these positions,his opponents objected that the ancients were so ignorant of thegeography of the most northern parts of Europe, that theirauthority was entitled to no weight ; and that their representationof Scandinavia as an island, might with more proprietybe adduced to prove the scantiness of their information, thanto confirm so bold an hypothesis. It was also remarked that ifthe land which connected Scandinavia with the main continentIrons. of Lit and Bit Soc of Qu^)6e| yol. i., p. 5, 1829.Q2228 SUPPOSED Diminution OFwas laid dry between the time of Pliny and the ninth century,to the extent to which it is known to have risen above the seaat the latter period, the rate of depression could not have beenuniform, as was pretended, for it ought to have fallen muchmore rapidly between the ninth and eighteenth century.Many of the physical proofs relied on by Celsius and hisfollowers, show clearly that they did not distinguish betweenthe shallowing of the water by deposition of fresh sediment,and the diminution of depth caused by subsidence of thesea. By their own statements, it appeared that the accessionsof new land, and the loss of depth, were at the mouths oflivers, or in certain deep bays, into which it is well known thatsand and mud are carried by currents. As illustrating, however,the gradual conversion of the Gulf of Bothnia into land,their observations deserve great attention. Thus, for example,they pointed out the fact, that at Pitea half a mile was gainedin forty-five years, and at Lutea no less than a mile in twenty-eightyears. Ancient ports, on the same coast, had becomeinland cities. Considerable tracts of the gulf were renderedthree feet shallower in the course of fifty years — iQany oldfishing-grounds had been changed into dry land — small islandshad been joined to the continent. According to Linnaeus, theincrease of land on the eastern side of Gothland near Coburg,was about two or three toises annually for ninety years*.Besides these changes, it was asserted that along the southernshore, also, of the Baltic, particularly in West Prussia andPomerania, anchors and sunk ships had been discovered farinland ; and although these occurrences were partly accountedfor by the silting up of river-beds, yet the tradition seemsworthy of credit, that a bay of the sea penetrated, at a remoteperiod, much farther to the south in that direction. Theseand many other facts, are of geological interest, although theyafford no confirmation to the theory of Celsius.His most plausible arguments were derived from the allegedexposure of certain insular rocks in the Bothnia and otherbays, which were declared to have been once entirely coveredwith water, but which had gradually protruded themselvesmore and more above the waves, until, in the course of aboutLinn, de tell, habit, iucrem.THE LEVEL OF THE BALTIC. 229a century and a half, they grew to be eight feet high. Ofthis phenomenon, the following explanation was offered by hisopponents. The islands in question consisted of sand anddrift-stones, and the waves, during great tempests, threw upnew matter upon them, or converted shoals into islands.Sometimes, also, icebergs, heavily laden with rock, werestranded on a shoal or driven up on a low island ; and whenthey melted away, they left a mass of debris, many feet inheight. Browallius, and other Swedish naturalists, pointedout that some of these islands were lower than formerly ; so thatby reference to this kind of evidence, there was equally goodreason for contending that the level of the Baltic was graduallyrising. They also added another curious and very conclusiveproof of the permanency of the water-level for many centuries.On the Finland coast were some large pines, growing close to thewater's edge ; these were cut down, and, by counting the concentricrings of annual growth, as seen in a transverse sectionof the trunk, it was demonstrated that they had stood thereforfour hundred years. Now, according to the Celsian hypothesis,the sea had sunk fifteen feet during that period, so thatthe germination and early growth of these pines must havebeen for many seasons below the level of the water. In likemanner it was shewn, that the lower walls of many ancientcastles, such as those of Oldenburg and Abo, reached then tothe water's edge, and must, therefore, according to the theoryof Celsius, have been originally constructed below the level ofthe sea. Another unanswerable argument in proof of the stabilityof the level of the Baltic, was drawn from the island of Salt-holm,not far from Copenhagen. This isle is so low that, inautumn and winter, it is permanently overflowed ; and is onlydry in summer when it serves for pasturing cattle. It appears,from documents of the year 1S80, that this island was then alsoin the same state, and exactly on a level with the mean heightof the sea, instead of being twenty feet under water, as it oughtto have been according to the computation of Celsius. Severaltowns, also, on the shores of the Baltic, as Lubeck, Wismar,Stock, Stralsund, and others, after six and even eight hundredyears, are as little elevated above the sea as at the era oftheir foundation, being now close to the water's edge. Thelowest part of Dantzic was no higher than the mean levelSUPPOSED DIlflNUTION OFof the sea in the year 1000; and after dight centuries, itsrelative position remains exactly the same *.Notwithstanding these convincing proofs that the supposedchange in the relative level of land and sea arose from some localappearances, there are still many who contend for a loweringof die Baltic ; and many Swedish officers of the pilotage establishmentdeclared, in the year 18S1, in favour of this opinion,after measuring the height of landmarks placed at certain heightsabove the sea, half a century before, as objects of comparisonfor the express purpose of settling the point at issue. Beforewe attach any weight to these assertions, which only relateto slight differences of elevation, we ought to be assured thatthe observers were on their guard against every imaginablecause of deception arising from local circumstances. Thus,for example, if the height of an alluvial plain was taken duringthe last century, it might have been subsequently raised byfresh deposits, and thus the sea would appear to have sunk ;or, if a mark was cut in the rocks, the sea may have beenseveral inches or even feet higher at one period than another,in consequence of the setting in of a current urged by particularwinds into a long narrow gulf, which cause is well known toraise the Baltic, at some seasons, two feet above its ordinarylevel.Von Buch, in his travels, discovered in Norway, and at Udderin Sweden, beds of shells of existing species at considerableheights above the level of the water. Since that time,several other naturalists have confirmed his observation ; and,according to Strom, some deposits occur at an elevation of morethan four hundred feet above the sea in the northern part ofNorway. M. Alex. Brongniart, who has lately visited Udderin Gothenburg, a port at the entrance of the Baltic, informsus that the principal mass of shells in the creek of Uddevallarises about two hundred feet above the level of the sea, restingon rocks of gneiss. All the species are identical with those nowinhabiting the contiguous sea, and are for the most part entire,although some of them are broken, as happens on a sea-beach.They are nearly free from any admixture of earthy matter.The reader need scarcely be reminded that at the height of aFor a full account of the Celsian controversy we may refer our readers to VonHoff, Geschicbte, &c., toI. i., p. 439.THE LBVBL OF THB BALTIC. 231few feet .above the beach, on our coasts the rooks, where theyare alternately submerged and laid dry by the ebbing andflowing tide, are frequently covered with barnacles or balani,which are firmly attached. On examining, with care, the smoothsurface of the gneiss, immediately above the ancient shelly beachat Uddevalla, M. Brongniart found, in a similar manner, balaniadhering to the rocks, so that there can be no doubt that thesea had for a long period sojourned on the spot *. Now, this interestingfact is precisely analogous to one well known to all whoare acquainted with the geology of the borders of the Mediterranean.Perforating shells (Venus lithophaga,Lam.) excavatefunnel-shaped hollows in the hardest limestone and marble, alongthe present sea-shores ; and lines of these perforations, sometimescontaining the same species of shells, have been discovered atvarious heights above the sea near Naples, in Calabria, at MontePeregrine, in the Bay of Palermo, and other localities. Asmany of these districts have been violently shaken by earthquakeswithin the historical era, and as the land has been sometimesraised and sometimes depressed, as we shall afterwardsshow by examples, there is no difficulty in explaining the phenomena,provided time be allowed. But no argument can bederived, from such observations, in support of great pleadingsof the coast, whether by slow or sudden operations in modemtimes, unless we use the term modem in a geological sense.On the contrary, we know that the physical outline of the coastand heights in the bay of Palermo, when it was a Greek portmore than two thousand years ago, was so nearly the same asit is at present, that the beds of recent shells, and the perforationsin the rocks, must have stood nearly in the same relationto the level of the Mediterranean as they stand now. The highbeaches on the Norwegian and Swedish coast establish the importantand certainly very unexpected fact, that those parts ofEurope have been the theatres of considerable subterraneanmovements within the present zoological era, or since the seaswere inhabited by species now our contemporaries. But thephenomena do not lend the slightest support to the Celsian hypothesis,nor to that extraordinary notion proposed in our owntimes by Von Buch, who imagines that the whole of the landTableau des Terrains, &c> p. 89. 1829.232 DELTA OF THE RHONE.along the northern and western shores of the Baltic is slowlyand insensibly rising ! No countries have been more entirelyfree from earthquakes since the times of authentic history thanNorway, Sweden, and Denmark. In common with our ownisland) and, indeed with almost every spot on the globe, theyhave experienced some slight shocks at certain periods, as duringthe earthquake of Lisbon, and on a few other occasions, butthese may rather be considered as prolonged vibrations in thecrust of the earth, extending in the manner of sounds throughthe air to almost indefinite distances, than as those violent movementswhich in the great regions of active volcanos change, fromtime to time, the relative level of land and sea.Delta of the Rhone, — ewe may now turn our attention tosome of the principal deltas of the Mediterranean, for no otherinland sea affords so many examples of accessions of new landsat the mouths of rivers within the records of authentic history.We have already considered the lacustrine delta of the Rhonein Switzerland, and we shall now describe its contemporaneousmarine delta. Scarcely has the river passed out of the LemanLake, before its pure waters are again filled with sand andsediment by the impetuous Arve descending from the highestAlps, and bearing along in its current the granitic detritusannually carried down by the glaciers of Mont Blanc. TheRhone afterwards receives vast contributions of transportedmatter from the Alps of Dauphine, and the primary and volcanicmountains of Central France ; and when at length it entersthe Mediterranean, it discolours its blue waters with a whitishsediment for the distance of between six and seven miles fromits mouth, throughout which space the current of fresh-water isperceptible. Strabo's description of the delta is so inapplicableto its present configuration, as to attest a complete alteration inthe physical features of the country since the Augustan age.It appears, however, that the head of the delta, or the point atwhich it]^begins to ramify, has remained unaltered since the timeof Pliny, for he states that the Rhone divided itself at Aries intotwo arms. This is the case at present ; one of the branchesbeing pow'called Le petit Rhone, which is again subdividedbefore entering the Mediterranean. The advance of the baseof the delta, in the last eighteen centuries, is demonstrated byDELTA OF THE RHONE. 233many curious antiquarian monuments. The most striking ofthese is the great detour made by the old Roman road fromUgemum to Betters (part of the high road between Paix,Abuse Textile, and Nismes, Nemausus). It is clear that, whenthis was first constructed, it was impossible to pass in a directline, as now, across the delta, and that either the sea or marshesintervened in a tract now consisting of terra firma *. Astrucalso remarks, that all the places on the low lands, lying to thenorth of the old Roman road between Nismes and Betters, havenames of Celtic origin evidently given to them by the first inhabitantsof the country ; whereas the places lying south of thatroad, towards the sea, have names of Latin derivation, and wereclearly founded after the Roman language had been introduced.Another proof, also, of the great extent of land which has comeinto existence since the Romans conquered and colonized Gaul,18 derived from the fact, that the Roman writers never mentionthe thermal waters of Alaric in the delta, although they werewell acquainted with those of Aix and others, still more distant,and attached great importance to them, as they invariably didto all hot springs. The waters of Alaric, therefore, must haveformerly issued under the sea — a common phenomenon on theborders of the Mediterranean ; and on the advance of the deltathey continued to flow out through the new deposits. Amongthe more direct proofs of the increase of land, we find thatMese, described under the appellation of Mesua Col lis by pompousMeat, and stated by him to be nearly an island, isnow far inland. Notre Dame des Ports also, was a harbourin 898, but is now a league from the shore. Psalmody was anisland in 815, and is now two leagues from the sea. Severalold lines of towers and sea-marks occur at different distancesfrom the present coast, all indicating the successive retreat ofthe sea, for each line has in its turn become useless to mariners,which may well be conceived when we state that the tower ofTignaux, erected on the shore so late as the year 1737, isalready a French mile remote from it ;{!•By the confluence of the Rhone and the currents of the• Mem. d'Astruc, cited by Von Hoff, toL i., p. 228.f Lib. II., c. y.I Bouche, Cborog^phie et Hist, de Provence, vol. i., p. 23, cited by Hoff,To1. ^p. 290.2S4 Delta OP TBS RNQNB,Mediterranean driven by winds fixHn the south, and-barsare often formed across the mouths of the river: by thesemeans considerable spaces become divided off from the sea* andsubsequently from the river also, when it shifts its channels ofefflux. As some of these etangs, as they are called, are subjectto the occasional ingress of the river when flooded, and ofthe sea during storms, they are alternately salt and fresh.Others, after being filled with saltwater, are often lowered byevaporation till they become more salt than the sea *, and it hashappened, occasionally, that a considerable precipitate of muriateof soda has taken place in these natural patterns. Duringthe latter part of Napoleons career, when the excise-laws wereenforced with extreme rigour the police was employed to preventsuch salt from being used. The fluvlatile and marine shellsenclosed in these small lakes, often live together in brackishwater ; but the uncongenial nature of the fluid usually producesa dwarfish sise, and sometimes gives rise to strangevarieties in form and colour.Captain Smyth, in the late survey of the coast of the Mediterranean,found the sea, opposite the mouth of the Rhoneto deepen gradually from four to forty fathoms, within a distanceof six or seven miles, over which the discoloured freshwaterextends ; so that the inclination of the new deposits mustbe too slight to be appreciable in such an extent of section asageologist usually obtains in examining ancient formations.When the wind blew from the south-west, the ships employedin the survey were obliged to quit their moorings ; and whenthey returned, the new sand-banks in the delta were foundcovered over with a great abundance of marine shells. By thismeans, we learn how occasional beds of drifted marine shellsmay become inter stratified with fresh water strata at the mouthsof rivers.That a great proportion, at least, of the new deposit in thedelta of the Rhone consists of rocks and not of loose incoherent ^matter, is perfectly ascertained. In the museum at Montpellieris a cannon taken up from the sea near the mouth ofthe river, imbedded in a crystalline calcareous rock. Largemasses, also, are continually taken up of an arenaceous rock,cemented by calcareous matter, including multitudes of brokenshells of recent species. The observations recently made on thisDELTA OF THE PO. 235subject corroborate the former statement of Marsilli ^, that theearthy deposits of the coast of Languedoc form a stony substance,for which reason he ascribed a certain bituminous, saline,and glutinous nature, to the substances brought down withsand by the Rhone. If the number of mineral springs chargedwith carbonate of lime which fall into the Rhone and its feedersin different parts of France be considered, we shall feel no surpriseat the ratification of the newly-deposited sediment in thisdelta. It should be remembered, that the fresh-water introducedby rivers, being lighter than the water of the sea, floatsover the latter, and remains upon the surface for a considerabledistance. Consequently, it is exposed to as much evaporationas the waters of a lake ; and the area over which the river-wateris spread at the junction of great rivers and the sea, maywell be compared, in point of extent to that of considerablelakes. Now, it is well known, that so great is the quantity ofwater carried off by evaporation in some lakes, that it is nearlyequal to the water flowing in ; and in some inland seas, as theCaspian, it is quite equal. We may, therefore, well supposethat, in cases where a strong current does not interfere, thegreater portion not only of the matter held mechanically insuspension, but of that also which is in chemical solution, mustbe precipitated within the limits of the delta. When these fineringredients are extremely small in quantity, they may onlysuffice to supply crustaceous animals, corals, and marine plants,with the earthy particles necessary for their secretions ; butwhenever it is in excess (as generally happens if the basin of ariver lie partly in a district of active or extinct volcanos), thenwill solid deposits be formed, and the shells will at once beincluded in a rocky mass.Delta of the Po, — The Adriatic presents a great combinationof circumstances favourable to the rapid formation ofdeltas — a gulf receding far into the land, — a sea without tidesor strong currents, and the influx of two great rivers, the Poand the Adige, besides numerous minor streams draining onthe one side a great crescent of the Alps, and on the otherHint. Phys. de la Mer.236 DELTA OF THE PO.some of the loftiest ridges of the Apennines. From thenorthernmost point of the Gulf of Trieste, where the Isonzoenters, down to the south of Ravenna, there is an uninterruptedseries of recent accessions of land, more than one hundredmiles in length, which, within the last two thousand years,have increased from two to twenty miles in breadth. TheIsonzo, Parliament, Piave, Brentaa, Adige, and Po, besidesmany other inferior rivers, contribute to the advance of thecoast-line, and to the shallowing of the gulf. The Po and theAdige may now be considered as entering by one commondelta, for two branches of the Adige are connected witharms of the Po. In consequence of the great concentrationof the flooded waters of these streams, since the systemof embankment became general, the rate of encroachmentof the new land upon the Adriatic, especially at that pointwhere the Po and Adige enter, is said to have been greatlyaccelerated. Adrian was a seaport in the time of Augustus, andhad , in ancient times, given its name to the gulf ; it is nowabout twenty Italian miles inland. Ravenna was also a seaport,and is now about four Italian miles from the mainsea. Yet even before the practice of embankment was introduced,the alluvium of the Po advanced with rapidity on theAdriatic ; for Spina, a very ancient city, originally built in thedistrict of Ravenna, at the mouth of a great arm of the Po, wasso early as the commencement of our era, eleven Italian milesdistant from the sea *•The greatest depth of the Adriatic, between Dalmatia andthe mouths of the Po, is twenty-two fathoms ; but a largepart of the gulf of Trieste and the Adriatic, opposite Venice,is less than twelve fathoms deep. Farther to the south, whereit is less affected by the influx of great rivers, the gulf deepensconsiderably. Donati, after dredging the bottom, discoveredthe new deposits to consist partly of mud and partly of rock,the latter formed of calcareous matter, encrusting shells. Healso ascertained, that particular species of testacea were groupedtogether in certain places, and were becoming slowly incorporatedwith the mud, or calcareous precipitates t. Olivi, alsoSee Brocchi on the various writers on this subject. Conch. Foss. Subap.,ToL i.; p. 1 18, f Ibid., vol. i., p. 39,DELTA OF THE PO* 237found some deposits of sand, and others of mud, extendinghalf way across the gulf; and he states that their distributionalong the bottom was evidently determined by the prevailingcurrent *• It is probable, therefore, that the finer sediment ofall the rivers at the head of the Adriatic may be intermingledby the influence of the current ; and all the central parts ofthe gulf may be considered as slowly filling up with horizontaldeposits, precisely similar to those of the Subapennine hills, andcontaining many of the same species of shells. The Fo merelyintroduces at present fine sand and mud, for it carries nopebbles farther than the spot where it joins the Trebia, westof Piacenza. Near the northern borders of the basin, theIsonzo, Parliament, and many other streams, are forming immensebeds of sand and some conglomerate, for there somehigh mountains of Alpine limestone approach within a fewmiles of the sea. In the time of the Romans, the hot bathsof Monfalcone were on one of several islands of Alpine limestone,between which and the main land, on the north, was achannel of the sea, about a mile broad. This channel is nowconverted into a grassy plain, which surrounds the islands onall sides. Among the numerous changes on this coast, we findthat the present channel of the Isonzo is several miles to thewest of its ancient bed, in part of which at Bronchi, the oldRoman bridge which crossed the Via Appian was lately foundburied in fluviatile silt.Notwithstanding the present shallowness of the Adriatic, itis highly probable that its original depth was very great ; forif all the low alluvial tracts were taken away from its bordersand replaced by sea, the high land would terminate in thatabrupt manner which generally indicates, in the Mediterranean,a great depth of water near the shore, except in those spotswhere sediment imported by rivers and currents has diminishedthe depth. Many parts of the Mediterranean are now ascertainedto be above two thousand feet deep, close to the shore,as between Nice and Genoa ; and even sometimes six thousandfeet, as near Gibraltar. When, therefore, we find near Parma,and in other districts in the interior of the peninsula, beds ofhorizontal tertiary marl, attaining a thickness of about twoSee Brocchi on the various writers on this subject. Coocfa. Fobs, Subap.,ToL ii, p. 94.238 Delta OF THE NfLK.thousand feet, or when we discover strata of inclined conglomerate,of the same age, near Nice, measuring above a thousandfeet in thickness, and extending seven or eight miles in length,we behold nothing which the analogy of the deltas in theAdriatic might not lead us to anticipate.Delta of the Nile.— That Egypt was the gift of the Nile,was the opinion of her priests before the time of Herodotus ;but we have no authentic memorials for determining, withaccuracy, the additions made to the habitable surface of thatcountry since the earliest historical period. We know thatthe base of the delta has been considerably modified since thedays of Homer. The ancient geographers mention seven principalmouths of the Nile of which the most eastern, the Peru*sian, has been entirely silted up, and the Mended, orFanatic, has disappeared. On the other hand, the Bucolichas, in modern times, been greatly enlarged, and has causedthe coast to advance ; so that the city of Damietta, which, in theyear 124S, was on the sea, and possessed a good harbour, isnow one mile inland. The Phatnitic mouth, and the Sebenitic^have been so altered, that the country immediately about theirhas little resemblance to that described by the ancients. TheBolbitine mouth has increased in its dimensions, so as to causethe city of Rosetta to be at some distance from the sea. Butthe alterations produced round the Canopic mouth are themost important. The city Foal, which, so late as the beginningof the fifteenth century, was on this embouchure, is nowmore than a mile inland. Canopus, which, in the time ofScylax, was a desolate insular rock, has been connected withthe firm land ; and Pharos, an island in the times of old, nowbelongs to the continent. Homer says, its distance fromEgypt was one day's voyage by sea *. That this should havebeen the case in Homer's time, Archer and others have,with reason, affirmed to be in the highest degree improbable ;but Strabo has judiciously anticipated their objections, observing,that Homer was probably acquainted with the gradualadvance of the land mi this coast, and availed himself ofthis phenomenon to give an air of higher antiquity to the• Ody^ B. iv., 355,DELTA OF Tick NILE. 239remote period in which he laid the scene of his poem *.The Lake Mareotis^ also, together with the canal which connectedit with the Canopic arm of the Nile, has been filledwith mud, and is become dry. Herodotus observes, that thecountry round Memphis seemed formerly to have been an armof the sea gradually filled by the Nile, in the same manner asthe Meander, Achelous, and other streams, had formed deltas,* Egypt , therefore'' he says, * * like the Red Sea, was once a longnarrow bay, and both gulfs were separated by a small neck ofland. If the Nile' he adds, ** should by any means have anissue into the Arabian Gulf, it might choke it up with earth intwenty thousand, or even perhaps in ten thousand years ; andwhy may not the Nile have filled with mud a still greater gulf,in the space of time which has passed before our age t V*The depth of the Mediterranean is about twelve fathoms ata small distance from the shore of the delta ; it afterwardsincreases gradually to fifty and then suddenly descends tothree hundred and eighty fathoms, which is, perhaps, theoriginal depth of the sea where it has not been rendered shallowerby fluviatile matter. The progress of the delta, in thelast two thousand years affords, perhaps, no measure for estimatingits Irate of growth when it was an inland bay, andhad not yet protruded itself beyond the coast-line of the Mediterranean.A powerful current now sweeps along the shoresof Africa, from the Straits of , Gibraltar to the prominentconvexity of Egypt, the western side of which is continuallythe prey of the waves ; so that not only are fresh accessions ofland checked, but ancient parts of the delta are carried away.By this cause Canopus, and some other towns, have been overwhelmed;but to this subject we shall again refer when speakingof tides and currents.Lib. I^ Part i., pp. 80 and 98. Consult Von Hoff, vol. i., p. 244.t Euterpe, XI.CHAPTER XIV.Oceanic deltas — Delta of the Ganges and Burrampooter — Its side, rate of advance,and nature of its deposits— Formation and destruction of islands — abundanceof crocodiles — Inundations — delta of the Mississippi — Deposits of drift woodGradual filling up of the Yellow Sea — ^Rennell's estimate of the mud carrieddown by the Gange^^Fonnation of valleys illustrated by the growthof deltas — Grouping of new strata in general — Convergence of deltas — Conglomerates— various causes of stratification — Direction of laminae— Remainson the interchange of land and sea.OCEANIC DELTAS.The remaining class of deltas are those in which rivers, onentering the sea, are exposed to the influence of the tides. Inthis case it frequently happens that an estuary is produced, ornegative delta, as it has been termed by Rennell, where, insteadof any encroachment of the land upon the sea, the ocean entersthe river's mouth, and penetrates into the land beyond thegeneral coast-line. Where this happens, the tides and currentsare the predominating agents in the distribution of transportedsediment. The phenomena, therefore, of such estuaries,will come under our examination when we treat of the movementsof the ocean. But whenever the volume of fresh-wateris so great as to counteract and almost neutralize the force oftides and currents, and in all cases where the latter agents havenot sufficient power to remove to a distance the whole of thesediment periodically brought down by rivers, oceanic deltasare produced. Of these, we shall now select a few illustrativeexamples.Delta of the Ganges. — The Ganges and the Burrampooterdescend, from the highest mountains in the world, into a gulfwhich runs two hundred and twenty-five miles into the continent.The Burrampooter is somewhat the larger river of the two, butit first takes the name of the Megna, when joined by a smallerstream so called, and afterwards loses this again on its unionDELTA OF rilE Canons. 241with the Ganges at the distance of about forty miles from thesea. The area of the delta of the Ganges (without includingthat of the Burrampooter, which has now become conterminous)is considerably more than double that of the Nile ; and its headcommences at a distance of two hundred and twenty miles, inadirect line from the sea. That part of the delta borderingon the sea is composed of a labyrinth of rivers and creeks, allof which are salt, except those immediately communicatingwith the principal arm of the Ganges. This tract, known bythe name of the Woods, or Sunderland, a wilderness infestedby tigers and alligators, is, according to Rennell, equal inextent to the whole principality of Wales *, The base of thismagnificent delta is two hundred miles in length, includingthe space occupied by the two great arms of the Ganges whichbound it on either side. On the sea-coast there are eightgreat openings, each of which has evidently, at some ancientperiods, served in its turn as the principal channel of discharge.Although the flux and reflux of the tide extend even to thehead of the delta, when the river is low, yet, when it is periodicallyswollen by tropical rains, the velocity of the stream counteractsthe tidal current, so that, except very near the sea, the ebband flow become insensible. During the flood-season, therefore,the Ganges almost assumes the character of a river entering alake or inland sea; the movements of the ocean being then subordinateto the force of the river, and only slightly disturbingits operations. The great gain of the delta in height and areatakes place during the inundations ; and during other seasons ofthe year, the ocean makes reprisals, scouring out the channels,and sometimes devouring rich alluvial plains.So great is the quantity of mud and sand poured by the Gangesinto the gulf in the flood season, that the sea only recovers itstransparency at the distance of sixty, miles from the coast. Thegeneral slope, therefore, of the new strata must be extremelygradual. By the charts recently published, it appears that thereis a gradual deepening from four to about sixty fathoms, as weproceed from the base of the delta to the distance of about onehundred miles into the Bay of Bengal. At some few pointsseventy, or even one hundred fathoms are obtained at that• Account of the Ganges and Burrampooter Riven, by Bfajor Reine, Phil.TVani. 1781.VOL.L »242 DELTA OF THE GANGES.distance. One remarkable exception, however, occurs tothe regularity of the shape of the bottom ; for opposite themiddle of the delta, at the distance of thirty or forty milesfrom the coast, is a nearly circular space called the *' swatch ofno grounds about fifteen miles in diameter, where soundingsof one hundred, and even one hundred and thirty fathoms, failto reach the bottom. This phenomenon is the more extraordinary,since the depression occurs within five miles of the line ofshoals ; and not only do the waters charged with Gangeticsediment pass over it continually, but, during the monsoons,the sea, loaded with mud and sand, is beaten back in thatdirection towards the delta. As the mud is known to extendfor eighty miles farther into the gulf, we may be assured that,in the course of ages, the accumulation of strata in ** the swatch*'has been of enormous thickness; and we seem entitled todeduce, from the present depth at the spot, that the originalinequalities of the bottom of the Bay of Bengal were on asgrand a scale as are those of the main ocean. Opposite themouth of the Hoogly river, and immediately south of SagerIsland, four miles from the nearest land of the delta, a newisle was formed about thirty years ago, called EdmonstoneIsland, where there is a lighthouse, and the surface of which isnow covered with vegetation and shrubs. But while there isevidence of rapid gain at some points, the general progress ofthe coast is very slow, for the tides, which rise from thirteen tosixteen feet, are actively employed in removing the alluvialmatter, and diffusing it over a wide area.* The new strataconsist entirely of sand and fine mud ; such, at least, are the onlymaterials which are exposed to view in regular beds on the banksof the numerous creeks. No substance so coarse as gravel occursin, any part of the delta, nor nearer the sea than four hundredmiles. It should be observed, however, that the superficialalluvial beds, which are thrown down rapidly from turbidIt 18 stated in the chart published in the year 1825, by Captain Hothurgh,that the sands opposite the whole delta stretched between four and five miles farthersouth than they had done forty years previously; and this wai taken ai the measureof the progress of the delta itself, during the same period. But that gentlemaninforms me that a more careful comparison of the ancient charts, during a recentsurvey, hai proved that they were extremely incorrect in their latitudes!, so that theadvance of the new sands and delta was greatly exaggerated.DELTA OF THE GANGES-crocodiles. 243waters during the floods, may be very distinct from those depositedat a greater distance from the shore, where crystallineprecipitates, perhaps, are forming, on the evaporation of so greata surface, exposed to the rays of a tropical sun. The separationof sand and other matter, held in mechanical suspension,may take place where the waters are in motion ; but mineral ingredients,held in chemical solution, would naturally be carriedto a greater distance, where they aid in the formation of coralsand shells, and, in part, perhaps, become the cementing principleof rocky masses.Among the remarkable proofs of the immense transportationof earthy matter by the Ganges and Megna, may be mentionedthe great magnitude of the islands formed in their channelsduring a period far short of that of a man's life. Some ofthese, many miles in extent, have originated in large sand-banksthrown up round the points at the angular turning of the river,and afterwards insulated by breaches of the stream. Others,formed in the main channel, are caused by some obstruction atthe bottom. A large tree, or a sunken boat, is sometimessufficient to check the current, and cause a deposit of sand,which accumulates till it usurps a considerable portion of thechannel. The river then borrows on each side to supply thedeficiency in its bed, and the island is afterwards raised byfresh deposits during every flood. In the great gulf belowLuckipour, formed by the united waters of the Ganges andBurrampooter (or Megna), some of the islands, says Rennell,rival in size and fertility the Isle of Wight. While the riveris forming new islands in one part, it is sweeping away oldones in others. Those newly formed are soon overrun withreeds, long grass, the Tamar Indica, and other shrubs, formingimpenetrable thickets, where tigers, buffaloes, deer, andother wild animals, take shelter. It is easy, therefore, to perceive,that both animal and vegetable remains must continuallybe precipitated into the flood, and sometimes become imbeddedin the sediment which subsides in the delta.Two species of crocodiles, of distinct genera, abound in theGanges and its tributary and contiguous waters ; and Mr. H. T.Colebrooke informs me, that he has seen both kinds in places farinland, many hundred miles from the sea. The Gangetic crocodile,or Gavial (in correct orthography, Garish), is confined toR2244 DELTA OF THE GANGES.the fresh-water, but the common crocodile frequents both fredand salt ; being much larger and fiercer in salt and brackishwater. These animals swarm in the brackish water along theline of sand-banks where the advance of the delta is most rapid.Hundreds of them are seen together in the creeks of the delta,or basking in the sun on the shoals without. They will attackmen and cattle, destroying the natives when bathing, andtame and wild animals which come to drink. '^ I have notunfrequently," says Mr. Colebrooke, " been witness to thehorrid spectacle of seeing a floating corpse seized by a crocodilewith such avidity, that he half emerged above the water withhis prey in his mouth." The geologist will not fail to observehow peculiarly the habits and distribution of these syriansexpose them to become imbedded in those horizontal strata offine mud which are annually deposited over many hundredsquare miles in the Bay of Bengal. The inhabitants of the land,when they happen to be submerged, are usually destroyed bythese voracious reptiles ; but we may suppose the remains ofthe syrians themselves to be continually entombed in the newformations.It sometimes happens, at the season when the periodical floodis at its height, that a strong gale of wind, conspiring with ahigh spring tide, checks the descending current of the river,and gives rise to most destructive inundations. From this cause,in the year 1763, the waters at Luckipour rose six feet abovetheir ordinary level, and the inhabitants of a considerable district,with their houses and cattle, were totally swept away.The population of all oceanic deltas are particularly exposedto suffer by such catastrophes, recurring at considerable intervalsof time ; and we may safely assume, that such tragicalevents have happened again and again since the Gangeticdelta was inhabited by man. If human experience and forethoughtcannot always guard against these calamities, still lesscan the inferior animals avoid them ; and the monuments ofsuch disastrous inundations must be looked for in great abundancein strata of all ages, if the surface of our planet hasalways been governed by the same laws. When we reflect onthe general order and tranquillity that reigns in the rich andpopulous delta of Bengal, notwithstanding the havoc occasionallycommitted by the depredations of the ocean, we perceiveDELTA OF THE MISSISSIPPI. 245how unnecessary it is to attribute the imbedding of successiveraces of animals in older strata to extraordinary energy in thecauses of decay and reproduction in the infancy of our planet,or to those general catastrophes and sudden revolutions resortedto by cosmogonists.As the delta of the Ganges may be considered a type of thoseformed on the borders of the ocean, it will be unnecessary toaccumulate examples of others on a no less magnificent scale asat the mouths of the Orinoco and Amazon, for example. Tothese, indeed, it will be necessary to revert when we treat ofthe agency of currents. The tides in the Mexican Gulf are sofeeble, that the delta of the Mississippi has somewhat of an intermediatecharacter between an oceanic and mediterranean delta.A long narrow tongue of land is protruded, consisting simplyof the banks of the river, and having precisely the same appearanceas in the inland plains during the periodical inundations,when nothing appears above water but the higher part of thatsloping glacis which we before described. This tongue of landhas advanced many leagues since New Orleans was built. Greatsubmarine deposits are also in progress, stretching far and wideover the bottom of the sea, which has become throughout aconsiderable area extremely shallow, not exceeding ten fathomsin depth. Opposite the mouth of the Mississippi large raftsof drift trees, brought down every spring, are matted togetherinto a net-work many yards in thickness, and stretching overhundreds of square leagues *• They afterwards become coveredover with a fine mud, on which other layers of trees are depositedthe year following, until numerous alternations of earthy and vegetablematter are accumulated. An observation of Darby,in regard to the strata composing part of this delta, deservesattention. In the steep banks of the Atchafalaya, that armof the Mississippi which we before alluded to when describing*• the raft'' the following section is observable at low water : —first, an upper stratum, consisting invariably of blueish clay,common to the banks of the Mississippi ; below this a stratumof red ochreous earth peculiar to Red River, under which theblue clay of the Mississippi again appears f ; and this arrange-captainHall's Travel in North America, vol. ili , p. 338.t Darby Louisiana p. 103.246 PROPORTION OF SEDIMENTment is constant, proving, as that geographer remarks, that thewaters of the Mississippi and the Red River once occupiedalternately considerable tracts below their present point of union.Such alternations are probably common in submarine spacessituated between two converging deltas. For before the tworivers unite, there must almost always be a certain periodwhen an intermediate tract will be alternately occupied andabandoned by the waters of each stream ; since it can rarelyhappen, that the season of highest flood will precise correspondin each. In the case of the Red River, for example,and Mississippi, which carry off the waters from countries placedunder widely distant latitudes, an exact coincidence in the timeof greatest inundation is very improbable.CONCLUDING REMARKS ON DELTAS.Quantity of Sediment in River Water, — Very few satisfactoryexperiments have as yet been made, to enable us to determine,with any degree of accuracy, the mean quantity of earthy matterdischarged annually into the sea by some one of the principalrivers of the earth. Whatsoever computed the Rhine to contain,when most flooded, one part in a hundred of mud in suspension*.By several observations of Sir George Staunton, it appeared thatthe water of the Yellow River in China contained earthy matterin the proportion of one part to two hundred, and he calculatedthat it brought down, in a single hour, two million feet of earth,or forty-eight million daily ; so that, if the Yellow Sea be taken tobe one hundred and twenty feet deep, it would require seventydays for the river to convert an English square mile into firmland, and twenty-four thousand years to turn the whole seainto terra firma, assuming it to be one hundred and twenty-fivethousand square miles in extent •}•. Manfred, the. celebratedItalian hydrographer, conceived the average proportion of sedimentin all the running water on the globe, which reachedthe sea, to be-^479 ^^^ ^^ imagined that it would require a thousandyears for the sediment carried down to raise the generallevel of the sea about one foot. Some writers, on the contrary,• Comment, Bonn., vol. iL, part i., p. 237.f Staunton's Embuiy to China. London, 1797, to. toL ii., p. 408.IN RIVER WATER. 247as De Mullet, have declared the most turbid waters to containfar less sediment than any of the above estimates would import;and there is so much contradiction and inconsistency in the factsand speculations hitherto promulgated on the subject, that wemust wait for additional experiments before we can form anyopinion on the question.One of the most extraordinary statements is that of MajorRennell, in his excellent paper, before referred to, on the Deltaof the Ganges. ^^ A glass of waters he says, *' taken out ofthis river when at its height, yields about one part in four ofmud. No wonder, then, that the subsiding waters should quicklyform a stratum of earth, or that the delta should encroach onthe sea * !^ The same hydrographer computed with much carethe number of cubic feet of water discharged by the Gangesinto the sea, and estimated the mean quantity through thewhole year to be eighty thousand cubic feet in a second. Whenthe river is most swollen, and its velocity much accelerated, thequantity is four hundred and five thousand cubic feet in asecond. Other writers agree that the violence of the tropicalrains, and the fineness of the alluvial particles in the plainsof Bengal, cause the waters of the Ganges to be chargedwith foreign matter to an extent wholly unequalled by anylarge European river during the greatest floods. We havealready alluded to the frequent sweeping down of large islandsby the Ganges ; and Major R. H. Colebrooke, in his accountof the course of the Ganges, relates examples of the rapidfilling up of some branches of the river, and the excavation ofnew channels, where the number of square miles of soil removedin a short time (the column of earth being one hundredand fourteen feet high) was truly astonishing. Fortysquare miles, or S5,600 acres, are mentioned as having beencarried away, in one locality, in the course of a few years f .But although we can readily believe the proportion of sedimentin the waters of the Ganges to exceed that of any river innorthern latitudes, we are somewhat staggered by the resultsto which we must arrive if we compare the proportion of mud,as given by Rennell, with his computation of the quantity ofwater discharged, which latter is probably very correct. If it• Phil. Tram., 1781.t Tna»» of alia Asiatic SociMy, toL tu., p. 14.248 SEDIMENT IN RIVER WATER.were true that the Ganges, in the flood-season, contained onepart in four of mud, we should then be obliged to supposethat there passes down, every four days, a quantity of mudequal in volume to the water which is discharged in thecourse of twenty four hours. If the mud be assumed to beequal to one-half the specific gravity of granite (it would, however,be more), the weight of matter daily carried down in theflood-season, would be about equal to seventy-four times theweight of the Great Pyramid of Egypt ♦• Even if it couldbe proved that the turbid waters of the Ganges contain onepart in a hundred of mud, which is affirmed to be the case inregard to the Rhine, we should be brought to the extraordinaryconclusion, that there passes down, every two days, into theBay of Bengal, a mass about equal in weight and bulk to theGreat Pyramid.The most voluminous current of lava which has flowed fromEtna within historical times, was that of 1669. Ferrara, aftercorrecting BorrelIi*s estimate, calculated the quantity of cubicyards of lava in this current, at one hundred and forty millions.Now this would only equal in bulk one-seventh of thesedimentary matter which is carried down in a single year bythe Ganges, assuming the average proportion of mud to waterto be no more than one part in one hundred, so that, allowingseven grand eruptions in a century, it would require an bun*dred Etna to transfer a mass of lava from the subterraneanregions to the surface, equal in volume to the mud carrieddown in the same time from the Himalaya mountains into theBay of Bengal f. As considerable labour has been bestowedAccording to Rennes, the Ganges discharges, in the flood-season, 405.000cubic feet of water per second, which gives, in round numbers, 100,000 cubic feetof mud per second, which X 86,400, the number of seconds in twenty-four hour,= 8,641,100,000, the quantity of cubic feet of mud going down the Ganges perdiem. Assuming the specific gravity of mud to be half that of granite, the matterwould equal 4,320,550,000 feet of granite. Now about twelve and a half cubic feetof granite weigh one ton ; and it is computed, that the Great Pyramid of Egypt,if it were a solid mass of granite, would weigh about 6,000,000 of tons.t According to Ferrara's calculation, about 140,000,000 of cubic yards of lavawere poured from the crater of Etna in 1669. This x 27, will give 3,780,000,000of cubic feet, which would be about one-seventh of the amount of mud carrieddown by the Ganges in a year ; for, assuming the average proportion of mud to beone part in a hundred, this would give on an average 800 cubic feet per second :800 X 31,557,600, (the number of seconds in a Julian year,) gives 25,246,080,000.GROUPING OF STRATA IN DELTAS. 249in computing the volume of lava-streams in Sicily, Campania,and Auvergne, it is somewhat extraordinary that so few observationshave been made on the quantity of matter transportedby aqueous agents from one part of the earth to another. Itwould certainly not be difficult to approximate to the amountof sediment carried down annually by some of the largestrivers, such as the Amazon, Mississippi, Ganges, and others,because the earthy particles conveyed by them to their deltas arefine and somewhat uniformly spread throughout the stream,and the principal efflux takes place within a limited periodduring the season of inundation. Arguments have beenexpended in vain for ^ half a century, in controverting theopinion of those who imagine the agency of running water inthe existing state of things, even if continued through an indefinitelapse of ages, to be insignificant, or at least wholly incompetentto produce considerable inequalities on the earth's surface.Some matter-of-fact data should now be accumulated,and we may confidently affirm, that when the aggregateamount of solid matter transported by rivers in a given numberof centuries from a large continent, shall be reduced toarithmetical computation, the result will appear most astonishingto those who are not in the habit of reflecting how many ofthe mightiest operations in nature are effected insensibly, withoutnoise or disorder. The volume of matter carried into thesea in a given time being once ascertained, every geologistwill admit that the whole, with some slight exceptions, is subtractedfrom valleys not from the tops of intervening ridgesor the summits of hills ; in other words, that ancient valleyshave been widened and deepened, or new ones formed, to theextent of the space which the new deposits, when consolidated,would occupy.Grouping of Strata in Delia, — The changes which havetaken place in deltas, even rince the times of history, may suggestmany important considerations in regard to the manner ofdistribution of sediment in subaqueous deposits. Notwithstandingfrequent exceptions arising from the interference ofa variety of causes, there are some general laws of arrangementwhich must evidently hold good in almost all the lakes andseas now filling up. If a lake, for example, be encircled on250 GROUPING OF STRATA IN DELTAS.two sides by lofty mountains leaving from them many riversand torrents of different sizes, and if it be bounded on the othersides, where the surplus waters issue, by a comparatively lowcountry, it is not difficult to define some of the leading geologicalfeatures which will characterize the lacustrine formationwhen this basin shall have been gradually converted into dryland by influx of fluviatile sediment. The strata would bedivisible into two principal groups ; the older comprising thosedeposits which originated on the side adjoining the mountainswhere numerous deltas first began to form; and the newergroup consisting of beds deposited in the more central parts ofthe basin, and towards the side farthest from the mountains.The following characters would form the principal marks ofdistinction between the strata in each series. The more ancientsystem would be composed, for the most part, of coarser materials,containing many beds of pebbles and sand often of greatthickness, and sometimes dipping at a considerable angle.These, with associated beds of finer ingredients, would, iftraced round the borders of the basin, be seen to vary greatlyin colour and mineral composition, and would also be veryirregular in thickness. The beds, on the contrary, in the newergroup, would consist of finer particles, and would be horizontal,or very slightly inclined. Their colour and mineral compositionwould be very homogeneous throughout large areas, and woulddiffer from almost all the separate beds in the older series.The following are the causes of the diversity here alluded tobetween the two great members of the lacustrine formation.When the rivers and torrents first reach the edge of the lake,the detritus washed down by them from the adjoining heightssinks at once into deep water, all the heavier pebbles and sandsubsiding near the shore. The finer mud is carried somewhat'farther out, but not to the distance of many miles, for thegreater part may be seen, where the Rhone enters the Lake ofGeneva, to fall down in clouds to the bottom not far from therivers mouth. Certain alluvial tracts are soon formed at themouths of every torrent and river, and many of these, in thecourse of ages, become several miles in length. Pebbles andsand are then transported farther from the mountains, but intheir passage they decrease in size by attrition, and are in partconverted into mud and sand. At length some of the numerousGROUPING OF STRATA IN DELTAS. 251deltas, which are all directed towards a common centre, approachnear to each other — those of adjoining torrents become united,and are merged, in their turn, in the delta of the largest river,which advances most rapidly into the lake, and renders all theminor streams, one after the other, its tributaries. The variousmineral ingredients of each are thus blended together into onehomogeneous mixture, and the sediment is poured out from acommon channel into the lake. As the average size of the transportedparticles decreases continually, so also the force andvolume of the current augments, and thus the newer depositsare diffused over a wider area, and are consequently more horizontalthan the older. When there were many independentdeltas near the borders of the basin, their separate depositsdiffered entirely from each other. We may suppose that onewas charged, like the Arve where it joins the Rhone, withwhite sand and sediment, chiefly derived from decomposedgranite — that another was black, like many streams in theTyrol, flowing from incoherent rocks of dark slate — that athird was coloured by ochreous sediment, like the Red Riverin Louisiana — and that a fourth, like the Elsa in Tuscany, heldmuch carbonate of lime in solution. At first, they would eachform distinct deposits of sand, gravel, limestone, marl, or othermaterials; but after their junction, new chemical combinationsand distinct colours would be the result, and the particles,having been conveyed ten, twenty, or a greater number of milesover alluvial plains, would become finer.In deltas where the causes are more complicated, and wheretides and currents partially interfere, the above descriptionwould only be applicable, with certain modifications ; but if aseries of earthquakes accompany the growth of a delta, andchange the levels of the land from time to time, as in the regionwhere the Indus now enters the sea, and others hereafter to bementioned, the phenomena will then depart widely from theordinary tjrpe. If we possessed an accurate series of maps ofthe Adriatic for many thousand years, our retrospect would,without doubt, carry us gradually back to the time whenthe number of rivers descending from the mountains intothat gulf by independent deltas, was far greater in number.The deltas of the Po and the Adige, for instance, would separatethemselves within the human era, as, in all probability,252 GROUPING OF DEPOSITS IN DELTAS.would those of the Isonzo and the Torre. If on the other hand,we speculate on future changes, we may anticipate the periodwhen the number of deltas will greatly diminish; far thePo cannot continue to encroach at the rate of a mile in acentury, and other rivers to gain as much in six or seven centuriesupon the shallow gulf, without new junctions occurringfrom time to time, so that Eridanus, <^ the king of rivers," willcontinually boast a greater number of tributaries. The Gangesand Burrampooter have probably become confluent within thehistorical era ; and the date of the junction of the Red Riverand the Mississippi would, in all likelihood, have been known,if America had not been so recently discovered. The unionof the Tigris and the Euphrates must undoubtedly have beenone of the modern geographical changes on our earth, andsimilar remarks might be extended to many other regions.Along the base of the Maritime Alps, between Toulon andGenoa, the rivers, with few exceptions, are now forming strataof conglomerate and sand. Their channels ate often severalmiles in breadth, some of them being dry, and the rest easilyforded for nearly eight months in the year; whereas during themelting of the snow they arc swollen, and a great transportationof mud and pebbles takes place. In order to keep open the mainroad from France to Italy, now carried along the sea-coast, itis necessary to remove annually great masses of shingle, broughtdown during the flood-season. A portion of the pebbles areseen in some localities, as near Nice, to form beds of shinglealong the shore, but the greater part are swept into a deep sea.The small progress made by the deltas of minor rivers on thiscoast need not surprise us, when we recollect that there is sometimesa depth of two thousand feet at a few hundred yards fromthe beach, as near Nice. Similar observations might be maderespecting a large proportion of the rivers in Sicily, and, amongothers, respecting that which, immediately north of the port ofMessina, hurries annually vast masses of granitic pebbles intothe sea.When the deltas of rivers having many mouths converge, apartial union at first takes place by the confluence of some oneor more of their arms ; but it is not until the main trunks areconnected above the head of the common delta, that a completeintermixture of their joint waters and sediment takes place.STRATIFICATION OF DEPOSITS IN DELTAS. 253The union, therefore, of the Po and Adige, and of the Gangesand Burrampooter, is still incomplete. If we reflect on thegeographical extent of surface drained by rivers such as nowenter the Bay of Bengal, and then consider how complete theblending together of the greater part of their transported matterhas already become, and throughout how vast a delta it is spreadby numerous arms, we no longer feel so much surprise at thearea occupied by some ancient formations of homogeneousmineral composition. But our surprise will be still fartherlessened when we afterwards inquire into the action of tides andcurrents, in disseminating the matter accumulated in variousdeltas.Stratification of Deposits in Deltas, — That the matter carriedby rivers into seas and lakes is not thrown in confused and promiscuousheaps, but is spread out far and wide along the bottom,is well ascertained ; and that it must for the most part be dividedinto distinct strata, may in part be inferred where it cannot beproved by observation. The horizontal arrangement of thestrata, when laid open to the depth of twenty or thirty feet inthe delta of the Ganges and in that of the Mississippi, is alludedto by many writers ; and the same disposition is well known toobtiun in all modem deposits of lakes and estuaries. Naturaldivisions are often occasioned by the interval of time which separatesannually the deposition of matter during the periodicalrains, or melting of the snow upon the mountains. The depositof each year acquires some degree of consistency before that ofthe succeeding year is superimposed. A variety of circumstancesalso give rise annually to slight variations in colour, fineness ofthe particles, and other characters. Alternations of strata distinctin texture, mineral ingredients, or organic contents, are producedby numerous causes. Thus, for example, at one period of theyear, drift wood may be carried down, and at another mud aswas before stated to be the case in the delta of the Mississippi ;or at one time when the volume and velocity of the stream aregreatest, pebbles and sand may be spread over a certain area,over which, when the waters are low, fine matter or chemicalprecipitates are formed. During inundations the current offresh-water often repels the sea for many miles ; but when theriver is low salt-water again occupies the same space. When2d4 Stratification OP DEPOSITS IN DELTAS.two deltas are converging, the intermediate space is often, forreasons before expired, alternately the receptacle of differentsediment derived from the converging streams. Lie one is,perhaps, charged with calcareous, the other with argillaceousmatter ; or one may sweep down sand and pebbles, the otho-impalpablemud. These differences may be repeated with considerableregularity, until a thickness of hundreds of feet ofalternating beds is accumulated.An examination of the strata of Shell-marl now forming inthe Scotch lakes, or of the sediment termed " warp," which subsidesfrom the muddy water of the Humber, and other rivers,shows that recent deposits are often composed of a great numberof extremely thin layers, ether even or slightly undulating, andparallel to the planes of stratification. Sometimes, however,the laminae in modem strata are disposed diagonally at aconsiderable angle, which appears to take place where thereare conflicting movements in the waters. In January, 1829*I visited, in company with Professor L. A, Necker, of Geneva,the confluence of the Rhone and Arve, when those riverswere very low, and were cutting channels through the vastheaps of debris thrown down from the waters of the Arve, in thepreceding spring. One of the sand-banks which had formed, inthe spring of 18S8, where the opposing currents of the two riversneutralized each other, and caused a retardation in tie motion,had been undermined ; and the following is an exact representationof the arrangement of laminae exposed in a vertical section.The length of the portion here seen is about twelve feet, andNo. 6.r-*^-^^the height five. The strata a a consist of irregular alternationsof pebbles and sand in undulating beds : below these are seamsof very fine sand, b b, some as thin as paper, others about aCONCLUDING REMARKS ON DELTAS. 255quarter of an inch thick. The strata c c are composed oflayers of fine greenish-grey sand, as thin as paper. Some ofthe inclined beds will be seen to be thicker at their upper, othersat their lower extremity, the inclination of some being very considerable.These layers must have accumulated one on theother by lateral apposition, probably when one of the riverswas very gradually increasing or diminishing in velocity, sq thatthe point of greatest retardation caused by their conflictingcurrents shifted slowly, allowing the sediment to be throwndown in successive layers on a sloping bank. The same phenomenonis exhibited in older strata of all ages ; and when wetreat of them, we shall endeavour more fully to illustrate theorigin of such a structure.We may now conclude our remarks on deltas, observing that,imperfect as is our information of the changes which they haveundergone within the last three thousand years, they are suiS-centto show how constant an interchange of sea and land istaking place on the face of our globe. In the Mediterraneanalone, many flourishing inland towns, and a still greater numberof ports, now stand where the sea rolled its waves since the erawhen civilized nations first grew up in Europe. If we couldcompare with equal accuracy the ancient and actual state of allthe islands and continents, we should probably discover thatmillions of our race are now supported by lands situated wheredeep seas prevailed in earlier ages. In many districts notyet occupied by man, land animals and forests now aboundwhere the anchor once sank into the oozy bottom. We shallfind, on inquiry, that inroads of the ocean have been no less considerable; and when to these revolutions produced by aqueouscauses, we add analogous changes wrought by igneous agency,we shall perhaps, acknowledge the justice of the conclusion ofa great philosopher of antiquity, when he declared that the wholeland and sea on our globe periodically changed places *,See an account of the Aristotelian system, p. 16, anie.CHAPTER XV.Destroying and transporting effects of tides and currents — Shifting of their position—Differences in the rise of the tides — Causes of currents — Action of thesea on the British coast — Shetland Islands — Large blocks removed — ^Efledsof lightning — breach caused in a mass of porphyry — Isles reduced to dusterof rocks — Orkney Isles — East coast of Scotland — Stones thrown up on theBell Rock— East coast of England— Waste of the diflb of Holdemeas^ Norfolk,and Suffolk— Silting up of estuaries — Origin of submarine forests-yarmouthestuary— Submarine forests — Suffolk coast — Dunwich — Ssmkcoast— Estuary of the Thames — goodwin Sands —Coast of Kent— Formationof Straits of Dover — Coast of Hands — Coast of Dorset — portland — Origin ofthe Chisel Bank — Cornwall — Lionnesse tradition — Coast of Brittany.Although the movements of great bodies of water termedtides and currents, are in general due to very distinct causes,we cannot consider their effects separately for they produce, bytheir joint action, those changes which are subjects of geologicalinquiry. We may view these forces as we before consideredrivers, first, as employed in destroying portions of the solidcrust of the earth, and removing them to other localities;secondly, as reproductive of new strata. Some of the principalcurrents which traverse large regions of the globe depend onpermanent winds, and these on the rotation of the earth on itsaxis, and its position in regard to the sun : — they are causes,therefore, as constant as the tides themselves, and, like themdepend on no temporary or accidental circumstances, but outhe laws which preside over the motions of the heavenlybodies. But, although the sum of their influence in adheringthe surface of the earth may be very constant throughoutsuccessive epochs, yet the points where these operations aredisplayed in the fullest energy shift perpetually. The heightto which the tides rise, and the violence and velocity of currents,depend in a great measure on the actual configurationof the land, the contour of a long line of continental or insularcoast, the depth and breadth of channels, the peculiar form ofthe bottom of seas — in a word, on a combination of circumstanceswhich are made to vary continually by many igneous andRISE OF THE TIDES. 257aqueous caused, aid, among the rest, by tides and currents.Although these agents, therefore, of decay and reproduction,are local in reference to periods of short duration, such as thosewhich history in general embraces, they are nevertheless universal,if we extend our views to a sufficient lapse of ages.The tides, as is well known, rise in certain channels, bays,and estuaries, to an elevation far above the average height ofthe same tides in more open parts of the coast, or on islandsin the main ocean. In all lakes, and in most inland seas, thetides are not perceptible. In the Mediterranean, even, deepand extensive as is that sea, they are only sensible in certainlocalities, and they then rarely rise more than six inchesabove the mean level. In the Straits of Messina, however,there is an ebb and flow every six hours, to the amount of twofeet, but this elevation is partly due to the peculiar set of thecurrents. In islands remote from the shore, the rise of thetides is slight, as at St. Helena, for example, where it rarelyexceeds three feet *. In the estuary of the Severn, the rise atKing's Road near Bristol is forty-two feet ; and at Chepstowon the Wye, a small river which opens into the same estuary,about fifty feet. All the intermediate elevations may be foundat different places on our coast. Thus, at Milford Haven,the rise is thirty-six feet ; at London, and the promontory ofBeachy Head, eighteen feet ; at the Needles, in the Isle ofWight, nine feet ; at Weymouth, seven ; at Lowestoff aboutfive; at Great Yarmouth, still less.That movements of no inconsiderable magnitude should beimpressed on an expansive ocean, by winds blowing for manymonths in one direction, may easily be conceived, when weobserve the effects produced in our own seas by the temporaryaction of the same cause. It is well known that a strong southwestor north-west wind, invariably raises the tides to anunusual height along the east coast of England, and in theChannel ; and that a north-west wind of any continuance causesthe Baltic to rise two feet and upwards above its ordinarylevel. Smeaton ascertained, by experiment, that in a canalfour miles in length, the water was kept up four inches higherat one end than at the other, merely by the action of the windalong the canal; and Kennel informs us, that a large pieceRomney Vents et Courant, vol. ii.j p. 2. Rev. F. Fellows, Quart. Journ. ofSci Ifareh, 1S29.Vol. I. S258 GULF STREAM.cf water, ten miles broad, and generally only three feet deep,has, by a strong wind, had its waters driven to one side, andsustained so as to become six feet deep, while the windwardside was laid dry *. As water, therefore, he observes, whenpent up so that it cannot escape, acquires a higher level, soina place where it can escape, the same operation produces acurrent ; and this current will extend to a greater or less distance,according to the force by which it is produced. Themost extensive and best determined of all currents, is the gulfstream, which sets westward in tropical regions; and, afterdoubling the Cape of Good Hope, where it runs nearly at therate of two miles an hour, inclines considerably to the northward,along the western coast of Africa, then crosses the Atlantic,and, having accumulated in the Gulf of Mexico, passes out atthe Straits of Bahama, with a velocity of four miles an hour,which is not reduced to two miles until the stream has proceededto the distance of eighteen hundred miles in the directionof Newfoundland : near that island it meets with a currentsetting southward from Ba£Sn^8 Bay, on the coast of Greenland,and is thereby deflected towards the east. One branch extendsin that direction, while another runs towards the north ; so thatfruits, plants, and wood, the produce of America and the WestIndies, are drifted to the shores of Ireland, the Hebrides, andaven to Spitsbergen.In describing the destroying effects of tides and currents, itwill be necessary to enter into some detail, because we have notthe advantage here, as in the case of the deltas of many rivers,ef viewing the aggregate mass which has resulted from the con*ttnual transportation of matter, for many centuries, at certainpoints. We must infer the great amount of accumulation asacorollary from the proofs adduced of the removing force ; andthis it will not be difficult to show is, on the whole, greater thanthat of running water on the land.If we follow the eastern and southern shores of the Britishislands, from our Ultima Thule in Shetland, to the Land's Endin Cornwall, we shall find evidence of a series of changes sincethe historical era, very illustrative of the kind and degree offorce exerted by the agents now under consideration. In thissurvey we shall have an opportunity of tracing the power ofthe sea on islands, promontories, bays, and estuaries; on Ixdd,Renal on the Channel-current.ROCK-lasses DRIFTED BT THE SEA. 259lofty cliffs as well as on low shores ; and on every description ofrock and soil, from granite to blown sand. We shall afterwardsexplain by reference to other reasons, some phenomena of whichour own coast furnishes no examples.Shetland Islands. — The northernmost group of the Britishislands, the Shetland are composed of a great variety of primaryand trap rocks, including granite, gneiss, mica-slate, serpentine,greenstone, and many others, with some secondaryrocks, chiefly sandstone and conglomerate. These isles are exposedcontinually to the uncontrolled violence of the Atlantic,for no land intervenes between their western shores and America.The prevalence, therefore, of strong westerly gales, causes thewaves to be sometimes driven with irresistible force upon thecoast, while there is also a current setting from the north. Thespray of the sea aids the decomposition of the rocks, and preparesthem to be breached by the mechanical force of the waves.Steep cliffs are hollowed out into deep caves and lofty arches ;and almost every promontory ends in a cluster of rocks, imitatingthe forms of columns, pinnacles, and obelisks. Modemobservations show that the reduction of continuous tracts tosuch insular masses is a process in which Nature is stillactively engaged. *^ The Isle of Sternness'' says Dr. Hubert,** presents a scene of unequalled desolation. In stormywinters, huge blocks of stones are overturned, or are removedfrom their native beds, and hurried up a slight acclivityto a distance almost incredible. In the winter of 1802, atabular-shaped mass, eight feet two inches by seven feet,and five feet one inch thick, was dislodged from its bed, andremoved to a distance of from eighty to ninety. feet. I measuredthe recent bed from which a block had been carried awaythe preceding winter (A. D. 1818), and found it to be seventeenfeet and a half by seven feet, and the depth two feet eightinches. The removed mass had been borne to a distance ofthirty feet, when it was shivered into thirteen or more lesserfragments, some of which were carried still farther, from thirtyto one hundred and twenty feet. A block, nine feet two inchesby six feet and a half, and four feet thick, was hurried up theacclivity to a distance of one hundred and fifty feet."Dr. Hibbert, DMcriptioxi of the Shetland Islands, p. 527. Dia., 1SS2.S8HBO ACTION OF THE SEA ONAt NorthmaTine, also, angular blocks of stone have beenremoved in a similar manner to considerable distances, by thewave* of the aea*, some of which are represented in theannexed figure. No. 7.awm/ i i f-i iiIn addition to numerous examples of masses detached anddriven by the tides and currents from their place, some remarkableeffects of lightning are recorded in these isles. At Funzie,in Fetlar, about the middle of the last century, a rock of micaschist, one hundred and five feet long, ten feet broad, and insome places four feet thick, was in an instant torn by a flashof lightning from its bed, and broken into three large, andseveral lesser fragments. One of these, twenty-six feet long,ten feet broad, and four feet thick, was simply turned over.The second, which was twenty-eight feet long, seventeen broad,and five feet in thickness, was hurled across a high point to thedistance of fifty yards. Another broken mass, about forty feetlong, was thrown still farther, but in the same direction, quiteinto the sea. There were also many lesser fragments scatteredup and down "f*.When we thus see electricity co-operating with the violentmovements of the ocean in heaping up piles of shattered rockson dry land, and beneath the waters, we cannot but admit thata region which shall be the theatre, for myriads of ages, of theaction of such disturbing causes, wilt present, at some futureperiod, a scene of havoc and ruin that may compare with anyf Dr. Hibbert, from MSS. of Ber. On>ige Low, nt F«tbr.THE SHETLAND ISLANDS. 2C1noT found by the geolt^st on the surface of our continents;misedasthey all have been in former agesfrom the bosom of thedeep. We have scarcely begun, as yet, to study the effects ofa single class of the mighty instruments of change and disorderDOW operating on our globe ; and yet geologists have presumedto resort to a nascent order of things, or to revolutions in theeconomy of Nature, to explain every obscure phenomenon !Id some of the Shetland Isles, as on the west of Meikle Roe,dikes, or veins of soft granite have smouldered away ; while tfaematrix in which they were inclosed, being of the same substance,butof a firmer texture, has remained unaltered. Thuslong narrow ravines, sometimes twenty feet wide, are laid open,and often give access to the waves. Aver describing somehuge cavernous apertures into which the sea flows for twohundred and fifty feet in Honest, Dr. Higher enumerateother ravages of the ocean. " A mass of rock, the averagedimensions of which may perhaps be rated at twelve or thirteenfeet square, and four and a half or five in thickness, wasfirst moved from its bed, about fifty years ago, to a distance ofthirty feet, and has since been twice turned over. But themost sublime scene is where a mural pile of porphyry, escapingthe process of disintegration that is devastating the coast,appears to have been left as a sort of rampart against theinroads of the ocean ; — the Atlantic, when provoked by wintrygalea, batters against it with all the force of real artillery-theMto^i»Jr-f>rvbB Action of the 8IA OMwatts having, in their repeated faults, forced thenwlTei asentrance. This breach, named the Grind of the Navir (No.8), ia widened every winter by the overwhelming surge that,finding a passage tfarougb it, separates large stones frtMn iusides, and f<Ht:es them to a distance of no less than one hundredand eighty feet. In two or three spots, the Augments whichhave been detached are brought together in immense bcapa,that appear as an accumulation of cubical masses, the productof some quarry *."It ia evident finn this example, that although the greatindestructible of some rocks may enable them to withstand,fw a longer time, the aclicHi of the elements, yet they cannotpermanently resist. There are localities in Shetland, in whichrocks of almost every variety of mineral consolation are suffering(haint(f;ration : thus the sea makes great inroads on theclay date of FitfcJ Head, on the Serpentine of the Word Hill inFetlar, and on the mica-schist of the Bay of Trieste, on thecast coast of the same isle, which decomposes in angular block*.The quarts rock on the east of Walls, and the gneiss andmica-schist of Caithness, suffer the same fate.Such devastation cannot be incessantly committed for thousandsof years without dividing islands, until they become athut mere clusters of rocks, the last shreds of masses once continuous.To this state many appear to have been reduced,and innumerable fantastic forms are assumed by rocks adjoiningthese isles, to which the name of Wrongs is applied, as itis to those of similar shape in Fere.Nu. 9.The granitic rocks (No. 9) between Papa Stour and HiltswickNess afford an example. A still more singular cluster of rockis seen to the south of Hillswick Ness (No. 10), which pre-wantsa variety of forms as viewed from different points, and hasoften been likened to a small £feet of vessels with spread sails *.NftlO.We may imagine that in the course of time Hillswick Nessitself may present a similar wreck, from the unequal decompositionof the rocks whereof it is composed, consisting of gneissand mica schist, traversed in all directions by veins of felsparporphyry.Midway between the groups of Shetland and Orkney is PairIsland, said to be composed of sandstone with high perpendicularcliffs. The current runs with such velocity, that during acalm, and when there is no swell, the rocks on its shores arawhite with the foam of the sea driven against them. TheOrkneys, if carefully examined, would probably afford as mundiillustration of our present topic as the Shetland Islands. Thenorth-east promontory of Ssnda, one of these isles, has been cutois in modern times by the sea, so that it became what is nowcalled Start Island, where a lighthouse was erected in ISO?,since which time the new strait has grown broader.East Coast of Scotland. — To pass over to the main land ofScotland, we find that, in Inverness shire, there have beeninroads of the sea at Fort George, and others in Murrayshira,264 ENCROACHMENTS OF THE SEA ONwhich have swept away the old town of Findhom. On thecoast of Kincardineshirei an illustration was afforded , at theclose of the last century, of the effect of promontories in protectinga line of low shore. The village of Matters, two milessouth of Johnshaven, was built on an ancient shingle beach,protected by a projecting ledge of limestone rock. This wasquarried for lime to such an extent, that the sea broke through,and in 1795 carried away the whole village in one night,and penetrated one hundred and fifty yards inland, where ithas maintained its ground ever since, the new village havingbeen built farther inland on the new shore. In the Bay ofMontrose, we find the North £sk and the South Est riverspouring annually into the sea large quantities of sand andpebbles, yet they have formed no deltas ; for the tides scourout the channels, and the current, setting across their mouths,sweeps away all the materials. Considerable beds of shingle,brought down by the North £sk, are seen along the beach.Proceeding southwards, we find that at Arbroath, in Forfar-shire,which stands on a rock of red sandstone, gardens andhouses have been carried away within the last thirty years byencroachments of the sea. It has become necessary to removethe lighthouses at the mouth of the estuary of the Tay, in thesame county, at Button Ness, which were built on a tract ofblown sand, the sea having encroached for three-quarters of amile.A good illustration was afforded, during the building of theBell Rock Lighthouse, at the mouth of the Frith of Tay, ofthe power which currents in estuaries can exert at considerabledepths, in scouring out the channel. The Bell Rock is asunken reef, consisting of red sandstone, being from twelve tosixteen feet under the surface at high water, and about twelvemiles from the main land. At the. distance of one hundredyards, there is a depth, in all directions, of two or threefathoms at low water. The perpendicular rise and fall of thespring-tides is fifteen feet, and at neap-tides, eight feet ; theirvelocity varying from one to three miles per hour. In 1807,during the erection of the lighthouse, six large blocks ofgranite, which had been landed on the reef, were removed bythe force of the sea, and thrown over a rising ledge to the distanceof twelve or fifteen paces ; and an anchor, weighing aboutTHE BAST COAST OF SCOTLAND. 2659A cwt., was thrown up upon the rock*. Mr. Stevensoninforms us moreover, that drift-stones measuring upwardsof thirty cubic feet or more than two tons weight, have,during storms, been often thrown upon the rock from the deepwater +.Among the proofs that the sea has encroached both in theestuaries of the Tay and Forth, may be mentioned the submarineforests which have been traced for several miles by Dr.Fleming, along the margins of those estuaries on the north andsouth shores of the county of Fife. The alluvial tracts,however, on which such forests grow, generally occupy spaceswhich may be said to be in dispute between the river and thesea, and to be alternately lost and won. Estuaries (a termwhich we confine to inlets entered both by rivers and tides ofthe sea) have a tendency to become silted up in parts ; but thesame tracts, after remaining dry, perhaps, for thousands ofyears, are again liable to be overflowed, for they are alwayslow, and, if inhabited, must generally be secured by artificialembankments. Meanwhile the sea devours, as it advances,the high as well as the low parts of the coast, breaking down,one after another, the rocky bulwarks which protect the mouthsof estuaries. The changes of territory, therefore, within thegeneral line of coast are all of a subordinate nature, in nowaytending to arrest the march of the great ocean, nor toavert the destiny eventually awaiting the whole region ; theyare like the petty wars and conquests of the independentstates and republics of Greece, while the power of Macedonwas steadily pressing on, and preparing to swallow up thewhole.On the coast of Fife, at St. Andrews, a tract of landwhich intervened between the castle of Cardinal Seaton andthe sea has been entirely swept away, as were the last remainsof the Priory of Frail, in the same county, in 1803. On bothsides of the Frith of Forth, land has been consumed ; at NorthBerwick in particular, and at Newhaven, where an arsenal anddock, built in the reign of James IV., in the fifteenth centuryhas been overflowed.• Account of the Erection of the Bell Rock Ligfatfaoose, p. 163.t Ed. Phiil. Joum^ vol. iil, p. 54, 1820.X Qtiaiicily Journal of Scuoce, &c^ No. Xii. new wriei^ Maicb, 1630.Encroachments OF THE Sea ONBoni Coast of England. — If we now proceed to the Englishcoast, we find records of numerous lands having been destroyedin Northumberland, as those near Marlborough andHoly Island, and at Tynemouth Castle, which pow overhangsthe sea, although formerly separated from it by a strip of land.At Hartlepool, and several other parts of the coast of Durhamcomposed of magnesian limestone, the sea has made considerableinroads. Almost the whole coast of Yorkshire, from the mouthof the Tees to that of the Humber, is in a state of gradual dilapidation.That part of the difis which consists of lias, the ooliteseries, and chalk, decays slowly. They present abrupt andnaked precipices, often three hundred feet in height ; and it isonly at a few points that the grassy covering of the slopingtalus marks a temporary relaxation of the erosive action ofthe sea. The chalk cliflb are washed into caves in the projectingheadland of Flamborough, where they are decomposed bythe salt vapours, and slowly crumble away. But the waste ismost rapid between that promontory and Spurn Point, or thscoast of Holiness, as it is called. This tract consists chieflyof beds of clay, gravel, sand, and chalk rubble. The irregularintermixture of the argillaceous beds causes many springsto be thrown out, and this facilitates the undermining process,the waves beating against them, and a strong current settingchiefly from the north. The wasteful action is very conspicuousat Darlington Height, the loftiest point in HoldernoBs*where the beacon stands on a cliffs one hundred and forty-sixfeet above high water, the whole being composed of clay, withpebbles scattered through it *•In the old maps of Yorkshire, we find spots, now sandbanksin the sea, marked as the ancient sites of the towns andvillages of Auburn, Khartoum, and Hyde. *< Of Hyde,^says Pennant, ** only the tradition is left ; and near the villageof Horse, a street called Horse Beck has long .sincebeen swallowed "f." Hawthorne and its church have also beenin great part destroyed, and the village of Kilns ; but theseplaces are now removed farther inland. The rate of encroachmentat Hawthorne, at present, is about four yards a year %^• PhilUps'g Geology of Yorkihin, p. 61.t Arctic Zoology, ?ol. i., p. 10, Introduction.t F«r«UfiaibnMtionlMiiadMUtolfr.Pliittip%Qfl«ffk.THB EAST COAST OF BNOLAITD. 267Not unreasonable fears lure entertained that at some futuretime the Spurn Point will become an island, and that the ocean,entering into the estuary of the Humber, will cause great devastation*, Pennant, after speaking of 'the silting up of someancient ports in that estuary, observes, '* But, in return, the seahas made most ample reprisals; the site, and even the verynames of several places, once towns of note upon the Humber,are now only recorded in history ; and Ravensper was at onetime a rigid to Hull (Maddox, Ant. Each. i., 48SS), and a portso very considerable in 1882, that Edward Balliol and the confederatedEnglish barons sailed from hence to invade Scotland;and Henry IV., in 1S99, made choice of this port to land at,to effect the deposal of Richard II., yet the whole of it haslong Once been devoured by the merciless ocean : extensivesands, dry at low water, are to be seen in their stead f."Pennant describes Spurn Head as a promontory in the formof a siecle, and says the land, for some miles to the north,was *^ perpetually preyed on by the fury of the German Sea,which devours whole acres at a time, and exposes on the shoresconsiderable quantities of beautiful amber ^.^According to Hermann, a strip of land, with several villages,was carried away near the mouth of the Humber in 1475.The maritime district of Lincolnshire consists chiefly of landswhich lie below the level of the sea, being protected by embankments.Great parts of this fenny tract were, at some unknownperiod, a woody country, but were afterwards inundated, andare now again recovered from the sea* Some of the fens wereembanked and drained by the Romans ; but after their departurethe sea returned, and large tracts were covered with bedsof silt containing marine shells, now again converted into productivelands. Many dreadful catastrophes are recorded byincursions of the sea, whereby several parties have been atdifferent times overwhelmed.We come next to the cliffs of Norfolk and Suffolk, wherethe decay is in general incessant and rapid.* At Huntington,cm the north, the undermining of the lower arenaceous beds atthe foot of the cliff causes masses of red and white chalk to beprecipitated from above. Between Huntington and Wey-• FhOlips'i Geology of Yorkshire p. GO.f Act Sool., vol L, i^ IS, Ititiodiielkn. | Had.268 ENCROACHMENTS OF THE SEA ONbourne, low hills, or dunes, of blown sand, are formed alongthe shore, from fifty to sixty feet high. They are composedof dry sand, bound in a compact mass by the long creepingroots of the plant called Marian (Arundo arenaria). Such isthe present set of the tides, that the harbours of Clay, swells,and other places, are securely defended by these barriers;affording a clear proof that it is not the strength of the materialat particular points that determines whether the sea shallbe progressive or stationary, but the general 'contour of thecoast. The waves constantly undermine the low chalk cliffs,covered with sand and clay, between Weyboume and Birmingham,a certain portion of them being annually removed.At the latter town I ascertained, in 18S9, some facts whichthrow light on the rate at which the sea gains upon the landiswas computed, when the present inn was built, in 1805,that it would require seventy years for the sea to reach thespot ; the mean loss of land being calculated, from previousobservations, to be somewhat less than one yard annually.The distance between the house and the sea was fifty yards ;but no allowance was made for the slope of the ground beingfrom the sea, in consequence of which, the waste was naturallyaccelerated every year, as the cliff grew lower, there beingat each succeeding period less matter to remove when portionsof equal area fell down. Between the years 1824 and 18S9,no less than seventeen yards were swept away, and only a smallgarden was then left between the building and the sea. Thereis now a depth of twenty feet (sufficient to float a frigate) atonepoint in the harbour of that port, where, only forty-eightyears ago, there stood a cliff fifty feet high, with houses uponit ! If once in half a century an equal amount of change wereproduced at once by the momentary shock of an earthquake,history would be filled with records of such wonderful revolutionsof the earth's surface, but, if the conversion of high landinto deep sea be gradual, it excites only local attention. Theflag-staff of the Preventive Service station, on the south sideof this harbour, has, within the last fifteen years, been thriceremoved inland, in consequence of the advance of the sea.Farther to the south we find cliffs, composed, like those diHoliness before mentioned, of alternating strata of blue clay,gravel, loam, and fine sand. Although they sometimes exceedTHE EAST COAST OF ENGLAND, 269two hundred feet in height, the havoc made on the coast is mostformidable. The whole site of ancient Cromer now formspart of the German Ocean, the inhabitants having graduallyretreated inland to their present situation, from whence the seastill threatens to dislodge them. In the winter of 1825, afallen mass was precipitated from near the lighthouse, whichcovered twelve acres, extending far into the sea, the cliffs beingtwo hundred and fifty feet in height*. The undermining bysprings has sometimes caused large portions of the upper part ofthe cliffs, with houses still standing upon them, to give way, sothat it is impossible, by erecting breakwaters at the base of thecliffs, permanently to ward off the danger. On the same coast,the ancient villages of Hidden, Wimpwell, and Eccles, havedisappeared ; several manors and large portions of neighbouringparishes having, piece after piece, been swallowed up ; norhas there been any intermission, from time immemorial, in theravages of the sea along a line of coast twenty miles in length,in which these places stood f . Hills of blown sand, betweenEccles and Pinkerton, have barred up and excluded the tidefor many hundred years fi*om the mouths of several smallestuaries ; but there are records of nine breaches, from twentyto one hundred and twenty yards wide, having been madethrough these, whereby immense damage was done to thelow grounds in the interior. A few miles south of Hap-pittsburgh,also, are hills of blown sand, which extend to Yarmouth; and these are supposed to protect the coast, but in facttheir formation proves that a temporary respite of the incursionsof the sea on this part is permitted by the present set ofthe tides and currents. Were it otherwise, the land, as wehave seen, would give way, though made of solid rock.At Yarmouth, the sea has not advanced upon the sands inthe slightest degree since the reign of Elizabeth. In the time ofthe Saxons, a great estuary extended as far as Norwich, whichdty is represented, even in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,as ** stated on the banks of an arm of the sea." Thesands whereon Yarmouth is built first became firm and habitableground about the year 1008, from which time a line ofdunes has gradually increased in height and breadth, stretching• Taylor's Geology of Bait Norfolk, p. 32. t Ibid.270 SILTING UP OF ESTUARIES — SUBMARINE FORESTS.across the whole entrance of the ancient estuary, and obstructingthe ingress of the tides so completely, that they are onlyadmitted by the narrow passage which the river keeps open,and which has gradually shifted several miles to the south.The tides at the river's mouth only rise, at present, to theheight of three or four feet. By the exclusion dT the sea, thousandsof acres in the interior have become cultivated lands ; and,exclusive of smaller pools, upwards of sixty fresh water lakeshave been formed, varying in depth from fifteen to thirty feet,and in extent from one acre to twelve hundred*. The Yare,and other rivers, frequently communicate with these sheets ofwater ; and thus they are liable to be filled up gradually withlacustrine and fluviatile deposits, and to be converted intoland covered with forests. When the sea at length returns(for as the whole coast gives way, this must inevitably happensooner or later), these tracts will be again submerged, and submarineforests may then be found, as along the margins of manyestuaries. We may easily conceive that such natural embankmentsas those thrown by the waves, and subsequently raisedby winds, across the entrance of this river, may so shut out thetide, that inland places may become dry which, on the breachingof the barrier, might again be permanently overflowedeven at low water ; for the tides are now so depressed, evenoutside the barrier, that the river is almost in the condition ofone which enters an inland sea. Were high tides to recur, thefresh-water would be pounded back during the flow, and wouldperhaps not entirely escape during the ebb. It has beenobserved, by Dr, Fleming, that the roots of the trees in severalsubmarine forests in Scotland are in lacustrine silt. Thestumps of the trees evidently occupy the position in whichthey formerly grew, and are sometimes from eight to ten feetbelow high water mark. The horizontality of the strata andother circumstances, preclude the supposition of a slide, andthe countries in question have been from time immemorial finefrom violent earthquakes, which might have produced subsidence.He has, therefore, attributed the depression, withmuch probability, to the drainage of peaty soil on the removal^f a seaward barrier. Suppose a lake (like one of those in the• Ttybr'iOeoIogyofSitttirorfblkyp.lO.LOSS OF LAND ON THE SUFFOLK COAST. 271▼aUej of the Yare,) to become a marsh, and a stratum ofvegetable matter to be formed on the surface, of sufficient densityto support trees. Let the outlet of the marsh be elevateda few feet only above the rise of the tide. All the strata belongthe level of the outlet would be kept constantly wet or in asemi fluid state, but if the tides rise in the estuary, and the seaencroaches, portions of the gained lands are swept away, andthe extremities of the alluvial and peaty strata, whereon theforest grew, are exposed to the sea, and at every ebb tide leftdry to a depth equal to the increased fall of the tide. Muchwater, formerly prevented from escaping by the altitude of theoutlet, now oozes out from the moist beds, — the strata collapseand the surface of the morass instead of remaining at its originalheight, sinks below the level of the sea *.Yarmouth does not project beyond the general line of coastwhich has been rounded off by the predominating current fromthe north-west. It must not be imagined, therefore, that theacquisition of new land fit for cultivation in Norfolk and Suffolkindicates any permanent growth of the eastern limits fourisland, to compensate its reiterated losses. No delta canform on such a shore.The cliffs of Suffolk, to which we next proceed, are somewhatless elevated than those of Norfolk, but composed ofsimilar accumulations of alternating day, sand, and gravel.From Gorleston in Suffolk, to within a few miles north ofLowestoff, the cliffs are slowly undermined. Near the last*mentioned town, there is an inland cliff about sixty feet high,the talus being covered with turf and heath, between whichand the sea is a low, flat tract of sand, called the Ness, whichgains slowly on the sea. It does not seem difficult to accountfor the retreat of the sea at this point from its ancient limits,the base of the inland cliff. About a mile off Lowestoff liesthe Holm Sand, the highest part of which is dry at low water*The current in the intervening passage, called Lowestoff Roads,18 a back-water, wherein the tide, instead of obeying the generalrule along this coast, runs nine hours towards the north, andonly three towards the south. Here, therefore, we have anSee two paper on Submarine Forest by the Rev. Dr. Fleming, in the Trans.Roy. Soc £d^ t61. ix p. 419, and Quarterly Joum. of Sci No. 13, new series,March, 1830.272 LOSS OF LAND ON THE SUFFOLK COAST.eddy and the Holm Sand is a bank caused by the meeting ofcurrents where, as usual, sediment subsides. The channelcalled Lowestoff Roads is about a mile broad, and the depthvaries from twenty to fifty-nine feet at low water. On oneside the current has hollowed out of the Holm Sand a deepcurve, called the Hook, and on the other side precisely opposite,is the projecting point of the Ness *. As the point andbends of a river correspond to each other, sand-bars beingthrown up at each point, and the greatest depth being wherethe river is wearing into the bend, so we find here a shoalincreasing at the Ness, and deep water preserved in the Hook.We cannot doubt that, at a modem period in the history of thiscoast, the high cliffs on which Lowestoft stands, were once continuousacross the space where the roadstead now is, and wherewe have stated the present depth to be fifty-nine feet at lowwater.By the mean of thirty-eight observations, it has beenfound that the difference of high and low tide at Lowestoffis only five feet eight inches f — a remarkably slight oscillationfor our eastern coast, and which naturally suggests the inquirywhether, at other points where there arc inland diffs the riseof the tides is below their average level.The sea undermines the high cliffs a few miles north ofLowestoff, near Gorton ; as also two miles south of the sametown, at Pakefield, a village which has been in part swept awayduring the present century. From thence to Dunwich thedestruction is constant. At the distance of two hundred andfifty yards from the wasting cliff at Pakefield, the sea is sixteenfeet deep at low water, and in the roadstead beyond, twenty-fourfeet. Of the gradual destruction of Dunwich, once themost considerable sea-port on this coast, we have manyauthentic records. Gardner, in his History of that borough,published in 1754, shows, by reference to documents beginningwith Doomsday Book, that the cliffs at Dunwich, Southward,Eastern, and Pakefield, have been always subject to wearaway. At Dunwich, in particular, two tracts of land whichhad been taxed in the eleventh century, in the time of KingSee Plan of proposed Canal at Lowestoff, by Cubits and Taylor, 1826.t These observations were made by Mr. R. C. Taylor.DESTRUCTION OP DUNWtCll dV THE SEA. 1^73£edward the Confessor, are mentioned, in the Conqueror's survey,made but a tew years afterwards, as having been devouredby the sea. The losses, at a subsequent period, of a monasterysat another of several churches — afterwards of the old portsof four hundred houses at once — of the church of St.Leonard, the high road, town-hall, gaol, and many other buildings,are mentioned, with the dates when they perished. Itis stated that, in the sixteenth century, not one quarter of thetown was left standing ; yet the inhabitants retreating inland,the name was preserved, as has been the case with many otherports when their ancient site has been blotted out. Thereis, however, a church, of considerable antiquity still standing,the last of twelve mentioned in some records. In 1740,the laying open of the churchyard of St. Nicholas and St.Francis, in the sea cliffs, is well described by Gardner, withthe coffins and skeletons exposed to view, — some lying on thebeach and rockedIn cradle of the nide imperious surge.Of these cemeteries, no remains can now be seen. Ray alsosays, ^* that ancient writings make mention of a wood a mileand a half to the east of Dunwich, the site of which must atpresent be so far within the sea *.^ This city, once so flourishingand populous, is now a small village, with about twentyhouses and one hundred inhabitants.There is an old tradition, ** that the tailors sat in theirshops at Dunwich, and saw the ships in Yarmouth Bay ;^ butwhen we consider how far the coast at Lowestoff Ness projectsbetween these places, we cannot give credit to the tale, which,nevertheless, proves how much the inroads of the sea in timesof old prompted men of lively imagination to indulge a tastefor the marvellous.Gardner's description of the cemeteries laid open by thewaves reminds us of the scene which has been so well depictedby Bewick t, and of which numerous points on our coastmight have suggested the idea. On the verge of a clifi^^ whichthe sea has undermined, are represented the unshaken towerand western end of an abbey. The eastern aisle is gone,Consequences of the Deluge, Phys. TheoL Discourses.t History of British Birds, vol ii, p. 220, £d. 1821.Vol. I. T274 Encroachments OV TBB 6BA ONaad the pisan of die cloister are soon to follow. The waterhave almost isolated the promontory, and invaded the cemeterywhere they have made sprat with the mortal rdics, and thrownup a akuU upon the beach. In the foreground is seen abroken tombstone, erected, as its I^end tells, ^< to perpehi^the meoKNry^ of one whose name is obliterated, as is thai ofthe county for which he was ^< Custos Rotulorum." A cormorantis perched on the monument defiling it, as if to remindsome moralise like Hamlet of *< the base uses'* to whichthings sacred may be turned. Had this excellent artist desiredto satirize certain popular theories of geology, he mighthave inscribed the stone to the memory of some philoec^erwho taught *^ the permanency of existing continents* — ** theera of repose** — '* the impotence int modem causes."South of Dunwich are two cliffs, called Great and LittleCat Cliff. That which bears the name of Great, has becomethe smallest of the two, and is only fifteen feet high, the moreelevated portion of the hill having been carried away; onthe other hand, the Lesser Cat Cliff has gained in importance,for the sea has here been cutting deeper into a hillwhich slopes towards it. But at no distant period, theancient names will again become appropriate, for at GreatCat Cliff, the base of another hill will soon be reached, andat Little Cat Cliff, the sea will, at about the same time, arriveat a valley.The incursions of the sea at Marlborough were formerlyvery destructive, and this borough is known to have been oncesituated a quarter of a mile east of the present shore. Theinhabitants continued to build farther inland, till they arrivedat the extremity of their property, and then the town decayedgreatly, but two sand-banks, thrown up at a short distance, nowafford a temporary safeguard to the coast. Between thesebanks and the present shore, where the current now flows, thesea is twenty*four feet deep on the spot where the town, formerlystood. Continuing our survey of the Suffolk coast to the souciward, we find that the cliffs of Bawds and' Felixtow arefoundering slowly, and that the point on which VanguardFort is built suffers gradual decay. It appears that, withinthe memory of persons now living, the Orwell mer continuedits course in a more direct line to the sea, and entered to theTHB EAST COAST OF BN^LANB, 279north Instead of the south of the low bank on which the fortlust mentioned is built.Harwich ia Essex stands on an isthmus, which will probablybecome an island in little more than half a century ( forthe sea will then have made a breach near Power PowerCourt, should it continue to advance as rapidly as it has doneduring the last fifty years. Within ten years, there was aconsiderable space between the battery at Harwich, builttwenty-three years ago, ind the sea ; part of the fortificationbas already been swept away, and the rest overhangs thewater.At Walton Name, in the same county, the difis, composedof london clay, capped by the shelly sands of the crag, reachthe height of about one hundred feet, and are annually underminedby the waves. The old churchyard of Walton has beenwashed away, and the cliffs to the south are continually disappearing.On the coast bounding the estuary of the Thames, there arenumerous examples both of the gain and loss of land. TheIsle of Stepped, which is now about six miles long by four inbreadth, is composed of London clay. The cliffs on thenorth, which are from sixty to eighty feet high, decay rapidly,fifty acres having been lost within the last twenty years. Thechurch at Minster, now near the coast, is said to have beenin the middle of the island fifty years ago ; and it is computedthat, at the present rate of destruction, the whole isle will beannihilated in about another half century *, On the coast to theeast of Sheppey stands the Church of Recover, upon a sandydiff about twenty feet high. In the reign of Henry VIII. iti^ said to have been nearly a mile distant from the sea. In the<* Gentleman's Magazine," there is a view of it about the middleof the last century, which still represents a considerablewgmce M$ intervening between the north wall of the churchyardsaid the diff. About twenty years ago, the waves came withinone hundred and fifty feet of the boundary of the churchyard,half of which has since been washed away. The church is nowdismantled (1829), and is in great danger; several housesin a field immediately adjoining having been washed away.For this infgwnstiso I am ladilitsd to W* QnmU* ftKk>T2276 GOODWIN 8ANDS.-^C0AST OF KENT.In the Isle of Thanet, Bedlam Farm, belonging to the hospitalof that name, has lost eight acres in the last twenty years,the land being chalk from forty to fifty feet above the level ofthe sea. It has been computed, that the average waste of thecliff between the North Foreland and the Receivers, a distanceof about eleven miles, is not less than two feet per annum.The chalk cliffs on the south of Thanet, between Ramsgateand Powell Bay, have, on an average, lost three feet perannum for the ten last years. The Goodwin Sands lie oppositethis part of the Kentish coast. They are about ten milesin length, and are in some parts three, and in others, sevenmiles distant from the shore, and, for a certain space, are laidbare at low water. When the erection of a lighthouse on thesesands was in contemplation by the Trinity Board, twelve yearssince, it was found, by brings, that the bank consisted of fifteenfeet of sand, resting on blue clay. An obscure traditionhas come down to us, that the estates of Earl Goodwin weresituated here, and some have conjectured that they were overwhelmedby the flood mentioned in the Saxon Chronicle, subanno 1099. The last remains of an island, consisting, likeSheppey, of clay, may, perhaps, have been carried away aboutthat time*In the county of Kent, there are other records of waste, atDeal; and at Dover, Shakspeare's Cliff, composed entirelyof chalk, has suffered greatly, and continually diminishes inheight, the slope of the hill being towards the land. Abouttwenty years ago, there was an immense land-slip from thiscliff, by which Dover was shaken as if by an earthquake.In proceeding from the northern parts of the German Oceantowards the Straits of Dover, the water becomes graduallymore shallow, so that in the distance of about two hundredleagues, we pass from a depth of one hundred and twenty, tothat of fifty-eight, thirty-eight, twenty-four, and eighteenfathoms. In the same manner, the English Channel deepensprogressively from Dover to its entrance, formed by the LandsEnd of England, and the Isle of Ushant on the coast of France ;so that the strait between Dover and Calais may be said toform a point of partition between two great inclined planes,forming the bottom of these seas*.• SttTHafoa oa Lit Bed of the Gezmaa Oceaii.-»£d. Fail Joum^ No. V.| p. 45.FORMATION OF THS STRAITS OF DOVER. 277Whether England was formerly united with France hasoften been a favourite subject of speculation ; and in 1768 asociety at Amiens proposed this as the subject of a prize essaywhich was gained by the celebrated Desmarest, then a youngman. He founded his principal arguments on the identity ofcomposition of the gifts on the opposite sides of the Channel,on a submarine chain extending from Bologna to Folkestone,only fourteen feet under low water, and on the identity of thenoxious animals in England and France, which could not haveswam across the straits, and would never have been introducedby man. He also attributed the rupture of the isthmus tothe preponderating violence of the current from the north *.It will hardly be disputed that the ocean might have effected abreach through the land which, in all probability, once unitedour country to the continent, in the same manner as it nowgradually forces a passage through rocks of the same mineralcomposition, and often many hundred feet high, upon ourcoast. Although the time required for such an operationwas probably very great, yet we cannot estimate it byreference to the present rate of waste on both sides of theChannel. For when, in the thirteenth century, the sea burstthrough the isthmus of Staveren, which formerly unitedFriesland with North Holland, it opened in about one hundredyears a strait more than half as wide as that which dividesEngland from France, after which the dimensions of the newchannel reined almost stationary. The greatest depth ofthe straits between Dover and Calais is twenty-nine fathoms,which only exceeds, by one fathom, the greatest depth of theMississippi at New Orleans. If the moving column of water inthe great American river, which, as we before stated, does notflow rapidly, can maintain an open passage to that depth inits alluvial accumulations, still more might a channel of thesame magnitude be excavated by the resistless force of thetides and currents of " the ocean streamsAt Folkestone, the sea eats away the chalk and subjacentstrata. About the year 1716, there was a remarkable sinkingCoTier, filoge de Desmarest278 SNdROACflMlENt« 6# Tutti MA dHdf a tract of lund near the sea, so that bouses becaiHtf Visibleat points near the shore, from whence they could not be seenpreviously. In the description ot this subsidence in the PhilosophicalTransactions, it is said, ^' that the land consisted offasolid stony mass (chalk), resting on wet clay (guilt), so thatit slid forwards towards the sea, just as a ship is launched onallowed planks' It is also stated that, within the memory efpersons then living, the cliff there had been washed away to theextent of ten rods *• Encroachments of the sea at Hythe arealso on record ; but between this point and Rye there has beena gain of land, within the times of history ; the rich level tractcalled Romney Marsh, about ten miles in width and five inbreadth, consisting of silt, having received great accession. Ithas been necessary, however, to protect it, from the earliestperiods, by a wall from the sea. These additions of land areexactly opposite that part of the English Channel where theconflicting tides meet ; for as those from the north are the moatpowerful, they do not neutralize each others force till they arriveAt this distance from the straits. Rye, on the south of this tract,was once destroyed by the sea, butt is now two miles distantteam it. The neighbouring town of Winchester was destroyedin the reign of Edward I., the mouth of the Other stopped up,and the river diverted into another channel. In its old bed anancient vessel, apparently a Dutch merchantman, was recentlyfound. It was built entirely of oak, and much blackened f.SihUh Coiui of England, — To pass over some paints nelirHastings, where the cliffs have wasted at several periods, wearrive at the promontory of Beachy Head. Here a mass ofchalk, three hundred feet in length, and from seventy to eightyin breadth, fell, in the year 1 818, with a tremendous crash ; andssimilar slips have since been frequent {.About a mile to the west of the town of Newhaven theremains of an ancient entrenchment are seen, on the brow ofCastle Hill. This earth-work was evidently once of considerableextent, but the greater part has been cut away. Thecliffs which are undermined here, are high ; more than onehundred feet of chalk being covered by tertiary clay and sandPhil. TxBns., 1716. f Edit. Loom. of Sd No.ziz^ p. 56.X Webster, 6eol.lVa]i8.,ToLiiL, p. 192.Th SOtiTH Goat Of England. 279tota mxtj tb seventy feet in thickness. In a few centuries thelast vestiges of the plastic clay formation on the southernborders of the chalk of the South Downs on this coast will beannihilated, and future geologists will learn, from historicaldooumetitSf the ancient geographical boundaries of groups ofstrata then no more On the opposite side of the estuary ofthd Ouse on the east or Newhaven harbour, a bed of shingle,composed of chalk flints, derived from the wAste of the adjoiningcliffs, had accumulated at Seaford for several centuries.In the great storm of November, 1624, this bank was entirelyswept away, and the town of Seaford inundated. Anothergreat beach of shingle is now forming from fresh materials.The whole coast of Sussex has been incessantly encroachedupon by the sea from time immemorial ; and, although suddeninundations only, which overwhelmed fertile or inhabited tractsare noticed in history, the records attest an extraordinaryamount of loss. During a period of no more than eighty years,there tare notices of about twenty inroads in which tracts erf landof from twenty to/burAundred certain extent were overwhelmedat once; the value of the tithes being mentioned by Nicholas,in his Taxation Ecclesiastical *« In the rdgn of Elisabeth, thetown of Brighton was situated on that tract where the chain-piernow extends into the sea. In thd year 1666, twenty-twotenements had been destroyed Under the clitfl At that periodthere still remained under the cliff one hundred and thirteentenements, the whole of which were overwhelmed in 1708 and1705. No traces of the ancient town are now perceptible, yetthere is evidence that the sea has merely resumed its ancientposition at the base of the cliffs, the sit of the old town havingbeen merely a beach abandoned by the ocean for ages. Itwould be endless to allude to all the localities on the Sussexand Hampshire coasts, where the land has been destroyed ; butwe may point to the relation of the present shape and geologicalstructure of the Isle of Wight, as attesting that it owesits present outline to the continued action of the sea. Throughthe middle of the island a high ridge of chalk strata, in avertical position, runs in a direction east and west. This chalkforme the projecting promontory of Culver Cliff M the est.280 Encroachments OP THE SEA ONand of the Needles on the west ; while Sandown Bay on the oneside, and Compton Bay on the other have been hollowed out ofthe softer sands and argillaceous strata, which are inferior tothe chalk. The same phenomena are repeated in the Isle ofPurbeck, where the line of vertical chalk forms the projectingpromontory of Standfast Point ; and Swanage Bay marks thedeep excavation made by the waves in the softer strata, correspondingto those of Sandown Bay.The entrance of the Channel called the Solent is becomingbroader by the waste of the cliffs in Cromwell Bay ; it is crossedfor more than two-thirds of its width by the shingle bank ofHurst Castle, which is about seventy yards broad, and twelvefeet high, presenting an inclined plane to the west. Thissingular bar consists of a bed of rounded chalk flints, resting onan argillaceous base, always covered by the sea. The flintsand a few other pebbles, intermixed, are exclusively derivedfrom the waste of Hordwell, and other cliffs to the westward,where fresh-water marls, capped with a covering of chalk flintsfrom five to fifty feet thick, are rapidly undermined.In the great storm of November, 18S4, this bank of shinglewas moved bodily forwards for forty yards towards the northeast;and certain piles which served to mark the boundaries oftwo manors were found, after the storm, on the opposite sideof the bar. At the same time many acres of pasture laud werecovered by shingle, on the farm of Bestower, near Lymington.This bar probably marks the line where the opposing tidesmeet, for there is a second, or half-tide, of eighteen inches threehours after the regular tide in this channel.The cliffs between Hurst Shingle Bar and the mouth of theStour and Avon are undermined continually. Within thememory of persons now living, it has been necessary thrice toremove the coast-road farther inland. The tradition, therefore,is probably true, that the church of Hordwell was once in themiddle of that parish although now very near the sea. Thepromontory of Christ Church Head gives way slowly. It isthe only point between Lymington and Poole Harbour whereany hard stoiiy masses occur in the cliffs. Five layers of largeferruginous concretions, somewhat like the septaria of theLondon clay, have occasioned a resistance at this pointy towhich we may ascribe the existence of this headland. In theTHE SOUTH COAST OF ENGLAND. 281mean time, the waves have cut deeply into the soft sands andloam of Poole Bay ; and, after severe frosts, great land-slipstake place, which by degrees become enlarged into narrowravines, or chines, as they are called, with vertical sides. Oneof these chines, near Bosom, has been deepened twenty feetwithin a few years. At the head of each there is a spring, thewaters of which have been chiefly instrumental in producingthese narrow excavations, which are sometimes from one hundredto one hundred and fifty feet deep.The peninsulas of Purbeck and Portland are continuallywasting away. In the latter, the soft argillaceous substratum(Simmering clay) hastens the dilapidation of the superincumbentmass of limestone.In 1665, the cliffs adjoining the principal quarries gaveway to the extent of one hundred yards, and fell into the sea ;and in December, 17S4, a slide to the extent of one hundredand fifty yards occurred on the east side of the isle, by whichseveral skeletons, buried between slabs of stone, were discovered.But a much more memorable occurrence of this naturein 179s, is thus described in Hutchins's History of Dorsetshire.'^ Early in the morning the road was observed to crack : thiscontinued increasing, and before two o'clock the ground hadsunk several feet, and was in one continued motion, butattended with no other noise than what was occasioned by theseparation of the roots and brambles, and now and then a fallingrock. At night it seemed to stop a little, but soon movedagain ; and before morning, the ground, from the top of thecliff to the water-side, had sunk in some places fifty feet perpendicular.The extent of ground that moved was about amile and a quarter from north to south, and six hundred yardsfrom east to west."Portland is connected with the main land by the Chesil Bankaridge of shingle about seventeen miles in length, and, in mostplaces, nearly a quarter of a mile in breadth. The pebblesforming this immense barrier are chiefly of limestone ; but thereare many of quartz, jasper, chert, and other substances, allloosely thrown together. What is singular, they graduallydiminish in size, from the Portland end of the bank to thatwhich attaches to the main land. The formation of this barmay probably be ascribed, like that of Hurst Castle, to a meet*i2Bti Chest BANt.iilg of tides of to a great eddy, between the peninsula and theland. We have seen that slight obstructions in the course ofthe Ganges will cause, in the course of a man's life, island!tnany times larger than the whole of Portland and which, insome cases, consist of a column of earth more than one hundredfeet deep. In like manner, we may expect the slightest impedimentin the course of that tidal wave, which is sweepingaway annually large tracts of our coast, to give rise to banksof sand and shingle many miles in length, if the transportedmaterials be intercepted in their passage to those submarinereceptacles whither they are borne by the current. The gradualdiminution in the size of the gravely as we proceed eastward,might probably admit of explanation, if the velocity of the tideor eddy at different points was ascertained ; the rolled massesthrown up being largest where the motion of the water is mostviolent, or where they are deposited at th least distance fromthe rocks From which they were detached « The storm of 1884burst over this bar with great fury and the village of Chesilton,built upon the southern extremity ot the bank, was overwhelmed,with many of the inhabitants*! The fundamentalrocks whereon the shingle rests are found at the depth of a fewyards only below the level of the sea.At Lyme Regis, in Dorsetshire, the *^ Church Cliffs asthey are called, consisting of lias, about one hundred feetin height, have gradually fallen away, at the rate of one yarda year, since l800f . The cliffs of Devonshire and Cornwall,which are chiefly composed of hard rocks, decay leasrapidly. Near Penance, in Cornwall, there is a projectingtongue of land, called the ** Green," formed of granitic and,This same itorxn carried away part of the Breakwater set Fl y ui^ ttU ^ and hii|efSaiaea of rock wei Fled firoia the bottom of the weather aide, aad rolled fairyto the top of the pile. It was in the same month, and also during a spring tide,that a great flood is mentioned on the toasts of England, in time year 10^9.FknrettM of Worcester says '< On the tiiii^ d|iy ef lh» nones of Nov.^ 1099, ths seacans out tipoA the shore, and buried towns and men vciy many, and cano aadsheep innumerable." Also the Saaoii Chronicle, akeady cited, for the year 1099,'< Tliisyear eke on St. Martins-mass day, the 11th of Nombre, sprung up somundi oirtbs asia flood, and so mickle harm did, aft kto mail tended this H sfsrsiam did, sad thaw wai th* ylk day a ■«# moon."t This gfiima iMM amazed by Dr. Camattr, tf Imm^ la Ista aad aaumfHttfts tkAMtton nt eofetnirAtt. 283«ftoitt which mtnrt than thirty ack^ea of pasture land have beengradually ftwept away in the course of the last two or threecenturies*. It is also said that St. Michael's Mount, now aninsular rock, was formerly situated in a wood several miles fh>mthe aea; and its old Cornish names according to Carew, signifiesthe Hare Rocic in the Wood. Between the Mount andNewly, there is seen, under the sand, black vegetable mould,full of hazel nuts, and the branches, leaves, roots and trunkstt forest trees, all of indigenous species. This vegetable stratumhas been traced seaward as far as the ebb permits, andseems to indicate some ancient estuary on that shore.The oldest historians mention a celebrated tradition in Cornwallof the submersion of the Lionnesse, a country whichformerly stretched from the Lands End to the Scilly Islands.The tract, if it existed, must have been thirty miles in length,and perhaps ten in breadth. The land now remaining on eitherside is from two hundred to three hundred feet high ; the interveningsea about three hundred feet deep. Although there is noevidence for this romantic tale, it probably originated in somecatastrophe occasioned by former inroads of the Atlantic uponthis exposed coast f.Having now laid before the reader an ample body of proofsof the destructive operations of tides and currents on our easternand southern shores, it will be unnecessary to enter into detailsof changes on the western coast, for they present merely a repetitionof the same phenomena, and in general on an inferiorscale. On the borders of the estuary of the Severn, the flatsof Somersetshire and Gloucestershire have received enormousaccessions, while, on the other hand, submarine forests on thecoast of Lancashire indicate the overflowing of alluvial tracts.There are traditions in Pembrokeshire { and Cardiganshire § offar greater losses of territory than that which the Lionnesse taleof Cornwall pretends to commemorate. They are all important,as demonstrating that the earliest inhabitants were familiarwith the phenomenon of incursions of the sea.The French coast, particularly that of Brittany, where theBoase, Trans. Royal GeoL Soc. of Cornwall, vbL ii., p. 129. f ^^i P- ^30.I Camden, who cites Giraldus, also Ray, << On Uie Deluge*' Phys. IlieoL p. 228.§ Meyxick'i Cardigan.284 Loss OF LAND ON THE COAST OF FRANCE.tides rise to an extraordinary height, is the constant prey of diewares. In the ninth century many villages and woods are reportedto have been carried away the coast undergoing greatchange, whereby the hill of St. Michael was detached from themain land. The parish of Bourgneuf, and several others inthat neighbourhood, were overflowed in the year 1500. In17S5, during a great stones the ruins of Panel were seenuncovered in the sea *. A romantic tradition » moreover, hasdescended from the fabulous ages, of the destruction of thesouth-western part of Brittany, whence we may probably hsome great inroad of the sea at a remote period f.^Hoff;6«ichichte,&CyYoLl,p.49. f ML,^.4B.CHAPTER XVI.of TSdfli and Currents, tm Ui m t e J I roads of the sea upon the delta ofthe Rhine in Holland — Changes in the aims of the Rhine — estuary of theBies Boaeh, fanned in 1421 — formation of the Zuyder Zee, in the IstieenftuTf— Islands destroyed — Delia of the Sis converted into a ha)* —Satoaij of the DoUaxt fanned — encroachment of the sea on the coast ofSleswick— Inroads on the eastern shores of North America — tidal wavecalled the Bove— Influence of tides and currents on the mean level of seas—Action of currents on inland lakes and seas— Baltic — ^Cimbiian delugeStraits of Gibraltar — Under-current — Shores of Mediterranean— Rockstransported ou floating icebergs — Dunes of blown sand— Sands of theLibyan Desert — De Luc's natural chronometers.Thx line of British coast wondered ia the preceding chapteroffered no example of the conflict of two antagonist forces ; theentrance, on the one hand, of a river draining a large continent,and on the other, the flux and reflux of the tide, aided by astrong current setting across a rivers mouth. But when wepass over by the Straits of Dover to the continent, and proceednorthwards, we find an admirable illustration of such a contest,where the Rhine and the ocean are opposed to each other, eachdisputing the ground now occupied by Holland ; the one strivingto shape out an estuary, the other to form a delta. Therewas evidently a period when the river obtained the ascendency,but for the last two thousand years, during which man haswitnessed and actively participated in the struggle, the resulthas been in favour of the ocean, the area of the whole territoryhaving become more and more circumscribed ; natural andartificial barriers having given way, one after another, andmany hundred thousand human beings having perished inthe waves.The Rhine, after flowing from the Grison Alps, copiouslycharged with sediment, first purges itself in the Lake of Constance,where a large delta is formed : then, swelled by theAr and numerous other tributaries, it flows for more than sixhundred miles towards the north ; when, entering a low tract, itdivides into two arms, not for north of Clever— a point which286 INROADS OP THE SEA IN HOLLAND.must therefore be considered the head of its delta. The leftarm takes the name of the Waal, and the right, retaining thatof the Rhine, sends off another branch to the left, called theLeek, and still lower down, another named the Yssel. Afterthis last division, the smallest stream, still called the Rhine,passes by Utrecht, and loses itself in the sands before reachingthe German Sea, a few miles below Leyden. It is common, inall great deltas, that the principal channels of discharge shouldshift from time to time ; but in Hollaufl so may magnificentcanals have been constructed, and have devoted, from time totime, the course of the waters, that the geographical cbangcB inthis delta are endless ; and their history, since the Roman era,forms a complicated topic of antiquarian research. The presenthead of the delta is about forty geographical miles from thenearest part of the gulf called the Zuyder Zee, and more thantwice that distance from the general coast-line. The presenthead of the Nilotic delta is about eighty or ninety geographicalmiles from the sea; that of the Ganges, as we before stated, twohundred and twenty ; and that of the Missiasipitt about one bundred and eighty, reckoning from the point where the Atohafalayabranches off, to the extremity of the new tongue of land in theGulf of Mexico. But the comparative distance between tbcibeadaof deltas and the sea affords coarsely any data for estimatingthe relative magnitude of the alluvial tracts fanned by theirrespective rivers. For the ramifications dep^d on many varyingand temporary circumstances, and the area over which tbejextend does not hold any ooostaQt proportion to the volume ofwater in the river.We may consider the Rhine, at present, as having tbiw^mouths; the southernmost or left arm being the Waal; tl|oLeek, the largest of the three, bdng in the centre ; and tboYssel forming the right or northern arm* As th whole coastto the south, 9$ far as Calais, and on the north, to the entranceof the Baltic, has, from time immemorial, yielded to the forceof the waves, it is evident that the delta of the Rhine, if it hadadvanced, would have become extremely prominent, and evenif it had remained stationary, would long ere this have projected,like that strip of land already described, at (he moistof the Mississippi, beyond the rounded outline of the coast.But we findji on the 60|}ti3iry« that « Una of idan^ w]m)^ idfirtMINROADS OF T0B Ba IN HOLLAND. 287the east bave pot only lessened in size, but in number also,while grenl bars in the interior have been formed by incursionsof the sea. We shall confine ourselves to the enumeration ofsome of the leading facts, in confirmation of these views, andbegin with the southernmost part of the delta where the Waalenters, which is at present united with the Meuse in the samemanner as an arm of the Po, before mentioned, has becomeoon6uent with the Adige. The Meuse itself had once a commonembouchure with the Scheldt, by Slays and Ostburg, butthis channel was afterwards sanded up* as were many othersbetween Walcheren, Cleveland, and other isles at the mouthsof these rivers. The new accessions were almost all within thecoast-line, and were far more than counterbalanced by inroadsof the sea, whereby large tracts of land, and dunes of blownsand, together with towns and villages, were swept away betweenthe fourteenth and eighteenth centuries. Besides the destruc-^tion of parts of Walcheren, Cleveland, and populous districts inSadzand, the island Orient was in the year 1668 annihilated.One of the moat memorable eruptions occurred in 14S1,where the tide, pouring into the mouth of the united Meuseand Waal, burst through a dam in the district nailedBeigse-Veld, and overflowed twenty*two villages, formingthat large sheet of water called the Lies Bosch. No ives**t^ even of the ruins of these places could ever afterwards b#seen, but a small portion of the new bay became afterw^ssilted up, and formed an island. The Leek, or central arm ofthe Rhine, which enters the sea a little to the north of thisnew estuary, has, at present, a communication with it. Tbeisland Grunewert, which in the year 1888 existed not far fromHouten, has been entirely destroyed. Farther to the northis a long line of shore, covered with sand dunes where greatdepredations have been made from time to time. The churchof Scheveningen, not far from the Hague, was once in themiddle of the village, and now stands on the shore ; half theplace having been overwhelmed by the waves in 1670. Cat*wick, once far from the sea, is now upon the shore ; two of itsstreets having been overflowed, and land torn away to theextent of two hundred yards in 1719. It is only by aid ofembankments, that Patten, and several other places farthernorth, have been defended against the sea.288 FOUM^TtdN OP THE ZUYttfeA 2£e.We may next examine the still more important changedwhich have taken place on the coast opposite the right arm ofthe Rhine or the Yssel, where the ocean has burst through alarge isthmus, and entered the inland lake Flevo, which, inancient times, was, according to Pompous Mela, formed by theoverflowing of the Rhine over certain low lands. It appears,that in the time of Tacitus, there were several lakes in the presentsite of the Zuyder Zee, between Friesland and Holland.The successive inroads by which these, and a great part of theadjoining territory, were transformed into a great gulf, beganabout the beginning of the thirteenth century, and were completedabout the end of the same. Acting gives the followingrelation of the occurrence, drawn from manuscript documents ofcontemporary inhabitants of the neighbouring provinces. Inthe year 1205, the island now called Wieringen, to the south ofthe Texel, was still a part of the main land, but during severalhigh floods, of which the dates are given, ending in December,1251, it was separated from the continent. By subsequentincursions, the sea consumed great parts of the rich and populousisthmus, a low tract which stretched on the north of LakeFlevo, between Staveren in Friesland, and Medemblick in Hoi*land, till at length a breach was completed about the year 1S82,and afterwards widened. Great destruction of land took placewhen the sea first broke in, and many towns were destroyed ;but there was afterwards a reaction to a certain extent, largetracts at first submerged having been gradually redeemedThe new straits south of Staveren are more than half thewidth of those of Dover, but are very shallow, the greatestdepth not exceeding two or three fathoms. The new bay is ofa somewhat circular form, and between thirty and forty milesin diameter. How much of this space may formerly have beenoccupied by Lake Flevo, is unknown.A series of isles, stretching from the Texel to the mouths ofthe Weser and Elbe, are evidently the last relics of a tractonce continuous. They have greatly diminished in sice,, andhave lost about a third of their number, since the time ofPliny*. While the delta of the Rhine has suffered so mate-somefew of them have extended their bonds, or become connected withothers by the ending up of chooses ; It ere tete, like Juiit, bftve generallyNEW ESTUARIES FORMED BY THE SEA. 289really from the action of tides and currents, it cannot besupposed that minor rivers should have been permitted toextend their deltas. It appears, that in the time of theRomans, there was an alluvial plain of great fertility, wherethe Ems entered the sea by three arms. This low countrystretched between Groningen and East Friesland, and sent outa peninsula to the north-east towards Emden. A flood, in1277, first destroyed part of the peninsula. Other inundationsfollowed at different periods throughout the fifteenth century.In 1507, a part only of Forum, a considerable town, remainedstanding; and in spite of the erection of dams, the remainderof that place, together with market-towns, villages, and monasteries,to the number of fifty, were finally overwhelmed. Thenew gulf, called the Dollars, although small in comparison tothe Zuyder Zee, occupied no less than six square miles at first;but part of this space was, in the course of the two followingcenturies, again redeemed from the sea. The small bay ofLeybucht, farther north, was formed in a similar manner inthe thirteenth century, and the bay of Harlbucht in the middleof the sixteenth. Both of these have since been partially reconvertedinto dry land. Another new estuary, called the Gulf ofJade, near the mouth of the Weser, scarcely inferior in size tothe Dollars, has been gradually hollowed out since the year1016, between which era and 1651 a space of about four squaremiles has been added to the sea. The rivulet which now entersthis inlet is very small ; but Wrens conjectures, that an arm ofthe Weser hed once an outlet in that direction.Farther north we find so many records of waste on the westerncoast of Pickwick, as to lead us to anticipate, that, at no distantperiod in the history of the physical geography of Europe,given way as much on the north towards the sea, as they have gained on thesouth, or land side. Ostcrdun, Borkun, and several others, have been continuallywasting away. Suisse is reduced to a sand-bank. Langcroog has been dividedinto three parts*, and Wangeroog cut in two, many buildings having been carriedaway. Pliny counted twenty-three islands between the Texel and Eider, whereasthere are now only sixteen, including Heligoland and Ncuwerk. — Hoff, vol. i., p.364. Heligoland at the mouth of the Elbe began in the year 800 to be muchconsumed by the waves. In the years 1300, 1500, and 1649, other parts wereswept away, till at last only a rock and some low ground remained. Since 1770,a current has cut a passage sufficiently deep to admit large ships through thisremaining portion, and has formed two islands. — Hoff, vol. i.^ p. 57.Vol I. U290 DESTRUCTION OF NOftTHSTRAND BY THE SEA.Jutland will become an island, and the ocean will obtain amore direct entrance into the Baltic.Northstrand, up to the year 1240, was, with the islandsSalt and For, so nearly connected with the main land as toappear a peninsula, and was called North Friesland) a highlycultivated and populous district It measured from nine toeleven geographical miles from north to south, and six to eightfrom east to west. In the above-mentioned year it was tornasunder from the continent, and in part overwhelmed. TheIsle of Northstrand, thus formed, was, towards the end of thesixteenth century , only four geographical miles in circumference,and was still celebrated for its cultivation and numerous population.After many losses, it still contained nine thousand inhabitants.At last, in the year 1634, on the evening of the11th of October, a flood passed over the whole island, wherebyone thousand three hundred houses, with many churches, werelost ; fifty thousand head of cattle perished, and above sixthousand men. Three small isles, one of them still calledNorthstrand, alone remained, which are now continuallywasting.A review of the ravages committed during the last two thousandyears on the French, Dutch, and Danish coasts, naturallyleads us to inquire how it happened that the Rhine was enabled,at some former period, to accumulate so large a delta. Wemight, perhaps, in reply to this question, repeat our formerobservation, that the set of tides and currents necessarily variesfrom time to time ; and that different coasts become, each in theirturn, exposed to their fury, and then again restored to a stateof quiescence. Islands and promontories, moreover, may havedisappeared, which once protected the present site of Holland;and that region may afterwards have been laid open, as theBaltic would be, if the ocean, by renewing its attacks, shouldfinally breach the isthmus by Sleswick. It may also be suggestedthat if, in former times, the Straits of Dover were closed,the Rhine must have entered at the bottom of a deep bay,on the one side of which was Great Britain, and on the otherthe coasts of Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, and France.The transporting power of the current might then haVe beenmuch inferior to that afterwards exerted, when the tide ranfreely through the channel. Pliny expressed his wonder thatCOAST 09 America UNDERMINED. 291the new lands at the mouths of the Tigris and Euphrates grewso rapidly, and '' that the fluviatile matter was not swept awayby the tide, which penetrated far above the tracts where greataccessions were made *." The remark proves that he had consideredthe different condition of rivers in inland seas, andthose discharging their waters into the ocean ; but he did notreflect, that at the bottom of a deep bay where there is nocurrent setting across the river's mouth, the ebbing and flowingof the waters cannot remove the sedimentary matter to a greatdistance.After so many authentic details respecting the destructionof the coast in parts of Europe best known, it will be unnecessaryto multiply examples of analogous changes in more distantregions of the world. It must not, however, be imagined thatour own seas form any exception to the general rule. Thus,for example, if we pass over to the Eastern coast of NorthAmerica, where the tides rise to a great elevation, we findmany facts attesting the incessant demolition of land. At CapeMay, for example, on the north side of Delaware Bay, in theUnited States, the encroachment of the sea was shown byobservations made consecutively for sixteen years, from 1804to 1820, to average above nine feet a years ; and at Sullivan'sIsland, which lies on the north side of the entrance of theharbour of Charleston in South Carolina, the sea carriedaway a quarter of a mile of land in three years, endingin 1786J.Of oceanic deltas in general, it may be said that, evenwhere they advance, a large portion of the sediment is carriedaway by the movements of the sea. In the case of the greatriver of Amazons, the effects of the tides are still sensibleat the Straits of Pauxis, five hundred miles from the sea afteran interval of several days spent in their passage up. Theponding back, therefore, of this great body of fresh-water, andthe resistance opposed by the spring-tides to its descent, causea rapid acceleration during the ebb, whereby the sediment is^'Nec ullft in parte plus aut celertus prorecere terns flnminibiis insects.Magic id minim est, sestu longS ultra id accident non 'repercussas." — Hist.Nat, Ub. vi., c. 27.f New Monthly Mat, toL n.| pt 69. { Roff, vol. i., p. 96.U2292 TIDAL WAVE CALLED THE BORE.carried far from the mouth of the river, and then borne by acurrent towards the north. Captain Sabine * found that thesea was discoloured by the waters of the Amazon, at the distanceof not less than three hundred miles from its mouth,where they were still running, with considerable rapidity, inadirection inclined to that of the equatorial current of theocean. The deposits derived from this source appear to haveformed a large portion of the maritime districts of Guiana,and are said to extend even to the mouths of the Orinoco,ten degrees of latitude farther north, where that river alsois pouring an annual tribute of earthy matter into the sea.Before we conclude our remarks on the action of the tides,we must not omit to mention the wave called '^ the Bore,"which is a sudden and abrupt influx of the tide into a river ornarrow strait. Those rivers are most subject to this wavewhich have the greatest embouchures in proportion to the sizeof their channels ; because, in that case, a larger proportion oftide is forced through a passage comparatively smaller. Forthis reason, the Bristol Channel is very subject to the Bore,where it is of almost daily occurrence, and at spring-tidesrushes up the estuary with extraordinary rapidity. The samephenomena is frequently witnessed in the principal branches ofthe Ganges, and in the Megna. '^ In the Hoogly, or Calcuttariver'' says Rennell, " the Bore commences at Hoogly Point,the place where the river first contracts itself, and is perceptibleabove Hoogly Town ; and so quick is its motion, that it hardlyemploys four hours in travelling from one to the other, thoughthe distance is near seventy miles. At Calcutta it sometimesoccasions an instantaneous rise of five feet ; and both here, andin every other part of its track, the boats, on its approach,immediately quit the shore, and make for safety to the middleof the river. In the channels, between the islands in thenu)Uth of the Megna, the height of the Bore is said to exceedtwelve feet ; and is so terrific in its appearance, and dangerousin Its consequences, that no boat will venture to pass at springtidef," These waves may sometimes cause inundations, underminecliffs, and still more frequently sweep away trees and• Acc<>uut of Experiments to determine the Figure of the Earth, &c., p. 446.f Renndl, Phil. Tims., 1781.RELATIVE LEVEL OF THE ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC. 293land animals from low shores, whereby they may be carrieddown, and ultimately imbedded in submarine deposits.There is another question, in regard to the effects of tidesand currents, not yet fully determined — how far they may causethe mean level of the ocean to vary at particular parts of thecoast. It has been supposed, that the waters of the Red Seamaintain a constant elevation of between four and five fathomsabove the neighbouring waters of the Mediterranean, at alltimes of the tide ; and that there is an equal, if not greaterdiversity, in the relative levels of the Atlantic and Pacific, onthe opposite sides of the isthmus of Panama, fit the levellingrecently carried across that isthmus by Mr. Lloyd, toascertain the relative height of the Pacific Ocean at Panama,and of the Atlantic at the mouth of the river Chagres, haveshown, that the difference of mean level between those oceansis not considerable. According to the result of this survey, onwhich great dependence may be placed *, the mean height ofthe Pacific is three feet and a half, or 3 . 52 above the Atlantic,if we assume the mean level of the sea to coincide with themean between the extremes of the elevation and depression ofthe tides. For between the extremes of elevation and depressionof the greatest tides in the Pacific, at Panama, there is adifference of S7.44 feet ; but the mean difference at the usualspring-tides is 21.22 feet : whereas at Chagres this differenceis only 1.16 feet, and is the same at all seasons of the year.The tides, in short, in the Caribbean Sea are scarcely perceptible,not exceeding those in some parts of the Mediterranean;whereas the rise is very high in the bay of Panama. Butastronomers are agreed, that, on mathematical principles, therise of the tidal wave above the mean level of a particular seamust be greater than the fall below it ; and although thedifference has been hitherto supposed insufficient to cause anappreciable error, it is, nevertheless, worthy of observation,that the error, such as it may be, would tend to reduce thedifference now inferred, from the observations of Mr. Lloyd,Mr. Lloyd received from General Bolivar a special commission to surveythe isthmus of Panama, with the view of ascertaining the most eligible line ofcommunication between the two seas. He was assisted by Capt. Lamarck, aSwedish officer of engineers ; and the result of their labours will appear in thePhilosophical Transactions.294 ACTION OF CURRENTS ON The SHORES OF THE BALTIC.to exist between the levels of the two oceans. It is scarcelynecessary to remark how much all points relating to the permanenceof the mean level of the sea must affect our reasoningon the phenomena of estuary deposits ; and it is to be hoped,that further experiments will be made to ascertain the amountof irregularity, if any existACTION OF CURRENTS IN INLAND LAKES AND SEAS.Coast of the Baltic. — In such large bodies of water as theNorth American lakes, the continuance of a strong wind in onedirection often causes the elevation of the water and its accumulationon the leeward side; and while the equilibrium isbeing restored, powerful currents are occasioned. By thismeans the finer sedimentary particles, as we before mentioned,are borne far out from the deltas, and argillaceous and calcareousmaris are formed far from the shores. In the Euxinealso, although free from tides, we learn from Pallas, that thereis a sufficiently strong current to undermine the cliffs in manyparts, and particularly in the Crimea. But the force of currentsis exerted in a much more powerful degree in seas likethe Mediterranean and the Baltic, where strong currents setin from the ocean, whether driven in during tempests or fromother more constant causes. The current which runs throughthe Cattegat, or channel of communication between the GermanOcean and the Baltic, not only commits dreadful devastationson the isles of the Danish Archipelago, but acts, though withless energy, on the coasts far in the interior, as, for example, inthe vicinity of Dantzic *. The continuance of north-westerlygales and storms in the Atlantic, during the height of thespring-tides, has often been attended with the most fatal disasterson the Danish coast, where, during the last ten centuries,we find authentic accounts of the wearing down of promontoriesthe deepening of gulfs, the conversion of peninsulas intoTlius,mthe year ISOO, near the village of Jershoft a great mass was projectedby a landslip into the sea. Held, a point of laud running out before Dantzic,was formerly much broader than at present ; and farther north, in Samland^woods and territories have been torn away by the sea. — Hoes voL i., p. 73, whocites Pisans.Cambrian DELUGE. 286islands, and the waste of isles ; while in several cases marshland,defended for centuries by dikes, has at last been overflowed,and thousands of the inhabitants whelmed in thewaves*.We have before enumerated the ravages of the ocean on theeastern shores of Sleswick ; and as we find memorials of a seriesof like catastrophes on the western coast of that peninsula, wecan scarcely doubt that a large opening will, at some futureperiod, connect the Baltic with the North Sea. Jutland wasthe Cambric Chersonese of the ancients, and was then evidentlythe theatre of similar calamities; for Flores says,Cimbri, Teutonic, atque Figuring, ab extremis Gallia profuse,cum terres forum inundated Oceanus, novas sedes totoorbe qu8Brebant"|-." Some havi^ wished to connect this " Cambriandeluge** with the bursting of the isthmus betweenEngland and France, and with other supposed convulsions ;but when we consider the annihilation of Heligoland andNorthstrand, and the other terrific inundations in Jutland andHolstein since the Christian era, wherein thousands haveperished, we need not resort to hypothetical agents to accountfor the historical relation. The wave which, in 1634, devastatedthe whole coast of Jutland, committed such havoc, thatwe must be cautious how we reject hastily the traditions oflike catastrophes on the coasts of Kent, Cornwall, Pembrokeshire,and Cardigan ; for, however sceptical we may be as tothe amount of territory destroyed, it is very possible thatformer inroads of the sea may have been greater on those shoresthan any witnessed in modem times.Alius the island Barsoe, on the coast of Sleswick, has lost year after yearan acre at a time. The island Allen suffers in like manner. The peninsulaZiogst was converted into an island in 1625. There is a tradition, that the isleof Rngen (which is composed of tertiary limestone) was originally torn by astorm from the main land of Pomerania ; and it is known, in later times, to haralost ground, as in the year 1625, when a tract of land was carried away. Someof tha islands which have wasted away consist of ancient alluvial accumulations,containing blocks of granite, which are also spread over the neighbouring mainland.The Marsh Islands are mere banks, like the lands formed of the ** warp "in the Humber, protected by dikes. Some of them, after having been inhabitedwith security for more than ten centuries, have been suddenly overwhelmed.In this manner in 1216, no less than ten thousand of the inhabitants of Eldersand Ditmarsch perished ; and on the 1 th of October, 1634, the islands andthe whole coast as far as Jutland suffered by a dreadful deluge.f Lib, iii, cap. 3.i296 CURRENT IN THE STRAITS OF GIBRALTAR.Straits of Gibraltar. — It is well known that a powerfulcurrent sets constantly from the Atlantic into the Mediterranean,and its influence extends along the whole southern bordersof that sea, and even to the shores of Asia Minor. CaptainSmyth found, during his survey that the central current ran constantlyat the rate of from three to six miles an hour eastwardinto the Mediterranean, the body of water being three milesand a half wide. But there are also two lateral currents— oneon the European, and one on the African side; each of themabout two miles and a half broad, and flowing at about thesame rate as the central stream. These lateral currents ebband flow with the tide, setting alternately into the Mediterraneanand into the Atlantic. The escape of the great body ofwater which is constantly flowing in, has usually been accountedfor by evaporation, which must be very rapid and copious inthe Mediterranean ; for the winds blowing from the shores ofAfrica are hot and dry, and geometrical experiments recentlymade in Malta and other places show that the mean quantityof moisture in the air investing the Mediterranean is equalonly to one half of that in the atmosphere of England. It is,however, objected that evaporation carries away only freshwater,and that the current is continually bringing in salt-water:why, then, do not the component parts of the waters of theMediterranean vary ? or, why do they remain apparently thesame as those of the ocean ? Some have imagined that theexcess of salt might be carried away by an under-currentrunning in a contrary direction to the superior; and thishypothesis appeared to receive confirmation from a late discoverythat the water taken up about fifty miles within the Straits,from a depth of six hundred and seventy fathoms, contained aquantity of salt four times greater than the water of the surface.Dr. Wollaston*, who analysed this water obtained byCaptain Smyth, truly inferred that an undec- current of suchdenser water, flowing outward, if of equal breadth and depthwith the current near the surface, would carry out as muchsalt below as is brought in above, although it moved with lessthan one-fourth part of the velocity, and would thus prevent aperpetual increase of saltness in the Mediterranean beyond that• On the Water of the Mediterranean, by W. H. Wollaston, Med., F.R.S.,Phil.Trans. 1829, part I., p. 29. .Precipitation OF SILT Dl THE Mediterranean. 297existing in the Atlantic. It vas also remarked by others,that the result would be the same if, the swiftness being equal,the inferior current had only a fourth of the vdume of thesuperior. At the same time there appeared reason to concludethat this great specific gravity was only acquired by water atimmense depths ; for two specimens of the water taken at thedistance of some hundred miles from the Straits, and at depthsof four hundred, and even four hundred and fifty fathoms, werefound by Dr. AVoUaston not to exceed in density that of manyordinary samples of seawater. Such being the case, we cannow prove that the vast amount of salt brought into the mediterraneandoes not pass out again by the Straits. For it appearsby Captain Smyth's soundings, which Dr. Wollaston had notseen, that between the Capes of Trafalgar and Spare, whichare twenty-two miles apart, and where the Straits are shallowest,the deepest part, which is on the side of Cape Spare, is onlytwo hundred and twenty fatkotns. It is therefore evident thatif water sinks in certain parts of the Mediterranean, in consequenceof the increase of its specific gravity, to greater depthsthan two hundred and twenty fathoms, it can never flow outagain into the Atlantic, since it must be stopped by the submarinebarrier which crosses the shallowest part of the Straitsof Gibraltar.What, then, becomes of the excess of salt? — for this is aninquiry of the highest geological interest. The Rhone, the Po,and many hundred minor streams and springs, pour annuallyinto the Mediterranean large quantities of carbonate of lime,together with iron, magnesia, silica, alumina, sulphur, andother mineral ingredients, in a state of chemical solution. Toexplain why the influx of this matter does not alter the compositionof this sea has never been thought to present a greatdifficulty ; for it is known that calcareous rocks arc forming inthe delta of the Rhone, in the Adriatic, on the coast of AsiaMinor, and in other localities. Precipitation is acknowledgedto be the means whereby the surplus mineral matter is disposedof, after the consumption of a certain portion in the secretionsof testacea and zoophytes. But some have imagined that,before muriate of soda can, in like manner, be precipitated, thewhole Mediterranean ought to become as much saturated witheast as the brine-springs of Cheshire, oc Lake Aral, or theLi29S Precipitation OP SALT IN THB UDRBKAAXBAlf.Dead Sea. There is, however, aa essential SKsteoce b e t n e wthese cases ; for the Mediterranean is not only incomparablygreater in extent than the two last-mentioned basins, but itsdepth is enormous. In the narrowest part <^ the Straitsof Gibraltar, where they are about nine miles broad, betweenthe Isle of Tariff and Akanzar Point, the depthvaries from one hundred and sbcty to five hundred fathoms ;but between Gibraltar and Ceuta, Captain Smyth sounded tothe extraordinary depth of nine hundred and fifty fiiihoms!where he found a gravelly bottom, with fragments of brokenshells. Saussure sounded to the depth of two thousandfeet, within a few yards of the shore, at Nice. What profundity,then, may we not expect some of the central abyssesof this sea to reach ! The evaporation being, as we beforestated, very rapid, the surface water becomes impregnatedwith a slight excess of salt ; and its specific gravity being thusincreased, it instantly falls to the bottom, while lighter waterrises to the top, or that introduced by rivers, and by the currentfrom the Atlantic, flows over it. But the heavier fluiddoes not merely fall to the bottom, but flows on till it readiestthe lowest part of one of those submarine beans into whichwe mist suppose the bottom of this inland sea to be divided.By the continuance of this process, additional supplies ofbrine are annually carried to deep repositories, until thelower strata of water are fully saturated, and precipitationtakes place — not in thin films, such as are said to cover thealluvial marshes along the western shores of the Euxine, norin minute layers, like those of the salt ^'^tangs^ of the Rhone,but on the grandest scale— continuous masses of pure rock*salt, extending, perhaps, for hundreds of miles in length, likethose in the mountains of Poland, Hungary Transylvania,and Spain*.As to the existence of an inferior current flowing westward, none of the experimentsmade in the late survey give any countenance whatever to this popularnotion ; and it seems most unnecessary to resort to it, not only because the expenditureof the Mediterranean, by evaporation, must be immense, but because it isnot yet proved that the two lateral currents, which conjointly exceed in breadththat of the centre, do not restore the equilibrium, if occasionally disturbed. Theyebb and flow with the tide, but they may carry more water to the west than to theest* The opinion, that in the middle of the Straits the water retired into tbtFLOATING ICEBERGS. 29ilThe Stride of Gibraltar are said to become gradually wider bythe wearing down of the cliffs on each side at many points ; andthe current sets along the coast of Africa so as to cause considerableinroads in various parts, particularly near Carthage. Nearthe Canopic mouth of the Nile, at Aboukir, the coast was greatlydevastated in the year 1784, when a small island was nearlyconsumed. By a series of similar operations, the old site of thecities of Nioopolis^Taposiris, Para, and Canopus have becomea sandbank*.floating Icebergs, — Marine currents are sometimes instrumentalin the transportation of rock and soil, by floating largemasses of ice to great distances from the shore. When glaciersin northern latitudes descend the valleys burdened with alluvialdebris, and arrive at the shore, they are frequently detached,and float ofl*. Scoresby-f counted five hundred icebergs in latitude69^ and 70° north, rising above the surface from the heightof one to two hundred feet, and measuring from a few hundredyards to a mile in circumference. Many of these containedstrata of earth and stones, or were loaded with beds of rock ofgreat thickness, of which the weight was conjectured to be fromfifty thousand to one hundred thousand tons. As the mss ofice below the level of the water is between seven and eighttimes greater than that above, these masses may sometimestake the ground in great numbers, in particular parts of the sea,and may, as they dissolve, deposit such masses of matter onparticular parts of the bottom of the deep, or on the shores ofsome isles, as may offer perplexing problems to future geologists.Some ice islands have been known to drift from Baffin'sAtlantic by a submarine counter-current, first originated in the following circumstance.H. Du r Aigle, commander of a privateer called the Phoenix, of Marseilles,gave chase to a Dutch merchant ship, near Ceuta Point, and came up with her in thmiddle of the gut, between Tariffs and Tangier, and there gave her one broadside,which directly sunk her. A few days after, the sunk ship, with her cargo of brandyand oil, arose on the shore near Tangier, which is at least four leagues to thewestward of the place where she sunk, and directly against the strength of theetnirai current. — Phil. Trans., 1724. It seems obvious that the ship in this casewas brought back by one of the iatcrai currents, not by an under current.Clarke's Travels in Europe, Asia, and Africa, vol. iiL, pp. 340 and 363, 4thedition. t Voyage in 1S22| p. 233.300 DRIFT SAND.Bay to the Azores, as we before stated, and from the South Poleto the immediate neighbourhood of the Cape of Good Hope.Sand Hills, — It frequently happens, where the sea is encroachingon a coast, that perpendicular cliffs of considerableheight, composed of loose sand, supply, as they crumble away,large quantities of fine sand, which, being in mid-air when detached,are carried by the winds to great distances, coveringthe land or barring up the mouths of estuaries. This is exemplifiedin Poole Bay, in Hampshire, and in many points of thecoast of Norfolk and Suffolk. But a violent wind will sometimesdrift the sand of a sea-beach, and carry it up with fragmentsof shells to great heights, as in the case of the sands ofBarry, at the northern side of the estuary of the Tay, wherehills of this origin attain the extraordinary height of from twohundred and fifty to three hundred feet. On the coast ofFrance and Holland long chains of these dunes have been 'formed in many parts, and often give rise to very importantgeological changes, by barring up the mouths of estuaries, andpreventing the free ingress of the tides, or free efflux ofriver water. The Bay of Inkhorn, in Yorkshire, has beenblocked up in this manner since the beginning of the seventeenthcentury, so that large vessels can no longer enter ; andwe have already mentioned changes of a similar kind at GreatYarmouth, in Norfolk. Chains of sand-hills have also accumulatedon the shores of the delta of the Nile, especiallyopposite the Lakes of Brulos and Mental, forming moundswhereby the waters of these lakes are retained*. By the alternateformation and destruction of such barriers, fresh-waterand marine deposits may sometimes be formed in succession onthe same spots, and afterwards be laid dry by the exclusion ofthe tides, and be again submerged when high tides break intothe estuary again. Many of the phenomena of submarineforests may, perhaps, admit of explanation, when the effectsof such barriers of sand have been more carefully studied.The loose sand often forms a firm mass when bound togetherby the roots of plants fitted for such a soil, particularly theArundo arenaria, and Elymus arenarius.• Rennell*8 Herodotus*DE LUC's NATURAL CHRONOMETERS. 301A considerable tract of cultivated land on the north coast ofCornwall has been inundated by drift-sand, forming hills severalhundred feet above the level of the sea and composed ofcomminuted marine shells. By the shifting of the sands, theruins of ancient buildings have been discovered ; and, in somecases where they have been bored to a great depth, distinctstrata, separated by a vegetable crust, are visible. In somelocalities, as at New Quay, large masses have become sufficientlyindurated to be used for architectural purposes. Theratification, which is still in progress, appears to be due tooxide of iron held in solution by the water which percolatesthe sand *. Terrestrial shells are found enclosed entire in thisrock.The moving sands of the African deserts have been drivenby the west winds over all the lands capable of tillage onthe western banks of the Nile, except such as are shelteredby mountains-(-. The ruins of ancient cities are buried underthese sands between the Temple of Jupiter Ammon andNubia. De Luc attempted to infer the recent origin of ourcontinents, from the fact that the sands of the desert haveonly arrived in modern times at the fertile plains of the Nile.This scourge, he said, would have afflicted Egypt for agesanterior to the times of history, if the continents had risen abovethe level of^the sea several hundred centuries before our era J.But the author proceeded in this, as in all his other chronologicalcomputations, on a multitude of gratuitous assumptions,not one of which he had the candour to state explicitly. Heought, in the first place, to have demonstrated that the wholecontinent of Africa was raised above the level of the sea at oneperiod ; for unless this point was established, the region fromwhence the sands began to move might have been the lastaddition made to Africa, and the commencement of the sand-floodmight have been long posterior to the formation of thegreater portion of that continent. That the different parts ofEurope were not all elevated at one time, is now generallyadmitted. De Luc should also have pointed out the depth ofBoase on the Submersion of port of iHe Mount's Bay, &c. Trans. Roy.Geol. Society of Cornwall, rol. ii, p. 140.f De Luc, Meicuxe de France, Sept. 1809. | Ibid.902 DK Lucas Natural CHRONOHETBB8.drift nd in Various parts of the great Libyan deserts, andhare shown whether any valleys of large dimensions had beenfilled up, — show long these arrested the progress of the sands,and how far the flood had upon the whole advanced since thelimes of history. If, in the absence of all these necessary elementsof the computation, the doctrines of this author, respecting*' natural chronometers," were extremely popular, and that;too, in an age when close reasoning and rigorous investigationwere applied to other branches of physical science, it onlyproves how strong were the prepossessions in regard to timewhich impeded the progress of geology.There is not one great question relating to the former changesof the earth and its inhabitants into which considerations oftime do not enter ; and so long as the public mind was violentlyprejudiced in regard to this important topic, men of superiortalent alone, who thought for themselves, and were not blindedby authority, could deduce any just conclusions from geologicalevidence. It oust not, therefore, to be matter eitherof surprise or discouragement to us, that at the commencementof the present century, when for three hundred yearsmuch labour had been devoted to these investigations, so fewsound and enlightened views had met with gent reception.CHAPTER XVII.Reproductive effects of Tides and Currents — Silting up of Estuaries does not compensatethe loss of land on the horrors of the ocean — Bed of the GennanOcean — Composition and extent of its sand-banks — Strata formed by currentson the southern and eastern shores of the Mediterranean — transportationby cents of the sediment of the Amazons Orinoco, and Ifisassippi*-*StratificaHon^-CoDcluding remarks.From the facts enumerated in the last diaper, it will appearthat on the borders of the ocean, currents co-operating withtides are most powerful instruments in the destruction andtransportation of rocks ; and as numerous tributaries dischargetheir alluvial burden into the channel of one great river, so wefind that many great rivers often deliver their earthy contentsto one marine current, to be borne by it to a distance, anddeposited in some deep receptacles of the ocean. The currentnot only receives this tribute of sedimentary matter from streamsdraining the land, but acts also itself on the coast, as does ariver (XI the cliffs which bound a valley. The course of currentson the British shores is ascertained to be as tortuous asthat of ordinary rivers. Sometimes they run between sandbankswhich consist of matter thrown down at certain pointswhere the velocity of the stream had been retarded ; but it veryfrequently happens, that as in a river one bank is made ofalluvial gravel, while the other is composed of some hard rockconstantly undermined, so the current, in its bends, strikes hereAnd there upon a coast which then forms one bank, while ashoal under water forms the other. If the coast be composedof solid materials, it yields slowly, or if of great height, itdoes not lose ground rapidly, since a large quantity of mattermust then be removed before the sea can penetrate to any distance.But the openings where rivers enter are generally thepoints of least resistance, and it is here, therefore, that thecx%an makes the widest and longest breaches.But a current alone cannot shape out and keep open an331 Reproductive EFFECTS OF TIDES AND CURRENTS.estuary, because it holds in suspension, like the river, duringcertain seasons of the year, a large quantity of sediment ; andwhen their waters, flowing in opposite directions, meet, thismatter subsides. For this reason, in inland seas, and evenon the borders of the ocean, where the rise of the tide happensto be slight, it is scarcely possible to prevent a harbourfrom silting up ; and it is often expedient to carry out ajetty to beyond the point where the marine current and theriver neutralise each other's force, for beyond this point a freechannel is maintained by the superior force of the current.The formation and keeping open of large estuaries are due tothe combined influence of tides and currents ; for when thetide rises, a large body of water suddenly enters the mouth ofthe river, where, becoming confined within narrower bounds,while its momentum is not destroyed, it is urged on, and, havingto pass through a contracted channel, rises and runs withincreased velocity, just as a swollen river, when it reaches thearch of a bridge scarcely large enough to give passage to itswaters, is precipitated in a cataract, while rushing through thearch. During the ascent of the tide, a stream of fresh wateris flowing down from the higher country, and is arrestedfor several hours ; and thus a large lake of brackish wateris accumulated, which, as soon as the ebb causes the sea tofail, is let loose, as on the removal of an artificial sluiceor dam. By the force of this retiring body of water, thealluvial sediment, both of the river and of the sea, is sweptaway, and transported to such a distance from the mouth ofthe estuary, that a small part only can return with the nexttide. In many estuaries, as in the Thames, for example, thetide requires about five hours to flow up, and about seven toflow down ; so that the preponderating force is always in thedirection which tends to keep open a deep and broad passage.But as it is evident that both the river and the tidal currentare ready to part with their sediment whenever their velocityis checked, there is naturally a tendency in all estuaries to siltup partially, since the causes of retardation are very numerous,and constantly change their position.The new lands acquired within the mouth of an estuary areonly a few feet above the mean level of the sea, whereas cliffsof great height are consumed every year. If, therefore, theReproductive EFFECTS OF TIDES AND CURRENTS, 305area of land annually abandoned by the sea were equal to thatinvaded by it, there would still be no compensation in kind.Many writers have declared that the gain on our eastern coast,since the earliest periods of history, has more than counterbalancedthe loss ; but they have been at no pains to calculate theamount of the latter, and have often forgotten that, while thenew acquisitions are manifest, there are rarely any natural monumentsto attest the former existence of what is now no more.They have also taken into their account those tracts, artificiallyrecovered, which are often of great agricultural importance, andmay remain secure, perhaps, for thousands of years, but whichare nevertheless exposed to be overflowed again by a small proportionof the force required to remove the high lands of ourshores. It will seem, at first sight, somewhat paradoxical, butit is nevertheless true, that the greater number of estuaries,although peculiarly exposed to the invasion of the sea, areusually contracting in size, even where the whole line ofcoast is giving way. But the fact is, that the inroads madeby the ocean upon estuaries, although extremely great, arecompleted during periods of comparatively short duration; andin the intervals between these visitations, the mouths of rivers,like other parts of the coast, usually enjoy a more or less perfectrespite. All the estuaries, taken together, constitute butasmall part of a great line of coast ; it is, therefore, most probable,that if our observations extend to a few centuries only,we shall not see any, and very rarely all, of this small part exposedto the fury of the ocean. The coast of Holland and Friesland,if studied for several consecutive centuries since the Romanera, would generally have led to the conclusion that the landwas encroaching fast upon the sea, and that the aggrandizementwithin the estuaries far more than compensated the losses onthe open coast. But when our retrospect embraces the wholeperiod, an opposite inference is drawn ; and we find that theZuyder Zee, the Bies Bosch, DoUart, and Yahde, are modemgulfs and bays, and that these points have been the principaltheatres of the retreat, instead of the advance, of the land. Ifwe possessed records of the changes on our coast for severalthousand years, they would probably present us with similarresults ; and although we have hitherto seen our estuaries, forthe most part, become partially converted into dry land, andVol. I. X906 BBFB09UCTITB ■PFBGTt OF Tides ANB CVBBBNTf.poetical of bold cliffs inferreiiing between the mouths of risenconfounded by the sea this has in^relj arisen from the accidentalset of the currents and tides during a brief period.The current which flows from the north-west and bearsagainst our eastern coasts transports as we have seen* materialsof various kinds. It undermines and sweeps away the granite,gneiss, trap rooks, and sandstone of Shetland, and removes thegravel and loam of the cliffs of Wilderness, Norfolk, and Suffolk,which are between fifty and two hundred feet in height, andwhich waste at the rate of from one to six yards annually Itbears away the strata of London-clay on the coast of Essexand Sheppey^^-oonsumes the chalk with its flints for manymiles continuously on the shores of Kent and Sussex — commitsannual ravages on the fresh-water beds, capped by a thickcovering of chalk flints, in Hampshire, and continually saps thefoundations of the Portland limestone. It receives besides,during the tiny months large supplies of pebbles, sand andmud, which numerous streams from the Grampianss, Cheviotand other chains, send down to the sea. To what regions, then,is all this matter consigned ? It is not retained in mechanicalsuspension by the waters of the sea, nor does it mix with themin a state of chemical solution, — it is deposited somewhere, yetcertainly not in the immediate neighbourhood of our shores ;for, in that case, there would soon be a cessation of the encroachmentof the sea, and large tracts of low land , like Romney Marsh,would everywhere encircle our island. As there is now a depthof water, exceeding thirty feet, in some spots where cities flourishedbut a few centuries ago, it is clear that the current notonly carries far away the materials of the wasted cliffs, but tearstip besides many of the regular strata at the bottom of the sea.The German Ocean is deepest on the Norwegian side, wherethe soundings give one hundred and ninety fathoms; butthe mean depth of the whole basin may be stated at onlyabout thirty^one fathoms*. The bed of this sea is encumberedin an extraordinary degree with accumulations of debris,especially in the middle or central parts. One of the greatcentral banks trends from the Frith of Forth, in a north-stevenson,on the Bed of the German Ocean, or North Sea.— £d. PhiL Joum.^FlfcLINO UP OF THB German OCEAN. 307fftoterlj direlstio^^ to a distance of one hundred and ten miles ;others run from Denmark and Jutland upwards of one hundredand five miles to the north-west ; while the greatest of al], theDogger Banks extends for upwards of three hundred and fifty-fourmiles from north to south. The whole superficies of theseenormous shoals is equal to about one-fifth of the whole area ofthe German Ocean, or to about tie-third of the whole extentei England and Scotland *. The average height of the banksmeasures, according to Mr. Stevenson, about seventy-eight feet;and, assuming that the mass is uniformly composed to this depthof the same drift matter, the debris would cover the whole ofGreat Britain to the depth of twenty-eight feet, supposing thesurface of the island to be a level plain. A great portion ofthere banks consists of fine and coarse siliceous sand, mixed withfragments of corals and shells ground down, the proportion ofthese calcareous matters being extremely greater . As we knownot to what distance our continents formerly extended, we cannotconjecture, from any data at present obtained, how muchof the space occupied by these sands was formerly covered withstrata, subsequently removed by the encroachments of the sea,or whether certain tracts were originally of great depth, andhave since been converted into shoals by matter drifted by currents.But as the sea is moved to and fro with every tide,portions of these loose sands must, from time to time, be carriedinto those deep parts of the North Sea where they are beyondthe reach of waves or currents.So great is the quantity of matter held in suspension by thetidal current on our shores, that the waters are in some placesartificially introduced into certain lands below the level of thesea ; and by repeating this operation, which is called *' warningsfor two or three years, considerable tracts have beenraised, in the estuary of the Humber, to the height of about sixfeet. Large quantities of coarse sand and pebbles are alsodrifted along at the bottom : and when such a current meetswith any deep depression in the bed of the ocean, it mustnecessarily fill it up ; just as a river, when it meets with a lakein its course, fills it gradually with sediment. But in the oneStevenson, on Uie Bed of the German Ocean, or North Sea. — £d. Phil. Journ.,Wo.V.,p.47; 1820. t I'^i^-X230B Reproductive EFFECTS OP TIDES AND CURRENTS.case, the sheet of water is converted into land, whereas, in theother, a shoal only will be raised, overflowed at high water, orat least by spring-tides. The only records which we at presentpossess of the gradual shallowing of seas are confined, as mightbe expected, to estuaries, havens, and certain channels of nogreat depth ; and to some inlAnd seas, as the Baltic, Adriaticand Arabian Gulf. It is only of late years that accurate surveysand soundings have afforded data of comparison in verydeep seas, of which future geologists will avail themselves.It appears extraordinary that in some tracts of the sea,adjoining our coast, where we know that currents are not onlysweeping along rocky masses, thrown down, from time to time,from the high cliffs, but scouring out also deep channels in theregular strata, there should exist fragile shells and tenderzoophytes in abundance, which live uninjured by these violentmovements. The ocean, however, is in this respect acounterpart of the land ; and as, on our continents, rivers mayundermine their banks, uproot trees, and roll along sand andgravel, while their waters are inhabited by testacea and fish,and their alluvial plains are adorned with rich vegetation andforests, so the sea may be traversed by rapid currents, andits bed may suffer great local derangement, without any interruptionof the general order and tranquillity.One important character in the formations produced by currents,is the immense extent over which they are the means ofdiffusing homogeneous mixtures ; for these are often coextensivewith a great line of coast, and, by comparison with theirdeposits, the deltas of rivers must shrink into insignificance. Inthe Mediterranean the same current which is rapidly destroyingmany parts of the African coast, between the Straits of Gibraltarand the Nile, preys also upon the Nilotic delta, and drifts thesediment of that great river to the eastward . To this source therapid accretions of land on parts of the Syrian shores where riversdo not enter, may be attributed. The ruins of ancient Tyreare now far inland, and those of ancient Sidon are two milesdistant from the coast, the modern town having been removedtowards the sea*. But the south coast of Asia Minor affordsfar more striking examples of advances of the land upon the• Hoff, Vol. i., p. 253.COAST OF ASIA MINOR, GUIANA, ETC. 309sea, where small streams co-operate with the current beforementioned. Captain Beaufort, in his Survey of that coast, haspointed out the great alterations effected on these shores sincethe time of Strabo, where havens are filled up, islands joinedto the main land, and where the whole continent has increasedmany miles in extent. Strabo himself, on comparing the outlineof the coast in his time with it ancient state, was convinced,like our countryman, that it had gained very considerably uponthe sea. The new-formed strata of Asia Minor consist ofstone, not of loose, incoherent materials. Almost all the streamletsand rivers, like many of those in Tuscany and the southof Italy, hold abundance of carbonate of lime in solution, andprecipitate travertin, or sometimes bind together the sand andgravel into solid sandstones and conglomerates: every deltaand sand-bar thus acquires solidity, which often preventsstreams from forcing their way through them, so that theirmouths are constantly changing their position *•Among the greatest deposits now in progress, and of whichthe distribution is chiefly determined by currents, we mayclass those between the mouths of the Amazon and the southerncoast of North America. It is well known that a greatcurrent is formed along the coast of Africa, by the waterimpelled by the Trade Winds blowing from the south. Whenthis current reaches the head of the Gulf of Guinea, it isopposed by the waters brought to the same spot by the Guineacurrent, and it then streams ofi^ in a westerly direction, andpursues its rapid course quite across the Atlantic to the continentof South America. Here one portion proceeds alongthe northern coast of Brazil to the Caribbean Sea and the Gulfof Mexico. Captain Sabine found that this current was runningwith the astonishing rapidity of four miles an hour whereit crosses the stream of the Amazon, which river preserves partof its original impulse, and its waters not wholly mingled withthose of the ocean at the distance of three hundred miles fromits mouth t* The sediment of the Amazon is thus constantlycarried to the north-west as far as to the mouths of the Origor a brief Description of the Coast of Asia Minor, &c. London,1817.f Experiments to determine the Figure of the Earth, &c^ p. 445.310 Reproductive Effects OF TTDBt AVD CimSEim.loco, and an immense tract of swamp is formed along the foolof Guiana, with a long range of muddy shoals bordering themarshes and becoming converted into land *. The sedimentof the Orinoco is partly detained » and settles near its mouth,causing the shores of Trinidad to extend rapidly, and is partlyswept away into the Caribbean Sea by the equatorial currentAccording to Humboldt, much sediment is carried again outof the Caribbean Sea into the Gulf of Mexico. The rivers,also, which descend from the high plateau of Mexico, betweenthe mouths of the Norte and Tampico, when they arrive atthe edge of the plateau, swollen by tropical rains, bear down anenormous quantity of rock and mud to the sea ; but the current,setting across their mouths, prevents the growth of deltas,and preserves an almost uniform curve in that line of coast f.It must, therefore, exert a great transporting power, and itcannot fail to sweep away part of the matter which is dischargedfrom the mouths of the Norte and the Mississippi.It follows from these observations, that, in certain parts of theglobe, continuous formations are now accumulated over immensespaces along the bottom of the ocean. The materialsundoubtedly must vary in different regions, yet for thousandsof miles they may often retain some common characters, and besimultaneously in progress throughout a space stretching dO"of latitude from south-east to north-west, from the mouths ofthe Amazon for example, to those of the Mississippi — ^as faras from the Straits of Gibraltar to Iceland. At the same time,great coral reefs are growing around the West Indian islands;and in some parts, streams of lava are occasionally flowinginto the sea, which become covered again, in the intervalsbetween eruptions, with other beds of corals. The variousrocks, therefore, stratified and unstratified, now forming in thispart of the globe, may occupy, perhaps, far greater areas thanany group of our ancient secondary series which has yet beeptraced through Europe.In regard to the internal arrangement of *^ pelagian formationsdeposited by currents far from the land, we may inferthat in them, as in deltas, there is usually a division into strata;Locked's Observations on the Nat. Hist, of Guiana. Edin. Trans., vol. iv.^ This coast has been recently examined by Captain Vetch — See also Bazarsnvw chart of the Gulf of Mexico.REPRODUCTIVE EFFECTS OP TIDES AND CURRENTS. 311for, in both cases, the accumulations are successive, and, forthe most part, interrupted. The waste of cliffs on the Britishcoast is almost entirely confined to the winter months ; so thatrunning waters in the sea, like those on the land, are periodicallycharged with sediment, and again become pure. It will happen,in many cases, that the melting of snow will yield an annualtribute of flnviatile sediment in spring of summer, while violentgales of wind will cause the principal dilapidation on theshores to occur in autumn and winter; se that distinct materialsmay be arranged in alternate strata in deep depressions of thebed of the ocean.Those geologists who are not averse to presume thatthe course of Nature has beep uniform froid the earliest ages,and that causes now in action have produced the formerchanges of the earth's surface, will consult the ancient stratafor instruction in regard to the reproductive effects of (ides andcurrents. It will be enough for them to perceive clearly thatgreat effects now annually result from the operations of theseagents, in the inaccessible depths of lakes, seas, and the ocean ;and they will then search the ancient lacustrine and raarin*strata for manifestations of analogous effects in times past.Nor will it be necessary for them to resort to very ancientmonuments; fbr in certain regions where there are activevolcanos, and where violent earthquakes prevail, we mayexamine submarine formations many thousand feet in thick-tness, belonging to our own era, or at least, to the era efeentempoF^ry races of organic beings.CHAPTER Xyill.Division of igneous agents into the volcano and the earthquake — Distinct regionsof subterranean disturbance — Region of the Andes — System of Volcanos extendingfrom the Aleutian isles to the Moluccas — polynesian archipelago—Volcanic region extending from the Caspian Sea to the Adores— Former connexionof the Caspian with Lake Aral and the Sea of Aiof — Low strypeskirting these seas — tradition of Deluges on the shores of the BosphorusHellespont, and the Grecian archipelago — Periodical alternation of earthquakesin Syria and Southern Italy — Western limits of the European regionearthquakes rarer and more feeble in proportion as we recede from thecentres of volcanic action — extinct volcanos not to be included in lines ofactive vents.Wb hare hitherto considered the changes wrought, since thetimes of history and tradition, by the continued action of aqueouscauses on the earth's surface ; and we have next to examinethose resulting from igneous agency. As the rivers and springson the land, and the tides and currents in the sea, have, withsome slight modifications, been fixed and constant to certainlocalities from the earliest periods of which we have any records,so the volcano and the earthquake have, with few exceptions,continued, during the same lapse of time, to disturb the sameregions. But as there are signs, on almost every part of ourcontinent, of great power having been exerted by running wateron the surface of the land, and by tides and currents on cliffsbordering the sea, where, in modern times, no rivers haveexcavated, and no tidal currents undermined — so we find signsof volcanic vents and violent subterranean movements in placeswhere the action of fire has long been dormant. We canexplain why the intensity of the force of aqueous causes shouldbe developed in succession in different districts. Currents, forexample, and tides, cannot destroy our coasts, shape out or siltup estuaries, break through isthmuses, and annihilate islands,form shoals in one place and remove them from another, withoutthe direction and position of their destroying and transportingpower becoming transferred to new localities. Neither canPOSITION OF VOLCANIC VENTS, 3] 3the relative levels of the earth's crust, above and beneath thewaters, vary from time to time, as they are admitted to havevaried at former periods and as we shall demonstrate that theystill do, without the continents being, in the course of ages,modified, and even entirely altered, in their external configuration.Such events must clearly be accompanied by a completechange in the volume, velocity, and direction of the streamsand land floods to which certain regions give passage. Thatwe should find, therefore, cliffs where the sea once committedravages, and from which it has now retired— estuaries wherehigh tides once rose, but which are now dried up— valleyshollowed out by water, where no streams now flow ; — sall theseand nmilar phenomena are the necessary consequences of physicalcauses now in operation ; and we may affirm that, if therebe no instability in the laws of Nature, similar fluctuationsmust recur again and agiun in time to come.But however natural it may be that the force of runningwater in numerous valleys, and of tides and currents in manytracts of the sea, should now be spent it is by no means soeasy to explain why the violence of the earthquake and the fireof the volcano should also have become locally extinct, at successiveperiods. We can look back to the time when the marinestrata, whereon the great mass of Etna rests, had no existence ;and that time is extremely modem in the earth's history. Thisalone affords ground for anticipating that the eruptions of Etnawill one day cease.Nee qutf sulfureis order fomacilms AetnaIgpiea wmper exit, nerve enim fiat ignes temper,are the memorable words which are put into the mouth ofPythagoras by the Roman poet, and they are followed byspeculations as to the causes of volcanic vents shifting theirposition. Whatever doubts the philosopher expresses as tothe nature of these causes, it is assumed, as incontrovertible,that the points of eruption will hereafter vary, because theyhave formerly done so.We have endeavoured to show, by former chapters, howutterly this principle of reasoning is set at nought by the modernschools of geology, which not only refuse to conclude thatgreat revolutions in the earth's surface are now in progress, or314 aSOGRAPHICAL Boundaries .that they will take place because they have often lees repeatedin former ages, but assume the improbability of such a eonelusion and throw the whole weight of proof op those by whomthat doctrine is embraced.In our view of igneous causes we shall consider, first, thevolcano, and afterwards the earthquake ; for although both areprobably the effects of the same subterranean process, they giverise to very different phenomena on the surface of the globe.Both are confined to certain regions, but the subterraneanmovements are least violent in the immediate proximity ofvolcanic vents, especially where the discharge of aeriform fluidsand melted rock is made constantly from the same crater. Wesay that there are certain regions to which both tie points oferuption, and the movements of great earthquakes are confined ;and we shall begin by tracing out the geographical boundariesof some of these, that the reader may be aware of the magnifiedcent scale on which the agency of subterranean fire is nowsimultaneously developed. Over the whole of the vast tractsalluded to, active volcanic vents are distributed at intervalsand most commonly arranged in a linear direction. Throughoutthe intermediate spaces there is abundant evidence thatthe subterranean fire is at work continuously, for the groundis convulsed from time to time by earthquakes; gaseous vapoursespecially carbonic acid gas, are disengaged plentifully horn thesoil; springs often issue at a very high temperature, and thiswaters are very commonly impregnated with the same mineralmatters which are discharge \}y yolc^n^^ 4ur?t)g eruptions.Of these great regions, that of the Andes is one of the bestdefined. Respecting its southern extremity, we are still in /need of more accurate information, some conceiving it to .'extend into Terra del Fuego and Patagonia'. But if we ,begin with Chili, in the forty-sixth de^ee of south latintide, we find that, in proceeding from this point towards 'the north to the twenty-seyei)th degree, there is a line qf 'volcanos so uninterrupted, that it is rare to find any interveningdegree of latitude in which there is not an active 'vent. About twenty of these are now enumerates but wemay expect the number to augment greatly when tip country• Howl; rol iL, p. 4^6.OF Volcanic RBOIOVt. 31&,has been more carefully examined, and throughout a longerperiod. How long an interval of rest entitles us to consider 4 /volcano extinct, cannot yet be determined ; but we know that, /in Ischia, there intervened, between two consecutive eruptions, a ^ ,pause of seventeen centuries ; and a much longer period, perhaps,elapsed between the eruptions of Vesuvius before the earliestGreek colonies settled in Campania, and the renewal of itactivity in the reign of Titus, It will be necessary, therefore,to wait for at least six times as many centuries as have elapsedsince the discovery of America, before any one of the dormantcraters of the Andes can be presumed to be entirely spent,unless there are some geological proofs of the last eruptionshaving belonged to a remote era. The Chilian volcanos ripup through granitic mountains. Villarica, one of the principal,continues burning without intermission, and is so high that itmay be distinguished at the distance of one hundred and fiftyn^iles. A year never passes in this province without somslight shocks of earthquakes ; and about once in a century oroftener, tremendous convulsions occurs by which, 49 we shallafterwards see, the land has been shaken from one extremity tothe other, and continuous tracts, together with the bed of thePacific, have been raised permanently from one to twenty feetand upwards above their former level. Hot springs are numerousin this district, as well as springs of naphtha and petroleum,and mineral waters of various kinds. If we pursue our coursenorthwards, we find in Peru only one active volcano as yetknown ; but the province is so subject to earthquakes, thatscarcely a week happens without a shock, and many of thesehave been so considerable as to create great changes of thesurface. Proceeding farther north, we find in the middle ofQuito, where the Andes attain their highest elevation, fromthe second degree of south, to the third degree of north latitude,Tunguragua, Cotopaxi, Antisana, and Pichinca, the threeformer of which throw out flames not unfrequently. Fromfissures on the side of Tunguragua, a deluge of mud (condescendedin 1797, and filled valleys a thousand feet wide tothe depth of six hundred feet, forming barriers whereby riverswere dammed up, and lakes occasioned. Earthquakes have,in the same province, caused great revolutions in the physicalFeatures of the ^urfEu:e. Father novtfay there aM three volts*.I f316 GEOGRAPHICAL Boundariescanoes in the piDvinoe of Pasto, and three others in that ofPopayan. In the provinces of Guatemala and Nicaraguawhich lie between the Isthmus of Panama and Mexico, thereare no less than twenty-one active volcanos, all of them containedbetween the tenth and fifteenth degrees of north latitude.The great volcanic chain, after having pursued itscourse for several thousand miles from south to north, turnsoff in a side direction in Mexico, and is prolonged in a greatplateau, between the eighteenth and twenty-second treesof north latitude. This high table-land owes its present formto the circumstance of an ancient system of valleys, in a chainof primary mountains, having been filled up, to the depth ofmany thousand feet, with various volcanic products. Fiveactive volcanos traverse Mexico from west to east — Tuxtla,Orizaba, Popoqatepetl, JoruUo, and Colima. Jorullo, whichis in the centre of the great plateau, is no less than forty leaguesfrom the nearest ocean — san important circumstance, as showingthat the proximity of the sea is not a necessary condition,although certainly a very general characteristic, of the positionof active volcanos. The extraordinary eruption of this mountain,in 1759) will be described in the sequel. If the sameparallel line which connects these five vents be prolonged, in awesterly direction, it cuts the volcanic group of islands, calledthe Isles of Revillagigedo. To the north of Mexico there arethree, or according to some, five volcanos, in the peninsula ofCalifornia, but of these we have at present no detailed account*We have before mentioned the violent earthquakes which, in1812, convulsed the valley of the Mississippi at New Madrid,for the space of three hundred miles in length. As this happenedexactly at the same time as the great earthquake of Caraccas,it is probable that these two points are parts of one continuousvolcanic region ; for the whole circumference of the interveningCaribbean Sea must be considered as a theatre of earthquakesand volcanos* On the north lies the island of Jamaica,which, with a tract of the contiguous sea, has often experiencedtremendous shocks; and these are, frequent along a line extendingfrom Jamaica to St. Domingo, and Porto Rico. On thesouth of the same basin the shores and mountains of Colombiaare perpetually convulsed. On the west, is the volcanic drainof Guatemala and Mexico, before traced out ; and on the eastOP VOLCANIC REGIONS, 317the West Indian isles where, in St. Vincent's and Guadaloupe,are active vents.Thus it will be seen that volcanos and earthquakes occuruninterruptedly, from Chili to the north of Mexico ; and itseems probable, that they will hereafter be found to extend fromCape Horn to California, or even perhaps to New Madrid, inthe United States — a distance as great as from the pole to theequator. In regard to the eastern limits of the region, they liedeep beneath the waves of the Pacific, and must continue unknownto us. On the west they do not appear except wherethey include the West Indian islands, to be prolonged to agreat distance, for there seem to be no indications of volcanicdisturbances in Guiana, Brazil, and Buenos Ayres.On an equal, if not a still grander scale, is another continuousline of volcanic action, which commences, on the north, withthe Aleutian Isles in Russian America, and extends, first in aneasterly direction for nearly two hundred geographical miles, andthen southwards, without interruption, throughout a space ofbetween sixty and seventy degrees of latitude to the Moluccas,and there branches off in different directions both towards theeast and north-west. The northern extremity of this volcanicregion is the Peninsula of Alaska, in about the fifty-fifth degreecertitude. From thence the line is continued through theAleutian or Fox Islands, to Eamtschatka. In that archipelagoeruptions are frequent ; and a new isle rose in 1814, which, accordingto some reports, is three thousand feet high and fourmiles round*. Earthquakes of the most terrific description agitateand alter the bed of the sea and surface of the land throughoutthis tract. The line is continued in the southern extremityof the peninsula of Kamtschatka, where there are seven activevolcanos, which, in some eruptions, have scattered ashes to immensedistances. The Kurile chain of isles constitutes the prolongationof the range, where a train of volcanic mountains,nine of which are known to have been in eruption, trends inasoutherly direction. In these, and in the bed of the adjoiningsea, alterations of level have resulted from earthquakessince the middle of the last century. The line is then continuedto the south-west in the great Island of Jesse whereHoff,Tol.ii.;p. 414.318 OSCMftAPBf CAL Boundariesthere are retire volcanic Tented as also in Ripon, the principalof the Japanese group, where the number of burning mountainsis very great ; sight shrieks of earthquakes being almostincessant and violent ones experienced at distant intervals.Between the Japanese and Philippine Islands, the communicationis preserved bj several small insular vents. SulphurIsland in the Loo Chop archipelago, emits sulphureousvapour I and Formosa suffers greatly from earthquakes. InLuzon the most northern and largest of the Philippines, arethree active volcanos ; Mindanao also was in eruption in 1764.The line is then prolonged through Sanguis and the northeasternextremity of Celebes, by Temate and Tore, to theMoluccas, and, amongst the rest, Sumbawa. Here A greattransverse line may be said to run from east to west. On therest it passes through the whole of Java, where there arethirty-eight large volcanic mountains many of which continuallydischarge smoke and sulphureous vapours. In theVolcanos of Sumatra, the same linear arrangement is preserved; but the line inclines gradually to the north-west insuch a manner as to point to the active volcano in BarrenIsland in the Bay of Bengal, in about the twelfth degree ofnorth latitude. In another direction the volcanic range isprolonged through Borneo, Celebes, Banda, and New Guinea;and farther eastward in New Britain, New Ireland, and variousparts of the Polynesian archipelago. The Pacific Ocean,indeed seems, in equatorial latitudes, to be one vast theatre ofigneous action ; and its innumerable archipelagos, such as theNew Hebrides, Friendly Islands, and Georgian Isles, are allcomposed either of coralline limestones, or volcanic rocks withactive vents here and there interspersed. The abundant productionof carbonate of lime, in solution, would alone raise a strongpresumption of the volcanic constitution of these tracts, even ifthere were not more positive proofs of igneous agency.If we now turn our attention to the principal region in theOld World, which, from time immemorial, has been agitated byearthquakes, and has given vent at certain points to subterraneanfires, we find that it possesses the same general characters.This region extends from east to west for the distanceof about one thousand geographical miles, from the CaspianSea to the Azores ; including within iti» limits the greater part^,iXfirst .f Ai Chum tf MiismOF TOL0ANI« RBOI91IB. 319of thd M^iterrantaiii and its most prominent peninsulas Fromsouth to north it reaches from about the thirty^fifth to theforty-fifth degree of latitude. Its northern boundaries are Caucasus,the Black Sea, the mountains of Thrace Transylvania,and Hungry, — the Austrian, Tyrian, and Swiss Alps — theCevennes and Pyrenees with the mountains which branch offfrom the Pyrenees westward, to the north side of the TagusIts western limits are the ocean, but it is impossible to determinehow far it may be prolonged in that direction ) neithercan we assign with precision its extreme eastern limit, since thecountry beyond the Caspian and Sea of Aral is scarcely known.The great steppe of Tartary, in particular, is unexplored ; andwe are almost equally ignorant of the physical constitution ofChina, in which country, however many violent earthquakeshave been felt*The southern boundaries of the region include the mostnorthern parts of Africa, and part of the Desert of Arabia*. Wemay trace through the whole area comprehended within theseextensive limits, numerous points of volcanic eruptions, hotsprings, gaseous emanations and other signs of igneous agency ;while few tracts, of any extent, have been entirely exempt fromearthquakes throughout the last three thousand years.To begin on the Asiatic side, we find that, on the westernshores of the Caspian, in the country round Baku, there is atract called the Field of Fire, which continually emits inflammablegas, and springs of naphtha and petroleum occur in thesame vicinity, as also mud volcanos. In the chain of £lburs>to the south of this sea, is a lofty mountain, which, accordingto Mortier, sometimes emits smoke, and at the base of whichare several small craters, where sulphur and saltpetre are procuredin sufficient abundance to be used in commerce. Violentsubterranean commotions have been experienced along theborders of the Caspian ; and it is reported that, since 1£56, thewaters of that sea have encroached on the Russian territory tothe north ; but the fact, as Malte-Brun observes, requires confirmation.According to Engelhard and Parrot, the depth of thewater has increased in places, while the general surface has beenlowered ; and they say that the bottom of the sea has, in modern« Hofi^ vol ii, p. 99.320 VOLCANIC REGION EXTENDING Feutimes, varied in form ; and that, near the south coast, the Isle ofIda, north from Astrabat, formerly high land, has now becomevery how's. Any indications of a change in the relative levelsof the land in this part of Asia are of more than ordinaryinterest, because a succession of similar variations wouldaccount for many prominent features in the physical geographyof the district between the salt lake Aral, and the westernshores of the Euxine — a district well known to have beenalways subject to great earthquakes. The level of the Caspianis lower than that of the Black Sea, by more than fifty feet.A low and level tract, called the Steppe, abounding in salineplants, and said to contain shells of species now common in theadjoining sea, skirts the shores of the Caspian, on the northwest.This plain often terminates abruptly by a line of inlandcliffs, at the base of which runs a kind of beach, consisting offragments of limestone and sand, cemented together into aconglomerate. Pallas has endeavoured to show that there is anold line of sandy country, which indicates the ancient bed of astrait, by which the Caspian Sea was once united to that ofAzof. On similar grounds, it is inferred that the salt lakeAral was formerly connected with the Caspian. Howevermodern in the earth's history the convulsions may be whichhave produced the phenomena of the steppes, it is consistentwith analogy to suppose that a very minute portion of thewhole change has happened in the last twenty or thirty centuries.Yet, if we possessed more authentic records of physicalevents, we should probably discover that some smallportion of those great revolutions have fallen within such recentperiods. Remote traditions have come down to us of inundations,in which the waters of the Black Sea were forced throughthe Thracian Bosphorus, and through the Hellespont, into theiGgean. In the deluge of Samotbrace, it appears that thatsmall island, and the adjoining coast of Asia, were inundated;and in the Ogygian, which happened at a different time, Boeotiaand Attica were overflowed. Notwithstanding the mixtureof fable, and the love of the marvellous, in those rude ages,and the subsequent inventions of Greek poets and historians,• Travels in th Crimea and Caucasus, in 1815| yoL i., pp. 257 and 264. — Hoff,ToL L| p. 137.THE CASPIAN TO THE AZORES. 321it may be distinctly perceived that the floods alluded to werelocal and transient, and that they happened in succession nearthe borders of that chain of inland seas. They seem, thereforeto have been nothing more than great waves, which aboutfifteen centuries before our era, devastated the borders of theBlack Sea the Sea of Marmot, the Archipelago and neighbouringcoasts, in the same manner as the western shores ofPortugal, Spain, and Northern Africa were inundated, duringthe great earthquake at Lisbon, by a wave which rose, in someplaces, to the height of 6fty or sixty feet ; or. as happened inPeru, in 1746, where two hundred violent shocks followedeach other in the space of twenty-four hours, and the oceanbroke with impetuous force upon the land, destroying thetown of Callao, and four other seaports, and converting aconsiderable tract of inhabited country into a bay.In the country between the Caspian and the Black Seas, andin the chain of Caucasus, numerous earthquakes have, in modemtimes, caused fissures and subsidences of the soil, especially atTiflis*. The Caucasian territories abound in hot-springs andmineral waters. So late as 1814, a new island was raised byvolcanic explosions, in the Sea of Azof; and Pallas mentionsthat, in the same locality, opposite old Temruk, a submarineeruption took place in 1799} accompanied with dreadful thundering,emission of fire and smoke, and the throwing up of mireand stones. Violent earthquakes were felt at the same time atgreat distances from ^emruk. The country around Rerumexhibits similar phenomena, as does that around Taurus andthe lake of Urmia, in which latter we have already remarkedthe rapid formation of travertin. The lake of Urmia, which isabout two hundred and eighty English miles in circumference,resembles the Dead Sea, in having no outlet, and in being moresalt than the ocean. Between the Tigris and Euphrates, also,there are numerous springs of naphtha, and frequent earthquakesagitate the country.Syria and Palestine abound in volcanic appearances, andvery extensive areas have been shaken, at different periods,with great destruction of cities and loss of lives.It has been remarked, by Von Hoff, that from the commencementof the thirteenth to the latter half of the seventeenthcentury, there was an almost entire cessation of earthquakes• Host Tol, ii., p. 210.Vol. I. T322 Volcanic RBCIOS KXICmilW ffmCVMIB Sym and Judea; and, daring teak internal of qukwenoe,the Archipelago, together vhh part of the adjacent oosist ofJjemer Asia, as also Soothe Italy and SicOj, suffered extract*dinarj convulsions; while ▼oicanie emphasis in those partswere onnsnallj frequent. A more extended comparison, also,of the history of the sahtemnean convulsions of these tractsseems to ooofiim the opinion, that a Violent oiasof oommodonnever visits both at the same time. It is impossible for us todcdaie^ as yet, whether this phenomenon is constant in this, orgeneral in other regions, because we can hardy trace back aconnected series of events £uther than a few centuries; but itis well known that, where numerous Tents are clustered togetherwithin a small area, as in many archipdagps for instance,two of them are never in Tioknt eruption at once. If theaction of one becomes Tery great for a century or more, theothers assume the appearance of spent volcanos. It is, therefore,not improbable that separate provinces of the same rangeof volcanic fires may hold a relation to one deep-seated focus,analagous to that which the apertures of a small group bearto some one rent or cavity. Thus, for example, we may conjecturethat, ataoomparativdy small distance from thesurface^Ischia and Vesuvius mutually communicate with certain fissures,and that each afford relief alternately to elastic fluids and lavathere generated. So we may suppose Southern Italy and Syriato be connected, at a much greater depth, with a lower part ofthe very same system of fissures ; in which case any obstructionoccurring in one duct may have the effect of causing almost allthe vapour and melted matter to be forced up the other, andif they cannot get vent, they may be the cause of violentearthquakes.Continual mention is made in history of the ravages committedby earthquakes in Sidon, Tyre, Brutus, Laodicea, andAntioch, as also in the island of Cyprus. The country aroundthe Dead Sea appears evidently, from the accounts of modemtravellers, to be volcanic ; and there are similar appearances,according to Burckhardt, in Arabia Petra. A district nearSmyrna, in Asia Minor, was termed by the Greeks Catacecau-mene, or the burnt, where there is a large arid territory, withouttrees, and with a cindery soil *,Proceeding westwards, we reach the Grecian archipelagoBtnbo^ Ed. Fal., p. 900.line caspUn to the Azores. 323Inhere Santorin, afterwards to be described is the grand centreof volcanic action. To the north-west of Santorin is anothervolcano, in the island of Milo, of recent aspect, having a veryactive solfatara in its central crater, and many sources of boilingwater and steam. Continuing precisely the same line wearrive at that part of the Morea, where we learn, from ancientwriters, that Helice and Burn were, in the year 373 B. C, submergedbeneath the sea by an earthquake; and the walls,according to Ovid, were to be seen beneath the waters. Nearthe same spot, in our times (1817)« Vostiaaa was laid inruins by a subterranean convulsion *, At Method, also (nowMoon), in Messenia, about three centuries before our era, aneruption threw up a great volcanic mountain, which is representedby Strabo as being nearly four thousand feet in height ;but the magnitude of the hill requires confirmation. Some supposethat the accounts of the formation of a hill near Trseaene,of which the date is unknown, may refer to the same event.Macedonia, Thrace, and Epirus, have always been subject toearthquakes, and the Ionian Isles are continually convulsed.Respecting Southern Italy, Sicily, and the Lipari Isles, we neednot enlarge here, as the existence of volcanos in that regionis known to all, and we shall have occasion again to alludeto them.The north-eastern portion of Africa, including Egypt, whichlies six or seven degrees south of the volcanic line alreadytraced, has been almost always exempt from earthquakes 3 butthe north-western portion, especially Fez and Morocco, whichfall within the line, suffer greatly from time to time. Thesouthern part of Spain, also, and Portugal, have generally beenexposed to the same scourge simultaneously with NorthernAfrica. The provinces of Malaga, Murcia, and Grenada,and in Portugal, the country round Lisbon, are recorded atseveral periods to have been devastated by great earthquakes.It will be seen, from Micheirs account of the great Lisbonshock in 1755, that the first movement proceeded from the bedof the ocean ten or fifteen leagues from the coast. So lateas February 2, 1816, when Lisbon was vehemently shaken,two ships felt a shock in the ocean west from Lisbpp i one ofthem at the distance of one hundred and twenty, and theother two hundred and sixty-two French leagues from the^ Hoff,ToLii.|p,172.324 Volcanic regions.coast * — a fact which is the more interesting, because a linedrawn through the Grecian archipelago, the volcanic region ofSouthern Italy, Sicily, Southern Spain, and Portugal, will, ifprolonged westward through the ocean, strike the volcanic groupof the Azores, which has, therefore, in all probability, a submarineconnexion with the European line. How far the islesof Madeira and the Canaries, in the former of which violentearthquakes, and in the latter great eruptions, frequently happen,may communicate beneath the waters with the same region,must for the present be mere matter of conjecture.Besides the continuous spaces of subterranean disturbance ofwhich we have merely sketched the outline, there are other disconnectedvolcanic groups, of which the geographical extent isas yet very imperfectly known. Among these may be mentionedIceland, which belongs, perhaps, to the same region as the volcanoin Jan Mayence Island, situated five degrees to the northeast.With these, also, part of the nearest coast of Greenland,which is sometimes shaken by earthquakes, may be connected.The island of Bourbon belongs to another theatre of volcanicaction, of which Madagascar probably forms a part, if thealleged existence of burning volcanos in that island shall, onfurther examination, be substantiated. In following round theborders of the ocean to the north, we find the volcano of GadTor, within the entrance of the Arabian Gulf. In the provinceof Cutch, in Bombay, and the adjoining districts of Hindostan,violent earthquakes repeatedly devastate an extensive territory.Respecting the volcanic system of Southern Europe, it maybeobserved, that there is a central tract where the greatestearthquakes prevail, in which rocks are shattered, mountainsrent, the surface elevated or depressed, and cities laid in ruins.On each side of this line of greatest commotion, there are parallelbands of country, where the shocks are less violent. At a stillgreater distance (as in Northern Italy, for example, extendingto the foot of the Alps), there are spaces where the shocks aremuch rarer and more feeble, yet possibly of sufficient force tocause, by continued repetition, some appreciable alteration inthe external form of the earth's crust. Beyond these limits,again, all countries are liable to slight tremors at distant intervalsof time, when some great crisis of subterranean movementagitates an adjoining volcanic region ; but these may be const*Vixneur, Journal des Voyages, ?oI. ir., p. 111. Host, ?ol. ii.^ p. 275,VOLCANIC Regions. 325tered as mere vibrations, propagated mechanically through theexternal crust of the globe, as sounds travel almost to indefinitedistances through the air. Shocks of this kind have been felt inEngland, Scotland, Northern France, and Germany — particularlyduring the Lisbon earthquake. But these countriescannot, on this account, be supposed to constitute parts of thesouthern volcanic region, any more than the Shetland andOrkney Isles can be considered as belonging to the Icelandiccircle, because the sands ejected from Hecla have been waftedthither by the winds.We must also be careful to distinguish between lines ofextinct and active volcanos, even where they appear to run inthe same direction ; for ancient and modem systems may crossand interfere with each other. Already, indeed, we have proofthat this is the case ; so that it is not by geographical position,but by reference to the species of organic beings alone, whetheraquatic or terrestrial, whose remains occur in beds interstratifiedwith lavas that we can clearly distinguish the relative age ofvolcanos of which no eruptions are recorded. Had SouthernItaly been known to civilized nations for as short a period asAmerica, we should have had no record of eruptions in Ischia ;yet we might have assured ourselves that the lavas of that isle hadflowed since the Mediterranean was inhabited by the species oftestacea now living in the Neapolitan seas. With this assuranceit would not have been rash to include the numerous vents ofthat isle in the modern volcanic group of Campania. Onsimilar grounds we may class, without much hesitation, the submarinelavas of the Val di Notoo in Sicily, in the modem circleof subterranean commotion, of which Etna and Calabria formapart. But the lavas of the Euganean hills and the Licentia,although not wholly beyond the range of earthquakes inNorthern Italy, must not be confounded with any existingvolcanic system ; for when they flowed, the seas were inhabitedwith animals entirely distinct from those now known to live,whether in the Mediterranean or other parts of the globe. Butwe cannot enter into a full development of our views on thesesubjects in the present volume, as they would carry us into theconsideration of changes in the earth^s surface far anteriorto the times of history, to which our present examination isexclusively confined.CHAPTER XIX.HlitoTj of flie TolciUue eruption in she patriot nmnd NaplM — Isaac convnhioBSia the land of lachift — ^Nmnnoiu oonaa throne up there — ^R{ioiimo not mnhabitual volcano — Lake Ayemua — ^^The Solfatara — renewal of tha eraptioiiflpf Vemniua A.D. 79 — ^FUay't description of the phenomena— lUmariu onhit nlenoa affecting the destruction of Herculaneum and Pompeu-^Sabee*qpeot history of Vesuvius— I^ava discharged in lachia in 13U2— Pause ia tbaeruption of Vesuyiua—Monte Novo thrown up — Uniformity of the volcanicoperation! of Vesuvius and the Pblegneax^ Fields in ancient and modemtimes.We shall next present the reader with a sketch of the historyof some of the volcanic Tents dispersed throughout the greatregions before described, and consider attentively the compositionand arrangement of their lavas and ejected matter. Theonly volcanic region known to the ancients, was that of whichthe Mediterranean forms a part ; and they have transmitted tousvery imperfect records of the eruptions in three principalprovinces of that region, namely, the district round Naples ;that of Sicily and its isles ; and that of the Grecian Archipelago.By far the most connected series of records throughouta long period relates to the first of these districts ; and thesecannot be too attentively considered, as much historical informationis indispensable in order to enable us to obtain a clearview of the connexion and alternate mode of action of thedifferent vents in a single volcanic group. The Neapolitanvolcanos extend from Vesuvius, through the Phlegrsean Fields,to Procida and Ischia in a somewhat linear arrangement, rangingfrom the north-east to the south-west, as will be seen in theannexed map. (PI. S.) Within the space above limited, the volcanicforce is sometimes developed in single eruptions from aconsiderable number .of irregularly scattered points ; but a greatpart of its action has been confined to one principal and habitualvent, Vesuvius or Somma. Before the Christian era, from theremotest periods of which we have any tradition this principalFl.l.Volcanic ERUPTIONS IN ISCHIA. 327vent waB in a state of inactivity. Terrific convulsions then tookplace from time to time in Ischia (Pithecusa), and seem to haveextended to the neighbouring isle of Procida (Prochyta), forStrabo* mentions a story of the latter having been torn asunderfrom Ischia; and Pliny f derives its name from its having beenpoured forth by an eruption from Ischia. So violent werethe earthquakes and volcanic explosions to which Ischia wassubject, that Typhon the giant, ** from whose eyes and mouthfire proceeded, and who hurled stones to heaven with a loudand hollow noises was said to lie buried beneath it. Thepresent circumference of the island along the water's edge iseighteen miles, its length from west to east about five, and itsbreadth from north to south three miles. Several Greek colonieswhich settled there before the Christian era were compelledto abandon it in consequence of the violence of the eruptions.First the £rythrseans, and afterwards the Chaldeans, are mentionedas having been driven out by earthquakes and igneousexhalations. A colony was afterwards established by Hero,king of Syracuse, about three hundred and eighty years beforethe Christian era ; but when they had built a fortress, they werecompelled by ati eruption to fly, and never again returned.Strabo tells us that Times recorded a tradition that a littlebefore his time Epomeus, the principal mountain in the centreof the island, vomited fire during great earthquakes; thatthe land between it and the coast had ejected much fiery matterwhich flowed into the sea, and that the sea receded for thedistance of three stadia, and then returning, overflowed theisland. This eruption is supposed by some to have been thatwhich formed the crater of Monte Corso on one of the higherflanks of Epotneo, above Fora, the lava-current of which maystill be traced by aid of the scorise on its surface, fromthe crater to the sea. To one of the subsequent eruptionsin the lower , parts of the isle, which caused the expulsion ofthe first Greek colony, Monte Rotaro has been attributed, andit bears every mark of recent origin. The cone is remarkablyperfect, and has a crater on its summit precisely resembling thatof Monte Nuovo ; but the hill is larger, and resembles some ofthe more considerable cones of single eruption near Clermont in• Lib.>. t Nat Hist, Ub. iii c 6.328 VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS IN Ischia.Auvergne, and, like some of them, it has given vent to a lava-streamat its base, instead of its summit. A small ravineswept out by a torrent exposes the structure of the cone, whichis composed of innumerable inclined and slightly undulatinglayers of pumice, scorise, white lapilli, and enormous angularblocks of trachyte. These last have evidently been thrownout by violent explosions, like those which, in 1822, launchedfrom Vesuvius a mass of pyroxenic lava, of many tons weight,to the distance of three miles, which fell in the garden of PrinceOttajano. The cone of Rotaro is covered with the arbutus,and other beautiful evergreens. Such is the strength of thevirgin soil, that the shrubs have become almost arborescent ;and the growth of some of the smaller wild plants has been sovigorous, that botanists have scarcely been able to recognisethe species. The eruption whereby the Syracuse colony wasdislodged, is supposed to have given rise to that mighty currentwhich forms the promontory of Taro and Carus. The surfaceof these lavas is still very arid and bristling, and is coveredwith black sunrise ; so that it is not without great labour thathuman industry has redeemed some small spots, and convertedthem into vineyards. From the date of the great eruption lastalluded to, down to our own time, Ischia has enjoyed tranquillity,with the exception of one emission of lava hereafter to bedescribed, which, although it occasioned much local damage,does not appear to have devastated the whole country, in themanner of more ancient explosions.The population of the isle amounts at present to abouttwenty-five thousand, and is on the increase. They are supportedalmost entirely on the production of their vineyards. Thelofty central hill, Epomeo or S. Nicholas, on this island, is composedof greenish indurated tuff, of a prodigious thickness,inter stratified in some part with argillaceous marl, and, hereand there, with great streams of indurated lava. Visconti ascertained,by trigonometrical measurement, that this mountain wasS605 feet above the level of the sea. In mineral compositionand in form, as seen from many points of view, it resembles thehill to the north of Naples, on the summit of which standsthe convent of Camaldoli, which is 1643 feet in height. Boththese mountains, like the greater part of those in the Terra diLavoro, are of subaqueous origin ; although it has frequentlyEPOMEO OP Submarine ORIGIN. 329happened to them, as to Epomeo, that, after being elevatedabove the level of the sea, fresh eruptions have broken throughat different points. I found more than one argillaceous stratumcontaining marine shells, within eight hundred feet of thesummit of Epomeo ; and from this circumstance, and from thegeneral structure of the mountain, I am compelled to dissentfrom the opinion expressed bj Mr. Scrope, who supposed it tohave been once a great habitual volcano, like Vesuvius*. Atleast it is certain, that if any one of the cones on the presentmountain gave vent to several streams of lava in succession,this happened when the whole mass was still beneath the levelof the sea. Brocchi long ago announced, that the igneousrocks of this island rest on a plastic clay containing shells.Of these a considerable number have now been obtained,and identified with species still living in the Mediterranean.There are, upon the whole, on different parts of Epomeo, orscattered through the lower tracts of the island, twelve considerablevolcanic cones, which have been thrown up since theisland was raised above the surface of the deep ; and manystreams of lava may have flowed, like that of ^* Arso'^ in 130^,without cones having been produced ; so that this isle may, foragesbefore the period of the remotest traditions, have servedas a ^ety-valve to the whole Terra di Lavoro, while the firesof Vesuvius were dormant. It seems also clear, that Avernus,a circular lake near Fuzzuoli, about half a mile in diameter,which is now a salubrious and cheerful spot, once exhaledmephitic vapours, such as are often emitted by craters aftereruptions. There is no reason for discrediting the account ofLucretius-f-, that birds could not fly over it without being stifled,although they may now frequent it uninjured. There musthave been a time when this crater was in action ; and for manycenturies afterwards it may have » deserved the appellation of** ari janus Ditis,^' emitting, perhaps, gases as destructive ofanimal life as those suffocating vapours which were given outbyLake Quilotoa, in Quito, in 1797, by which whole herdsof cattle on its shores were killed ;|;, or as those deleteriousGeol. Trans Tol. ii., part 3, p. 388 j second series,f De Enim Nat., VI., 740w~Mr. Forbes on the Bay of Naples, Edin. Journ.of Science, No. 3, new atrietf p. 87, Jan. 1830.X Humboldt, Yoj^ p, 317.330 Vesuvius Before THE CHRISTIAN BRA.emanations which annihilated all the cattle in the island ofLancerote, one of the Canaries, in 1780*. Body St. Vincentmentions, that in the same isle birds fell lifeless to the ground ;and Sir William Hamilton informs us that he picked Updead birds on Vesuvius during an eruption. The Solfatara,also, near Puzzuoli, which may be still considered as a half-extinguishedcrater, appears, by the accounts of Strabo andothers, to have been before the Christian era in very much thesame state as at present giving vent continually to aqueousvapour, together with sulphureous and muriatic add gases,similar to those evolved bv Vesuvius.Such, then, were the points where the subterranean fires obtainedvent, from the earliest period to which tradition reachesback, down to the first century of the Christian era; but wethen arrive at a crisis in the volcanic action of this districtone of the most interesting events witnessed by man duringthe brief period throughout which he has observed the physicalchanges on the earth's surface. From the first colonizationof Southern Italy by the Greeks, Vesuvius afforded no otherindications of its volcanic character than such as the naturalistmight infer, from the analogy of its structure to other volcanos.These were recognised by Strabo, but Pliny did not includethe mountain in his list of active vents. The ancient conewas of a very regular form, terminating, not as at present, intwo peaks, but with a flattish summit, where the remains ofan ancient crater, nearly filled up, had left a slight depression,covered in its interior by wild vines, and with a sterile plainat the bottom. On the exterior, the flanks of the mountainwere covered with fertile fields richly cultivated, and at itsbase were the populous cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii.But the scene of repose was at length doomed to cease, and thevolcanic fire was recalled to the main channel which, at someformer unknown period, had given passage to repeated streamsof melted lava, sand, and scoriae. The first symptom of therevival of the energies of this volcano was the occurrence of anearthquake in the year 63 after Christ, which did considerableins fury to the cities in its vicinity. From that time to the year 79slight shocks were frequent, and in the month of August ai that^ Von Biicb| Ub. linen Tuleaabch. Ausbruch ttof der Tinsel Lanierote.ERUFTI014 OF VESUVIUS, A.D. 79. 831year they became more numerous and violent, till they ended atlength in an eruption. The elder Pliny, who commanded theRoman fleets was then stationed at Misenum ; and in his anxietyto obtain a near view of the phenomena, he lost his life, beingsuffocated by sulphureous vapours. His nephew, the youngerPliny, remained at Misenum, and has given us in his Letters alively description of the awful scene. A dense column of vapourwas first seen rising vertically from Vesuvius, and then spreadingitself out laterally, so that its upper portion resembled thehead, and its lower the trunk of the pine, which characterizesthe Italian landscape. This black cloud was pierced occasionallyby flashes of fire as vivid as lightning, succeeded bydarkness more profound than night. Ashes fell even upon theships at Misenum, and caused a shoal in one part of the sea— •the ground rocked, and the sea receded from the shores, so thatmany marine animals were seen on the dry sand. The appearancesabove described agree perfectly with those witnessed inmore recent eruptions, especially those of Monte Nuovo in 15S8,and of Vesuvius in 18S2. In all times and countries, indeed,there is a striking uniformity in the volcanic phenomena ; butit is most singular that Pliny, although giving a circumstantialdetail of so many physical facts, and enlarging upon the mannerof his uncles deaths and the ashes which fell when he wasat Stable, makes no allusion whatever to the sudden overwhelmingof two large and populous cities, Herculaneum andPompeii.All naturalists who have searched into the memorials of thepast, for records of physical events must have been surprisedat the indifference with which the most memorable occurrencesare often passed by, in the works of writers of enlightenedperiods ; as also of the extraordinary exaggeration which usuallydisplays itself in the traditions of similar events, in ignorantand superstitious ages. But, of all omissions, the most inexplicable,perhaps, is that now under consideration ; and we haveno hesitation in saying, that had the buried cities never beendiscovered, the accounts transmitted to us of their tragical endwould have been discredited by the majority, so vague andgeneral are the other narratives, or so long subsequent to theevent. Tacitus, the friend and contemporary of Pliny, whenadverting sin general terms to the convulsion, says merely thatEruption OF TBStTYlUSj A.D. 79. .'eddies were consumed or buried. Suetonius, although healludes to the eruption incidentally, is silent as to the cities.They are mentioned by Martial, in an epigram, as immersedin cinders; but the first historian who alludes to them bynameis Dion Cassius-f , who flourished about a century anda half after Pliny. He appears to have derived his informationfrom the traditions of the inhabitants, and to haverecorded, without discrimination, all the facts and fables whichhe could collect. He tells us, '< that during the eruption, amultitude of men of superhuman stature, resembling giants,appeared sometimes on the mountain and sometimes in theenvirons — that stones and smoke were thrown out, the sun washidden and then the giants seemed to rise again, while thesounds of trumpets were heard, &c., &c. ; and finally twoentire cities, Herculaneum and Pompeii, were buried undershowers of ashes, while all the people were sitting in thetheatre." That many of these circumstances were invented,would have been obvious, even without the aid of Pliny's Letters;and the examination of Herculaneum and Pompeii enables usto prove, that none of the people were destroyed in the theatres,and, indeed that there were very few of the inhabitants whodid not escape from both cities. Yet some lives were lost,and there was ample foundation for the tale in its most essentialparticulars. This case may often serve as a caution to thegeologist, who has frequent occasion to weigh, in like manner,negative evidence derived from the silence of eminent writers,against the obscure but positive testimony of popular traditions.Some authors, for example, would have us call inquestion the reality of the Ogygian deluge, because Homerand Hesiod say nothing of it. But they were poets, nothistorians, and they lived many centuries after the latest dateassigned to the catastrophe. Had they even lived at thetime of that flood, we might still contend that their silenceought, no more than Pliny's, to avail against the authority oftradition however much exaggeration we may impute to thelatter.It does not appear that in the year 79 any lava flowedfrom Vesuvius; the ejected substances, perhaps, consistedHaunts aut obnitflB urges. Hist., lib. 1 f Hist. Rom., lib. 66.£Eruption IN ISCHIA, A.D. 1302. 333entirely of lapiUi, sand, and fragments of older lava, as whenMonte Nuovo was thrown up in 1538. The first era at whichwe have authentic accounts of the flowing of a stream of lava,is the year 1036, which is the seventh eruption from the revivalof the fires of the volcano. A few years afterwards, in 1049,another eruption is mentioned, and another in 1188 (or 1139),after which a great pause ensued of one hundred and sixty-eightyears. During this long interval of repose, two minor ventsopened at distant points. In the first place it is on traditionthat an eruption took place from the Solfatara in the year1198, during the reign of Frederic II., Emperor of Germany ;and although no circumstantial detail of the event has reachedus from those dark ages, we may receive the fact without hesitation*. Nothing more, however, can be attributed to thiseruption, as Mr. Scrope observes, than the discharge of a lightand scoriform trachytic lava, of recent aspect, resting uponthe strata of loose tufa which covers the principal mass oftrachyte f* The other occurrence is well authenticated, — theeruption, in the year 130S, of a lava stream, from a new venton the south-east side of the island of Ischia. During part of1301, earthquakes had succeeded one another with fearfulrapidity ; and they terminated at last with the discharge of alava-stream from a point named the Campo del Arso, not farfrom the town of Ischia. This lava ran quite down to the sea —a distance of about two miles : in colour it varies from iron-greyto reddish black, and is remarkable for the glassy fel-sparswhich it pontus. Its surface is almost as sterile, after aperiod of five centuries, as if it had cooled down yesterday. Afew scantlings of wild thyme, and two or three other dwarfish ^plants, alone appear in the interstices of the scoriae, while theVesuvian lava of 1767 is already covered with a luxuriant vegetation,Pontus, whose country-house was burnt and overwhelmed,describes the dreadful scene as having lasted twomonths I . Many houses were swallowed up, and a partial emigrationof the inhabitants followed. This eruption produced noThe earnest authority, says Mr. Forbes, given for this fact, appears to beCapaccio, quoted in the Terra Trente of Bonito. £din. Jounu of Scl, &cNo. I., new series, p. 127, July, 1829.f Geol. Trans., vol. ii, part 3, p. 346, second series.{ Lib. tI, de Bello Neap., in Gnsvii Ihesaur.334 MONTE NUOVO FORMED A,t>. 1538.cone, but only a slight depression, hardly deserving the name of acrater, where heaps of black and red scoriae lie scattered around.Until this eruption, Ischia is generally believed to have enjoyedan interval of rest for about seventeen centuries ; but JuliusObsequies*, who flourished A.D. 214, refers to some volcanicconvulsion in the year 662, after the building of Rome.(91 B.C.) As Pliny, who lived a century before Obsequies,does not enumerate this among other volcanic eruptions, thestatement of the latter author is supposed to have been erroneous;but it would be more consistent, for reasons beforestated, to disregard the silence of Pliny, and to conclude thatsome subterranean commotion, probably of no great violence,happened at the period alluded to.To return to Vesuvius, — the next eruption occurred in1806 ; between which era and 1631 there was only one other(in 1500), and that a slight one. It has been remarked,that throughout this period Etna was in a state of such unusualactivity as to lend countenance to the idea that the great Sicilianvolcano may sometimes serve as a channel of discharge toelastic fluids and lava that would otherwise rise to the vents inCampania. The great pause was also marked by a memorableevent in the Phlegrsean Fields — the sudden formation of a newmountain in 15S8, of which we have received authentic accountsfrom contemporary writers. Frequent earthquakes, for twoyears preceding, disturbed the neighbourhood of Puzzuoli;but it was not until the Seth and 28th of September, 1538,that they became alarming, when not less than twenty shockswere experienced in twenty-for hours. At length, on thenight of the 29th, two hours after sunset, a gulph openedbetween the little town of Tripergola, which once existed onthe site of the Monte Nuovo, and the baths in its suburbswhich were much frequented. This watering place contained ahospital for those who resorted thither for the benefit of thethermal springs, and it appears that there were no fewer thanthree inns in the principal street. A large fissure approachedthe town with a tremendous noise, and began to dischargepumice-stones, blocks of unmelted lava and ashes mixed withwater, and occasionally flames. The ashes fell in immense• Prodlg. UUU^ c 114.>. ib3». 335quantities, even at Naples ; while the neighbouring Puzzuoli wasdeserted by its inhabitants. The sea retired suddenly for twohundred yards, and a portion of its bed was left dry. We shallafterwards, when treating of earthquakes, show by numerousproofs derived not only from the state of the Temple of Serapis(see Frontispiece), but from many other physical phenomena,that the whole coast, from Monte Niiovo to beyond Puzzuoli, wasat that time upraised to the height of many feet above the bedof the Mediterranean, and has ever since remained permanentlyelevated. On the 3rd of October the eruption ceased, sothat the hill (6g. I, No. 11), the great mass of which wasthrown up in a day and a night, was accessible; and thosewho ascended reported that they found a funnel-shaped crateron iU summit. (Fig. ft. No. 11.)1. Cone of Monte Nuovo. 2. Brim of crater of ditto.3. Their] spHng, culled Baths of Nero, or Stuff di Tivoli.The height of Monte Nuovo has recently been determined,by the Italian mineralogist Pine, to be four hundred and fortyEnglish feet above the level of the bay ; its base is abouteight thousand feet, or nearly a mile and a half, in circumference.According to Pine, the delhi of the crater is fourhundred and twenty-one English feet from the summit of thehill, so that its bottom is only nineteen feet above the level ofthe sea. No lava flowed from this cavity, but the ejected336 Volcanos OF THE PBLEORAAN FIELDS.matter consisted of pumiceous scoriae and masses of trachyte,many of them schistose, and resembling limestone. TheMonte Nuovo is declared, by the best authorities, to standpartly on the site of the Lucrine lake (fig. i. No. Is), which1. Monte Nuovo. 2. Honte Bu-baro.3. Lake Avenue. 4. Lucrine Lake.5. The SoUktacs. 6. PuiiuoU.7. Bay of Btitc.was nothing more than the crater of a coexistent volcano,and was almost entirely filled during the explosion of 15S8.Nothing now remains but a shallow pool, separated from thesea by an elevated beach, raised artificially.Immediately adjoining to Monte Nuovo is the larger volcaniccone of Monte fiarbaro (fig S, No. IS), the Taurus infants ofJuvenal— an appellation given to it probably from its deepcircular crater, which is about a mile in diameter. Large asis this cone, it was probably produced by a single eruption; andit does not, perhaps, exceed in magnitude some of the largestof those in Ischia, which there is every reason to believe tohave been formed within the historical era. It is composedchiefly of indurated tufa, like Monte Nuovo, stratified conformablyto its conical surface. This hill was once very celebratedfor its wines, and is still covered with vineyards ; but■Tbif repieMoUtiDii of th«Phlq;nMn Field* i*f«du«d from part of Plata mi.of Sir William Hamilton'* great work, "Camjn PhlegrKJ,'' to vidi m ntathe ntder for faithful lUlineatiDiu of the scenery of that country.VOLCANOS OF THE PHLEQRAAN FIELDS. 337Vfhen the vine is not in leaf it has a sterile appearance, andlate in the year, when seen from the beautiful bay of Baiae, itoften contrasts so strongly in verdure with Monte Nuovo,which is always clothed with arbutus, myrtle, and other wildevergreens, that a stranger might well imagine the cone ofolder date to be that thrown up in the sixteenth century.There is nothing, indeed, so calculated to instruct thegeologist, as the striking manner in which the recent volcanichills of Ischia, and that now under consideration, blend withthe surrounding landscape. Nothing seems wanting or redundant; every part of the picture is in such perfect harmonywith the rest, that the whole has the appearance of havingbeen called into existence by a single effort of creative power.What other result could we have anticipated, if Nature hasever been governed by the same laws ? Each new mountainthrown up — each new tract of land raised or depressed by earthquakes— should be in perfect accordance with those previouslyformed, if the entire configuration of the surface has been dueto a long series of similar convulsions. Were it true that thegreater part of the dry land originated simultaneously in itspresent state, and that additions were afterwards made slowlyand successively ; then, indeed, there might be reason to expecta strong line of demarcation between the signs of ancientand modern changes. But the continuity of the plan, and theperfect identity of the causes, are to many a source of deception,and lead them to exaggerate the energy of agents whichoperated in the earlier ages. In the absence of all historicalinformation they are as unable to separate the dates of theorigin of different portions of our continents, as is the strangerto determine, by their physical features alone, the distinct agesof Monte Nuovo, Monte Barbaro, Strong, and the Solfatara.The vast scale and violence of the volcanic operations in Campania,in the olden time, has been a theme of declamation, andhas been contrasted with the comparative state of quiescence ofthis delightful region in the modem era. Instead of inferring,from analogy, that the ancient Vesuvius was always at rest whenthe craters of the Phlegraean Fields were burning, — that eachHamilton observes, (writing in 1770,) " the new mountain produces as yetbut a very slender vegetation'* This remark was not applicable in 1828<— iCampi Pblegr«i| p. 69.Vol. I. Z33d Modern eruptionscone rose in succession, — and that many years, and often centuriesof repose intervened between each eruption — geologistsseem to have conjectured that the whole group sprung up fromthe ground at once, like the soldiers of Cadmus when he sowedthe dragons teeth. As well might they endeavour to persuadeus that on these Phlegraean Fields, as the poets feigned, thegiants warred with Jove ere yet the puny race of mortals werein being.For nearly a century after the birth of Monte Nuovo, Vesuviusstill continued in a state of tranquillity. There hadthen been no violent eruption for four hundred and ninety-twoyears ; and it appears that the crater was then exactly in thecondition of the present extinct volcano of Strong, nearNaples. Bracing, who visited Vesuvius not long before theeruption of 1631, gives the following interesting description ofthe interior. "The crater was five miles in circumference,and about a thousand paces deep ; its sides were covered withbrushwood, and at the bottom there was a plain on whichcattle grazed. In the woody parts wild-boars frequentlyharboured. In one part of the plain, covered with ashes, werethree small pools, one filled with hot and bitter water anotherSalter than the sea, and a third hot but tasteless *,^ But atlength these forests and grassy plains were suddenly consumed•'—blown into the air, and their ashes scattered to the winds. InDecember, 1681 , seven streams of lava poured at once from thecrater, and overflowed several villages on the flanks and at thefoot of the mountain. Resina, partly built over the ancient siteof Herculaneum, was consumed by the fiery torrent. Greatfloods of mud were as destructive as the lava itself, as oftenhappens during these catastrophes; for such is the violence ofrains produced by the evolution of aqueous vapour, that torrentsof water descend the cone, and, becoming charged withimpalpable volcanic dust, roll along loose ashes, acquiring suchconsistency as to deserve their ordinary appellation of *' aqueouslavasA brief period of repose ensued, which lasted only untilthe year 1666, from which time to the present there hasHamilton's Campi Phlegrai; folio, ?oLi., p. 62; and Break, CcoxpaiiMitome u, p. 186.rOP VESUVIUS. 339been a constant series of eruptions, with rarely an interval ofrest exceeding ten years. During these three centuries noirregular volcanic agency has convulsed other points in thisdistrict. Breslau remarked that such irregular convulsionshad occurred in the Bay of Naples, in every second century,as, for example, the eruption of the Solfatara in the twelfth,of the lava of Arso, in Ischia, in the fourteenth, and ofMonte Nuovo in the sixteenth ; but the eighteenth has formedan exception to this rule, and this seems accounted for by theunprecedented number of eruptions of Vesuvius during thatperiod ; whereas, when the new vents opened, there had alwaysbeen, as we have seen a long inheritance of activity in theprincipal volcano.IZCHAPTER XX.Dimensions and stmchire of the cone of Vesuvius — dikes in the recent cone, howformed — Section through Vesuvius and Somma — Vesuvian lavas and minerals— Effects on decomposition of lava — Alluvions called " aqueous lavas'—Origin and composition on the matter enveloping Herculaneum and PompeiiControversies on the subject — Condition and contents of the buried cities—Proofs of their having suffered by an earthquake — Small number of skele-tons—State of preservation of animal and vegetable substances — rolls ofPapyrus — Probability of future discoveries of MSS — Stable — torre delGreco — Concluding remarks on the destroying and renovating agency of theCampaniann volcanos.Structure of the cone of Vesuvius, — Between the end of theeighteenth century and the year 18S2, the great crater of Vesuviushad been gradually filled by lava boiling up from below,and by scoriae falling from the explosions of minor mouthswhich were formed at intervals on its bottom and sides. Inplace of a regular cavity, therefore, there was a rough androcky plain, covered with blocks of lava and scoriae, and cutby numerous fissures, from which clouds of vapour wereevolved. But this state of things was totally changed by theeruption of October, 1822, when violent explosions, duringthe space of more than twenty days, broke up and threw outall this accumulated mass, so as to leave an immense gulf orchasm, of an irregular, but somewhat elliptical shape, aboutthree miles in circumference when measured along the verysinuous and irregular line of its extreme margin, but somewhatless than three quarters of a mile in its longest diameter, whichwas directed from Nee. to S. W. * The depth of this tremendousabyss has been variously estimated, for from the hourof its formation it decreased daily, by the dilapidation of itssides. It measured at first, according to the accounts of someauthors, two thousand feet in depth from the extreme part of• Account of the Eruption of Vcsuvhis in October, 1822, by G. P. Scrope,esq., Joum. of Sci., &c., vol. xv., p. 175.STRUCTURE OP THE CONE OF VESUVIUS. 341the existing summit; but Mr. Scrope, when he saw it, soonafter the eruption, estimated its depth at less than half thatquantity. More than eight hundred feet of the cone was carriedaway by the explosions, so that the mountain was reducedin height from about four thousand two hundred to threethousand four hundred feet -f .As we ascend the sloping sides, the volcano appears a massof loose materials — ^a mere heap of rubbish, thrown togetherwithout the slightest order ; but on arriving at the brim of thdcrater, and obtaining a view of the interior, we are agreeablysurprised to discover that the conformation of the whole displaysin every part the most perfect symmetry and arrangement.The materials are disposed in regular strata slightly undulating,appearing, when viewed in front, to be disposed in horizontalplanes. But as we make the circuit of the edge of the craterand observe the cliffs by which it is encircled projecting orreceding in salient or retiring angles, we behold transversesections of the currents of lava and beds of sand andscoriae, and recognise their true dip. We then discover thatthey incline outwards from the axis of the cone, at anglesvarying from 30° to 46°. The whole cone, in fact, is composedof a number of concentric coatings of alternating lavas, sand,and scorise. Every shower of ashes which has fallen fromabove, and every stream of lava descending from the lips of thecrater, have conformed to the outward surface of the hill, sothat one conical envelope may be said to have been successivelyfolded round another, until the aggregation of the whole mountainwas completed. The marked separation into distinct bedsresults from the different colours and degrees of coarseness inthe sands, scorise, and lava, and the alternation of these witheach other. The greatest difficulty, on the first view, is to conceivehow so much regularity can be produced, notwithstandingthe unequal distribution of sand and scoriae, driven byprevailing winds in particular eruptions, and the small breadthof each sheet of lava as it first flows out from the crater. Buton a closer examination we find that the appearance of extremeuniformity is delusive, for when a number of beds thin outgradually, and at different points, the eye does not without differ.Forbes, Account of Mount Vesuvius, Edin. Joum. of Sci.^ No. xviii.,p. 195, Oct., 1826. t Ibid., p. 194.342 pTRUCTUftE OF THB CGNB OF YEffUVlUS,eulty recognise the termination of any one stratum, but usuallysupposes it continuous with some other, which at a short distancemay lie precisely in the same plane. The slight undulationsmoreover, produced by inequalities on th sides of thohill on which the successive layers were moulded, assists thedeception. As countless beds of sand and scoriae constitutethe greater part of the whole mass, these may sometimes mantlecontinuously round the whole cone ; and even lava-streams maybeof considerable breadth when first they overflow, since insome eruptions a considerable part of the upper portion of thecone breaks down at once, and may form a sheet extending iwfar as the space which the eye usually takes in in a single section.The high inclination of some of the beds, hind the firmunion of the particles even where there is evidently no cement,is another striking feature in the volcanic tuffs and breccias,which seems at first not very easy of explanation. But the lastgreat eruption afforded ample illustration of the manner in>irhich these strata are former). Fragments of lvii, scoriae,pumice, and sand, when they fall at slight distances from thesummit, are only half cooled down from a state of fusion, andare afterwards acted upon by the heat from within, and byfunerals or small crevices in the cone through which hotvapours are disengaged. Thus heated, the ejected fragmentscohere together strongly ; and the whole mass acquires suchconsistency in a few days, that fragments cannot be detachedwithout a smart blow of the hammer. At the same time sandand scoriae, ejected to a greater distance, remain incoherent *.The inclined strata before mentioned, which dip outwardsin all directions from the axis of the cone of Vesuvius, areintersected by veins or dikes of compact lava, for the most partin vertical position. In 18^, these were seen to be aboutseven in number, some of them not less than four or fivehundred feet in height, and thinning out before they reachedthe uppermost part of the cone. Being harder than the bedsthrough which they pass, they have resisted decomposition,and stand out in relief f.Monticello and Covelli, Astoria di Felon. del Veauy.,en 1821-2-3.f When I visited Vesuvius in November, 1828, 1 was prevented from descendinginto the crater by the constant ejections then thrown out. I only got sightpf three of the dikes, but Signor MontioeUi had previously had drawings made ofDike IN VESUVIUS; HOW FORMED. 3i3There can be no doubt that these dikes have been producedby the filling up of open fissures with liquid lava ; but of thedate of their formation we know nothing farther than that theyare all subsequent to the year 79, and, relatively speaking,that they are more modem than all the lavas and scoriae whichthey intersect. A considerable number of the upper strata,not traversed by them, must have been due to later eruptionsif the dikes were filled from below. That the earthquakeswhich almost invariably precede eruptions occasion rents inthe mass is well known ; and, in 1822, three months before thelava flowed out, open fissures, evolving hot vapours, werenumerous. It is clear that such rents must be injected withmelted matter when the column of lava rises, so that the originof the dikes is easily explained, as also the great solidity andcrystalline nature of the rock composing them, which has beenformed by lava cooling down slowly under great pressure.In the annexed diagram (No. 13.) it will be seen that, on theside of Vesuvius opposite to that where a portion of the ancientcone of Somma (a) still remains, is a projection (6) called thePedamentina, which some have supposed to be part of the circumferenceof the ancient crater broken down towards the sea,and over the edge of which the lavas of the modern Vesuviushave poured ; the axis of the present cone of Vesuvius being,according to Visconti, precisely equidistant from the escarpmentof Somma and the Pedamentina. But it has been objected(and not without reason) to this hypothesis, that if the Pedaland the escarpment of Somma were the remains of theoriginal crater ^ that crater must have been many miles indiameter, and more enormous than almost any one known onthe globe. It is, therefore, more probable that the ancientmountain was higher than Vesuvius (which, comparativelythe whole, which he showed me. The veins which I saw were on that side ofthe cone which is encircled hy Somma. In the March of the year before mentioned,an eruption began at the bottom of the deep gulf formed in 1822. Theejected matter had filled up nearly one-third of the original abyss in November, andthe same operation was slowly continuing, a single black cone being seen at thebottom in inmost continual activity. It is clear that these ejections may continuetill the throat of Vesuvius is filled up in the same manner as before 1822; andMr. Scrope has referred the frequent occurrence of volcanic cones without cratersto this cause. I found, in 1828, the lava of 1822 not yet cool on the north side ofthe cone, and evolving much heat and vapour from crevicesSECTION OF VESUVIUS AMD 60HUA.a. Honte Somma, or the Remains of the ancient cone of Vesuvius.(. The PedamentioB, a toTTsea-lika projection, encircling the base of the recentcone of VeniTiui, en the truth ride.c. Atria del Carlo*.dee. Crater hell by eniptioa of 1822./. Small cone thrown up in 1 Bes, ol ths bottom or the great crater.g^. Dilfei interesting SomniB.Asa, Dike iDteneettng the recent cone of Vcsaiius.speaking, is a volcano of no great height) ; and that the explosionsof the year 79 caused it not merely to disgorge thecontents of its crater, which had long been choked up, butblew up a great part of the cone itself: so that the wall ofSomma, and the ridge or terrace of the Pedamentina, were neverthe margin of a crater of eruption, but are the relics of aruined and truncated cone. It will be seen in the diagramthat the slanting beds of the cone of Vesuvius become horizontalin the Atrio del Cavallo (at c), where the base of the new conemeets the precipitous escarpment of Somma ; for when thelava flows down to this point, as happened in 18SS, its descendingcourse is arrested, and it then runs in another directionalong this small valley, circling round the base of the cone.Sand and scoriae, also, blown by the winds, collect at thebase of the cone, and are then swept away by torrents; so thatthere is always here a flattish plain, as represented. In thesame manner the small interior cone (/) must be composed ofsloping beds, terminating in a horizontal plain ; for while thisSo called from traveller leaving Out horse and mulet then when theypr^aie toOKeadthecone on foot.VESUVIAN LAVAS. 345monticule was gradually gaining height by successive ejectionsof lava and scoriae, in 1828, it was always surrounded by aflat pool of semi-fluid lava, into which scorise and sand werethrown.The escarpment of Somma exhibits a structure preciselysimilar to that of the cone of Vesuvius, but the beds are intersectedby a much greater number of dikes. The formation ofthis older cone does not belong to the historical era, and wemust not, therefore, enlarge upon it in this place ; but we shallhave occasion presently to revert to the subject, when we speakof a favorite doctrine of some modem geologists, concerning•* craters of elevation" (Erhebung's Craters), whereby, indefiance of analogy, the origin of the identical disposition ofthe strata and dikes in Vesuvius and Somma has been referredto a mode of operation totally dissimilar.Peruvian Lavas. — ^^The modern lavas of Vesuvius arecharacterized by a large proportion of augite (or pyroxene).When they are composed of this mineral and felspar, they maybesaid to differ in no way in composition from many of theandent volcanic rocks of Scotland. They are often porphyritic,containing disseminated crystals of augite, leucite, or someother mineral, imbedded in a more earthy base. These porphyriticlavas are often extremely compact, especially in thedikes both of Vesuvius and Somma, which, in hardness andspecific gravity, are by no means inferior to ordinary veins oftrap, and, like them, often preserve a remarkable parallelismin their two opposite faces for considerable distances. Inregard to the structure of the Vesuvian lavas on a great scale,there are no sections of sufficient depth to enable us to drawfair comparisons between them and the products of extinctvolcanos. At the fortress near Torre del Greco a section isexposed, fifteen feet in height, of a current which ran into thesea ; and it evinces, especially in the lower part, a decidedtendency to divide into rude columns. A still more strikingexample may be seen to the West of Torre del Annunziata,near Forte Scassato, where the mass is laid open by the sea tothe depth of twenty feet. In both these cases, however, therock may rather be said to be divided into numerous perpendicularfissures, than to be prismatic, although the same346 EFFECTS OF DECOMPOSITION ON Unpicturesqueeffect is produced. In the lava-currents of CentralFrance (those of the Vivarais, in particular), the uppermostportion, often forty feet or more in thickness, is an amorphousmass passing downwards into lava, irregularly prismatic ; and,under this, there is a foundation of regular and vertical columns,in that part of the current which must have cooled most slowly.But the lavas last mentioned are often one hundred feet ormore in thickness ; and we cannot expect to discover the samephenomenon in the shallow currents of Vesuvius, although itmay be looked for in modern streams in Iceland, which exceedeven those of ancient France in volume. Mr. Scrope* meii<*tons, that, in the cliffs encircling the great crater of the modemcone, he saw many currents offering a columnar division, andtome almost as regularly prismatic as any ranges of the olderbasalts ; and he adds, that \n some the spheroidal concretionarystructure, on a large scale, was equally conspicuous. Brieslakfalso informs us, that in the siliceous lava of 1737, which containsaugite, leucite, and crystals of felspar, he found veryregular prisms in a quarry near Torre del Greco ; which observationis confirmed by modern authorities |. The decompositionof some of the felspathic lavas, either by simple weathering,or by gaseous emanations, converts them from a hard toa soft clayey state, so that they no longer retain the smallestresemblance to rocks cooled down from a state of fusion. Theexhalations of sulphuretted hydrogen and muriatic acid whichare disengaged continually from the Solfatara, also producecurious changes on the trachyte of that extinct volcano : therock is whitened and becomes porous, fissile, and honeycombeditill at length it crumbles into a white siliceous powder §•Numerous globular concretions, composed of concentric laminae,are also formed by the same vapours in this decomposed rock||.They who have visited the Phlegrsean Fields and the volcanicregion of Sicily, and who are aware of the many problematicalappearances which igneous rocks of the most modemorigin assume, especially after decomposition cannot but be« Journ. of Sci., toL zv., p. 177. f Voy. dans la Campania, tome, i, p. 201.I Mr. Forbes, on Mount Venus, Edin. Journ. of Sci., No. ZTiii., Oct. 1828.Daubeny on Volcanos, p. 169.II Scrope, Geol. Trans., second series, vol. ii., p. 346,Peruvian MINERALS. 347astonished at the confidence with which the contending Nep-tunis and Vulcanists in the last century dogmatized on theigneous or aqueous origin of certain rocks of the remotest antiquity.Instead of having laboured to acquire an accurateacquaintance with the aspect of known volcanic rocks, and thetransmutations which they undergo subsequently to their firstconsolidation the adherents of both parties seem either to haveconsidered themselves born with an intuitive knowledge of thef fleets of volcanic operations, or to have assumed that theyrequired no other analogies than those which a laboratory andfurnace might supply.Peruvian Minerals. — A great variety of minerals are foundin the lavas of Vesuvius and Somma ; for there are so manycommon to both, that it is unnecessary to separate them,Augite, leucite, felspar, mica, olivine, and sulphur, are mostabundant. It is an extraordinary fact, that, in an area of threesquare miles round Vesuvius, a greater number of simplefunerals have been found than in any spot of the same dien*lions on the surface of the globe. Hay only enumerated threehundred and eighty species of simple minerals as known tohim, and no less than eighty-two had been found on Vesuviusbefore the end of the year 1828 *. Many of these are peculiarto that locality, Some mineralogists have conjectured that thegreater part of these were not of Vesuvian origin, but thrownpp in fragments from* some older formation, through which thegaseous explosions burst. But none of the older rocks inItaly, or elsewhere, contain such an assemblage of mineralproducts ; and the hypothesis seems to have been promptedby a disinclination to admit that, in times so recent in theearth^s history, the laboratory of Nature could have been soprolific in the creation of new and rare compounds. HadVesuvius been a volcano of high antiquity, formed when NatureWantoned as in her primo and play'd at willHer virgin fancies,it would have been readily admitted that these, or a muchgreater variety of substances, had been sublimed in the crevicesof lava, just as several new earthy and metallic compoundsare known to have been produced by fumeroles^ since theMeuticeUi and Covelli, Frodrom. della Funeral. Wa?*348 FLOWING OF LAVA UNDER WATER.eruption of 18S2. But some violent hypothesis must alwaysbe resorted to, in order to explain away facts which imply theunimpaired energy of reproductive causes, in our own times.We have hitherto described the structure of the cone ; butasmall part only of the ejected matter remains so near to thevolcanic orifice. A large portion of sand and scoriae is borneby the winds and scattered over the surrounding plains, or fallsinto the sea ; and much more is swept down by torrents intothe deep, during the intervals, often protracted for many centuries,between eruptions. There, horizontal deposits of tufaceousmatter become intermixed with sediment of other kinds,and with shells and corals, and, when afterwards raised, formrocks of a mixed character, such as tuffs, peperinos, and volcanicconglomerates. Some of the lavas, ako, of Vesuvius,reach the sea, as do those of almost all volcanos ; since they aregenerally in islands, or bordering the coast. Here they finda bottom already rendered nearly level, for reasons beforeexplained by us, when speaking of deltas. Instead, therefore,of being highly inclined, as around the cone, or in narrowbands as in a valley, they spread out in broad horizontal sheetsso long as they retain their fluidity ; and this process may probablycontinue for a considerable time, since, as upon the land,the upper coating of hardened lava protects the liquid andmoving mass below from contact with the air, so beneath thesea the same superficial crust may prevent the great body oflava from cooling, and, being pressed upon by the weight of anincreasing column of water as the current descends, it is probablysqueezed down : thus the subjacent matter, still in a stateof fusion, may be made to flow rapidly towards all points of thecompass. This would take place the more readily if the Hut-ionianassumption be true, that lava cools down more slowlyunder the pressure of a deep sea than in the open air, whichwas supposed to be a corollary from Sir James Hall's experimentsrespecting compression, whence it was inferred that vastpressure prevented water from expanding into steam. Buteven if such be the case, it by no means follows that the heatof the lava could be carried off more slowly than in the air, andin seas of ordinary depth there can be no doubt that the meltedmatter would cool far more rapidly under water.Besides the ejections which fall on the cone, and thatVOLCANIC ALLUVIONS. 349much greater mass which finds its way gradually to theneighbouring sea, there is a third portion often of no inconsiderablethickness composed of alluvions, spread over thevalleys and plains at small distances from the volcano. Immensevolumes of aqueous vapour are evolved from a craterduring eruptions, and often for a long time subsequentlyto the discharge of scoriae and lava. . These vapours arecondensed in the cold atmosphere surrounding the highvolcanic peak, and heavy rains are caused sometimes evenin countries where, under other circumstances, such a phenomenonis entirely unknown. The floods thus occasionedsweep along the impalpable dust and light scoriae, till a currentof mud is produced, which is called, in Campania, ** lavad'acqua," and is often more dreaded than an igneous stream(lava di fusco), from the greater velocity with which it moves.So late as the 27th of October, 1832, one of these alluvionsdescended the cone of Vesuvius. After overspreading muchcultivated soil, it flowed suddenly into the villages of St. Sebastianand Massa, and, filling the streets and interior of some ofthe houses, suffocated seven persons. It will therefore happenvery frequently, that, towards the base of a volcanic cone, alternationswill be found of lava, alluvions, and showers of ashes.To which of these two latter divisions the mass enveloping Herculaneumand Pompeii should be referred, has been a questionof the keenest controversy ; but the discussion might have beenshortened, if the combatants had reflected that, whether volcanicsand and ashes were conveyed to the towns by runningwater, or through the air, during an eruption, the interior ofbuildings, so long as the roofs remained entire, and all undergroundvaults and cellars, could only be filled by an alluvion.We learn from history, that a heavy shower of sand, pumice,and lapilli, sufficiently great to render Pompeii and Herculaneumuninhabitable, fell for eight successive days and nights,in the year 79, accompanied by violent rains. We ought,therefore, to find a very close resemblance between the stratacovering these towns, and those composing the minor cones ofthe Phlegraean Fields, accumulated rapidly, like Monte Nuovo,during a continued shower of ejected matter ; with this difference,that the strata incumbent on the cities would be horizontal,whereas those in the cones are highly inclined, and that350 Composition of tHK MASS EffVELOPINOlarge angular fragments of rock, which are thrown out nearthe vent would be wanting at a distance, where small lapillionly would be found. Accordingly, with these exceptions, noidentity can be more perfect than the form and distributionof the matter at the base of Monte Nuoto» as laid open bythe encroaching sea, and the appearance of the beds superimposedon Pompeii. That city is covered with numerousalterations of different horizontal beds of tuff and lapilli, forthe most part thin, and subdivided into very fine layers.I observed the following section near the Amphitheatre, inNovember, 18S8, — (descending series).1. Black sparkling sand from the eruption of 1822, containingminute regularly-formed crystals of augite and tourmalinefrom . • 2to3*8< Vegetable mould 83. Brown incoherent toff full c/tpitoHtie gloMet in layers, fromhalf an inch to 3 inches in thickness • • • .164. dial scores and white lapilli . • • • » 35. Brown earthy tuff with numerous ptsoUtic globules . 96. Brown earthy tuff with lapilli divided into layers • • 47. Layer of whitish lapilli .018. Grey solid tuff 39. Pumice and white lapilli • • • • . .0310 4Many of the ashes in these beds are vitrified and harsh tothe touch. Crystals of leucite, both fresh and farinaceous, havebeen found intermixed! . The depth of the bed of ashes abovethe houses is variable, but seldom exceeds twelve or fourteenfact, and it is said, that the higher part of the Amphitheatrealways projected above the surface; though, if this were thecasts it seems to be inexplicable that the city should neverhave been discovered till the year 1760. It will be observed,in the above section that two of the brown haIf<-consoli-•• The last great eruption, in 1822^ only caused a covering of a few inches^wk on Pompeii. Several feet are mentioned by Mr. Forbes — Ed. Joum. ofS'kvuciS No. x\x.f p. 131, Jan. 1829 ; but he must have measured in spots where it)s4^i UriftiMl. The dust and ashes were five feet thick at the top of the crater,Ai^^( iWrt^ased gradually to ten inches at Torre del Annunziata. The size and«v^))Hl Mf the ejected fragments diminished very regularly in the same ccwtinuooimedium M the distance from the centre of projection was greater.f Forbes £d. Jours. of Bono six., ^ 130, Jan, 1829.Herculaneum AND POllPEII. 351dated tuffs are filled with small politic globules. It issurprising that this circumstance is not alluded to in theanimated controversy which the Royal Academy of Naplesmaintained with one of their members, Signor Lippi, as to theorigin of the strata incumbent on Pompeii. The mode ofaggregation of these globules has been fully explained by Mr.Scrope, who saw them formed in great numbers, in 182S, byrain falling during the eruption on fine volcanic sand andsometimes, also, beheld them produced like hail in the air, bythe mutual attraction of the minutest particles of fine dampsand. Their occurrence, therefore, agrees remarkably wellwith the account of heavy rain, and showers of sand and ashes,recorded in history, and is opposed to the theory of an allurelion brought from a distance by a food of water*Lippi entitled his work *' Fu il fusco o 1* aqua che sotterr6Pompey ed Ercolano ?^* and he contended that neither were thetwo cities destroyed in the year 79, nor by a volcanic eruption,but purely by the agency of water charged with transportedmatter. His Letters, wherein he endeavoured to dispense, as faras possible, with igneous agency, even at the foot of the volcano,were dedicated with great propriety to Werner, and afford anamusing illustration of the polemic style in which geologicalwriters of that day indulged themselves. His arguments werepartly of an historical nature, derived from the silence of contemporaryhistorians, respecting the fate of the cities which,as we have already stated, is most remarkable ; and were partlydrawn from physical proofs. He pointed out with great clearnessthe resemblance of the tufaceous matter in the vaults andcellars at Herculaneum and Pompeii to aqueous alluvions,and its distinctness from ejections which had fallen throughtheir. Nothing, he observed, but moist] pasty matter couldhave received the impression of a woman's breast, which wasfound in a vault at Pompeii, or have given the cast of a statuediscovered in the theatre at Herculaneum. It was objected tohim, that the heat of the tuff in Herculaneum and Pompeiiwas proved by the carbonization of the timber, corn, papyrus*rolls, and other vegetable substances there discovered: butLippi replied with truth, that the papyri would have been« Napoli, 1816»352 COMPOSITION OF THE MASS ENVELOPINGburnt^upy if they had come in contact with fire, and that theirbeing only carbonized, was a dear demonstration of their havingbeen enveloped , like fossil wood, in a sediment deposited fromwater. The Academicians, in their report on his pamphlet,assert, that when the Amphitheatre was first cleared out, thematter was arranged, on the steps, in a succession of concavelayers, accommodating themselves to the interior form of thebuilding, just as snow would lie if it had fallen there. Thisobservation is highly interesting, and points to the differencebetween the stratification of ashes in an open building, and inthe interior of edifices and cellars. Nor ought we to callthis allegation in question, because it could not be substantiatedat the time of the controversy, when the matter was allremoved ; although Lippi took advantage of this removal, andmet the argument of his antagonists by requiring them toprove the fact.There is decisive evidence that no stream of lava has everreached Pompeii since it was first built, although the foundationsof the town stand upon the old leucitic lava of Somma ;several of whose streams, with tuff interposed, have been cutthrough in excavations. At Herculaneum the case is different,although the substance which fills the interior of the housesand the vaults must have been introduced in a state of mud,like that found in similar situations in Pompeii : the superincumbentmass differs wholly in composition and thickness.Herculaneum was situated several miles nearer to the volcano,and has therefore been always more exposed to be covered, notonly by showers of ashes, but by alluvions and streams oflava. Accordingly, masses of both have accumulated on eachother above the city, to a depth of nowhere less than seventy,and in many places of one hundred and twelve feet*. Thetufi^ which envelops the buildings consists of comminutedvolcanic ashes, mixed with pumice. A mask imbedded in thismatrix has left a cast, the sharpness of which was compared byHamilton to those in Paris plaster ; nor was the mask in theleast degree scorched, as we might expect it to have been, if ithad been imbedded in heated matter. This tuff^is porous, and,when first excavated, is soft and easily worked, but acquiresHamilton's Obserrfttlons oa Mount Vesuvius, p. 94. London, 1774.HBftCULANKUM AND Pompeii. 353a considerable degree of induration on exposure to the air.Above this lowest stratum is placed, according to Hamilton,*• the matter of six eruptions'' each separated from the other byveins of good soil. In these soils Lippi informs us, that he collecteda considerable number of land shells — san observationwhich is no doubt correct, for we know that in Italy severalspecies burrow annually, in certain seasons, to the depth offive feet and more from the surface. Delia Torre also informsus, that there is in one part of this superimposed mass a bedof true siliceous lava flava di pietro dura) ; and, as no suchcurrent is believed to have flowed till near one thousandyears after the destruction of Herculaneum, we must conclude,that the origin of a large part of the covering of Herculaneumwas long subsequent to the first inhumation of the place. Thatcity, as well as Pompeii, was a sea-port. Herculaneum is stillvery near the shore, but a tract of land, a mile in length,intervenes between the borders of the Bay of Naples andPompeii. In both cases the gain of land is due to the fillingup of the bed of the sea with volcanic matter, and not to elevationby earthquakes, for there has been no change in the relativelevel of land and sea. Pompeii stood on a slight eminencecomposed of the lavas of the ancient Vesuvius, and flights ofsteps led down to the water's edge. The lowermost of thesesteps are said to be still on an exact level with the sea.After these observations on the nature of the strata envelopingand surrounding the cities, we may proceed to considertheir internal condition and contents, so far at least as they<ifier facts of geological interest. Notwithstanding the muchgreater depth at which Herculaneum was buried, it was discoveredbefore Pompeii, by the accidental circumstance of awell being sunk, in 1718, which came right down upon thetheatre, where the statues of Hercules and Cleopatra were soonfound. Whether this city or Pompeii, both of them foundedby Greek colonies, was the most considerable, is not yet determined; but both are mentioned by ancient authors as amongthe seven most flourishing cities in Campania. The walls ofPompeii were three miles in circumference ; but we have, as yet,BO certain knowledge of the dimensions of Herculaneum. Inthe latter place the theatre alone is open for inspection ; theForum, Temple of Jupiter, and other buildings, having beenSoul. 2 A354 OBJECTS PRB8BRVBD IN 'filled up with rubbish as the wotkmdi proceeded, owing to thedifficulty of removing it from so great a depth below ground*Even the theatre is only seen by torch-light and the mostinteresting information, perhaps, which the geoli^st obtainsthere, is the continual formation of stalactite in the galleriescut through the tuff; for there is a constant population ofwater charged with carbonate of lime mixed with a small portionof magnesia. Such mineral waters must, in the course oftime, create great changes in many rocks : and we cannot butperceive the unreasonableness of the expectations of somegeologists, that volcanic rocks of remote eras should accordprecisely with those of modem date; since it is obvious thatmany of those produced in our own time will not long retainthe same aspect and composition.Both at Herculaneum and Pompeii, temples have beenfound with inscriptions commemorating their having beenrebuilt after they were thrown down by an earthquakes.This earthquake happened in the reign of Neix>» sixteen yearsbefore the inhumation of the cities. In Pompeii, one-fourthof which is now laid open to the day, both the public and privatebuildings bear testimony to the catastrophe. The wallsare rent, and in many places traversed by fissures still open.Columns are lying on the ground only half hewn from hugeblocks of travertin, and the temple for which they were deignedis seen half repaired. In some few places the pavement hadsunk in, but in general it was undisturbed, consisting of greatflags of lava, in which two immense ruts have been worn bythe constant passage of carriages through the narrow streetWhen the hardness of the stone is considered, the continuityof these ruts from one end of the town to the other is not alittle remarkable, for there is nothing of the kind in the oldestpavements of modern cities.A very small number of skeletons have been discoveredin either city ; and it is clear that the great mass of inhabitantsnot only foimd time to escape, but also to carry withthem the principal part of their valuable effects. In thebarracks at Pompeii were the skeletons of two soldierschained to the stocks, and in the vaults of a country-house• SwiBbuns and LtltndS" ■ Padtrni, Phil. T^ini., 176S, ?ol. 50^ p. 619.HmCULAHBVH AND Forfeit. 365in the suburbs, were the skeletons of seventeen persona whoappear to have fled there to escape from the shower of ashes.They were found inclosed in. an indurated tnff^and in thismatrix was presented a perfect cast of a woman, perhaps themistress of the bouse, with an infant in her arms. Ahhonghher form was imprinted on the rock, nothing but the bonesremained. To these a drain of gold was suspended and ringswith jewels were on the fingers of the skeleton. Against thesides of the same vault was ranged a long line of earthenamplMwse.The writings scribbled by the soldiers on the walls of theirbarracks, and the names of the owners of each house writtenover the docMrs, are still perfectly legible. The colours offresco paintings on the stuccoed walls in the interior of buildingsare almost as vivid as if they were just finished. Ifthese artificial colours, t he before, have stood, it is not wonderfulthat those of shells should have remained unfaded. Thereare public fountains decorated with shells laid out in patternsin the same fashion as those now seen in the town of Naples;and in the room of a painter who was perhaps a natmahst, alarge collection of shells was found, comprising a great varietyof Mediterranean pedes, in as good a state of preservation as tfthey had remained tor the same number of years in a museum.A comparison of these remains with those found so generally inafossil state would not assist us in obtaining the least insight solothe time required to produce a certain degree of decompositionor generalisation ; for although, under favourable circumstancesmuch greater alteration might doubtless have been broughtabout in a shorter period, yet the example before us shows thatan inhumation of seventeen centuries may sometimes elieetnothing towards the reduction of shells and several other bodiesto the state in which fossils are usually found.The wooden beams in the houses at Herculaneum are Lad(on the exterior, but when cleft open they appear to be almostin the state oi ordinary wood, and the progress made by thewho mass towards the state of lignite is scarcely appreciable.Some animal and v^etaUe substances of more perishable kindshave oi course suffered much change and decay, yet the stateof conservation of these is truly remarkable. Fishing-netsare very abundant in both dties^ often quite entire; and their2 A2356 PAFTRI IN HBRCULANEI7U.number at Pompeii is the more interesting from the sea bangnow, as we stated a mile distant. Linen has been foundat Herculaneum, with the texture well defined; and in afruiterer's shop in that dty were discovered . vessels full ofalmonds) chestnuts, walnuts, and fruit of the ^^ carubiere,^all distinctly recognizable from their shape. A loaf also, stillretaining its form was found in a baker's shop, with his namestamped upon it thus: " Eleris Q. Crane Riser On thecounter of an apothecary was a box of pills converted into afine earthy substance ; and by the side of it a small cylindricalroll, evidently prepared to be cut into pills. By the side ofthese was a jar containing medicinal herbs. In 1827, moistolives were found in a square glass case, and '^ caviare or roeof a fish, in a state of wonderful preservation. An examinationof these curious condiments has been published byCorelli of Naples, and they are preserved hermetically sealedin the museum there*.There is a marked difference in the condition and appearanceof the animal and vegetable substances found in Pompeii andHerculaneum ; those of Pompeii being penetrated by a greypulverulent tuff, those in Herculaneum seeming to have beenfirst enveloped by a paste which consolidated round them, andthen allowed them to become slowly carbonized. Some of therolls of papyrus at Pompeii still retain their form ; but the writing,and indeed almost all the vegetable matter, appear to havevanished and to have been replaced by volcanic tufa somewhatpulverulent. At Herculaneum the earthy matter has scarcelyever penetrated ; and the vegetable substance of the papyrushas become a thin amiable black matter, almost resembling inappearance the tinder which remains when stiff* paper has beenburnt, in which the letters may still be sometimes traced. Thesmall bundles, composed of five or six rolls tied up together, hadsometimes lain horizontally, and were pressed in that direction,but sometimes they had been placed in a vertical position. Smalltickets were attached to each bundle, on which the title of thework was inscribed. In one case only have the sheets beenfound with writing on both sides of the pages. So numerousare the obliterations and corrections, that many must have been« Mr. forbes, Sin. Jotixn. of Sd.; No. six., p. 130, Jaa, 1629,PAPYRI IN BBRCULANEtJM. 357original manuscripts. The variety of hand-writings is quiteextraordinary : almost all are written in Greek, but there are afew in Latin. They were all found in the library of one privateindividual ; and the titles of four hundred of those least injured,which have been read, are found to be unimportant works,but all entirely new, chiefly relating to music, rhetoric, andcookery. There are two volumes of Epicurus " On Nature,"and the others are mostly by writers of the same school, onlyone fragment having been discovered, by an opponent of theEpicurean system, Crispus*. In the opinion of some antiquaries,not one-hundredth part of the city has yet beenexplored; and the quarters hitherto cleared out, at greatexpense, are those where there was the least probability ofdiscovering manuscripts.As Italy could already boast splendid Roman amphitheatresand Greek temples, it was a matter of secondary interest toadd to. their number those in the dark and dripping galleriesof Herculaneum ; and having so many of the masterpieces ofancient art, we could have dispensed with the inferior bustsand statues which could alone have been expected to reward ourresearches in the ruins of a provincial town. But from themoment that it was ascertained that rolls of papyrus preservedin this city could still be deciphered, every exertion ought tohave been steadily and exclusively directed towards the discoveryof other libraries. Private dwellings should have beensearched, and no labour and expense should have been consumedin examining public edifices. A small portion of thatzeal and enlightened spirit which prompted the late Frenchand Tuscan expedition to Egypt, might, long ere this, in acountry nearer home, have snatched from oblivion some ofthe lost works of the Augustan age, or of the most eminentGreek historians and philosophers. A single roll of papyrusmight have disclosed more matter of intense interest than allthat was ever written in hieroglyphics .In one of the manuscript which was in the hands of the interpreters when IVisited the museum, the author indulges in the speculation that all the Homericpersonages were allegorical — that Agamemnon was the ether, Achilles the sun,Helen the earth, Paris the air, Hector the moon, &cf During my stay at Naples, in 1828, the Neapolitan Government, after havingdiscontinued operations for many years, cleared out a small portion of Herculesnenm; near the sea, where the covering was least thick. After this expense956 DESTSOCnON OF Tore UBI. GSECaBesides the cities already mentioned, Stdbfae, a small townabout six miles from Vesuvius, and near the site of the modenaCastel-a-Mare (see map, plate 8), was overwhelmed duringthe eruption of 79. Pliny mentions that, when his unde wasthere, he was obliged to make his escape, so great was thequantity ol falling stones and ashes. In the ruins of thisplace, a few skeletons have been found buried in volcanicsections together with some antiquities of no great value, androlls of papjmis, which, like those of Pompeii, were illegible.Of the towns hitherto mentioned, Herculaneum alone hasbeen overflowed by a stream of melted matter ; but this didnot, as we have seen, enter or injure the buildings wludi werepreviously endowed and covered over with tuff. But burningtorrents have often taken their course through the streets ofTorre del Greco, and consumed or inclosed a large portion ofthe town in solid rock. It seems [probable that the destructionof three thousand of its inhabitants, in 1681, which some accounts attribute to boiling water, was principally due to oneof those alluvions which we before mentioned; but, in 1787,the lava itself flowed through the eastern side of the town, andafterwards reached the sea: and, in 1794, another currentrolling over the western side, filled the street and houses, andkilled more than four hundred persons. The main street isnow quarried through this lava, which supplied building-stonesfor new houses erected where others had been annihilated.The church was half buried in a rocky mass, but the upperportion served as the foundation of a new edifice* The numberof the population at present is estimated at fifteen thousand; and a satisfactory answer may readily be returned tothose who inquire how the inhabitants can be so '^ inattentiveto the voice of time and the warnings of Natures as to rebuildtheir dwellings on a spot so often devastated. No neighbouringsite unoccupied by a town, or which would not be equallyinsecure, combines the same advantages of proximity to thehad been incurred, it wai discovered that the whole of the ground had been previouslyexamined, near a century before, by the French Prince d'Elbeuf, who hadremoved everything of value ! The want of system with which operation! havealways been, and still are, carried on is such, that we may expect similar blundersto be made continually.Sir H. Davy, Consolations in Tnvel| p. 66.JMFLSCXIONB ON The Buried Cities. 359captain to the sea* and to the rich lands on the flanks of Vesuvius.If the present population were exiled, they would immediatelybe replaced by another, for the same reason that theMaremma of Tuscany and the Campagna di Roma will neverbe depopulated, although the malaria fever commits morehavoc in a. few years than the Vesuvian lavas in as manycenturies. The district around Naples supplies one, amongstinnumerable examples, that those regions where the surface ismost frequently renewed, and where the renovation is accompanied,at different intervals of time, by partial destruction ofanimal and vegetable life, may nevertheless be amongst themost habitable and delightful on our globe. We have alreadyniade a similar remark when speaking of tracts where aqueouscauses are now most active ; and the observation applies as wellto parts of the surface which are the abode of aquatic animals,as to those which support terrestrial species. The sloping sidesof Vesuvius eve nourishment to a vigorous and healthy populationof about eighty thousand souls ; and the surrounding hillsand plains, together with several of the adjoining isles, owethe fertility of their soil to matter ejected by prior eruptions*Had the fundamental limestone of the Apennines remaineduncovered throughout the whole area, the country could nothave sustained a twentieth part of its present inhabitants. Thiswill be apparent to every geologist who has marked the changein the agricultural character of the soil the moment he haspassed the utmost boundary of the volcanic ejections, as whenfor example, at the distance of about seven miles from Vesuvius,he leaves the plain and ascends the declivity of the SerpentineHills.Yet favoured, as this region has been by Nature from timeimmemorial, the signs of the changes imprinted on it during theperiod that it has served as the habitation of man, may appearin after-ages to indicate a series of unparalleled disasters*Let us suppose that at some future time the Mediterraneanshould form a gulf of the great ocean, and that the tidal currentshould encroach on the shores of Campania, as it nowadvances upon the eastern coast of England : the geologist willthen behold the towns already buried, and many more whichwill inevitably be entombed hereafter, laid open in the steepdiffs, where he will discover streets superimposed above each360 KEFtECnOlCS OK THE BinUBD CTTISS.Other, with thkk interreiiiog santa of toff or lava — Bone no*scathed by fire, like those of Herculaneum and Pompey], othershalf melted down like those of Tcnre del Greco, or shatteredand thrown about in strange confusion like Tripeigola. Amongthe ruins will be seen skeletons of men, and impressions ofthe human form stamped in solid rocks of tuff. Ncx" willthe signs of earthquakes be wanting. The pavement of partof the Domitian Way, and the Temple of the Nymphs, submergedat high tide, will be uncovered at low water, thecolumns remaining erect and uninjured ; while other templeswhich had once sunk down, like that of Serapis, will be foundto have been upraised again by subsequent movements. Ifthey who study these phenomena and speculate on theircauses, assume that there were periods when the laws of Naturediffered from those established in their own time, they willscarcely hesitate to refer the wonderful monuments in questionto those primeval ages. When they consider the numerousproofs of reiterated catastrophes to which the re^on was subject,they may, perhaps, commiserate the unhappy fate of beingscondemned to inhabit a planet during its nascent and chaoticstate, and feel grateful that their favoured race escaped suchscenes of anarchy and misrule.Yet what was the real condition of Campania during thoseyears of dire convulsion ? ''A climate where heaven's breathsmells sweet and wooingly — a vigorous and luxuriant natureunparalleled in its productions — a coast which was once thefairy land of poets, and the favourite retreat of great men.Even the tyrants of the creation loved this alluring r^on,spared it, adorned it, lived in it, died in it ^'^ The inhabitants,indeed, have enjoyed no immunity from the calamities whichare the lot of mankind; but the principal evils which theyhave suffered must be attributed to moral, not to physicalcauses — to disastrous events over which man might have exerciseda control, rather than to the inevitable catastrophes whichresult from subterranean agency. When Spartacus encampedhis army of ten thousand gladiators in the old extinct crater ofVesuvius, the volcano was more justly a subject of terror toCampania than it has ever been since the rekindling of its fires.Forth*! Italy, roLii.CHAPTER XXI.Steal physiognomy of Etna— Ifinor cones produced by lateral eraptbiSuoceniYe obliteration of ibese con e a E army eniptiona of Etna — MonthRosa thrown up in 1669— great fissure of S. Lio— Towns overflowed bylava — part of Catania destroyed — mode of the advance of a current of lavaexcavation of a church under lava — Series of subterranean caverns-lineardirection of cones formed in 1811 and 1819 — Flood produced in 1755by the melting of snow during an eruption — A glacier covered by a lava*stream on Etna— Volcanic eruptions in Iceland — New island thrown up in1783— Two lavarcunrents of Skapt&r Jokul in the same year— llieir immensevolume — Eruption of Jorullo in Mezico-^Humboldt's Theory respecting theconvexity of the Plain of Malpais.As we have entered into a detailed historical account of thechanges in the volcanic district round Naples, our limits willonly permit us to allude in a cursory manner to some of thecircumstances of principal interest in the history of othervolcanic mountains. After Vesuvius, our most authenticrecords relate to Etna, which rises near the sea in solitarygrandeur to the height of nearly eleven thousand feet *, themass being chiefly composed of volcanic matter ejected abovethe surface of the water. The base of the cone is almost circular,and eighty-seven English miles in circumference ; but ifwe include the whole district over which its lavas extend, thecircuit is probably twice that extent. The cone is divided byNature into three distinct zones, called the fertile the woody ^and the desert regions. The first of these, comprising thedelightful country around the skirts of the mountain, is wellcultivated, thickly inhabited, and covered with olives, vines,com, fruit-trees, and aromatic herbs. Higher up, the woodyregion encircles the mountain — an extensive forest, six or sevenmiles in width, affording pasturage for numerous flocks. Thetrees are of various species, the chestnut, oak, and pine, beingmost luxuriant; while, in some tracts, are groves of corkAccording' to Captain Smyth (Sicily and its Islandtfy p. 145); its height is10,874 feet362 MINOR yOLCAN08 ON Etna.and beech. Above the forest is the desert region, a waste oiblack lava and scoriae ; where, on a kind of plain, rises thecone to the height of about eleven hundred feet, from whichsulphureous vapours are continually evolved. The most grandand original feature in the physiognomy of Etna are the multitudeof minor cones which are distributed over its flanks,and which are most abundant in the woody regkxi. l^iese,although they appear but trifling irregularities when viewedfitmi a distance as subordinate parts of so imposing and colossala mountain, would, nevertheless, be deemed hills of considerablealtitude in almost any other r^on.Without enumerating numerous continues of ashes thrownout at different points, there arp about eighty of these secondaryvolcanos, of considerable dimensions ; fifty-two on the westand north, and twenty-seven on the east side of Etna. Oneof the largest, called Monte Ricardo, near Bronze, is upwardsof seven hundred feet in height : and a double hill near Nicolaicalled Monti Rossi, formed in 1669, is four hundred and fiftyfeet high, and the base two miles in circumference; so thatit somewhat exceeds in gaze Monte Nuovo, before described.Yet it ranks only as a cone of the second magnitude amongstthose produced by the lateral eruptions of Etna. On lookingdown from the lower borders of the desert r^on, thesevolcanos present us with one of the most beautiful and characteristicscenes in Europe. They afford every variety ofheight and size, and are arranged in beautiful and picturesquegroups. However uniform they may appear when seen fromthe sea, or the plains below, nothing can be more diversifiedthan their shape when we look from above into their craters, oneside of which is generally broken down. There are, indeed,few objects in Nature more picturesque than fi wooded volcaniccrater. The cones situated in the higher parts of the forestZone are chiefly clothed with lofty pines ; while those at a lowerelevation are adorned with chestnuts, oak, beech, and holm.The history of the eruptions of Etna, imperfect and interruptedas it is, affords, nevertheless, a full insight into the mannerin which the whole mountain has successively attained itspresent magnitude and internal structure. The principal conehas more than once fallen in, and been reproduced. In 1444it was three hundred and twenty feet high, and fell in after theBURIED Cones ON ETNA* 363earthquakes of 1587. In the year 1698/when a violent earthsquake shook the whole of Sicily, and killed sixty thousandpersons, the cone lost so much of its height, says Boooone»that it could not be seen frcHn several places in Valdemone,whence it was before visible. The greater number of eruptionshappen either from the great crater, or from lateral openingsin the desert region. When hills are thrown up in themiddle zone, and project beyond the general level, they graduallylose their height during subsequent eruptions; for whenlava runs down from the upper parts of the mountain, andencounters any of these hills, the stream is divided, and flowsround them so as to elevate the gently-sloping grounds fromwhich they rise. In this manner a deduction is often made atonce of twenty or thirty feet, or even more, from their height.Thus, one of the minor cones, called Monte Peluso, was diminishedin altitude by a great lava-stream which encircled it in1444 ; and another current has recently taken the same course —yet this hill still remains four or five hundred feet high. Thereis a cone called Monte Nulla, near Nicolai, round the .baseof which several successive currents have flowed and showersof ashes fallen since the time of history, till at last, during aneruption in 1586, the surrounding plain was so raised, thatthe top of the cone alone was left projecting above the generallevel. Monte Nero, situated above the Grotto dell' Capre, wasin 1766 almost submerged by a current ; and Monte Capreoloafforded, in the year 1669> a curious example of one of the laststages of obliteration ; for a lava-stream descending on a highridge which had been built up by the continued superpositionof successive lavas, flowed directly into the crater, and nearlyfilled it. The lava, therefore, of each new lateral cone tendsto detract from the relative height of lower cones above theirbase : so that the flanks of Etna, sloping with a gentle inclinedtion, envelop in succession a great multitude of minor volcanos,while new ones spring up from time to time ; and thishas given to the older parts of the mountain, as seen in somesections two or three thousand feet perpendicular, a complexand highly interesting internal structure.Etna appears to have been in activity from the earliest timesof tradition ; for Diodorus Stimulus mentions an eruption whichcaused a district to be deserted by the Sicani before the Trojan364 BBUPTtOH OP ETNA A. D. 1669*var. Thucydides iDfonns us *, that between the commutationof Si^y by the Greeks, and the commencement of the Peloponnesianwar in the year 4S1 B.C., three eruptions had occurred.The Must of these happened in the year 4S7 B.C', and ravagedthe environs of Catania ; and was probably that so poeticallydescribed by Pindar in his first Pythian ode.The great eruption which happened in the year 1669 is thefirst to which we shall call the reader's attention. An earthquakehad levelled to the ground all the houses in Nicolost, atown situated near the lower margin of the woody region,about twenty miles from the summit of £thai and ten funthe sea at Catania. Two gulphs then opened near that town,from whence sand and scoriae were thrown up in such quantity,that, in the course of three or four months, a double come wasfanned, called Monti Rose, about four hundred and fifty feet1. Monti Ron, near Nicolai, fanned in 1669. 2. Vunpeluw !> ^high. But the most extraordinary phenomenon occurred atthe commencement of the convulsion in the neighbouring plainof S. Lio. A fissure six feet broad, and of unknown depth,opened with a loud crash, and ran, in a somewhat tortuouscourse, to within a mile of the summit of Etna. Its directionwas from north to south, and its length twelve miles. It• Book III., howard the eod.t The hill which I litre here introduced wu called hy mj guide Lampoon,but the name giieu in the text ii the nearest to tria which I find in QemmeUaro'iCatalogue of Minor Cmw*.EltUPTION OF Etna A. D. 1669. 365emitted a most vivid light. Five other parallel fissures of considerablelength afterwards opened one after the other, andemitted smoke, and gave out bellowing sounds which wereheard at the distance of forty miles. This case seems to presentthe geologist with an illustration of the manner in whichthose continuous dikes of vertical porphyry were formed whichare seen to traverse some of the older lavas of Etna; forthe light emitted from the great rent of S. Lio appears toindicate that it was filled to a certain height with incandescentlava, probably to the height of an orifice not far distant fromMonti Rossi, which at that time opened and poured out a lava-current.This lava soon reached a minor cone called Compilers,at the base of which it entered a subterranean grotto communicatingwith a suite of caverns which are common in the lavasof Etna. Here it appears to have melted down some of thevaulted foundations of the hill, so that the whole cone becameslightly depressed and traversed by numerous open fissures.The lava, after overflowing fourteen towns and villages, somehaving a population of between three and four thousand inhabitants,arrived at length at the walls of Catania. These hadbeen purposely rased to protect the city ; but the burning floodaccumulated till it rose to the top of the rampart, which wassixty feet in height, and then it fell in a fiery cascade and overwhelmedpart of the city. The wall, however, was not throwndown, but was discovered long afterwards by excavations madein the rock by the Prince of Discard ; so that the traveller maynow see the solid lava curling over the top of the rampart as ifstill in the very act of falling.This great current had performed a course of fifteen milesbefore it entered the sea, where it was still six hundredyards broad and forty feet deep. It covered some territoriesin the environs of Catania, which had never before beenvisited by the lavas of Etna. While moving on, its surfacewas in general a mass of solid rock ; and its mode of advancing,as is usual with lava-streams, was by the occasional fis-duringof the solid walls. A gentleman of Catania, namedPappalardo, desiring to secure the city from the approachof the threatening torrent, went out with a party of fiftymen whom he had dressed in skins to protect them fromthe heat, and armed with iron crows and hooks. They brokeS66 aUBTBRIUNBAN OAVBRNi OF Etna.open c»ie of the Bold walls which flanked the currentBelpasso, and immediately forth issued a rivulet of melted matterwhich took the direction of Patent ; but the inhabitants of thattown, being alarmed for their safety, took up arms and put astop to farther operations*. As another illustration of thesolidity of the walls of an advancing lava-stream we may mentionan adventure related by Becupox), who in 1766, hadascended a small hill formed of ancient volcanic matter tobehold the slow and gradual approach of a fiery current,two miles and a half broad ; when suddenly two small threadsof liquid matter issuing from a crevice detached themselvesfrom the main stream, and ran rapidly towards the hill. Heand his guide had just time to escape, when they saw the hill,which was fifty feet in height, surrounded, and in a quarterof an hour meted down into the burning mass, so as to flowon with it. But it must not be supposed that this compilefusion of rocky matter coming in contact with lava is of universal,or even common occurrence. It probably happenswhen fresh portions of incandescent matter come successivelyin contact with fusible materials. In many of the dikes whichintersect the tufts and lavas of Etna, there is scarcely anyperceptible alteration effected by heat on the edges of thehorizontal beds, in contact with the vertical and more crystallinemass. On the site of Compilers, one of the towns overflowedin the great eruption above described, an excavation wamade in 1704 ; and by immense labour the workmen reached, atthe depth of thirty-five feet, the gate of the principal church,where there were three statues, held in high veneration. Oneof these, together with a bell, some money, and other articles,were extracted in a good state of preservation fn»n beneath agreat arch formed by the lava. It seems very extraordinarythat any works of art, not encased with tufi^, like those inHerculaneum, should have escaped fusion in hollow spacesleft open in this lava-current, which was so hot at Cataniaeight years after it entered the town, that it was impossibleto hold the hand in some of the crevices.We mentioned the entrance of the lava-stream into a subterraneangrotto, whereby the foundations of a hill were par*• Fern, DMcai. dell' Etiis,p.loa.s«tmioif8 OF BTiiA IN 1611 Aim IW. '867tally undermined. Such underground passages aie ainoiig themost curious features on Etna, and appear to have been producedby the hardening of the lava, during the escape c^ greatvolumes of elastic fluids, which are often discharged for manydays in succession after the crisis of the eruption is over.Near Nicolai, not far from Monti Rossi, one of these greetopenings may be seen, called the Fossa delta Palma, 68$feet in circumference at its mouthy and 78 deep. After reachingthe bottom of this, we enter another dark cavity, and thenothers in succession, sometimes descending precipices by meansof ladders. At length the vaults terminate in a great galleryninety feet long, and from fifteen to fifty broad, beyond whichthere is still a passage, never yet explored; so that the extentof these caverns remains unknown*. The walls and roofs ofthese great vaults are composed of rough and bristling moorish,of the most fantastic forms.We shall now proceed to offer some observations on the twolast eruptions in 1811 and 1819. It appears, from the relationof Signor Gremmellaro, who witnessed the phenomena, that thegreat crater in 1811 testified, by its violent detonations, thatthe lava had ascended to near the summit of the mountain, byits central duct. A violent shock was then felt, and a streambroke out from the side of the cone, at no great distance fromits apex. Shortly after this had ceased to flow, a second streamburst forth at another opening, considerably blow the first ;then a third still lower, and so on till seven different issues hadbeen thus successively formed, all lying upon the same straightline. It has been supposed that this line was a perpendicularrent in the internal framework of the mountain, which rentwas probably not produced at one shock, but prolonged sue*cesfflvely downwards, by the lateral pressure and intense heatc^ the internal column of lava, as it subsided by gradualdischarge through each vents .In 1819 three large mouths or caverns opened very nearthose which were formed in the eruptions of 1811, fromwhich flames, red hot cinders, and sand, were thrown upwith loud explosions. A few minutes afterwards anothermouth opened below, from which flames and smoke issued ;• Fcnin, Dams. ddL* Slay. MacnD, 181S. f Serope on Volcanos, p.l5d.370 GLACIER COVERED BT LATA.and autumn of 1828^ caused the supplies of snow and icewhich had been preserved in the spring of that year for theuse of Catania and the adjoining parts of Sicily and the islandof Malta, to fail entirely. Considerable distress was felt forthe want of a commodity regarded in these countries as one ofthe necessaries of life rather than an article of luxury, and onthe abundance of which in some large cities the salubrity ofthe water and the general health of the community is said insome degree to depend. The magistrates of Catania appliedto Signor M. Gemmellaro, in the hope that his local knowledgeof Etna might enable him to point out some crevice ornatural grotto on the mountain, where drift snow was still preserved.Nor were they disappointed ; for he had long suspectedthat a small mass of perennial ice at the foot of the highestcone was part of a larger and continuous glacier covered by alava-current. Having procured a large body of workmen, hequarried into this ice, and proved the superposition of the lavafor several hundred yards, so as completely to satisfy himselfthat nothing but the subsequent flowing of the lava over the icecould account for the position of the glacier. Unfortunately forthe geologist, the ice was so extremely hard, and the excavationso expensive, that there is no probability of the operationsbeing renewed. On the first of December, Isis, I visited thisspot, which is on the south-east side of the cone, and not farabove the Casa Angles, but the fresh snow had already nearlyfilled up the new opening, so that it had only the appearanceof the mouth of a grotto. I do not, however, question theaccuracy of the conclusion of Signor Gemmellaro, who beingwell acquainted with all the appearances of drift snow inthe fissures and cavities of Etna, had recognized, even beforethe late excavations, the peculiarity of the position of the icein this locality. We may suppose, that, at the commencementof the eruption, a deep mass of drift snow had beencovered by volcanic sand showered down upon it before thedescent of the lava. A dense stratum of this fine dust mixedwith scoriae is well known to be an excellent non-conductor ofheat, and may thus have preserved the snow from completefusion when the burning flood poured over it. The shepherdsin the higher regions of Etna are accustomed to provide anannual store of snow to supply their flocks with water inVOLCANIC ERUPTIONS IN ICELAND. 371the summer months, by simply strewing over the snow in thespring a layer of volcanic sand a few inches thick, whicheffectually prevents the sun from penetrating. When lavahad once consolidated over a glacier at the height of ten thousandfeet above the level of the sea, we may readily conceivethat the ice would endure as long as the snows of Mont Blanc,unless melted by volcanic heat from below. When I visitedthe great crater in the beginning of winter, (December 1st,1828,) I found the crevices in the interior encrusted withthick ice, and in some cases hot vapours were streaming outbetween masses of ice and the rugged and steep walls of thecrater. After the discovery of Signor Gemmellaro, it wouldnot be surprising to find, in the cones of the Icelandic volcanos,repeated alternations of lava streams and glaciers.Volcanic Eruptions in Iceland, — With the exception ofEtna and Vesuvius, the most complete chronological recordsof a series of eruptions are those of Iceland : for their historyreaches as far back as the ninth century of our era ; and, fromthe beginning of the twelfth century, there is clear evidencethat, during the whole period, there has never been an intervalof more than forty, and very rarely one of twenty years, withouteither an eruption or a great earthquake. So intense isthe energy of the volcanic action in this region, that someeruptions of Hecla have lasted six years without ceasing.Earthquakes have often shaken the whole island at once, causinggreat changes in the interior, such as the sinking down of hills,the rending of mountains, the desertion by rivers of theirchannels, and the appearance of new lakes ^. New islands haveoften been thrown up near the coast, some of which still exist,while others have disappeared either by subsidences or theaction of the waves.In the interval between eruptions, innumerable hot springsafford vent to subterranean heat and sol fat aras dischargecopious streams of inflammable matter. The volcanos in differentparts of this island are observed, like those of thePhlegraean Fields, to be in activity by turns, one vent oftenserving for a time as a safety-valve to the rest. Many conesHoff, Tol ii., p. 393.2 B 2372 ERUFnON OF SRAPTAR JO&ULare^often thrown up ia one eruption, and in thb case they takea linear direction, running generally from north-east to southwest,from the north-eastern part of the island where the volcanoKrabla lies, to the promontory Reykianas.The convulsions of the year 1783 appear to have been moretremendous than any recorded in the modern annals of Iceland ;and the original Danish narrative of the catastrophe, drawn upin great detail, has since been substantiated by several Englishtravellers, particularly in regard to the prodigious extent ofcountry laid waste, and the volume of lava produced *. Abouta month previous to the eruption on the main land, a submarinevolcano burst forth in the sea at the distance of thirtyor forty miles in a south-west direction from Cape Reykianas,and ejected so much pumice, that the ocean was covered to thedistance of one hundred and fifty miles, and ships were considerablyimpeded in their course. A new island was thrownup, consisting of high cliffs, within which, fire, smoke, andpumice were emitted from two or three different points. Thisisland was claimed by his Danish Majesty, who denominatedit Nyoe, or the new island ; but, ere a year had elapsed, the searesumed her ancient domain, and nothing was left but a rockyreef from five to thirty fathoms under water. Earthquakes,which had long been felt in Iceland, became violent onthe 11th of June, when Skaptilr Jokul, distant nearly twohundred miles from Nyoe, threw out a torrent of lava whichflowed down into the river Skapt&, and completely dried it up.The channel of the river was between high rocks, in manyplaces from four hundred to six hundred feet in depth, andnear two hundred in breadth. Not only did the lava fill upthese great defiles to the brink, but it overflowed the adjacentfields to a considerable extent. The burning flood, on issuingfrom the confined rocky gorge, was then arrested for someThe first narrative of the eruption was drawn up by Stephensen, then ChiefJustice in Iceland, appointed Commissioner by the King of Denmark, for estimatingthe damage done to the country, that relief might be afiR)rded to the sufferers.Henderson was enabled to correct some of the measurements given byStephensen, of the depths width, and length, of the lava parents, by reference tothe MS. of Mr. Parson, who visited the tract in 1794, and examined the lava withattention. (Journal of a Residence in Iceland, &c., p. 229.) Some of the principalfacts are also corroborated by Dr. Looker in his ** Tour in Iceland** vol. ii.,p. 128.IN Iceland A.D. 1783. 373time by a deep lake, which formerly existed in the course ofthe river between Skaptardal and Aa, which it entirely filled.The current then proceeded again, and reaching some ancientlava full of subterraneous caverns, penetrated and melted downpart of it ; atkd in some places where the steam could not gainvent, it blew up the rock, throwing fragments to the height ofmore than one hundred and fifty feet. On the 18th of June,another ejection of liquid lava rushed from the volcano, whichflowed down with amazing velocity over the surface of the firststream. By the damming up of the mouths of some of thetributaries of the Skapta, many villages were completely overflowedwith water, and thus great destruction of property wascaused. The lava, after flowing for several days, was precipitateddown a tremendous cataract called Stapafoss, where itfilled a profound abyss, which that great waterfall bad beenhollowing out for ages, and then the fiery current continued itscourse.On the 3rd of August, fresh floods of lava still pouring fromthe volcano, a new branch was sent ofi^ in a different direction ;for the channel of the Skaptfi was now so entirely choked up,and every opening to the west and north so obstructed, thatthe melted matter was forced to take a new course, and, runningin a south-east direction, it discharged itself into the bed of theriver Hverfisfliot, where a scene of destruction scarcely inferiorto the former was occasioned. These Icelandic lavas, like theancient streams which are met with in Auvergne, and otherprovinces of Central France, are stated by Stephensen to haveaccumulated to a prodigious depth in narrow rocky gorges,but when they came to wide alluvial plains, they spread themselvesout into broad lakes of fire, sometimes from twelve tofifteen miles wide, and one hundred feet deep. When the** fiery lake'' which filled up the lower portion of the valley ofthe SkaptR had been augmented by new supplies, the lavaflowed up the course of the river to the foot of the hills, fromwhence the Skaptft takes its rise. This affords a parallel caseto one which can be shewn to have happened at a remote era inthe volcanic region of the Vivarais in France, when lava issuedfrom the cone of Threats, and while one branch ran down, anothermore powerful stream flowed up the river Ardeche. Thesides of the valley of the SkaptR present superb ranges of basaltic374 Comparative VOLUME OFcolumns of older lavas, resembling those which are laid openin the valleys descending from Mont Dor in Auvergne wheremore modern lava-currents, on a scale very inferior in magnitudeto those of Iceland, have also usurped the beds of theexisting rivers. The eruption of Skaptlu* Jokul did not entirelycease till the end of two years ; and when Mr. Parsonvisited the tract eleven years afterwards, in 1794, he foundcolumns of smoke still rising from parts of the lava, and severalrents filled with hot water*.Although the population of Iceland did not exceed fiftythousand, no less than twenty villages were destroyed, besidesthose inundated by water, and an 'immense number of cattle,and more than nine thousand human beings perished, partly bythe depredations of the lava, partly by the noxious vapourswhich impregnated the air, and, in part, by the famine causedby showers of ashes throughout the island, and the desertionof the coasts by the fish.We must now call the reader's particular attention to theextraordinary volume of melted matter produced in this tip*tion. Of the two branches, which flowed in nearly oppositedirections, the greatest was fifty, and the lesser forty miles inlength. The extreme breadth which the Skapt4 branch attainedin the low countries was from twelve to fifteen miles,that of the other about seven. The ordinary height of bothcurrents was one hundred feet, but in narrow defiles it sometimesamounted to six hundred feet. A more correct idea willbe formed of the dimensions of the two streams, if we considerhow striking a feature they would now form in the geology ofEngland, had they been poured out on the bottom of die seaafter the deposition, and before the elevation of our secondaryand tertiary rocks. The same causes which have excavatedvalleys through parts of our marine strata, once continuous,might have acted with equal force on the igneous rocks, leaving,at the same time, a sufficient portion undestroyed, to enable usto discover their former extent. Let us then imagine the terminationof the Skapt& branch of lava to rest on the escarpmentof the inferior and middle oolite, where it commands the valeef Gloucester. The great plateau might be one hundred feetHendMioii's Journal to, p. 228»ANCIENT AND MODERN LAVAS. 375thick, and from ten to fifteen miles broad, exceeding any whichcan be found in Central France. We may also suppose greattabular masses to occur at intervals, capping the summit of theCotswold Hills between Gloucester and Oxford, by Northleach^Bedford, and other towns. The wide valley of the Oxfordclay would then occasion an interruption for many miles ; butthe same rocks might recur on the summit of Cumnor andShooter Hills, and all the other oolitic eminences of that district.On the chalk of Berkshire, extensive plateaus, six or sevenmiles wide, would again be formed ; and lastly, crowning thehighest sands of Highgate and Hampstead, we might beholdsome remnants of the deepest parts of the current five or sixhundred feet in thickness, rivalling or even surpassing inheight Salisbury Crags and Arthur's Seat.The distance between the extreme points here indicatedwould not exceed ninety miles in a direct line ; and we mightthen add, at the distance of nearly two hundred miles fromLondon, along the coast of Dorsetshire and Devonshire forexample, a great mass of igneous rocks, to represent those ofcontemporary origin, which were produced beneath the lewdof the sea, where the island of Node rose up. Yet, gigantic asmust appear the scale of these modem volcanic operations,they are perfect insignificant in comparison to currents of theprimeval ages, if we embrace the theoretical views of somegeologists of great celebrity. We are informed by ProfessorBrongniart, in his last work, that ^* aux piques g^gnostiquetanciennes, tons les phtoomfenes g^logiques se pas soient dansdes dimensions centuries de celles qu'ils presentment adjournHad Skaptir Jokul therefore been a volcano of theolden time, it would have poured forth lavas at a single eruption,a hundred times more voluminous than those which have beenwitnessed by the present generation. If we multiply the currentbefore described, by a hundred, and first assume that itsheight and breadth remain the same, it would stretch out tothe length of nine thousand miles, or about half as far again asfrom the pole to the equator. If, on the other hand, we supposeits length and breadth to remain the same, and multiplyits height in an equal proportion, its ordinary elevation becomesTableau des Tenraioa qui component Tkorce du Globai p. 62. PaxiSy 1829.376 ERUPTION OF JORULLO9 A.D, 1759.ten thousand feet, and its greatest more than double that ofthe Himalaya mountains. Amongst the ancient strata, noIgneous rock of such colossal magnitude has yet been met with,nay it would be most difficult to point out a mass of igneousorigin of ancient date distinctly referable to a single erupti<Hi,which would rival in volume the matter poured out from Skap-tdr Jokul in 1783. It is, however, a received principle ingeological reasoning, not only in France, but in England andother countries, that we ought always to assume that the energiesof natural forces have been impaired and enfeebled, untilthe contrary can be shewn ; and as we have hitherto investigatedbut a small part of the globe, evidence may hereafter be broughtto light of the superior violence of single volcanic eruptions inremote ages. If the proofs be deficient at present in favourof the general decline of the agents of decay and renovation,we must be content with the argument of the geologist in oneof Voltaire's novels. Monsieur, on en d^couvrira!*Eruption of Jorullo in 1759. — ^As another example of thestupendous scale of modem volcanic eruptions, we may mentionthat of Jorullo in Mexico in 1759. We have alreadydescribed the great region to which this mountain belongs.The plain of Malpais forms part of an elevated plateau,between two and three thousand feet above the level of thesea, and is bounded by hills composed of basalt, trachyte, andvolcanic tuff, clearly indicating that the country had previously,though probably at a remote period, been the theatre of igneousaction. From the era of the discovery of the New Worldto the middle of the last century, the district had remained im-disturbed,and the space, now the site of the volcano, which isthirty-six leagues distant from the nearest sea, was occupied byfertile fields of sugar-cane and indigo, and watered by thetwo brooks Cuitimba and San Pedro. In the month of June,1759) hollow sounds of an alarming nature were heard, andearthquakes succeeded each other for two months, until, inSeptember, flames issued from the ground, and fragments ofburning rocks were thrown to prodigious heights. Six volcaniccones, composed of scoriae and fragmentary lava, wereHomme aux quaint ^cus.CONVEXITY OP THE PLAIN OF Calais* 377formed on the line of a chasm which ran in the direction fromN.N.E. to S.S.W. The least of these cones was three hundredfeet in height, and Jorullo, the central volcano, was elevatedone thousand six hundred feet above the level of theplain. It sent forth great streams of basaltic lava, containingincluded fragments of primitive rocks, and its ejections did notcease till the month of February, 1760. Humboldt visitedthe country twenty years after the occurrence, and was informedby the Indians, that when they returned long after the catastropheto the plain, they found the ground uninhabitable fromthe excessive heat. When the Prussian traveller himselfvisited the locality there appeared, round the base of thecones, and spreading from them as from a centre over anextent of four square miles, a mass of matter five hundred andfifty feet in height in a convex form, gradually sloping in alldirections towards the plain. This mass was still in a heated .state, the temperature in the fissures being sufficient to light acigar at the depth of a few inches. On this convex protuberancewere thousands of flattish conical mounds, from six tonine feet high, which, as. well as large fissures traversing theplain, acted as funerals, giving out clouds of sulphuric acid ^ujand hot aqueous vapour. The two small rivers before mentioneddisappeared during the eruption, losing themselvesbelow the eastern extremity of the plain, and reappearing ashot springs at its western limit. Humboldt attributed theconvexity of the plain to inflation from below, supposing theground, for four square miles in extent, to have risen up inthe shape of a bladder, to the elevation of five hundred andfifty feet above the plain in the highest part. But this theory,which is entirely unsupported by analogy, is by no meansborne out by the facts described ; and it is the more necessaryto scrutinize closely the proofs relied on, because the opinion ofHumboldt appears to have been received as if founded ondirect observation, and has been made the groundwork of otherbold and extraordinary theories. Mr. Scrope has suggestedthat the phenomena may be accounted for far more naturally,by supposing that lava flowing simultaneously from the differentorifices, and principally from Jorullo, united into a sortof pool or lake. As they were poured forth on a surface previouslyflat, they would, if their liquidity was not very great.378 CON Venit OF THB PLAIN OF Calais.remain thickest and deepest near their source, and diminish inbulk from thence towards the limits of the space which theycovered. Fresh supplies were probably emitted successively duringthe course of an eruption which lasted a year, and some ofthese resting on those first emitted, might only spread to asmall distance from the foot of the cone, where they wouldnecessarily accumulate to a great height.The showers, also, of loose and pulverulent matter from thesix craters, and principally from Jorullo, would be composed ofheavier and more bulky particles near the cones, and would raisethe ground at their base, where, mixing with rain, they mighthave given rise to the stratum of black clay which is describedas covering the lava. The small conical mounds (called ^* homi-tos or ovens) may resemble those five or six small hillocks whichexisted in 18S3, on the Vesuvian lava, and sent forth columns ofvapour, having been produced by the disengagement of elasticfluids heaving up small dome-shaped masses of lava. The fissuresmentioned by Humboldt as of frequent occurrence, are such asmight naturally accompany the consolidation of a thick bed oflava, contracting as it congeals; and the disappearance of riversis the usual result of the occupation of the lower part of a valleyor plain by lava, of which there are many beautiful examplesin the old lava-currents of Auvergne. The heat of the ^^ horsnitos" is stated to have diminished from the first, and Mr.Bullock, who visited the spot many years after Humboldt,found the temperature of the hot spring very low, a fact whichseems clearly to indicate the gradual congelation of a subjacentbed of lava, which from its immense thickness may have heesienabled to retain its heat for half a century.Another argument adduced in support of the theory ofinflation from below was the hollow sound made by the stepsof a horse upon the plain, which, however, proves nothingmore than that the materials of which the convex mass is composedare light and porous. The sound called *^ rimbombo^by the Italians is very commonly returned by made groundwhen struck sharply, and has been observed not only on thesides of Vesuvius and other volcanic cones where there is acavity below, but in plains such as the Campagna di Romacomposed in great measure of tufi^ and porous volcanic rocks.The reverberation, however, may, perhaps, be assisted by*ERUPTION OF JORULLO9 A.D. 1819. 379grottos and caverns, for these may be as numerous in the lavasof Jorullo, as in many of those of Etna ; but their existencewould lend no countenance to the hypothesis of a great archedcavity, or bubble, four square miles in extent and in the centrefive hundred and fifty feet high *. A subsequent eruption ofJoruUo happened in 1819> accompanied by an earthquake ;but unfortunately no European travellers have since visitedthe spot, and the only facts hitherto known are that ashes fellat the city of Guanaxuato, which is distant about one hundredand forty English miles from Jorullo, in such quantitiesas to lie six inches deep in the streets, and the tower of thecathedral of Guadalaxara was thrown down f.See Scrope on Volouios, p. 267.f For this information I am indebted to Captain Vetch, F Jt.S.CHAPTER XXII.Volcanic Archipelagos — The Canaries — eruptions of the Peak of Tenerifle —Overthrown up in Lancerote in 1730-36— Pretended distinction betweenancient and modem lavas — recent formation of oolitic travertine in Lancelot— Grecian Archipelago — Santorin and its contiguous is les V onBuch's Theory of ** Elevation Craters '* considered — New islands thrown upin the Gulf of Santorin — Supposed *' Crater of Elevation " in the Isle ofPalma — Description of the Caldera of Palma — barren island in the Bay ofBengal — Origin of the deep gorge on the side of ** Elevation Crater'* —Stratification of submarine volcanic products — Causes of the great size ofthe craters of submarine volcanos — Cone of Somma, formed in the samemanner as that of Vesuvius Mineral composition of volcanic productsSpeculations respecting the nature of igneous rocks produced at great depths,by modem volcanic eruptions.In our chronological sketch of the changes which have happenedwithin the traditionary and historical period in thevolcanic district round Naples, we described the renewal ofthe fires of a central and habitual crater, and the almost entirecessation of a series of irregular eruptions from minor andindependent vents. Some volcanic archipelagos offer interestingexamples of the converse of this phenomenon, the greathabitual vent having become almost sealed up, and eruptionsof great violence now proceeding, either from different pointsin the bed of the ocean, or from adjoining islands, where, asformerly in Ischia, new cones and craters are formed fromtime to time. Of this state of things the Canary Islands nowafford an example.The highest crater of the Peak of Teneriffe has been in thestate of a solfatara ever since it has been known to Europeans;but several eruptions have taken place from the sides of themountain, one in the year I4S0, which formed a small hill,and another in 1704 and the two following years, accompaniedwith great earthquakes, when the lava overflowed a town andharbour. Another eruption happened in June, 1798, not farfrom the summit of the peak. But these lateral emissions oflava, at distant intervals, may be considered as of a subordinateVOLCANIC ERUPTION IN LANCBROTE. 381kind, and subsidiary to the great discharge which has takenplace in the contiguous isles of Pal ma and Lancerote ; and theoccasional activity of the peak may be compared to the irregulareruptions before mentioned, of the Solfatara of Arsoin Ischia, and of Monte Nuovo, which have broken out sincethe renewal of the Vesuvian fires in 79.We shall describe one of these insular eruptions in theCanaries, which happened in Lancerote, between the years1780 and 1736, as the effects were remarkable ; and Von Buchhad an opportunity, when he visited that island in 1815, ofcomparing the accounts transmitted to us of the event, withthe present state and geological appearances of the country*.On the 1st of September, 1730^ the earth split open on asudden two leagues from Yaira. In one night a considerablehill of ejected matter was thrown up, and a few days later,another vent opened and gave out a lava stream, which overranChinanfaya and other villages. It flowed first rapidly,like water, but became afterwards heavy and slow, like honey.On the 7th of September an immense rock was protruded fromthe bottom of the lava, with a noise like thunder, and thestream was forced to change its course, from N. to N. W., so thatSt. Catalina, and other villages, were overflowed. Whether thismass was protruded by an earthquake or was a mass of ancientlava, blown up like that before mentioned, in 1783, in Iceland,is not explained. On the 11th of September more lava flowedout and covered the village of Maso entirely, and, for the spaceof eight days, precipitated itself with a horrible roar into thesea. Dead fish floated on the waters in indescribable multitudesor were thrown dying on the shore. After a briefinterval of repose, three new openings broke forth, immediatelyfrom the site of the consumed St. Catalina. and sent out anenormous quantity of papilio, sand, and ashes. On the 28thof October, the cattle throughout the whole country droppedlifeless to the ground, suffocated by putrid vapours, whichcondensed and fell down in drops. On the 1st of December, alava-stream reached the sea, and formed an island, round whichdead fish were strewed.It is unnecessary here to give the details of the overwhelm-thisaccount was principally derived by Von Buch from the MS. of DonAndrea Lorenzo Curbeto^ Curate of Taira, the point where the eruption be^n.Uber linen yukaxuscb. Ausbrucb »uf der lovel X«iuiierote.382 . THIRTY NBW Cone THROWN UP.ing of other places by fiery torrents, or of a storm which wasequally new and terrifying to the inhabitants, as they hadnever known one in their country before. On the 10th ofJanuary, 1781, a high hill was thrown up, which, on the sameday, precipitated itself back again into its own crater : fierybrooks of lava flowed from it to the sea. On the 3rd ofFebruary a new cone arose. Others were thrown up in Marchandpoured forth lava-streams. Numerous other volcaniccones were subsequently formed in succession, till at last theirnumber amounted to about thirty. In June, 1781, duringa renewal of the eruptions, all Uie banks and shores in thewestern part of the island were covered with dying fish,of different species, some of which had never before beenseen. Smoke and flame arose from the sea, with loud detonations.These dreadful commotions lasted without interruptionfor five successive years and a great emigration of theinhabitants became necessary.As to the height of the new cones, Von Buch was assuredthat the formerly great and flourishing St. Catalina lay buriedunder hills 400 feet in height ; and he observes, that the mostelevated cone of the series rose 600 feet above its base, and1878 feet above the sea, and that several others were nearly ashigh. The new vents were all arranged in one line, about twogeographical miles long, and in a direction nearly east andwest. If we admit the probability of Von Buch's conjecture,that these vents opened along the Une of an open cleft, it seemsnecessary to suppose, that this subterranean fissure was onlyprolonged upwards to the surface by degrees, or that the rentwas narrow at first, as is usually the case with fissures causedby earthquakes. Lava and elastic fluids might escape fromsome point on the rent where there was least resistance, tillthe first aperture becoming obstructed by ejections and theconsolidation of lava, other orifices burst open in succession,along the line of the original fissure. Von Buch found thateach crater was lowest on that side on which lava had issued ;but some craters were not breached, and were without anylavarstreams. In one of these were open fissures, out of whichhot vapours rose, which in 1815 raised the thermometer to 145^Fahrenheit, and was probably at the boiling point lower down.The exhalations seemed to consist of aqueous vapour, yet theycould not be pure Bteun, for the crevices were entrusted obVOLCANIC Eruption IN Lancelot. 383either side by siliceous sinter, (an opal-like hydrate of silica,of a white colour,) which extended almost to the middle. Thisimportant fact attests the length of time during which chemicalprocesses continue after eruptions, and how open fissuresmay be filled up laterally by mineral matter, sublimed fromvolcanic exhalations. The lavas of this eruption coverednearly a third of the whole island, often forming on slightlyinclined planes great horizontal sheets several square leaguesin area, resembling very much the basaltic plateaus of Auvergne.One of the new lavas was observed to contain masses ofolivine of an olive-green colour, resembling those which occur inone of the lavas of the Vivarais. Von Buch supposes the greatcrystals of olivine to have been derived from a previously existingbasalt, melted up by the new volcanos, but sufficientdata are not furnished for warranting such a conjecture. Theolder rocks of the island consist, in a great measure, of thatkind of basaltic lava called dolerite, sometimes columnar,and of common basalt and amygdaloid. Some recent lavasassumed, on entering the sea, a prismatic form, and so muchresembled the older lavas of the Canaries, that the onlygeological distinction which Von Buch appears to have beenable to draw between them was, that they did not alternatewith conglomerates, like the ancient basalts. Some modemwriters have endeavoured to discover in the abundance ofthese conglomerates, a proof of the dissimilarity of the volcanicaction in ancient and modem times ; but this characteris more probably attributable to the difference between submarineoperations and those on the land. All the blocks andimperfectly rounded fragments lava, transported, during theintervals of eruption by rivers and torrents, into the adjoiningsea, or torn by the continued action of the waves from cliffswhich are undermined, must accumulate in stratified brecciasand conglomerates, and be covered again and again by otherlavas. This is now taking place on the shores of Sicily,between Catania and Trezza, where the sea breaks down andcovers the there with blocks and pebbles of the modern lavas ofEtna ; and on parts of the coast of Ischia, where numerouscurrents of trachyte are in like manner undermined in loftyprecipices. So often then as an island is raised in a volcanic384 ANCIENT AND MODERN LAVAS.archipelago, by earthquakes from the deep, the fundamentaland (relatively to all above) the oldest lavas will often be distinguishablefrom those formed by subsequent eruptions on dryland, by their alternation with beds of sandstone and fragmentaryrocks. The supposed want of identity then between thevolcanic phenomena of different epochs resolves itself into themarked difference between the operations simultaneously inprogress, above and below the water. Such, indeed, is thesource, as we stated in our fifth chapter, of many of our strongesttheoretical prejudices in geology. No sooner do we study andendeavour to explain submarine appearances, than we feel, touse a common expression, out of our element; and unwilling toconcede, that our extreme ignorance of processes now continuallygoing on can be the cause of our perplexity, we takerefuge in a " pre-existent order of nature'Throughout a considerable part of Lancerote, the old lavasare covered by a thin stratum of limestone, from an inch to twofeet in thickness. It is of a hard stalactitic nature, sometimesoolitic, like the Jura limestone, and contains fragments of lavaand terrestrial shells, chiefly helices and spiral bulimi. VonBuch imagines, that this remarkable superstratum has beenproduced by the furious north-west storms, which in winterdrive the spray of the sea in clouds over the whole island ; fromwhence calcareous particles may be deposited stalactitically.If this explanation be correct, and it seems highly probable, thefact is interesting, as attesting the quantity of matter held insolution by the sea water, and ready to precipitate itself in theform of solid rock. At the bottom of such a sea, impregnated,as in the neighbourhood of all active volcanos, with mineralmatter in solution, lavas must be converted into calcareousamygdaloids, a form in which the igneous rocks so frequentlyappear in the older European formations. We may mentionthat recent crevices in the rocks of Trezza, one of the Cydo-pian isles at the foot of Etna, are filled with a kind of travertine,as high as the spray of the sea reaches ; and in this hard vein-stone,fragments, and even entire specimens of recent shellsthrown up by the waves, are sometimes included.From the year 17S6 to 1815, when Von Buch visited Lancelot,there had been no eruption ; but, in August 182^, acrater opened near the port of Rescind and formed, by its ejectOP THE OaSCIAN AKCIIIPELAOO. 385tioDs, in the space of twenty-four hours, a considerable hill.Violent earthquakes preceded and accompanied this eruption*.Grecian Archipelago. — We shall next direct our inquiryto the island of Santorin, as it will afford us an opportunityof discussing the merits of a. singular theory, which hasobtained no small share of popularity in modern times, respecting" craters of elevation," (Erhebungs Craters, Cratersde seulement,) as they have been termed. The threelands of Santorin, Theresa, and Astonish surround sgulf almost circular, and above six miles in diameter. Theyare chiefly composed of trachytic conglomerates and tuffs,covered with pumice ; but in one part of Santorin clay-slateis seen to be the fundamental rock. The beds in all these islesNo, IS.dip at a slight angle towards the exterior of the group, andlose themselves in the surrounding sea ; whereas, on the ,Budding dn 3d. Nat., tame V., p. 45.— 1825. The Tokano wustill bunung when tbt Mcoont hen cited wm whitley.V01.L 3 C386 NBW ISLANDS IN THE GULF OF 8ANTORIN.tray, they present a high and steep escarpment towards thecentre of the inclosed space. The gulf, therefore, is nearly onall sides environed by precipices ; those of Santorin, which formtwo-thirds of the circumference, being two leagues in extent,and in some parts three hundred feet high. These rocky cliffsplunge at once into the sea, so that close to the shore soundingsare only reached at a depth of eight hundred feet and at a littledistance farther at a depth of one thousand feet. In the middleof this gulf, the small isle of Hiera, now called Palais Kameni,rose up, 144 years before the Christian era. In 14S7 this islereceived new accessions. In 1573 the Little Eameni was raisedin the middle of the basin, its elevation being accompanied bythe discharge of large quantities of pumice and a great disengagementof vapour. Lastly, in 1707 and 1709 the NewKameni was formed, which still exhales sulphureous vapours.Tliese isles are formed of rocks of brown trachyte which hasaresinous lustre, and is full of crystals of glassy felspar.Although the birth of New Kameni was attended by an eruptionsit is certain that it was upraised from a great depth byearthquakes, and was not a heap of volcanic ejections, nor oflava poured out on the spot There were shells upon it whenit first appeared; and beds. of limestone and marine shellsare described by several authors as entering, together withIgneous rocks, into the structure of other parts of this group.In order, therefore, to explain the formation of such circulargulfs, which are common in other archipelagos. Von Buch supposes,and Humboldt adopts the same opinion, that thedifferent beds of lava, pumice, and whatever else may be inter-stratified,were first horizontally disposed along the floor of theocean. An expansive force from below then burst an openingthrough them, and, acting towards a central point, raisedsymmetrically on every side all which resisted its action, sothat the uplifted strata were made to dip away on all sidesfrom the centre outwards, as is usual in volcanic cones whilea deep hollow was left in the middle, resembling in all essentialparticulars an ordinary volcanic crater.In the first instance we should inform the reader, that thistheory is not founded on actual observations of analogouseffects produced by the elevating forces of earthquakes^ or theescape of elastic fluids in any part of the globe ; for the inflameOF ELEVATION CRATERS. 387tion from below, of the rocks in the plain of Malpais, duringthe eruption of Jorullo, was, as before stated, an hypothesisproposed, long after that eruption, to account for appearanceswhich admit of a very different explanation. Besides, in the caseof Jonillo, there was no great "crater of elevation" formed inthe centre. All our modem analogies, therefore, being infavour of the origin of cones and craters exclusively by eruptions,we are entitled to scrutinize with no small severitythe new hypothesis ; and we have a right to demand demonstrativeevidence, that known and ordinary causes are perfectlyinsufficient to produce the observed phenomena. Had VonBuch and Humboldt, for* instance, in the course of thoseextensive travels which deservedly render their opinions, inregard to all volcanic operations, of high authority, discovered asingle cone composed exclusively of marine or lacustrine strata,without a fragment of any igneous rock intermixed ; and in thecentre a great cavity, encircled by a precipitous escarpment ;then we should have been compelled at once to concede, thatthe cone and crater-like configuration, whatever be its mode offormation, may sometimes have no reference whatever to ordinaryvolcanic eruptions.But it is not pretended that, on the whole face of the globe,a single example of this kind can be pointed out. In Europeand North America thousands of square leagues of territoryhave been examined, composed of marine strata, which havebeen elevated to various heights, sometimes to more than tenthousand feet above the level of the sea, sometimes in horizontaltabular masses ; in other cases with every degree of inclination,from the horizontal to the vertical. Some have been movedwithout great derangement, others have been rent, contorted,or shattered with the utmost violence. Sometimes largedistricts, at others small spaces, appear to have changed theirposition. Yet, amidst the innumerable accidents to whichthese rocks have been subject, never have they assumed thatform, exactly representing a large truncated volcanic cone,with a great cavity in the centre. Are we then called upon tobelieve that whenever elastic fluids generated in the subterraneanregions burst through horizontal strata, so as to upheavethem in the peculiar manner before adverted to, they alwaysselect, as if from choice, those spots of comparatively insignia388 THEORY OF Elevation Craters.cant area, where a certain quantity of volcanic matter happensto lie, while they carefully avoid purely lacustrine and marinestrata, although they often lie immediately contiguous ? Whyon the luther borders of the Limagne auvergne, whereseveral enipticHis burst through, and elevated the horizontalmary and limestones, did these freshwater beds never acquirein any instance a conical and cratenfonn disposition ?But let us proceed to examine some of the most celebratedexamples adduced of craters of elevation. The most perfecttype of this peculiar configuration is said to be afforded by theIsle of Palma ; and while we controvert Von Buch's theoreticalopinions, we ought not to forget how much geolt^ isindebted to his talents and zeal, and amongst other works forhis clear and accurate description of this isle *. In themiddle of Palma rises a mountain to the height of four thousandfeet, presenting the general form of a great cone, theupper part of which had been truncated and replaced by anenormous funnel-shaped cavity, about four thousand feet deep;and the surrounding borders of which attain, at their highestpoint, an elevation of seven thousand feet above the sea. Theexternal flanks of this cone are gently inclined, and, in part,cultivated ; but the bottom and the walls of the central cavity,called by the inhabitants the Caldera, present on all sidesrugged and uncultivated rocks, almost completely depend ofvegetation.So steep are the sides of the Caldera, that there is no pathby which they can be descended ; and the only entrance is by «great ravine, which, cutting through the rocks environing theFarcical. Bach. der C>nui*cheD luieln. Berlin, 1825.ISLE OP PALMA — BARREN ISLAND. 389circus, runs down to the sea. The sides of this gorge areragged, broken, and precipitous. In the mural escarpmentssurrounding the Caldera are seen nothing but beds of basalt,and conglomerates composed of broken fragments of basalt,which dip away with the greatest regularity, from the centre tothe circumference of the cone. Now, according to the theoryof ** elevation craters' we are called upon to suppose that, inthe first place, a series of horizontal beds of volcanic matteraccumulated over each other, to the enormous depth of morethan four thousand feet — a circumstance which alone wouldimply the proximity, at least, of a vent from which immensequantities of igneous rocks had proceeded. After the aggregationof the mass, the expansive force was directed on a givenpoint with such extraordinary energy, as to lift up bodily thewhole mass, so that it should rise to the height of seven thousandfeet above the sea, leaving a great gulf or cavity in themiddle. Yet, notwithstanding this prodigious effort of gaseousexplosions, concentrated on so small a point, the beds, insteadof being shattered, contorted, and thrown into the utmost disorder,have acquired that gentle inclination, and that regularand symmetrical arrangement, which characterize the flanks ofa large cone of eruption, like Etna ! We admit that earthquakes,when they act on extensive tracts of country, mayelevate and depress them without deranging, considerably, therelative position of hills, valleys, and ravines. But is it possibleto conceive that elastic fluids could break through a mere pointas it were of the earth's crust, and that too where the beds werenot composed of soft, yielding clay, or incoherent sand, butof solid basalt, thousands of feet thick, and that they couldinflate them, as it were, in the manner of a bladder ? Wouldnot the rocks, on the contrary, be fractured, fissured, throwninto a vertical, and often into a reversed position; and, ere theyattained the height of seven thousand feet, would they not bereduced to a mere confused and chaotic heap ?The Great Canary is an island of a circular form, analogousto that of Palma. Barren Island, also, in the Bay of Bengal, isproposed as a striking illustration of the same phenomenon ;and here it is said we have the advantage of being able tocontrast the ancient crater of elevation with a cone and crater oferuption in its centre. When seen from the ocean, this island3W THB0B7 OF Imitation CR&TBBS.presents, on almost all nee, a Surface of bare rocks, whichrise up with a moderate declivity towards the interior ; but atonepant there is a narrow cleft, by which we can penetrateinto the centre, and there discover that it is occupied by a grcMtcircular basin, filled by the waters of the sea, bordered allaround by steep rocks, in the midst of which rises a volcaniccone, very frequently in eruption. The summit of this cone is1690 French fu'et in height, corresponding to that of the circularborder which incloses the basin ; so that it can only beseen from the sea through the ravine, which precisely resemblesthe deep gorge by which we penetrate into the Caldera of theIsle of Palma, and of which an equivalent, more or less decidedin its characters, is said to occur in all elevation craters.The cone of the high peak of Teyda, in Tencriffe, is alsorepresented as rising out of the middle of a crater of elevation,standing like a tower surrounded by its fuss and bastion ; thefoss being the remains of the ancient gulf, and the bastionthe escarpment of the circular inclosure. So that Teneriffe isan exact counterpart of Barren Island, except that one israised to an immense height, while the other is still on a levelwith the sea, and in part concealed beneath its waters.Now, without enumerating more examples, let us wonderwhat form the products of submarine volcanos may naturallybe expected to assume. There is every reason to conclude, fromthe few accounts which we possess of eruptions at the bottomof the sea, that they take place in the same manner there as onthe open surface of a continent *. That the volcanic phenomena,if they are ever developed at unfathomable depths, may• ScTopo on VoImooi, p. 171.SUBMARINE VOLCANIC ROCKS. 391be extremely different, is very possible ; but when they havebeen witnessed by the crews of vessels casually passing, theexplosions of aeriform fluids beneath the waters have closelyresembled those of volcanos on the land. Rocky fragments.Ignited scoriae, and comminuted ashes, are thrown up, andin several cases conical islands have been formed, which afterwardsdisappeared ; as when, in 1691 and 1720, small isleswere* thrown up off St. Michael in the Azores, or as Sabinarose in 1811 near the same spot, and, in 1783, Nyoe, off thecoast of Iceland. Where the cones have disappeared, theyprobably consisted of loose matters, easily reduced by thewaves and currents to a submarine shoal. When islands haveremained firm, as in the case of Hiera, and the New and LittleEameni in the Gulf of Santorin (see wood-cut No. 15), theyhave consisted in part of solid lava. Whatever doubts mighthave been entertained as to the action of volcanos entirely submarine,yet it must always have been clear, that in thosenumerous cases where they just raise their peaks above thewaves, the ejected sand, scoriae, and fragments of rock, mustaccumulate round the vent into a cone with a central crater,while the lighter will be borne to a distance by tides and currents,as by winds during eruptions in open air. The lavawhich issues from the crater spreads over the subaqueousbottom, seeking the lowest levels, or accumulating upon itself,according to its liquidity, volume, and rapidity of congelation ;following, in short, the same laws as when flowing in the atmosphere*.But we may next enquire, what characters may enable ageologist to distinguish between cones formed entirely, or ingreat part beneath the waters of the sea, and those formed onland. In the first place, large beds of shells and corals oftengrow on the sloping sides of submarine cones, particularly inthe Pacific, and these often become inter stratified with lavas.Instead of alluvions containing land-shells, like some of thosewhich cover Herculaneum, great beds of tufaceous sand andconglomerate, mixed with marine remains, might be expectedon such parts of the flanks of a volcano like Stromboli as aresubmerged beneath the waters. The pressure of a column ofScrope on Volcoaofl, p. 173.392 TRUNCATION OF VOLCANIC CONES.water exceeding many times that of the atmosphere, mustimpede the escape of the elastic fluids and of lava, until theresistance is augmented in the same proportion ; hence theexplosions will be more violent, and when a cone is formed itwill be liable to be blown up and truncated at a lower levelthan in shallower water or in the open air. Add to this,that when a submarine volcano has repaired its cone, it is liableto be destroyed again by the waves, as in several cases beforeadverted to. The vent will then become choked up withstrata of sand and fragments of rock, swept in by the tidesand currents. These materials are far more readily consolidatedunder water than in the air, especially as mineral mat toris so copiously introduced by the springs which issue fromthe ground in all volcanic regions hitherto carefully investigated.Beds of solid travertin, also, and in hot countriescon reefs, must often, during long intervals of quiescence,obstruct the vent, and thus increase the repressive force andaugment the violence of eruptions. The probabilities, therefore,in a submarine volcano, of the destruction of a largerpart of the cone, and the formation of a more extensivecrater, are obvious; nor can the dimensions of "craters ofelevation," if referred to such operations, surprise us. Duringan eruption in 1444, accompanied by a tremendous earthquake,the summit of Etna was destroyed, and an enormous craterwas left, from which lava flowed. The segment of that cratermay still be seen near the Casa Angles, and, when complete, itmust have measured several miles in diameter. The cone wasafterwards repaired ; but this would not have happened soeasily had Etna been placed like Stromboli in a deep sea, withits peak exposed to the fury of the waves. Let us suppose theEtnean crater of 1444 to have been filled up with beds ofcoral and conglomerate, and that during succeeding eruptionsthese were thrown out by violent explosions, so that the conebecame truncated down to the upper margin of the woodyregion, a circular basin would then be formed thirty Italianmiles in circumference, exceeding by five or six miles the circuitof the Gulf of Santorin. Yet we know by numeroussections that the strata of trachyte, basalt, and trachytic breccia,would, in that part of the great cone of Etna, dip on all sidesoff from the centre at a gentle angle to every point of the com-SUPPOSED SECTION OF BARREN ISLAND. 393pass, except where irregularities were occasioned, at pointswhere the small buried cones before mentioned occurred. If thisgulf were then again choked up, and the vent obstructed, so thatnew explosions of great violence should truncate the cone oncemore down to the inferior border of the forest zone of Etna, thecircumference of the gulf would then be fifty Italian miles *.Yet even then the ruins of the cone of £tna might form a circularisland entirely composed of volcanic rocks, sloping gentlyoutwards on all sides at a very slight angle ; and this islandmight be between seventy and eighty English miles in its exteriorcircuit, while the circular bay within might be betweenforty and fifty miles round. In fertility it would rival theIsland of Palma ; and the deep gorge which leads down fromthe Valley of Calanna to Zafarana, might well serve as anequivalent to the grand defile which leads into the Caldera.It is most probable, then, that the exterior inclosure ofBarren Island, c d, in the annexed diagram, is nothing morethan the remains of the truncated cone c a 6 d, a great portionof which has been carried away, partly by the action of theNo. 18.SupfOMi 8»tti9m 9f Barren Idmd^ in ih» Jhgr ^f Otmgml.waves, and partly by explosions which preceded the formationof the new interior cones e g. Whether the outer and largercone has in this particular case, together with the bottom ofthe ocean on which it rests, been upheaved, or whether it originallyprojected in great part like Stromboli above the level ofthe sea, may, probably, be determined by geological investigations; for, in the former case, some beds replete with marineremains may be inter stratified with volcanic ejections.Some of the accounts transmitted to us by eye-witnesses, ofthe gradual manner in which New Kameni first rose coveredwith living shells in the Gulf of Santorin, appear, certainly,For the measurements of different parts of the cone of Etna, see Trattato delbosdii dell' Etna, Scuderi, Act. dell* Acid. Lion. de Catan^ vol. i.394 THEORY OF ELEVATION Craters.to establish the possibility of the elevation of small masses froma depth of several hundred feet during an eruption and duringthe emission of lava. But the protrusion of isolated masses,under such circumstances affords no analogy to the supposedac^ou of the expansive force in the formation of craters ofelevation. It is hardly necessary, after the observations nowmade to refer the reader again to our section of Somma andVesuvius, and to say that we ascribed the formation of theancient and the modern cone to operations precisely analogous.M. Necker '"' long ago pointed out the correspondence oftheir structure, and explained most distinctly the origin of theform of Somma ; and his views were afterwards confirmed byMr. Scrope. But, notwithstanding the juxta-portion of theentire and the ruined cone, the identity of the slope andqu&qui-versal dip of the beds, the similarity of their mineralcomposition, and the intersection of both cones by porpbyriticdikes the defenders of the ^' elevation" theory have declaredthat the lavas and breccias of Somma were once horizontal, andwere afterwards raised into a conical mass, while they admitthat those in Vesuvius have always been as highly inclined asthey are now.In controverting Von Buch's theory, we might have adducedas the most conclusive argument against it, that it would leadits advocates, if consistent with themselves, to the extravagantconclusion, that the two cones of Vesuvius had derived theirform from very distinct causes. But as these geologists are notafraid to follow their system into all its consequences, and haveeven appealed to Somma as confirmatory of their views, it wouldbe vain to hope, by pointing out the closest analogies betweenthe effects of ordinary volcanic action and '^ craters of elevations'*to induce them to abandon their hypothesis.The marine shelly strata, inter stratified with basalt, throughwhich the great cone of Etna rises, are also said to have constitutedan ancient crater of elevation ; but when we alludemore particularly to the geology of Sicily, it will appear thatthe strata in question do not dip so as to countenance in theleast degree such an hypothesis. The nearest approach,perhaps, to the production of a conical mass by elevation from• Memoire lur le Mont Somma, Mem. de la Sec. de Phys. et desist. NateGenere, torn, ii., part I., p. 155.IflNBSAL COMPOSITION OF LAVAS. 395below is in the Cantal in Central France. The volcaniceruptions which produced at some remote period the volcanicmountain called the Plomb du Cantal broke upthrough fresh-water strata, which must have been depositedoriginally in an horizontal position, on rocks of graniticschist. During the gradual formation of the great cone,beds of lava and tuff, thousands of feet in thickness, werethrown out from one or more central vents, so as to covergreat part of the lacustrine strata, and these at the same timewere traversed by dikes, and in parts lifted up together withthe subjacent granitic rocks ; so that if the igneous productscould now be removed, and the marls, limestones, and fundamentalschists, supported at their present elevation, they wouldform a kind of dome-shaped protuberance. But the outline ofthis shattered mass would be very unlike that of a regularcone, and the dip of the beds would be often horizontal, asnear Aurillac, often vertical, often reversed, nor would therebe in the centre any great cavity or crater of elevation*.On the other hand, the vokamc beds of the Plomb du Cantalare arranged in a conical form, like those of Etna, not by eIeva-»tion from below, but because they flowed down during successiveeruptions from above.We may observe that the Fossa Grande on Vesuvius, a deepravine washed out by the winter-torrents which descend fromthe Atrio del Cavallo, may represent, on a small scale, theValley of Calanna, and its continuation, the Valley of St.Giacomo on Etna. In the Fossa Grande, a small body ofwater has cut through tuff, and in some parts solid beds oflava of considerable thickness; and the channel, althoughrepeatedly blocked up by modem lavas, has always beenre-excavated. It is natural that on one side of every largehollow such as the crater of a truncated cone, there should beachannel to drain off the water ; and this becoming in thecourse of ages a deep ravine, may have caused such gorges asexist in Palma and other isles of similar conformation.Mineral Composition of Volcanic Producta,-^The mineralcalled felspar, forms in general more than half of the mass ofSee a Memoir by Messrs. Murchison and Lyell, Sar Ics Depots LustresTcitiaixei du Cantal, &c., Ann. det ScL Nate October, 1629.396 Mineral COMPOSITION OF Lata.modern lavas. When it is in great excess, lavas are calledtracbytic ; when augite (or pyroxene) predominates, tliej aretermed basaltic. But lares of composition, predsdj intermediate,occur, and from their colour have been called gray-stones.A great abundance of quartz characterizes the graniticand other ancient rocks, now generally considered by geologistsas of igneous origin, whereas that mineral, which is nothingmore than silex crystallized, is rare in recent lavas, althoughsilex enters largely into their composition. Hornblende, whichis so common in ancient rocks, is rare in modem lava, nordoes it enter largely into rocks of any age in which augiteabounds. Mica occurs plentifully in some recent trachytes,but is rarely present where augite is in excess. We mustbeware, however, not to refer too hastily to a difference of era,characters which may, in truth, belong to the different circumstancesunder which the products of fire originate.When we speak of the igneous rocks of our own times, wemean that small portion which happens in violent eruptions tobe forced up by elastic fluids to the surface of the earth. Wemerely allude to the sand, scoriae, and lava, which cool in theopen air ; but we cannot obtain access to that which is congealedunder the pressure of many hundred, or many thousandatmospheres. We may, indeed, see in the dikes of Vesuviusrocks consolidated from a liquid state, under a pressureof perhaps a thousand feet of lava, and the rock so formed ismore crystalline and of greater specific gravity than ordinarylavas* But the column of melted matter raised above the levelof the sea during an eruption of Vesuvius must be more thanthree thousand feet in height, and more than ten thousand feetin Etna ; and wc know not how many miles deep may be theducts which communicate between the mountain and thosesubterranean lakes or seas of burning matter which supply forthousands of years, without being exhausted, the same volcanicvents. The continual escape of hot vapours from many cratersduring the interval between eruptions, and the chemicalchanges which are going on for ages in the funerals of volcanos,prove that the volcanic foci retain their intense heatconstantly, nor can we suppose it to be otherwise; for as lava-currentsof moderate thickness require many years to cooldown in the open air, we must suppose the great reservoirs ofNUllBfiR OF VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS* 397melted matter at vast depths in the nether regions to preservetheir high temperature and fluidity for thousands of years.During the last century, about fifty eruptions are recorded ofthe five European volcanos, Vesuvius, Etna, Volcano, Santorin,and Iceland, but many beneath the sea in the Grecian Archipelagoand near Iceland may doubtless have passed unnoticed.If some of them produced no lava, others on the contrary, likethat of Skapt&r Jokul in 1783, poured out melted matter forfive or six years consecutively, which cases, being reckoned asangle eruptions, will compensate for those of inferior strength.Now, if we consider the active volcanos of Europe to constituteabout a fortieth part of those already known on the globe, andcalculate, that, one with another, they are about equal in activityto the burning mountains in other districts, we may then computethat there happen on the earth about two thousand eruptionsin the course of a century, or about twenty every year.However inconsiderable, therefore, may be the superficialrocks which the operations of fire produce on the surface, wemust suppose the subterranean changes now constantly in progressto be on the grandest scale. The loftiest volcanic conesmust be as insignificant, when contrasted to the products offire in the nether regions, as are the deposits formed in shallowestuaries when compared to submarine formations accumulatingin the abysses of the ocean. In regard to the characters ofthese volcanic rocks, formed in our own times in the bowels ofthe earth, whether in rents and caverns, or by the cooling oflakes of melted lava, we may safely infer that the rocks areheavier and less porous than true lavas, and more crystalline,although composed of the same mineral ingredients. As thehardest crystals produced artificially in the laboratory, requirethe longest time for their formation, so we must suppose thatwhere the cooling down of melted matter takes place by insensibledegrees, in the course of ages a variety of minerals willbe produced far harder than any formed by natural processeswithin the short period of human observation.These subterranean volcanic rocks, moreover, cannot bestratified in the same manner as sedimentary deposits fromwater, although it is evident that when great masses consolidatefrom a state of fusion, they may separate into naturaldivisions ; for this is seen to be the case in many lavasSubterranean VOLCANIC B0CB;8.currents. We may also expect that the rocks in questionwill often be rent by earthquakes^ since these are common involcanic regions, and the fissures will be often injected withsimilar matter, so that dikes of crystalline rock will traversemasses of similar composition. It is also clear that no organicremains can be included in such masses, unless where sedimentarystrata have subsided to great depths, and In this casethe fossil substances will probably be so acted upon by heat,that all signs of organization will be obliterated. Lastly, thesedeep-seated igneous formations must underlie all the stratacontaining organic remains, because the heat proceeds frombelow upwards, and the intensity required to reduce the mineralingredients to a fluid state must destroy all organic bodiesin rocks either subjacent or included in the midst of them. If,by a continued series of elevator movements, such masses shallhereafter be brought up to the surface, in the same manner assedimentary marine strata have, in the course of ages, beenupheaved to the summit of the loftiest mountains, it is nestdifficult to foresee what perplexing problems may be presentedto the geologist. He may then, perhaps, study in somemountain chain the very rocks produced at the depth ofseveral miles beneath the Andes, Iceland, or Java, in thetime of Leibnitz, and draw from them the same conclusionwhich that philosopher derived from certain igneous productsof high antiquity ; for he conceived our globe to havebeen, for an indefinite period, in the state of a comet, withoutan ocean, and uninhabitable alike by aquatic or terrestrialanimals.CHAPTER XXIII.Earthquakes and their fifes — Deficiency of ancient account! — Ordinary atmosphericphenomena — Changes produced by earthquakes in modem timesconsidered in chronological order — Earthquake in Murcia, 1829 — Bogota in1827^Chili in 1822— Great extent of country elevated— Aleppo in 1822—Ionian Isles in 1820 — Island of Sumbawa in 1815 — Town of Tomboro submerged— Earthquake of Cutch in 1819 — Subsidence of the delta of theIndus — Earthquake of Caraccas in 1812 — South Carolina in ISll^Geo-graphical changes in the valley of the Mississippi — volcanic convulsions inthe Aleutian Islands in 1806 — Reflections on the earthquakes of the eighteenthcentury — Earthquake in Quito, 1797 — Cumana, 1797— Caraccas,1790— Sicily, 1790-JaTa, 1786~Sinking down of large tracts.Ws have already stated , in our sketch of the geographicalboundaries of volcanic regions, that, although the points of eruptionare but thinly scattered and form mere spots on the surfaceof those vast districts yet the subterranean movements extendsimultaneously, over immense areas. We shall now proceedto consider the changes which these movements have beenobserved to produce on the surface, and in the internal structureof the earth's crust.It is only within the last century and a half, since Hooke firstpromulgated his views respecting the connexion between geologicalphenomena and earthquakes, that the permanent changeseffected by these convulsions have excited attention. Beforethat time, the narrative of the historian was almost exclusivelyconfined to the number of human beings who perished, thenumber of cities laid in ruins, the value of property destroyed,or certain atmospheric appearances which dazzled or terrifiedthe observers. The creation of a new lake, the engulphing of acity, or the raising of a new island, are sometimes, it is true,adverted to, as being too obvious, or of too much geographicalinterest, to be passed over in silence. But no researches weremade expressly with a view of ascertaining the precise amountof depression or elevation of the ground, or the particularalterations in the relative position of sea and land ; and verylittle distinction was made between the raising of soil by volcanic400 EARTHQUAKE IN MURCIA, A.D. 1829.ejections and the upheaving of it by forces acting from below.The same remark applies to a very large proportion of modemaccounts ; and how much reason we have to regret this decencyof information is apparent from the fact, that in everyinstance where a spirit of scientific inquiry has animated theeye-witnesses of these events, facts calculated to throw muchlight on former modifications of the earth's structure have beenrecorded.As we shall confine ourselves almost entirely, in our notice ofcertain earthquakes, to the changes brought about by them inthe configuration of the earth's crust, we may mention, generally,some accompaniments of these terrible events which arealmost uniformly commemorated in history, that it may be unnecessaryto advert to them again. Irregularities in the seasonsprecede or follow the shocks; sudden gusts of wind, interruptedby dead calms ; violent rains, in countries or at seasonswhen such phenomena are unusual or unknown ; a reddeningof the sun's disk, and a haziness in the air, often continued formonths ; an evolution of electric matter, or of inflammable gasfrom the soil, with sulphureous and mephitic vapours ; noisesunderground, like the running of carriages, or the discharge-ofartillery, or distant thunder ; animals utter cries of distress,and evince extraordinary alarm, being more sensitive than menof the slightest movement ; a sensation like sea-sickness, and adizziness in the head, are experienced : — these, and other phenomenawhich do not immediately bear on our present subject,have recurred again and again at distant ages, and in all partsof the globe.We shall now begin our enumeration with the latest authenticnarratives of earthquakes, and so carry back our survey retrospectively,that we may bring before the reader, in the firstplace, terminate and circumstantial details of modern times, andenable him, by observing the extraordinary amount of changewithin the last hundred and fifty years, to perceive how greatmust be the deficiency in the meagre annals of earlier eras.Murcia, 18S9. — The first event which presents itself in ourchronological order, is the earthquake which happened in thesouth of Spain on the Syst of March, 18^9. It appears, bythe narrative of M. Casas, the French Consul at Alicant^ thatEARTHQUAKE OF BOGOTA, 1827 — Child, 1822. .401the accounts of the catastrophe were generally much exaggerated.The district violently agitated was only about foursquaremiles in area, being the basin of the river Segura betweenOrihuela and the sea. All the villages in this tract werethrown down by a vertical movement, the soil being traversedby innumerable crevices four or five inches broad. In thealluvial plain, especially that part near the sea, small circularapertures were formed, out of which black mud, salt-water, andmarine shells were vomited ; and in other places fine yellowish-greenmicaceous sand, like that on the beach at Autant, wasthrown up in jets. No crater sent forth lava as was assertedin several Spanish journals '^.Bogota, 1827.— On the 16th November, 1827, the plain ofBogota was convulsed by an earthquake, and a great numberof towns were thrown down. Torrents of rain swelled theMagdalena, sweeping along vast quantities of mud and othersubstances, which emitted a sulphureous vapour and destroyedthe fish. Popayan, which is distant two hundred geographicalmiles S.S.W. of Bogota, suffered greatly. Wide crevicesappeared in the road of Guanacas, leaving no doubt that thewhole of the Cordilleras sustained a powerful shock. Otherfissures opened near Costa, in the plains of Bogota, into whichthe river T'unza immediately began to flow *f. In such cases,we may observe, the ancient gravel bed of a river is deserted,and a new one formed at a lower level ; so that, a want ofrelation in the position of alluvial beds to the existing watercoursesmay be no test of the high antiquity of such depositsto a geologist, in countries habitually convulsed by earthquakes.Extraordinary rains accompanied the shocks beforementioned, and two volcanos are said to have been in eruptionin the mountain-chain nearest to Bogota.Chili, 1822.— On the 19th of November, 1822, the coast ofChili was visited by a most destructive earthquake. The shockwas felt simultaneously throughout a space of one thousandtwo hundred miles from north to south. St. Ago, Valparaiso,and some other places, were greatly injured. When the districtFenuuac, Bulletin des Sci. Nat., November, 1829, p. 203.t Phil Mag., July, 1828, p. 37.Vol L 2D402 COAST OF Chilli PERM Anomaly Elevated.round Valparaiso was examined on the morning after the shock,it was found that the whole line of coast for the distance ofabove one hundred miles was raised above its former level *•At Valparaiso the elevation was three feet, and at Quinteroabout four feet. Part of the bed of the sea remained bare anddry at high water, ^^ with beds of oysters muscles, and othershells adhering to the rocks on which they grew, the fish beingall dead, and exhaling most offensive effluviaf.^' An old wreckof a ship, which before could not be approached, became accessiblefrom the land ; although its distance from the originalsea-shore had not altered. It was observed, that the watercourseof a mill, at the distance of about a mile from the sea,gained a fall of fourteen inches, in little more than one hundredyards ; and from this fact it is inferred, that the rise in someparts of the inland country was far more considerable than onthe coast %. Part of the coast thus elevated consisted of granite,in which parallel fissures were caused, some of which weretraced for a mile and a half inland. Cones of earth, aboutfour feet high, were thrown up in several districts, by theforcing up of water mixed with sand, through funnel-shapedhollows — a phenomenon very common in Calabria, and the explanationof which will hereafter be considered. Those housesin Chili of which the foundations were on rock, were lessdamaged than such as were built on alluvial soil. The area overwhich this permanent alteration of level extended, was estimatedat one hundred thousand square miles. The whole country, fromthe foot of the Andes to a great distance under the sea, is supposedto have been raised, the greatest rise being at the distanceof about two miles from the shore. '' The rise upon the coastwas from two to four feet : — at the distance of a mile inland itmust have been from five to six, or seven feet §.*' The soundingsin the harbour of Valparaiso have been materially changedby this shock, and the bottom has become shallower. Theshocks continued up to the end of September, 1823 : eventhen, forty-eight hours seldom passed without one, and sometimestwo or three were felt during twenty-four hours. Mrs.See Geol. Trans., vol. i., second series ; and also Joiim. of Sd 1824, voLxviL,p- 40. f G^l. Trans vol. i., second series, p. 415.t Joum. of ScL, voL xvii., p. 42. } Ibid., pp. 40, 45.fiARTHQUAKB OF ALEPPO, 1822 — IONIAN ISLES, 1820. 403Graham observed, after the earthquake of 18S2, that besidesthe beach newly raised above high-water mark, there wereseveral older elevated lines of beach one above the other, consistingof shingle mixed with shells, extending in a paralleldirection to the shore, to the height of fifty feet above the sea*.Aleppo J 18S2. — In 18SS Aleppo was destroyed by an earthquake,and alterations are said to have been caused in the lewdof the land ; but of these we have no exact details. At thesame time two rocks were reported by the captain of a Frenchvessel to have risen fitHn the sea, in the neighbourhood ofCyprus an island well known tb be subject to subterraneanmovements, and almost under the same latitude as Aleppo .In these and similar instances, where there is no evidence of asubmarine eruption, it is not the magnitude of the masseslifted above the sea which are of importance, but the indicationapparently afforded by them, that a submarine tract, of whichthey merely form the highest points, has undergone somechange of level.Ionian Isles, 1820.— In the year 18S0, from the 15th ofFebruary to the 6th of March, Santa Maura, one of the Ionianisles, experienced a succession of destructive earthquakes.Immediately afterwards a rocky island was observed not farfrom the coast, which had never been known before j;. Noindications of a submarine eruption were observed on this spot :it is, therefore, most probable that this rock was elevated bythe earthquake ; but an examination of its structure is much tobe desired.Island of Sumbawa, 1815. — In April, 1816, one of themost frightful eruptions recorded in history occurred in themountain Toroboro, in the island of Sumbawa. It began onthe 6th of April, and was most violent on the 11th and Isti,and did not entirely cease till July. The sound of the explosionswas heard in Sumatra, at the distance of nine hundred• Geol. Trans., vol. i^ second eeriei, p. 415.-f* Joum. of Sd., voL sir., p. 450.f Algerine Zeitung, 1820, No. 146. Vernal, Journal des Voyages, vol vip.383 J cited by Von HoflP, Tol ii., p. 180.2D2404 Eruption OF TOMBORO IN SUMBAWA, 1815.and seventy geographical miles in a direct line; and at Tematein an opposite direction, at the distance of seven hundred andtwenty miles. Out of a population of twelve thousand, onlytwenty-six individuals survived on the island. Violent whirlwindscarried up men, horses, cattle, and whatever else camewithin their influence into the air, tore up the largest trees bythe roots, and covered the whole sea with floating timber*.Great tracts of land were covered by lava, several streams ofwhich, issuing from the crater of the Tomboro mountain, reachedthe sea. So heavy was the fall of ashes, that they broke intothe Resident's house at Bima, forty miles east of the volcano,and rendered it, as well as many other dwellings in the town,uninhabitable. On the side of Java, the ashes were carried tothe distance of three hundred miles, and two hundred andseventeen towards Celebes, in sufficient quantity to darken theair. The floating cinders to the westward of Sumatra formedon the lath of April a mass two feet thick, and several milesin extent, through which ships with difficulty forced their way.The darkness occasioned in the daytime by the ashes in Javawas so profound, that nothing equal to it was ever witnessed inthe darkest night. Although this volcanic dust when it fell wasan impalpable powder, it was of considerable weight, whencompressed, a pint of it weighing twelve ounces and threequarters. Along the sea-coast of Sumbawa, and the adjacentisles, the sea rose suddenly to the height of from two to twelvefeet, a great wave rushing up the estuaries, and then suddenlysubsiding. Although the wind at Bima was still during thewhole time, the sea rolled in upon the shore, and filled thelower parts of the houses with water a foot deep. Every prowand boat was forced from the anchorage, and driven on shore.On the 19th of April, says one of Raffles correspondents,^' we grounded on the bank of Bima town. The anchorageat Bima must have altered considerably, as where we groundedthe Temate cruiser lay at anchor in six fathoms a few monthsbefore'' Unfortunately no facts are stated by which we mayjudge with certainty whether this shoal, implying a change ofdepth of more than thirty feet, was caused by an accumulationof ashes, or by an upheaving of the bottom of the sea. It isRuffles's Java, vol i., p. 28.EARTHQUAKE OF CUTCH IN BOMBAY, 1819. 405Stated, however, that the surrounding country was coveredwith ashes. On the other hand, the town called Tomboro, onthe west side of the volcano, was overflowed by the sea, whichencroached upon the shore at the foot of the volcano, so thatthe water remained permanently eighteen feet deep in placeswhere there was land before. Here we may observe, that theamount of subsidence of land was very apparent in spite of theashes which would naturally have caused the limits of thecoast to be extended.The area over which tremulous noises and other volcaniceffects extended, was one thousand English miles in circumference,including the whole of the Molucca islands, Java, aconsiderable portion of Celebes, Sumatra, and Borneo. Inthe island of Amboyna, in the same month and year, the groundopened, threw out water, and then closed again *• We mayconclude, by reminding the reader, that but for the accidentalpresence of Sir Stamford Raffles, then governor of Java, weshould scarcely have heard in Europe of this tremendouscatastrophe. He required all the residents in the various districtsunder his authority to send in a statement of the circumstanceswhich occurred within their own knowledge; but,valuable as were their communications, they are often calculatedto excite rather than to satisfy the curiosity of the geologist.They mention that similar effects, though in a lessdegree, had about seven years before accompanied an eruptionof Caring Assam, a volcano in the island of Bali, west ofSumbawa ; but no particulars of this catastrophe are recorded f .Cutchy 1819. — ^A violent earthquake occurred at Cutch, inBombay, on the 16th of June, 1819. The principal town, Bhooi,was converted into'a heap of ruins, and its stone buildings throwndown. The shock extended to Ahmedhabad, where it wasvery destructive; and at Poona, four hundred miles farther, itwas feebly felt. At the former city, the great mosque erectedby Sultan Aimed nearly four hundred and fifty years beforefell to the ground, attesting how long a period had elapsed sincea shock of similar violence had visited that point. At Ajar,the fort, with its towers and guns, was hurled to the ground in• Raffles's Hist, of Java, vol. i., p. 25. — Ed. Phiil. Jonrn., vol. iil, p. 389.t Life and Sezvices^of Sir Stamford Raffles, p. 241. London; 1830.406 Subsidence IW THB Delta DP THB INDUS.one oomnKm mass of ruin. The shocks continued some daysuntil the dOth, when, thirty miles from Bhooi, a Volcano burstout in eruption, and the convulsions ceased. Although theruin of towns was great, the face of Nature in the inland country,says Captain Macmurdo, was not visibly altered. In thehills some large masses only of rock and soil were detachedfrom the precipices ; but the eastern and almost deserted channelof the Indus, which bounds the province of Cutch, wasgreatly changed. This estuary or inlet of the sea was, beforethe earthquake, fordable at Luckput, being only about a footdeep when the tide was at ebb, and at flood tide never morethan six feet ; but it was deepened at the fort of Luckput, afterthe shock, to more than eighteen feet at low water*. Onsounding other parts of the channel, it was found, that wherepreviously the depth of the water at flood never exceeded oneor two feet, it had become from four to ten feet deep; and thisincrease of depth extended from Cutch to the Sind shore,a distance of three or four miles. The channel of the Run,which extends from Luckput round the north of the provinceof Cutch, was sunk so much, that, instead of being dry asbefore during that period of the year, it was no longer fordable,except at one spot only. By these remarkable changes oflevel, a part of the inland navigation of that country, which hadbeen closed for centuries, became again practicable.The fort and village of Sindree, situated where the Runnn joinsthe Indus, was overflowed ; and, after the shock , the tops of thehouses and wall were alone to be seen above the water, for thehouses, although submerged, were not cast down. Had theybeen situated in the interior, where so many forts were levelledo the ground, their site would perhaps have been regarded ashaving remained comparatively unmoved. From this circumstancewe may feel assured that great permanent pleadingsand depressions of soil may be the result of earthquakes, withoutthe inhabitants being in the least degree conscious of anychange of level.Cones of sand, six or eight feet in height, were thrown outof the lands near the Runnn. Somewhat farther to the east ofthe line of this earthquake lies Oojain (called Ozone in thePeryplus Maris ErythrJ. Ruins of an old town are thereSd. Phil. Jooni*, voL iv., p. 106.BARTHQUAKB OP Caracas, Asp. 1812. 407found, a mile north of the present, sunk in the earth to thedepth of from fifteen to sixteen feet, which sinking is knownto have been the consequence of a tremendous catastrophe inthe time of the Rajah Viermaditya.Caracas, 181S.— On the Seth of March, 1812, severalviolent shocks of an earthquake were felt in Caraccas. Thesurface undulated like a boiling liquid, and terrific soundswere heard underground. The whole city with its splendidchurches was in an instant a heap of ruins, under which tenthousand of the inhabitants were buried. On the 5th of April,enormous rocks were detached from the mountains. It wasbelieved that the mountain Silla lost from three hundred tothree hundred and sixty feet of its height by subsidence ; butthis was an opinion not founded on any measurement. On the27th of April, a volcano in St. Vincent's threw out ashes ; andon the 30th, lava flowed from its crater into the sea, while itsexplosions were heard at a distance equal to that betweenVesuvius and Switzerland, the sound being transmitted, asHumboldt supposes, through the ground. During the earthquakewhich destroyed Caraccas, an immense quantity of waterwas thrown out at Valecillo near Valencia, as also at PortoGabelle, through openings in the earth ; and in the Lake Mara-carbothe water sank *.Although the great change of level in the mountain Sillawas not distinctly proved, the opinion of the inhabitantsdeserves attention, because we shall afterwards have to mentionsome well-authenticated alterations in the same district duringpreceding earthquakes. Humboldt observed that the Cordilleras,composed of gneiss and mica slate, and the country immediatelyat their foot, were more violently shaken than the plains.South Carolina, 1811. previous to the destruction ofLaura and Caraccas in 1811, South Carolina was convulsedby earthquakes, and the shocks continued till those cities weredestroyed. The valley also of the Mississippi, from the villageof New Madrid to the mouth of the Ohio in one direction,and to the St. Francis in another, was convulsed to suchHiimboldt'8 Pen. Nary voL iv., p. 12 ; and Sd. PhiL Joum,, vol. L, p. 272*1819.406 EARTHQUAKE OF south CAROLINA, 1811.a degree as to create lakes and islands. Flint, the geographer,who visited the country seven years after the event, informsus, that a tract of many miles in extent, near the Little Prairie,became covered with water three or four feet deep ; and whenthe water disappeared, a stratum of sand was left in its place.Large lakes of twenty miles in extent were formed in the courseof an hour, and others were drained. The grave-yard at NewMadrid was precipitated into the bed of the Mississippi. Theinhabitants related that the earth rose in great undulations ; andwhen these reached a certain fearful height, the soil burst, andvast volumes of water, sand, and pit-coal, were discharged ashigh as the tops of the trees. Flint saw hundreds of these deepchasms remaining in a tender alluvial soil seven years after.The people in the country, although inexperienced in suchconvulsions, had remarked that the chasms in the earth were inadirection from Sew. to Nee. ; and they accordingly felled thetallest trees, and, laying them at right angles to the chasms,stationed themselves upon them. By this invention, whenchasms opened more than once under these trees, severalpersons were prevented from being swallowed up *, At oneperiod during this earthquake, the ground not far below NewMadrid swelled up so as to arrest the Mississippi in its course,and to cause a temporary reflux of its waves. The motion ofsome of the shocks was horizontal, and of others perpendicular;and the vertical movement is said to have been much less desolatingthan the horizontal. If this be often the case, thoseshocks which injure cities least may often produce the greatestalteration of level.Aleutian Islands, 1806.— In the year 1806 a new island, inthe form of a peak, with some low conical hills upon it, rosefrom the sea among the Aleutian Islands, north of Kamt-schatka. According to Langsdorf-|-, it was four geographicalmiles in circumference ; and Von Buch infers from its magnitude,and from its not having again subsided below the levelof the sea, that it did not consist merely of ejected matter, likeMonte Nuovo, but of solid rock upheaved *. Another extraordinaryeruption happened in the spring of the year 1814, inSilliman'fl Joum., Jan., 1829.t Bemerkimgen, auf eider Rise urn die Welt bd. ii 8. 209.ALEtrriAN ISLES, 1806-NRW ISLANDS THROWN UP. 409the sea near Unalaschka, in the same archipelago. A newisle was then produced of considerable size, and with a peakthree thousand feet high, which remained standing for a yearafterwards, though with somewhat diminished height.Although it is not improbable that the earthquakes accompanyingthe tremendous eruptions above mentioned may haveheaved up part of the bed of the sea, yet we must wait for fullerinformation before we assume this as a fact. The circumstanceof these islands not having disappeared like Sabina,may have arisen from the emission of lava. If Jorullo, forexample, in 1759i had risen from a shallow sea to the heightof one thousand seven hundred feet, instead of attending thatelevation above the Mexican plateau, the massive current ofbasaltic lava which poured out from its crater would haveenabled it to withstand for a long period, the action of aturbulent sea.We are now about to pass on to the events of the eighteenthcentury ; but, before we leave the consideration of those alreadyenumerated, let us pause for a moment, and reflect how manyremarkable facts of geological interest are afforded by theearthquakes above described, though they constitute but asmall part of the convulsions even of the last thirty years.New rocks have risen from the waters ; the coast of Chili /orone hundred miles has been permanently elevated ; part of thedelta of the Indus has sunk down, and some of its shallowchannels have become navigable ; the town of Tomboro hasbeen submerged, and twelve thousand of the inhabitants ofSumbawa have been destroyed. Yet, with a knowledge ofthese terrific catastrophes, witnessed during so brief a periodby the present generation, will the geologist declare with perfectcomposure that the earth has at length settled into a state ofrepose ? Will he continue to assert that the changes of relativelevel of land and sea, so common in former ages of the world,have now ceased ? If, in the face of so many striking facts, hepersists in maintaining this favorite dogma, it is in vain to hopethat, by accumulating the proofs of similar convulsions during aseries of antecedent ages, we shall shake his tenacity of purpose,Si fractus illabatur orbisImpavidum fervent niinee.Nee Allen. Qeogr, Ephemera. bd. ilL, s. 348.410 BARTHQUAKB OF QUITO, i;«7— GnMANA, lf97.Quito, 1797.— On the morning of February 4th, 1797, thevolcano of Tunguragua in Quito, and the surrounding district,for forty leagues, from south to north, and twenty leaguesfrom west to east, experienced an undulating movement, whichlasted four minutes. The same shock was felt over a tract ofone hundred and seventy leagues from south to north, fromPiura to Popayan $ and one hundred and forty from west toeast, from the sea to the river Nape. In the smaller district,first mentioned, every town was levelled to the ground ; andRiobamba, Quern, and other places, were buried under massesdetached from the mountains. At the foot of Tunguragua theearth was rent open in several places; and streams of water andfetid mud, called **nioya,'^ poured out, overflowing and wastingeverything. In valleys one thousand feet broad, the water ofthese floods reached to the height of six hundred feet ; and themud deposit barred up the course of the river, so as to formlakes, which in some places continued for more than eighty days.Flames and suffocating vapours escaped from the lake Quilotoa,and killed all the cattle on its shores. The shocks continuedall February and March, and on the 6th of April they recurredwith almost as much violence as at first. We are told thatthe form of the surface in the district most shaken was entirelyaltered, but no exact measurements are given whereby we mayestimate the degree of elevation or subsidence *. Indeed itwould be difficult, except in the immediate neighbourhood ofthe sea, to obtain any certain standard of comparison, if thelevels were really as much altered as the narrations seem toimply.Cntnana, 1797. — In the same year, on the 14th of December,the small Antilles experienced subterranean movements, andfour-fifths of the town of Cumana was shaken down by a verticalshock. The form of the shoal of Momerouge, at themouth of the river Bourdon, was changed by an upheavingof the grounds.Canaille, Joiira. de Fhyi. tome liz., p. 230. Gilberts, ibmelen, bd. vi., p. 67.Humboldt's Voy., p. 317.t Humboldt's Voy, Beat Hist, part I, p. 309.Caracas 1790 — SICILY, 1790 — ^JATA, 1786. 411Caraccas, 1790. — In the Caraccas, near where the Laurajoins the Orinoco, between the towns San Pedro de Alcantaraand San Francisco de Aripao, an earthquake on St. MatthewsDay, 1790, caused a sinking in of the granitic soil, and left alake eight hundred yards in diameter, and from eighty to onehundred in depth. It was a portion of the forest of Aripaowhich subsided, and the trees remained green for severalmonths under water*.Sicily 1790. — On the 18th of March in the same year, at S.Maria di Niscemi, some miles from Terranuova, near the southcoast of Sicily, the ground gradually sunk down for a circumferenceof three Italian miles, during seven shocks ; and, in oneplace, to the depth of thirty feet. It continued to subside tothe end of the month. Several fissures sent forth sulphur,petroleum, steam, and hot water; and a stream of mud whichflowed for two hours, and covered a space sixty feet long, andthirty broad. This happened far from both the ancient andmodem volcanic district, in a group of strata, consistingchiefly of blue clays*.Java, 1786. — about the year 1786 an earthquake was feltat intervals, for the period of four months, in the neighbourhoodof Batur, in Java, and an eruption followed. Variousrents were formed which emitted a sulphureous vapour ; separatetracts sunk away, and were swallowed by the earth. Intoone of these the rivulet Dotog entered, and afterwards continuedto follow a subterraneous course. The village of Japanwas buried in the ground, with thirty-eight of its inhabitants,who had not time to escape. We are indebted to Dr. Hors-fieldfor having verified the above mentioned facts.Humboldt*! Voy., Relat Hist., pari il, p. 632. f Ferrara, Campi. fl., p. 51,I Batav. Trans., vol viii., p. 141.CHAPTER XXIV,Earthquake in Calabria February Sth, 1783 — Shocks continued to the end ofthe year 1786 — authorities — extent of the area convulsed — Geological structureof the district — Difficulty of ascertaining changes of relative level evenon the seacoast — Subsidence of the quay at Messina — Shift or fiuilt in theRound Tower of Terranuova — movement in the stones of two obelisks —Alternate opening and closing of fissures — Cause of thb phenomenon — Largeedifices engulphed — Dimensions of new caverns and fissures — Gradual closingin of rents — abounding of detached masses into the air — Landslipa— Buildingstransported entire, to great distances — Formation of fifty new lakes — Currentsof mud — Small funnel-shaped hollows in alluvial plains — fall of diflSialong the sea-coast — Shore near Sdlla inundated— State of Stromboli andEtna during the shocks — Illustration afforded by Diis earthquake of themode in which valleys are formed.Of the numerous earthquakes which have occurred in differentparts of the globe, during the last hundred years, that ofCalabria, in 1783, is the only one of which the geologist canbe said to have such a circumstantial account as to enable himfully to appreciate the changes which this cause is capable ofproducing in the lapse of ages. The shocks began in February,1783, and lasted for nearly four years, to the end of 1786.Neither in duration, nor in violence, nor in the extent ofterritory moved, was this convulsion remarkable, when contrastedwith many experienced in other countries, both duringthe last and present century ; nor were the alterations whichit occasioned in the relative level of hill and valley, land andsea, so great as those effected by some subterranean movementsin South America, in our own times. The importance of theearthquake in question arises from the circumstance, thatCalabria is the only spot hitherto visited, both during and afterthe convulsions, by men possessing sufficient leisure, zeal, andscientific information, to enable them to collect and describewith accuracy the physical facts which throw light on geologicalquestions.Among the numerous authorities Yivenzio^ physician to theEARTHQUAKE IN CALABRIA, A.D. 1783. 413King of Naples, transmitted to the court a regular statementof his observations during the continuance of the shocks ; andhis narrative is drawn up with care and clearness *. FrancescoAntonio Grimaldi, then secretary of war, visited the differentprovinces at the king's command, and published a most detaileddescription of the permanent changes in the surface -f. Hemeasured the lengthy breadth, and depth of the differentfissures and gulphs which opened, and ascertained their numberin many provinces. His comments, moreover, on the reports ofthe inhabitants, and his explanations of their relations, arejudicious and instructive. Pignataro, a physician residing atMonteleone, a town placed in the very centre of the convulsions,kept a register of the shocks, distinguishing them into fourclasses, according to their degree of violence. From his work,it appears that, in the year 1783, the number was nine hundredand forty-nine, of which five hundred and one were shocks ofthe first degree of force ; and in the following year there wereone hundred and fifty-one, of which ninety-eight were of thefirst magnitude. Count Impolite, also, and many others, wrotedescriptions of the earthquake ; and the Royal Academy ofNaples, not satisfied with these and other observations, sent adeputation from their own body into Calabria, before theshocks had ceased who were accompanied by artists instructedto illustrate by drawings the physical changes of the district,and the state of ruined towns and edifices. Unfortunatelythese artists were not very successful in their representationsof the condition of the country, particularly whenthey attempted to express, on a large scale, the extraordinaryrevolutions which many of the great and minor river-coursesunderwent. But many of the plates published by theAcademy are valuable ; and we shall frequently avail ourselvesof them to illustrate the facts about to be described |. In additionto these Neapolitan sources information, our countryman.Sir William Hamilton, surveyed the district not withoutsome personal risk, before the shocks had ceased ; and his sketch,published in the Philosophical Transactions, supplies manyfacts that would otherwise have been lost. He has explainedAstoria de* Tremuoti della Calabria, del 1783.t Descries. de* Tremuoti Accad. nelly Calabria nel 1783. Napoli, 1784.t Astoria de* Fenomeni del Remote, &c. nell' an. 1783, posta in luce dallaReal.Accad., &C| di Nap. Napoli, 1 784, fol.414 CAftTIIQUAKB Itt Calabria, A.D. 1783.in a rational manner maner events which, as related in thelanguage of some eye-witnesses, appeared marvellous andincredible. Dolomieu also examined Calabria, soon afterthe catastrophe, and wrote an account of the earthquake,correcting a mistake into which Hamilton had fallen, whosupposed that a part of the tract shaken had consisted ofvolcanic tuff. It is, indeed, a circumstance which enhancesthe geological interest of the commotions which so often modifythe surface of Calabria, that they are confined to a countrywhere there are neither ancient nor modern rocks of igneousorigin ; so that at some future time, when the era of disturbanceshall have passed by, the cause of former revolutions will beas latent as in parts of Great Britain now occupied exclusivelyby ancient marine formations.The convulsion of the earth, sea, and air, extended overthe whcde of Calabria Ultra, the south-east part of CalabriaCitra, and across the sea to Messina and its environs — ^adistrict lying between the S8th and S8th trees of latitude.The concussion was perceptible over a great part of Sicily,and as far north as Naples ; but the surface over which theshocks acted so forcibly as tx) excite intense alarm, did notgenerally exceed five hundred square miles in circumference.The soil of that part of Calabria is composed chiefly, likethe southern part of Sicily, of calcareo-argillaceous strata ofgreat thickness, containing marine shells. This clay is sometimesassociated with beds of sand and limestone. For themost part these formations resemble in appearance and consistencythe Subapennine marls, with their accompanying sandsand sandstones; and the whole group bears considerable resemblance,in the yielding nature of its materials, to most of ourtertiary deposits in France and England. Chronologicallyconsidered, however, the Calabriann formations are comparativelyof very modern date, and abound in fossil shells referableto species now Using in the Mediterranean.We learn from Vivenzio, that on the Both and 96ih ofMarch, 1783, earthquakes occurred in the islands of Zante,Cephalonia, and St. Maura; and in the last-mentioned isleseveral public edifices and private houses were overthrown, andmany people destroyed. We have already shown that theIonian Isles fall within the line of the same great volcanicregion as Calabria ; so that both earthquakes were probablyeXTBNT OP Territory Convulsed. 415derived from a common source, and it is not improbable thatthe bed of the whole intermediate sea was convulsed.If the city of Oppido, in Cahibria^ be taken as a centre andround that centre a circle be described with a radius of twenty-twomiles, this space will comprehend the surface of the countrywhich suffered the greatest alteration, and where all the townsand villages were destroyed. But if we describe the circlewith a radius of seventy-two miles, this will then comprehendthe whole country that had any permanent marks of havingbeen affected by the earthquake. The first shock, of February5th, 1783, threw down in two minutes, the greater part of thehouses in all the cities, towns, and villages, from the westernflanks of the Apennines in Calabria Ultra, to Messina inSicily, and convulsed the whole surface of the country.Another occurred on the 28th of March, with almost equalviolence. The granitic chain which passes through Calabriafrom north to south, and attains the height of many thousandfeet, was shaken but slightly ; but it is said that a great partof the shocks which were propagated with a wave-like motionthrough the recent strata from west to east, became very violentwhen they reached the point of junction with the granite, as ifa reaction was produced where the undulatory movement ofthe soft strata was suddenly arrested by the more solid rocks.The surface of the country often heaved like the billows of aswelling sea, which produced a swimming in the head like seasickness*It is particularly stated, in almost all the accounts,that just before each shock the clouds appeared motionless ; andalthough no explanation is offered of this phenomenon, it isobviously the same as that observed in a ship at sea when itpitches violently. The clouds seem arrested in their career asoften as the vessel rises in a direction contrary to their course;so that the Calabria must have experienced precisely thesame motion on the land.We shall first consider that class of physical changes producedby the earthquake which are connected with changesin the relative level of the different parts of the land ; and afterwardsdescribe those which are more immediately connectedwith the derangement of the regular drainage of the country,and where the force of running water co-operated with that ofthe earthquake.In regard to alterations of dative level; none of the accountstoL^of ~™ ey . ».««• i, level 1^" •"'^»-5r»t»trq*e, »d .nile r-jrAe""""?'" "Trfvo&tulf. It ."* i.lbr.»*h.l».«thei^l^the elope"! intelB* ot , . <^ ^^ ,„e. conti Bpnog.he^the,^ »e»e.*. ■ ■ ■'f^^.Mge to d.»»'« "^'^,h.Uh ep™edb. . „„faUt i«>e7"°^S:^„UteiitiBiiBp«rt ,,,>^ „,1 of tile gre""'': . ' „.'''•^'^'rSy'"M»otu™»«''^t^aei"" * } .™rj lenitive JtitodtsbW .- J .X.'^fc °f. P-^tnriot in their Same, *•'<'«'■"■ '1^ '* « A"*"'" ,hr"me level on both «« "^cont,. ^-^^""r, imrttae. there had b«. • »"■W .,■ ■'S'otho. ^'""'Tj'Ze.h.d.ll.red.ta'^ ;^.::^'fe^'^r€i^:^Citra, and «*district lyingThe concurand as far Ishocks RCtcgenerallyThe soilthe southgreat thirstsee;nanlong jj^regiChaKQEB op KE!LAnvE LStBL. 417innumerable fissures in the earth. One of these was of greatlength and depth ; and in parts, the level of the correspondingsides was greatly changed. In the town of Terranuora, somehouses were seen uplifted above the common level, and othersadjoining sunk down into the earth. In several streets, the soilappeared thrust up, and abutted against the walls of houses ; alarge circular tower of solid masonry, which had withstood thegeneral destruction, was divided by a vertical rent, and oneaide was upraised, and the foundations heaved out of the418 Earthquake IN CUABRU| A.Dk 1783.ground. It wsa compared hj the Aaldeiiiiduit to ■ granttooth half extracted from the decus, with the upper part ofthe fangs exposed. (See cut No. SO.)Along the line of this shift, or " faults as it would be tendedtechnically by miners, the waDs were found to adhere firmlyto each other, and to fit so wdl, that the only signs of thor- having been disunited was the want of correspondence in thecourses of stone on other side of the rent.In some walls which had been thrown down, or violentlyshaken, in Monteleone, the separate stones were parted fromthe mortar so as to leave on exact mould where they had rested,whereas in other cases the mortar was ground to dust betweenthe stones.It appears that the wave-like motions, and those which arecalled vortices or whirling In a vortex, often produced effectsof the most capricious kind. Thus, in some streets of Monte-leone,every house was thrown down "but 'one; in others, allbut two; and the buildings which' were qwred were oftenscarcely In the least degree injured.In many cities of Calabria, all the most solid bindings werethrown down, while those which were slightly built, escaped ;but at Romano, as also at Messina, In Sicily, it was preciselythe reverse, the massive edifices being the only ones that stood.Two obelisks (No. 21)placed at the extremities of a magnificentfacade in the convent of S. Bruno, in a small town called Sternodd BoBOo, were observed to have undergone movement of a singularkind. The shock which agitated the building is describedas having beenhonzontal and vortices. The pedestal of eachpbcltsk nnutined in its original place; but the separate scenesFtaSOSES — B0D8KS ENOULPaEO. 419above were finned partially round, and removed sometimesDine inches from their portion, without falling.It appears evident that a great part of the rending and fis-duringof the ground was the effect of a violent motion frombelow upwards; and in a multitude of cases where the rentsand chasms opened and closed alternately, we must supposethat the earth was hy turns heaved up, and then let fall again.We may conceive the same effect to be produced on a smallKale, if, by some mechanical force, a pavement composed oflarge flags of stone should be raised up and then allowed to£b11 suddenly, so as to resume its original position. If anysmall pebbles happened to be lying on the line of contact oftwo flags, they would fall into the opening when the rose, and be swallowed up, so that no trace (^ them would(qipear after the subsidence of the stones. In the same manner,when the earth was upheaved, large bouses, trees, cattle,and men were engulphed in an instant in chasms and fissures)and when the ground sank down again, the earth closed uponthem, so that no vestige of them was discoverable on thesurface. In many instances, individuals were swallowed upby one Aoek, and then, thrown out agtiin alive, together withlarge jets of water, by the shock which immediately succeeded.At Jerome, a country which, according to the Academicians,was lacerated in a most extraordinary manner, the fisres ran in every direction like cracks on a broken pane420 EARTffQOAKB IN Calabria, A.D. t7B3.erf" glass (see cut No. 2S) ; and, as a greet portion of tbeffiremained open after the shocks, it is very possible that thiscountry was permanently upraised.In the vicinity of Oppido, the central plant from which theearthquake diffused its violent movements, many houses wereswallowed up by the yawning earth, which closed immediatelyover them. In the adjacent district also of Cannamaria, fourfarm-houses, several (^-stores, and some spacious dwelling-houseswere so completely oigulphed in one chasm, that not aVestige of them was afterwards discernible. The same phenomenonoccurred at Terranuova, S. Christina, and Sinopoli.The Academicians state particularly that when deep abysseshad opened in the argillaceous strata of Terranuova, and housesbad sunk into them, the sides of the chasms closed with suchviolence, that, on excavating afterwards to recover articles ofvalue, the workmen found the contents and detached parts <ifthe buildings jammed together so as to become (Hie compactmass. It is unnecessary to accumulate examples of dmilar occurrences;but so many are well authenticated during this earthquakein Calabria, that we may, without hesitation, yield assentto the accounts of catastrophes of the same kind repeatedagain and again in history, where whole towns are declared tohave been engulphed, and nothing but a pool of water or tractof sand left in their place.On the sloping side of a hill near Oppido, a great chasm-opened,and, although a Urge quantity of soil was precipitatedSIIRIUIONB OF NEW nBSUBBS AND Cubits. 421into the abyss, together with a considerable number of olive-treesand part of a vineyard, a great gulph remained after theshock in the form of an amphitheatre, five hundred feet longand two hundred feet deep (see cut No. S3).According to Grimaldi, many fissures and chasms, formedby the first shock of February 5th, were greatly widened,listened, and deepened by the violent convulsions of MarchS8th. In the territory of San Fill, thb observer found a nevravine, half a mile in length, two feet and a half broad, andtwenty-five feet deep; and another of similar dimensions in theterritory of Romano. A ravine nearly a mUe long, one hundredand five feet broad, and thirty feet deep, opened in the districtof Flaisano, where, also, two gulphs were caused — one in a placecalled Cerzulle, three quarters of a mile long, one hundred andfitly feet broad, and above one hundred feet deep, and anotherat La Fortuna, nearly a quarter of a mile long, above thirtyfeet in breadth, and no less than two hundred and twenty-fivefeet deep. In the district of Fosolano three gulphs opened :one of these measured three hundred feet square, and abovethirty feet deep; another was nearly half a mile long, fifteenfeet broad, and above thirty feet deep ; the third was sevenhundred and fifty feet square. Lastly, a calcareous mountain,called Zefirio, at the southern extremity of the Italian peninsula,was cleft in two for the length of nearly half a mile, andan irregular breadth of many feet. Some of these chasms werein the form of a crescent. The annexed cut (No. 34) repressBABTBIJOAKE IK OAUSBIA, &.D. in*.ienb one by no means remarkable lor hi dimenaoiis, wliklimnaiited open by the aide of a bbuU put over the hill ofSt. Angelo, near Soruno. The biimU met Mens b Kcn inthe for^;roui]d.Id the Vicinity of Setninara, a lake was suddenly famed bythe opening at a gnat chasm, from the bottom of which wateriwued. This lake was called Imago del Tolfib. It extendedJtS80 palms in length, by 1250 in breadth, and 70in depth. The inhabitants, dreading the miasma of this stagnantpool, endeavoured, at great cost, to drain it by canals,but without success, as it was fed by springs issuing from thebottom <^ the deep chasm. A small circular subsidence occurrednot fkr from Polistena, of. which a representation isgiven in the annexed cut.Sir W. Hamilton was shown eev^^l deep fissures in thevicinity of Mileto, which, although not one of them was abovea foot in breadth, had opened so wide during the earthquake asto swallow up an ox and near one hundred goats. The Academiciansalso found, on their return through districts whichthey had passed at the commencement of thar tour, that manyrents had in that short interval gradually closed in, so that theirwidth bad diminished several feet, and the opposite walls badsometimes neatly met It is natural that this should happenin argillaceous strata, while in more solid rocks we mayexpect that fissures will remain open for ages. Should thisbeascertained to be a general Jbct in countries convulsedwowauawm or ukxn «r usbmim. 423by earthquake, it would afire • mtiAttarj caqplmrtinnOb a OODDDDOD T^hffffffPfff^^r* fi budgcu tisos* Suc CumofftcQ leUnn their lull wwt wo looK " tiff vocksouHOfit of ^lw**^slGB^ granite, or other indented materials; but they contracttheir dimeDrioDSy bf>ff wiiiif mere threads* or are om untidy cutoff,where Basks of an aigfllaoeons nature are interposed. Ifwe suppose the filling up of fissures with metallic and otheringredients to he apiooess requiring ages for its completion, it18 olmoos that the opposite walk of rents where strata consist<if yielding material, must collapse or a p proaA very near toA rich other befit se snflUent time is allowed find the accretion ofa la quantity of vanstone.It is sated by Grimaldi that the thermal waters of St Euphemia, in Tern di Amatq, which first burst out during theearthquake of 16S8, acquired, in February 178S, an augmentationboth in quantity and dree of heat. This £ict appearsto indicate a connexion between the heat of the interior andthe fissures caused by the Cambrian earthquakes, notwithstandingthe absence of Tolcanic rocks either ancient or modem inthat district.The violence of the movement of the ground upwards wasiBfigiilm'ly illustrated by what the Academicians call the^^ sbalzo," or bounding into the air, to the height of severalyards, ci masses slightly adhering to the surface. In sometowns a great part of the payement-stones were thrown up,and found lying with their bower des uppermost. In thesecases we must suppose that they were propelled upwards bythe momentum which they had acquired, and that the adhesionof one end of the mass being greater than that of theother, a rotatory motion had been communicated to them.When the stone was projected to a sufficient height to performsomewhat more than a quarter of a revolution in theair, it pitched down on its edge and fell with its lower sideuppermost.The next class of effects to be considered are those moreimmediately connected with the formation of valleys, in whichthe action of water was often combined with that of the earthquake.The country agitated was composed, as we beforestated, chiefly of argillaceous strata, intersected by deep narrowvalleys, sometimes from five to six hundred feet deep. As the424 SABTHQUAU IN Cambria, A.D. 1783;boundary cliffs were in great part vertical it will readily beconceived that, amidst the various movements of the earth, theprecipices overhanging the rivers, being without support on oneside, were often thrown down. We find, indeed, that inundationsproduced by obstructions in river-courses are amongthe most disastrous consequences of great earthquakes in allparts of the world; for the alluvial plains in the bottoms .ofvalleys are usually the most fertile and well peopled parts ofthe whole country, and whether the site of a town is above orbelow a temporary barrier in the channel of a river, it is ez*posed to injury by the waters either of a lake or a flood.From each side of the deep valley or ravine of Terranuova,enormous masses of the adjoining flat country were detachedand cast down into the course of the river, so as to give rise tpgreat lakes* Oaks, olive-trees, vineyards, and com, veersoften seen growing at the bottom of the ravine, as little injuredas their companions from which they were separated in thepliun above at least five hundred feet higher, and at the distanceof about three-quarters of a mile* In one part of thisravine was an enormous mass, two hundred feet high, andabout four hundred feet in diameter at its basis, which hadbeen detached by some former earthquake. It is well attestedthat this mass travelled down the ravine near four miles,having been put in motion by the earthquake of the 5th .ofFebruary. Hamilton, after examining the locality, declaredthat this phenomenon might be accounted for by the declivityof the valley, the great abundance of rain which fell, and thegreat weight of the alluvial matter which pressed behind it.The momentum of the *^ terre movitine," or lavas, as theflowing mud is called in the country, is no doubt very great;but the transportation of masses that might be compared tosmall hills, for a distance of several miles at a time, is an effectwhich could never have been anticipated : and the fact shouldserve as a hint to those geologists who are fond of appealingto alluvial phenomena as proofs of the superior violence ofaqueous causes in former ages.The first account sent to Naples of the two great slides orlandslips above alluded to, which caused a great lake nearTerranuova, was couched in these words: — *^ Two mountainson the opposite sides of a valley walked from their originalLANDSLIP OF RA BOMORD, Steam. 'SOBLUia ^5pontiiMi und they met in the middle of the plain, and therejoining together, they intercepted the course of a river, be."The expressions here used resemble singularly those appliedto phenomena, probably very analogous, which are said to haveoccurred at Fez, during the great Lisbon earthquake as alsoin Jamaica and Java at other periods.Not far.from Dorian, vrhich was levelled to the ground hjthe great shock of February the 6th, a small valley, containinga beautiful olive>grove, called Fra Raymond, underwent a mostextraordinary revolution. Innumerable fissures first traversedthe river-plain in all directions, and absorbed the water untilthe argillaceous substratum became soaked, and a great partof it was reduced to a state of fluid paste. Strange alterationsin the outline of the ground were the consequence, as thesoil to a great depth was easily moulded into any form. InadditicHi to this change, the ruins of the neighbouring hillswere precipitated into the hollow ; and while many olives were1. Portion of kbiU covered with oliver UnowD down.2. New bed of the mtr Citric. 3. Town of SariuiD,uprooted, others remained growing on the fallen masses, andinclined at various angles (see cut No. S6). The snail riverMariti was entirely concealed for many days ; and when atlength it reappeared, it had shaped for itself an entirely newchannel.426 BAETHQVA«B IN OALABEU^ A.D* 1763.Near Seminary, an extensive olive-ground and orchard werehurled to a distance of two hundred feet, into a valley sixtyfeet in depth. At the same time a deep chasm was riven inanother part of the high plateau from which the orchard hadbeen detached, and the river immediately entered the fissure,leaving its former bed completely dry. A small inhabitedhouse, standing on the mass of earth carried down into thevalley, went along with it entire, and without injury to dieinhabitants. The olive-trees, also, continued to grow on theland which had slid into the valley, and bore the same yearan abundant crop of fruit.Two tracts of land on which a great part of the town ofPolistena stood, consisting of some hundreds of houses, weredetached into a contiguous ravine, and nearly across it abouthalf a mile from their original site ; and, what is most extraordinary,several of the inhabitants were dug out from the ruinsalive, and unhurt.Two tenements, near Mileto, called the Macini and Vatican,about a mile long, and half a mile broad, were carriedfor a mile down a valley. A thatched cottage, togetherwith large olive and mulberry^trees, most of wl^chremained erect, were carried uninjured to this extraordinarydistance. According to Hamilton, the surface removed hadbeen long undermined by rivulets, which were afterwards infull view on the bare spot deserted by the tenements. Theearthquake seems to have opened a passage in the adjoiningargillaceous hills, by which water charged with loose soil hadsuddenly taken its course into the subterranean channels of therivulets immediately under the tenements, so that the entirepiece of ground was floated ofi^. Another example of subsidence,where the edifices were not destroyed, is mentioned byGrimaldi, as having taken place in the dty of Catanzaro, thecapital of the province of that name. The houses in thequarter called San Giuseppe subsided with the ground tovarious depths from two to four feet, but the buildings remaineduninjured.It would be tedious, and our space would not permit us, tofollow the different authors through their local details of landslipsproduced in numerous minor valleys ; but they are highlyinteresting, as showing to how great an extent the power ofVocation OV KBW LAHBI. 427nVeTi to widen Valley, end to carry away large pcntiona rf•cti towards the sea, i> increased where earthquakes are ofH0.S7.periodical occurrence. Among other territories, that of Cmque-fronde was greatly convulsed, various portions of soil beingraised or sunk, and innumerable fissures traversing the countryin all directions (see cut No. %7) . Along the flanks of a smallvalley in this district there appears to have been an almostuninterrupted line of landslips.Vivenzio states, that near Sitizzano a valley was very nearlyfilled up to a level with the high grounds on each inde, by theenormous masses detached from the boundary hills, and castdown into the course of two streams. By this barrier a ^ewas formed of great depth, about two miles long and a milebroad. The same author mentions that upon the whole, therewere fifty lakes occasioned during the convulsions, and heasngns localities to all of these. The government Surveyorsenumerated two hundred and fifteen lakes, but they includedin this number many small and insignificant ponds.Near S. Lucid, among other places, the soil is described-ashaving been "dissolved*' so that large torrents oi mud inundatedall the low grounds, like lava. Just emerging fromthis mud, the tops only of trees and of the ruins of farm-bouses,were seen. Two miles from Laureate the swampy soil in tworavines became filled with calcareous matter, which oozed outBARTHQUAKB IN Calabria, A.D. 17S3.From the ground immediately before the first great shock.Thus jQud, rapidly accumulating, began, ere long, to roll onwardlike a flood of lava into the valley, where the two streamsuniting, moved forward with increased impetus from east towest. It now presented a breadth of three hundred palms bytwenty in depth, and before it ceased to move, covered a surfaceequal in length to an Italian mile. In its progress it overwhelmeda flock of thirty goats, and tore up by the roots manyolive and mulberry-trees, which floated like ships upon itssurface. When this calcareous lava had ceased to move itgradually became dry and hard, during which process the masswas lowered ten palms. It continued fragments of earth of aferruginous colour, and emitting a sulphureous smelLMany of the appearances exhibited in the alluvial plainsindicate clearly the alternate ring and sinking of the ground.The first effect of the more violent shocks was usually to dryup the rivers, but they immediately afterwards overflowed theirbanks. Along the alluvial plains, and in marshy places, animmense number of cones of sand were thrown up. Theseappearances Hamilton explains, by supposing that the firstmovement raised the fissured phiin from below upwards, sothat the rivers and stagnant waters in bogs sank down, or atleast were not upraised with the soil. But when the' groundhLL OF Cliffs ON THE SEA COAST. 429returned with violence to its fonder position, the water wasdrown up in jets through assures *.In the Report of the Academy, we find that some plains wereentered with circular hollows, for the most part about the sizeof carriage-wheels, but often somewhat larger or smaller.When filled with water to within a foot or two of the surfacetbejr appeared like wells ; but, in general, they were filledwith dry sand, sometimes with a concave surface, and at othertimes convex. On digging down, they found them to be ,and the moist loose sand in the centre markedthe tube up which the water spouted. The annexed cutrepresents a section of one of these inverted cones when thewater had disappeared, and nothing but dry micaceous sandremained.Along the sea-coast of the straits of Messina, near the celebratedrock of Scilla, the fall of huge masses detached fromthe bold and lofty cliffs overwhelmed many villas and gardens.At Giant Greco a continuous line of cliff, for a mile in length,was thrown down. Great agitation was frequently observedin the bed of the sea during the shocks, and, oti those parts ofthe coast where the movement was most violent, all kinds offishwere taken in greater abundance, and with much greaterfacility. Some rare specks, as that called Cicirelli, whichusually lie buried in the sand, were taken on the surface of thewaters in great quantity. The sea is said to have boiled upnear Messina, and to have been agitated as if by a copiousdischarge of vapours from its bottom. The Prince of ScillyFail. 'Aiiit, Toi Lxxiii, p> 160.490 EARTHQUAKE IV CALABEU, A.D. 1783.had persuaded a great part of his vassals to betake tfaemadvetto their fishing-boats for safety, and he himself had goneon board. On the night of the 5th of February, when nameof the people were sleeping in the boats, and others on a lewdplain slightly elevated above the sea, the earth rocked, andsuddenly a great mass was torn from the contiguous MountJaci| and thrown down with a dreadful crash upon the pkm.Immediately afterwards, the sea rising thirty palms above thelevel of this low tract, rolled foaming over it, and swept awaythe multitude. It then retreated, but soon rushed back againwith greater violence, bringing with it some of the people andanimals it had carried away. At the same time every boat wassunk or dashed against the beach, and some of them were sweptfar inland. The aged Prince, with one thousand four hundredand thirty of his people, was destroyed. The number ofpersons who perished during the earthquake in the two calabriaand Sicily is estimated by Hamilton at about forty thousand,and about twenty thousand more died by epidemics whichwere caused by insufficient nourishment, exposure to the atmosphere,and malaria, arising from the new stagnant lakes andpools. By far the greater number were buried under the ruinsof their houses ; while some were burnt to death in the conflagrationswhich almost invariably followed the shocks, and consumedimmense magazines of oil and other provisions. A small numberwere engulphed in chasms and fissures, and their skeletonsare perhaps buried in the earth to this day, at the depth ofseveral hundred feet, for such was the profundity of some ofthe openings which did not dose in again.The inhabitants of Pizzo remarked, that on the 5th ofFebruary, 1783, when the first great shock afflicted Calabria,the volcano of Stromboli, which is in full view of that town,and at the distance of about fifty miles, smoked less, and threwup a less quantity of inflamed matter, than it had done for someyears previously. On the other hand, the great crater of Etnais said to have given out a considerable quantity of vapourtowards the beginning, and Stromboli towards the close of thecommotions. But as no eruption happened from either ofthese great vents during the whole earthquake, the sourcesof the Calabriann convulsions, and of the volcanic fires of Etnaand Stromboli, appear to be very independent of each other;Excavation 07 Valleys. 431unless indeed, they have the same mutual relation as Vesuviusand the volcanos of the Phlegrsean Fields and Ischia, a violentdisturbance in one district serving as a safety-valve to theother, and both never being in full activity at once.It is impossible for the geologist to consider attentive theeffect of this angle earthquake of 178S, and to look forward tothe alterations in the physical condition of the country to whichA continued series of such movements will hereafter give risewithout perceiving that the formation of valleys by runningwater can never be understood, if we consider the questionindependently of the agency of earthquakes. Rivers do notheffn to act as some seem to imagine, when a country isalready elevated far above the level of the sea, but whileit is firing or king by successive movements. WhetherCalabria is now undergoing any considerable change of relativelevel, in regard to the sea, or is, upon the whole, nearly stationary,is a question which our observations, confined almostentirely to the last half century, cannot possibly enable us todetermine. But we know that strata, containing species ofshells identical with those now living in the contiguous parts ofthe Mediterranean, have been raised in this country, as theyhave in Sicily, to the height of several thousand feet* Nowthose geologists who merely grant that the present course ofNature, in the inanimate world, has been unchanged since theexisting spedes of animals were in being, will not feel surprisethat the Calabriann streams and rivers have out out of suchcomparatively modem strata a great system of valleys varyingin depth from fifty to six hundred feet, and often several mileswide, when th consider how numerous must have been theearthquakes which lifted those recent marine strata to so prodigiousa height. Some speculators, indeed, who disregard theanalogy of existing Nature, and who arenas prodigal of violenceas they are thrifty of time, may suppose that Calabria *' roselike an exhalation " from the deep, after the manner of Milton'sPandemonium. But such an hypothesis will deprive them ofthat peculiar removing force required to form a regular systemof deep and wide valleys, for time is essential to the operation.Lands must be cleared away in the intervals between subterraneanmovements, otherwise fallen masses will serve asbuttresses to the precipitous difis bordering a valley, so that432 Earthquake IN Calabria A.D. 1783«the succeeding earthquake will be unable to exert its full power.Barriers must be worn through and swept away, and steep oroverhanging cliffs again left without support before anothershock can take effect in the same manner.If a single convulsion be too violent, and agitate at once anentire hydrographical basin, or if the shocks follow each othertoo rapidly, the previously-existing valleys will be annihilated,instead of being modified and enlarged. Every stream will becompelled to be^n its operations anew, and to open for itself apassage through strata before undisturbed, instead of continuingto deepen and widen channels already in great part excavated.On the other hand, if, consistently with all that is knownfrom observation of the laws which regulate subterraneanmovements, we consider their action to have been intermittentsufficient periods have always intervened between the severershocks to allow the drainage of the country to be nearly restoredto its original state, then are both the kind and degree of forcesupplied which may enable running water to hollow out a valleof any depth and size consistent with the degree of elevationabove the sea which the district in question may happen atany time to have attained during a succession of physical revolutions,Notwithstanding the great derangement caused by violentearthquakes, there is an evident tendency in running water toremain constant to the same connected series of valleys. Thesoftening of the soil is invariably greatest in the channels ofrivers and in alluvial plains. The water is absorbed in aninfinite number of rents, and. when the ground is swelled withwater it is reduced almost to a state of mud by the vehementagitation of the ground in every direction, and often for severalyears consecutively. The erosive and transporting action ofrunning water is, therefore, facilitated in the tracts alreadyexcavated.When we read of the drying up and desertion of thechannels of rivers, the accounts most frequently refer to theirdeflection into some other part of the same alluvial plain, perhapsseveral miles distant. Under certain circumstancesa change of level may undoubtedly force the water to flowover into some distinct hydrographical basin ; but even thenit will fall immediately into valleys already formed. ■Excavation OF Valle. 433Tided, therefore, we suppose the elevation and subsidence ofmountain-chains to be a gradual process, there is no difficultyin explaining how the rivers draining our continents have convertedravines into valleys, and enlarged and deepened valleysto an enormous extent. On the contrary, the signs of slow andgradual action so manifest in the sinuosities and other charactersof valleys are admirably reconcilable with the great widthand depth of the excavations, if we are content not only to supposea great succession of ordinary earthquakes, but also theusual intervals of time between the shocks.We may observe that earthquakes alone could never giverise to a regular system of valleys ramifying from a maintrunk like the veins from the great arteries of the humanbody. On the contrary, they would, in the course of time,destroy every system of valleys on the globe, were it not for theagency of aqueous causes. We learn from history that eversince the first Greek colonists, the Bruttii, settled in Calabria,that region has been subject to devastation by earthquakes, and,for the last century and a half, ten years have seldom elapsedwithout a shock ; but the severer convulsions have not onlybeen separated by intervals of twenty, fifty, or one hundredyears, but have not affected precisely the same points whenthey recurred. Thus the earthquake of 1783, although confinedwithin the same geographical limits as that of 1638,and not very inferior in violence, visited, according to Grimaldi,very different localities. The points where the local intensityof the force is developed, being thus perpetually varied, moretime is allowed for the removal of separate mountain massesthrown into river channels by each shock.When chasms and deep hollows open at the bottom of valleys,they must often be filled with those "mud lavas before described; and these must be extremely analogous to the enormousancient deposits of mud which are seen in many countries, as inthe basin of the Tay, Isle, and North Desk rivers, for example,in Scotland — alluvions hundreds of feet thick, which are neitherstratified nor laminated like the sediment which subsides fromwater. Whenever a landslip blocks up a river, these currentsof mud will be arrested, and accumulate to an enormous depth.The transportation for several miles at a time, of masses aslarge as great edifices by the momentum of these floods of mudVol. I. 2 F434 Excavation OP Valleys.combined with the motion of the earthquake, and the envelopingof hind animals, together with many other facts mentionedin the Calabriann account, cannot but exdte in the mind ofevery geologist a strong desire to become more acquaintedwith the changes now in progress in those vast regions of theglobe which are habitually devastated by earthquakes. Toour extreme ignorance of this important class of phenomenawe may probably refer the obscurity of many of the appearancesof superficial alluvions throughout the greater part ofEurope, as well as the diversity of opinion relating to them,and the extravagant theories which have passed current.The portion of the Calabriann valleys formed within the lastthree thousand years, must, undoubtedly, be inconsiderable inamount, compared to that previously formed, just as the lavaswhich have flowed from Etna since the historical era constitutebut a small proportion of the whole cone. But as a continuedseries of such eruptions as man has witnessed would reproduceanother cone like Etna, so a sufficient number of earthquakeslike that of 1783 would enable torrents and riversto re-excavate all the Calabriann valleys if they were now to beentirely obliterated. It must be evident that more change iseffected in two centuries in the width and depth of the valleysof that region, than in many thousand years in a country asundisturbed by earthquakes as Great Britain. For the samereason, therefore, that he who desires to comprehend the volcanicphenomena of Central France will repair to Vesuvius,Etna, or Hecla, so they who aspire to explain the mode inwhich valleys are formed must visit countries where earthquakesare of frequent occurrence. For we may be assured, thatthe power which uplifted our more ancient tertiary strata ofmarine origin to more than a thousand feet above the levelof the sea, co-operated at some former epoch with the forceof rivers in the removal of large portions of rock and soil,just as the elevator power which has upraised newer strata tothe height of several thousand feet in the south of Italy hascaused those formations to be already intersected by deepvalleys and ravines.He who studies the hydrographical basin of the Thames* andcompares its present state with its condition when it was aRoman province, may have good reason to declare that if thatEXCAVATION OF VALLEYS. 435river and its tributaries had since their origin been always asinactive, and as impotent as they are now, they could nevernot even in millions of years, have excavated the valleysthrough which they flow : but, if he concludes from thesepremises, that the valleys in this basin were not formed byordinary causes, he reasons like one, who having found a solfatarawhich for many centuries has thrown out nothing morethan vapour and a few handfuls of sand and scoriae, infers thata lofty eonej composed of successive streams of lava and ejections,can no longer be produced by volcanic agency.2 F 2CHAPTER XXV.IBftfihgiiaVM of the eighteenth century, continued — Java, 1772— Translation of mlofty cone— Caucasus, 1772— Java, 1771— Colombia, 1766— Cluli, 1760—Azores, 1757 — Lisbon, 1755 — Sinking down of the quay to the depth of sixhundred feet — Shocks felt throughout Europe, Northern Africa, and theWest Indies — Great wave— Shocks felt at sea — St Domingo, 1751 — ConceptionBay, 1750 — permanent elevation of the bed of the sea to the heightof twenty-four feet— Peru, 1746— Kamtschatka, 1737— Martinique, 1727—Iceland, 1725 — ^Teneriffe, 1706— Java, 1699 — Landslips obstruct the Bataviaand Tangaran rivers — Quito, 1698 — Sicily, 1693 — Subsidence of landMoluccas, 1693 — Jamaica, 1692 — Large tracts engulphed — portion of PortRoyal sunk from twenty to fifty feet under water — ^^The Blue Mountainsshattered — Reflections on the amount of change in the last one hundred andforty years — Proofs of elevation and subsidence of land on the coast of the Bayof Bais — Evidence of the same afforded by the present state of the Temple ofSerapis.In the preceding chapters we have considered a small part ofthose earthquakes only which have occurred during the lastfifty years, of which accurate and authentic descriptions happento have been recorded. We shall next proceed to examine someof earlier date, respecting which information of geologicalinterest has been obtained.Java 177^.— In the year 1772, Papandayang, formerlyone of the loftiest volcanos in the island of Java, was in eruption.Before all the inhabitants on the declivities of the mountaincould save themselves by flight, the ground began to giveway, and a great part of the volcano fell in and disappeared.It is estimated that an extent of ground of the mountain itselfand its immediate environs fifteen miles long and full six broad,was by this commotion swallowed up in the bowels of the earth.Party villages were destroyed, some being engulphed and somecovered by the substances thrown out on this occasion, and twothousand nine hundred and fifty-seven of the inhabitantsperished. A proportionate number of cattle were also killed.EARTHQUAKES IN Caucasus JAVA, ETC. 437and most of the plantations of cotton, indigo, and coffee in theadjacent districts were buried under the volcanic matter. Thiscatastrophe appears to have resembled, although on a granderscale, that of the ancient Vesuvius in the year 79* The cone wasreduced in height from nine thousand to about five thousandfeet, and, as vapours still escape from the crater on its summit,a new cone may one day rise out of the ruins of theancient mountain, as the modem Vesuvius has risen from theremains of Somma*.Caucasus, 1772. — About the year 1772, an earthquakeconvulsed the ground in the province of Beshtau, in the Caucasus,so that part of the hill Metshuka sunk into an abyss .Java, 1771. — By an earthquake in the year 1771, severaltracts of ground were upraised in Java, and a new bank madeits appearance opposite the mouth of the river of Batavia;.Colombia 1766.— On the 21st of October, 1766, the groundwas agitated at once at Cumana, at Caraccas, at M aracaybo,and on the banks of the rivers Casanare, the Meta, the Orinoco,and the Ventuario. These districts were much fissured,and great fallings in of the earth took place in the mountainPaurari; Trinidad was violently shaken. A small island inthe Orinoco, near the rock Aravacoto, sunk down and disappeared.At the same time the ground was raised in thesea near Carrack, where the Point Del Garde was enlarged.A rock also rose up in the river Guarapica, near the village ofMaturing. The shocks continued in Colombia hourly forfourteen months.Chili 1760. — In 1760, the volcano Peter, in Chili, was ineruption, and formed a new crater. A fissure, several miles inDr. Cornfield, Batav. Trans., vol. viii., p. 26. Dr. H. informs me that he hasseen this truncated mountain, and though he did not ascend it, he has conversedwith those who have examined it Raffles' s account (History of Java, vol. i.) isderived from Cornfield.f Pales's Travels in Southern Russia.I RafBes's History of Java, vol. ii., p. 232.} Humholdfs Personal Narrative, vol. iv., p. 45, and Saggio di Stoiia Amesrieana, vol. ii., p. 6.II Humboldt, Yoy. Relat Hist, part i., p. 30r, and part ii p. 23«488. l^ARTHQDAKC OF LISBON, ETC., A.D. 1759.length, opened in a neighbouring hill and a great landslip obstructedthe river Longue for ten days, giving rise to a considerablelake.Azores 1767. — In the year 1767, the island of St. Georgewas struck by an earthquake, and eighteen small islets roseatthe distance of about two hundred yards from the dire.These may possibly have been produced by a submarineeruption.LiAofif 1766. — In no part of the volcanic region of southernEurope has so tremendous an earthquake occurred in modemtimes as that which began on the 1st of November, 1766, atLisbon. A sound of thunder was heard under ground, andimmediately afterwards a violent shock threw down the greaterpart of that city. In the course of about six minutes, sixtythousand persons perished. The sea first retired and laid thebar dry ; it then rolled in, rising fifty feet or more above itsordinary level. The mountains of Arabia, Estella, Julio,Marian, and Cintra, being some of the largest in Portugal, wereimpetuously shaken, as it were, from their very foundations ;and most of them opened at their summits, which were split andrent in a wonderful manner, huge masses of them being throwndown into the subjacent valleys *. Flames are related to have,issued from these mountains, which are supposed to have beenelectric ; they are also said to have smoked ; but vast cloudsof dust seem to have given rise to this appearance. The mostextraordinary incident which occurred at Lisbon during thecatastrophe was the subsidence of a new quay, built entirely ofmarble, at an immense expense. A great concourse of peoplehad collected there for safety, as a spot where they might bebeyond the reach of falling ruins ; but, suddenly, the quaysank down with all the people on it, and not one of the deadbodies ever floated to the surface. A great number of boatsand small vessels anchored near it, all full of people, wereswallowed up, as in a whirlpool f. No Augments of theseHist and Philos. of Earthquakes p. 317.t Ber. C. Davy's Letters, vol. ii., Letter u., p. 12, who was at Lbbon altiietiiiie» and aaeertaiiiad that the boats and tmmIs said to lava ben awaUowad veremissing.EARTHQUAKE OF LISBON, A.D. 1755. 439wrecks ever rose again to the surface, and the water in theplace where the quay had stood is stated, in many accounts,to be unfathomable ; but, Whitehurst * says, he ascertained ittb be one hundred fathoms.In this case, we must either suppose that a certain tractsank down into a subterranean hollow which would cause a'^ fault " in the strata to the depth of six hundred feet, or wemay infer, as some have done, from the entire disappearanceof the substances engulphed, that a chasm opened and closedagain. Yet, in adopting this latter hypothesis, we must supposethat the upper part of the chasm, to the depth of onehundred fathoms, remained open.The great area over which this Lisbon earthquake extendedis very remarkable. The movement was most violent in Spain,Portugal, and the north of Africa ; but nearly the whole ofEurope, and even the West Indies, felt the shock on the sameday. A sea-port, called St. Eubals, about twenty miles southof Lisbon, was engulphed. At Algiers and Fez, in Africa,the agitation of the earth was equally violent, and at the distanceof eight leagues from Morocco, a village, with the inhabitantsto the number of about eight or ten thousand persons,together with all their cattle, were swallowed up. Soon afterthe earth closed again over them. A great wave swept overthe coast of Spun, and is said to have been sixty feet high atCadi. At Tangier, in Africa, it rose and fell eighteen timeson the coast. At Funchal, in Madeira, it rose full fifteen feetperpendicular above high water mark, although the tide whichebbs and flows there seven feet was then at half ebb. Besidesentering that city, and committing great havoc, it overflowedother sea-ports in the island. At Kindle, in Ireland, a bodyof water rushed into the harbour, whirled round several vessels,and poured into the market place.The shock was felt at sea, on the deck of a ship to the westof Lisbon, and produced very much the same sensation as ondry land. Ofl* St. Lucar, the captain of the Nancy frigatefelt his ship so violently shaken that he thought he had struckthe ground ; but on heaving the lead, found he was in a greatdepth of water. Captain Clark from Denial, in north latitude^ On the Formation of the Earth, p. 55.440 ST. DOlfflKGOj 1751.— CONCEPTION, 1750.86° M, between nine and ten in the morning, had his shipshaken and strained as if she had struck upon a rock, so that theseams of the deck opened, and the compass was overturned inthe binnacle. Another ship forty leagues west of St. Vincentexperienced so violent a concussion, that the men were throwna foot and a half perpendicularly up from the deck. InAntigua and Barbadoes, as also in Norway, Sweden, Germany,Holland, Corsica, Switzerland, and Italy, tremors and slightoscillations of the ground were felt.The agitation of lakes, rivers, and springs, in Great Britainwas remarkable. At Loch Lomond in Scotland, for examplesthe water, without the least apparent cause, rose against itsbanks, and then subsided below its usual level. The greatestperpendicular height of this swell was two feet four inches.It is said that the movement of this earthquake was undulatory,and that it travelled at the rate of twenty miles aminute, its velocity being calculated by the intervals betweenthe time when the first shock was felt at Lisbon, and its timeof occurrence at other distant places*.St Domingo 1751. — On the 15th of September, 1751, ashock began to be experienced in several of the West IndiaIslands, and on the Syst of November, a violent one destroyedthe capital of St. Domingo, Port au Prince. Part of the coasttwenty leagues in length sank down and has ever since formeda bay of the sea f.Conception J 1750. — On the 24th of May 1750, the ancienttown of Conception, otherwise called Penco, in Chili, wastotally destroyed by an earthquake and the sea rolled over it.The ancient port was rendered entirely useless, and the inhabitantsbuilt another town ten miles from the sea-coast, inorder to be beyond the reach of similar inundations. Duringa late survey of Conception Bay, Captains Beechey and Beecherdiscovered that the ancient harbour, which formerly admittedall large merchant vessels which went round the Cape, is nowoccupied by a reef of sandstone certain points of which pro*Michell on the Cause and Phenomena of Earthquakes, Phil. IVans., vol li.|k 566« 1760. t ^^^* ^^ I'Acad. des Sciences. i;52. Paria.PROOFS OF Elevation IN CONCEPTION BAT. 441sect above the sea at low-water, the greater part bang very-shallow.A tract of a mile and a half in length, where, accordingto the report of the inhabitants, the water was formerly fouror five fathoms deep, is now a shoal. The correctness ofthis statement of the original depth may be concluded fromthe circumstance, that the large trading vessels which formerlyfrequented the port could not have anchored in less than fourfathoms water. Our hydrographers found the reef to consistof hard sandstone, so that it cannot be supposed to have beenformed by recent deposits of the river Biobio, an arm of whichcarries down loose micaceous sand into the same inde of thebay. Besides it is a well known fact, that ever since the shockof 1750, no vessels have been able to approach within a mileand a half of the ancient port of Penco. That shock, therefore,uplifted the bed of the sea to the height of twenty-fourfeet at the least, and most probably the adjoining coast sharedin the elevation, for an enormous bed of shells of the samespecies as those now living in the bay, are seen used abovehigh-water mark along the beach, filled with micaceous sandlike that which the Biobio now conveys to the bay. Theseshells, as well as others which cover the adjoining hills of mica-schistto the height of from one thousand to one thousand fivehundred feet, have lately been examined by experienced conchologistsin London, and identified with those taken at the sametime in a living state from the Bay and its neighbourhood *.UUoa, therefore, was perfectly correct in his statement, that atvarious heights above the sea between Talcaguana and Conception,"mines were found of various sorts of shells used for limeof the very same kinds as those found in the adjoining sea."Among them, he mentions the great mussel called Chorus, andtwo others which he describes. Some of these, he says, are entire,and others broken ; they occur at the bottom of the sea, infour, six, ten, or twelve fathom water, where they adhere lu asea-plant called Cochayuyo. They are taken in dredges, ndbave no resemblance to those found on the shore or in shallowwater, yet beds of them occur at various heights on the hills.I was the more pleased with the sight," he adds, " as it■ Cabin Beecher hu shewn me ih«H (belli, and tete coUfctioii hag beenb; Mr. Broddifi.442 Earthquake IN Peru, A.D. 1746.appeared to me a convincing proof of the universality of thedeluge, although I am not ignorant that some have attributedtheir position to other causes ; but an unanswerable confutationof their subterfuge is, that the various sorts of shells whichcompose these strata both in the plains and mountains, are thevery same with those found in the bay." Perhaps thediluvian theory of this distinguished navigator, the companionof Contains, may account for his never having recorded evenreports of changes in the relative level of land and sea onthe shores of South America. He could not, however, havegiven us a relation of the rise of the reef above alluded to, forUie destruction of Penco happened a few years after thepublication of his Voyages. If we duly consider these facts sorecently brought to light, as well as the elevation before mentionedof the coast at Valparaiso in 1822, we shall be lesssceptical than Raspe, in regard to an event for which Hookehad cited Purchas's Travels. In that passage it was stated,*' that a certain sea-coast in a province of South America calledChili, was, during a violent earthquake, propelled upwardswith such force and velocity, that some ships cm the sea weregrounded in it, and the sea receded to a distance.**^ Raspe,being himself of opinion that all the continents had beenupraised gradually by earthquakes from the sea, admitted thatthe circumstance was not impossible, but he complains thatPurchas had interpolated the account of the earthquake(which happened probably at the dose of the seventeenth century)into Da CosU^s History of the West Indies f.Pen, 1746.— Peru was visited on the 28th of October, 1746,by an earthquake, which is declared to have been more tremendousand extensive than even that of Lisbon in 1755. Inthe first twenty-four hours, two hundred shocks were experienced.The ocean twice retired and returned impetuouslyupon the land : Lima was destroyed, and part of the coast nearCallao was converted into a bay ; four other harbours, amongwhich were Camilla and Guanape, shared the same fate. Therewere twenty-three ships and vessels great and small in the*• Loft's Voyage to Souci America, toI. ii, Book 8, chap. 6.f De Notes Iiuulu^ p. 120. 1763.EARTHQUAKES IN KAMT8CHATKA, MARTINIQUE, ETC. 443harbour of Callao, of which nineteen were sunk, and the otherfour, among which was a frigate called St. Vermin, were carriedbj the force of the waves to a great distance up the country.The number of the inhabitants in this city amounted to fourthousand. Two hundred only escaped, twenty two of whomwere saved on a small fragment of the fort of Vera Crus,which remained as the only memorial of the site of the townafter this dreadful inundation.A volcano in Lucan burst forth the same night, and suchquantities of water descended from the cone, that the wholecountry was overflowed ; and in the mountain near Pathoscalled Conversions de Caxamarquilla, three other volcanosburst out, and frightful torrents of water swept down theirsides*.Kamtachatkaf 17S7. — The eastern side of the peninsula ofEamtschatka, at Awatchka bay, was shaken by an earthquakeon October the 6th, 17S7. The sea was violently agitated,and overflowed the land to an immense height, and then withdrewso far as to lay bare its bottom between the first andsecond of the Kurile Isles. The shape of the ground wasgreatly changed. Several plains were uplifted and formedhills, and on the other hand many subsidences occasionedinland lakes and new bays on the coast f*Martinique, 1727. — In the year 17S79 a hill sunk down inMartinique during an earthquake t.Iceland, 1725. — In Iceland during the eruption of the volcanoLeirhnukur, in 1725-6, a tract of high land sunk down,and formed a lake, and half a mile from the same place a hillrose in a lake and converted it into dry land §.Teneriffe, 1706.— May 5th, 1706, a lateral eruption ofTeneriffe took place south of the harbour of Garachico, whichwas overwhelmed with lava. Many springs disappeared, andUUoa's Voyage, vol. ii., Book 7, chap. 7.f Knchenimkon by Chappe d*Aateroche, p. 337.{ Gang. of Amflriea, Schldur, Part II., p. 554.} ]>iir8aud«UI[aUe,G<og.,dAUM«rNoii^p.203.444 EARTHQUAKE IN JAYA^ A.D. 1699.there were such changes of level as to alter the whole faceof the country, hills having risen up where there were plainsbefore ♦•Java J 1699* — son the 5th of January , 16999 a terrible earthquakevisited Java, and no less than two hundred and eightconsiderable shocks were reckoned. Many houses in Bataviawere overturned, and the flame and noise of a volcanic eruptionwere seen and heard at that city, which were afterwardsfound to proceed from Mount Salakf, a volcano six days* journeydistant. Next morning the Batavia river, which has itsrise from that mountain, became very high and muddy, andbrought down abundance of bushes and trees, half burnt. Thechannel of the river being stopped up, the water overflowedthe country round, the gardens about the town, and some ofthe streets, so that fishes lay dead in them. AH the fish inthe river, except the carps, were killed by the mud and turbidwater. A great number of drowned buffaloes, tigers, rhinoceroses,deer, apes, and other wild beasts were brought downby the current, and notwithstanding," observes one of thewriters, ^^ that a crocodile is amphibious, several of them werefound dead among the rest}.''^ It is stated, that seven hillsbounding the river sank down, by which is merely meant, as bysimilar expressions in the description of the Calabriann earthquakes,seven great landslips. These hills, descending somefrom one side of the valley and some from the other, filled thechannel, and the waters then finding their way under themass, flowed out thick and muddy. The Tangaran riverwas also dammed up by nine hills, and in its channel werelarge quantities of drift trees. Seven of its tributaries alsoare said to have been ^* covered up with earth." A high tractof forest land, between the two great rivers before mentioned,is described as having been changed into an open country,destitute of trees, the surface being spread over with a fine redclay. This part of the account may, perhaps, merely refer tothe sliding down of woody tracts into the valleys, as happenedto so many extensive vineyards and olive-grounds in Calabria• Humboldt and Copland, Voy. Relat. Hist., Part I., p. 177.f Misspent Sales in Hooked account.X Hooke's Posthumous Works, p. 437, 1705^EARTHQUAKES IN QUITO, SICILY, MOLUCCAS, ETC. 445in 1783. The close packing of large trees in the Batavia riveris represented as very remarkable, and it attests in a strikingmanner the destruction of soil bordering the valleys which hadbeen caused by floods and landslips'*"*Quito, 1698.— In Quito, on the 19th of July, 1698, duringan earthquake, a great part of the crater and summit of thevolcano Carguairazo fell in, and a stream of water and mudissued from the broken sides of the hill f .Sicily, 1693. — Shocks of earthquakes spread over all Sicily in1693, and on the 11th of January the city of Catania and fortynine other places were levelled to the ground, and about onehundred thousand people killed. The bottom of the sea, saysVicentino Bonajutus, sank down considerably both in ]ports,inclosed bays, and open parts of the coast, and water bubbledup along the shores. Numerous long fissures of variousbreadths were caused, which threw out sulphureous water, andone of them, in the plain of Catania (the delta of the Simeto),at the distance of four miles from the sea, sent forth water assalt as the sea. The stone buildings of a street in the city ofNotoo, for the length of half a mile, sank into the ground, andremained hanging on one side. In another street, an openinglarge enough to swallow a man and horse appeared j;.Moluccas, 1693. — The small isle of Sore, which consists ofone great volcano, was in eruption in the year 1693. Differentparts of the cone fell one after the other into a deep crater,until almost half the space of the island was converted into afiery lake. Most of the inhabitants fled to franca, but greatpieces of the mountain continued to fall down, so that the lakebecame wider, and finally the whole population was Compelledto emigrate. It is stated, that in proportion as the lake of lavaincreased in size, the earthquakes were less vehement §.Jamaica, 169&. — In the year 1692 the island of Jamaicawas visited by a violent earthquake, the ground swelled and• Phi. Trans., 1 700. f Humboldt, Ail. Pit., p. 106.Phil Trans., 1693-4. $ Ind. 1693.446 Earthquake OV JAMAICA, A.D. 1«M»heaved like a rolling sea, and was traversed by nunaeroascracks, two or three hundred of which were often seen at a timeopening and then closing rapidly again. Many people wereswallowed up in these rents ; some the earth caught by themiddle and squeezed to death ; the heads of others only appearedabove ground, and some were first engulphed and thencast up agiun with great quantities of water. Such was thedevastation, that even at Port Royal , then the capital, where morehouses are said to have been left standing than in the wholeisland beside, three quarters of the buildings, together with theground they stood on, sank down with their inhabitants entirelyunder water. The large store-houses on the harbour side subsided,so as to be twenty-four, thirty-six, and forty-^gfat feetunder water ; yet many of them appeared to have remainedstanding, for it is stated that, after Uie earthquake, the mast-headsof several ships wrecked in the harbour, together withthe chimney-tops of houses, were seen just projecting above thewaves. A tract of land round the town, about a thousandacres in extent, sank down in less than one minute, during thefirst shock, and the sea immediately rolled in. The Swanfrigate, which was repairing in the wharf, was driven over thetops of many buildings, and then thrown upon one of the roofs,through which it broke. The breadth of one of the streets issaid to have been doubled by the earthquake. At severalthousand places in Jamaica the earth is related to have opened.On the north of the island several plantations, with their inhabitants,were swallowed up, and a lake appeared in their place,covering above a thousand acres, which afterwards dried up,leaving nothing but sand and gravel, without the least signthat there had ever been a house or tree there. Several tenementsat Allowed were buried under landslips; and oneplantation was removed half a mile from its place, the cropscontinuing to grow upon it uninjured. Between Spanish townand Sixteen-miles walk the high and perpendicular difis boundingthe river fell in, stopped the passage of the river, andflooded the latter place for nine days, so that the people *' concludedit had been sunk as Port Royal was.'^ But the floodat length subsided, for the river had found some new passageat a great distance. ^The Blue and other of the highest mountains are declared8UBSn>BNC£8» FLOODS, ITC. 447to have been strangely torn and rent. They appeared shatteredand half-naked, no longer affording a fine green prospect,as before, but stripped of their woods and natural verdure.The rivers on these mountains first ceased to flow for abouttwenty-four hours, and then brought down into the sea at PortRoyal and other places, several hundred thousand tons oftimber which looked like floating islands on the ocean. Thetrees were in general barked, most of their branches havingbeen torn off in the descent. It is particularly remarked inthis, as in the narratives of so many earthquakes, that fish weretaken in great numbers on the coast during the shocks. Thecorrespondents of Sir Hans Sloane, who collected with carethe accounts of eye-witnesses of the catastrophe, refer constantlyto subsidence and some supposed the whole of Jamaicato have sunk down*.We have now only enumerated she earthquakes of the lasthundred and forty years, respecting which, facts illustrativeof geological inquiries are on record. Even if our limits permitted,it would be a tedious and unprofitable task to examineall the obscure and ambiguous narratives of similar events ofearlier epochs, although, if the localities were now examinedby geologists well practised in the art of interpreting themonuments of physical changes, many events which have happenedwithin the historical era might still be determined withprecision. The reader must not inane, that in our sketch of theoccurrences in the short period above alluded to, we have givenan account of all, or even the greater part of the mutationswhich the earth has undergone, by the agency of subterraneanmovements. Thus, for example, the earthquake of Aleppo,in the present century, and of Syria in the middle of theeighteenth, would doubtless have afforded numerous phenomenaof great geological importance, had those catastrophes been describedby scientific observers. The shocks in Syria in 1759*were protracted for three months, throughout a space of tenthousand square leagues, an area compared to which that ofthe Calabriann earthquake, of 1788, was insignificant. Acton,Saphat, Warbeck, Damascus, Sidon, Tripoli, and many otherplaces, were almost entirely levelled to the ground. Manythousands of the inhabitants perished in each, and in the valley• FhiL IVans, 1694.448 DEnciBNcr of historical records.of Warbeck alone twenty thousand men are said to bare beenvictims to the convulsion. It would be as irrelevant to ourpresent purpose to enter into a detailed account of such cala*unities, as to fcdiow the track of an invading anny^ to enumeratethe cities burnt or rased to the ground, and reckon thenumber of individuals who perished by famine or the sword.If such then be the amount of ascertained changes in the lastone hundred and forty years, notwithstanding the extremedeficiency of our records during that brief period, how importantmust we presume the physical revolutions to havebeen in the course of thirty or forty centuries, during which,some countries habitually convulsed by earthquakes havebeen peopled by civilized nations ! Towns engulphed duringone earthquake may, by repeated shocks, have sunk to enormousdepths beneath the surface, while their ruins remainas imperishable as the hardest rocks in which they are inclosed.Buildings and cities submerged for a time beneath seasor lakes, and covered with sedimentary deposits, must, in someplaces, have been re-elevated to considerable heights above thelevel of the ocean. The signs of these events have probably beenrendered visible by subsequent mutations, as by the encroachmentsof the sea upon the coast, by deep excavations made bytorrents and rivers, by the opening of new ravines and chasms,and other effects of natural agents, so active in districts agitatedby subterranean movements. If it be asked why if such wonderfulmonuments exist, so few have hitherto been brought tolight — we reply — because they have not been searched for. Inorder to rescue from oblivion the memorials of former occurrences,we must know what we may reasonably expect to discover;and under what peculiar local circumstances. Theinquirer, moreover, must be acquainted with the action andeffects of physical causes, in order to recognise, explain, anddescribe, correctly, the phenomena when they present themselves.The best known of the great volcanic regions of which wesketched the boundaries, in the eighteenth chapter, is thatwhich includes Southern Europe, Northern Africa, and CentralAsia, yet nearly the whole even of this region must be laiddown in a geological map as ^' Terra Incognita*' Even Calabriamay be regarded as unexplored, as also Spain, Portugal,CHANGES ON THE COAST OF THE BAT OF DAIJB. 449the Barbary states, the Ionian Isles, the Morea, Asia Minor,Cyprus, Syria, and the countries between the Caspian andBlack Seas. We are, in truth, beginning to obtain some insightinto one small spot of that great zone of volcanic disturbancesthe district around Naples a tract by no means remarkablefor the violence of the earthquakes which have convulsedit.If, in this part of Campania, we are enabled to establishthat considerable changes in the relative level of land and seahave taken place since the Christian era, it is all that we couldhave expected, and it is to recent antiquarian and geologicalresearch, not to history, that we are principally indebted forthe information. We shall proceed to lay before the readersome of the results of modern investigations in the Bay of Bailieand the adjoining coast.Temple of Jupiter Serapis.^-^TldB celebrated monument ofantiquity affords, in itself alone, unequivocal evidence, that therelative level of land and sea has changed twice at PuEZUoli,since the Christian era, and each movement both of elevation andsubsidence has exceeded twenty feet. Before examining theseproofs we may observe, that a geological examination of thecoast of the Bay of Bais, both on the north and south of Puz-zuoli, establishes in the most satisfactory manner an elevationat no remote period, of more than twenty feet, and the evidenceof this change would have been complete even if thetemple had to this day remained undiscovered. If we coastalong the shore from Naples to Puzzuoli we find, on approachingthe latter place, that the lofty and precipitous cliffs ofindurated tuff, resembling that of which Naples is built, retireslightly from the sea, and that a low level tract of fertile land, ofa very different aspect, intervenes between the present sea-beach,and what was evidently the ancient line of coast. The inlandcliff is in many parts eighty feet high near Puzzuoli, and asperpendicular as if it was still undermined by the waves. Atite base, the new deposit attains a height of about twenty feetabove the sea, and as it consists of regular sedimentary deposits,containing marine shells, its position proves that since itsformation there has been a change of more than twenty feet inthe relative level of land and sea*Vol. I. a OTdvu or jump i^The flea encroaches on these new incoherent strata, and as thesoil is valuable, a wall has been built for its protection ; butwhen I Tinted the spot in 1828, the waves had swept awaypart of this rampart, and exposed to view a r^ular series of■tnUa o( tuff*, more or less cretaceous, alternating with beds'•■- ^^j ^t.ui^ j :-a, B«maiiu oC Ciceni'i nu N. tide ^ a. Antiquities* on bill SX. gf Pn*-Fuuuoli *. luolii. AiMteiil cliff sow inUod. t. AuciNit cliff ie. Terrace comport oi ncait lubmuiiMd. Temple of Senpii.of pumice and lapilli, and containing great abundance of marineShells, of species now common on this coast, and amongst themArtium ruslicum, Oatrea oculis, Donax trunculus (Lam.) and■ The spot here indicated oa the nimis of the eliS, ii (hat fran vhkbMimiltoii'i view, plate 26, Cunpi PhUgnei it token, tod do which he obanrf*Cieuro'i rill* called the Anaemia anciently stood.NEW Deposit UPRAISED Nab PUZZUOLI. 451Others. The straw vary from about a foot to a foot and halfin thickness, and one of them contains abundantly remains ofworks of art, tiles, squares of mosaic pavement of differentcolours, and small sculptured ornaments, perfectly uninjured.Intermixed with these I collected some teeth of the pig and oz*-These fragments of building occur below as well as abovestrata containing marine shells.If we then pass to the north of Puzzuoli and examine thecoast between that town and Monte Nuovo, we find a repetitionof analogous phenomena. The sloping sides of MonteBarbaro slant down within a short distance of the coast, andterminate in an inland cliff of moderate elevation, to which thegeologist perceives at once, that the sea must, at some formerperiod, have extended. Between this cliff and the sea is a lowplain or terrace, called La Starza, corresponding to that beforedescribed on the south-east of the town ; and, as the sea encroachesrapidly, fresh sections of the strata may readily beobtained, of which the annexed is an example.Section on the shore north of the town of Puzzuoli.1. Vegetable soil 102. Horizontal beds of police and scoria, with broken fragmentsof unrolled bricks, bones of animals and marine shells 1 63. Beds of lapilli, containing abundance of marine shells principallyArtium msticomi Dona tr*mciilus Lam., OstreaediUis, Triton cutaceum, Lam. and fiuccinum erratum,Bronchi, the beds varying in thickness from one to eighteeninches 104. Aigiilaeeons tuff containing bricks and fragments of buildingsnot rounded by attrition • » • • 16The thickness of many of these beds varies greatly as wetrace them along the shore, and sometimes the whole grouprises to a greater height than at the point above described.The surface of the tract which they compose appears to slopegently upwards towards the base of the old cliffs. Puzzuoliitself stands chiefly on a promontory of the older tufaoeousformation, which cuts off the new deposit, although I detecteda small patch of the latter in a garden under the town.Now if these appearances presented themselves on the easternor southern coast of England, a geologist would naturally endeavourto seek an explanation in some local depression of highwaler-mark, in consequence of a change in the set of the tides452 TBHPLB OF JUPITER Serapis*and currents : for towns have been built, like ancient Brightonon sandy tracts intervening between the old cliff and the sea,and in some cases they have been finally swept away by thereturn of the ocean. On the other hand, the inland diff atLowestoff, in Suffolk, remains, as we stated in the fifteenthchapter, at some distance from the shore, and the low greentract called the Ness may be compared to the low flat calledLa Stanzas near Puzzuoli. But there are no tides in the Mediterranean;and to suppose that sea to have sunk generallyfrom twenty to twenty-five feet since the shores of Campaniawere covered with sumptuous buildings, is an hypothesisobviously untenable. The observations, indeed, made duringmodern surveys on the moles and cottons (docks) constructedby the ancients in various ports of the Mediterranean,have proved that there has been no sensible variation of levelin that sea during the last two thousand years. A veryslight change would have been perceptible ; and had any beenascertained to have taken place, and had it amounted only toa difference of a few feet, it would not have appeared veryextraordinary, since the equilibrium of the Mediterraneanis only restored by a powerful current from the Atlantic*.Thus we arrive, without the aid of the celebrated temple, atthe conclusion that the recent marine deposit at Puzzuoli wasupraised in modern times above the level of the sea and thatnot only this change of position, but the accumulation of themodern strata, was posterior to the destruction of many edifices,of which they contain the imbedded remains. If we now examinethe evidence afforded by the temple itself, it appears,from the most authentic accounts, that the three pillars nowstanding erect, continued, down to the middle of the last century,half buried in the new marine strata before described.The upper part of the columns, being concealed by bushes,had not attracted the notice of antiquaries ; but, when the soilwas removed in 1750, they were seen to form part of the remainsof a splendid edifice, the pavement of which was stillpreserved, and upon it lay a number of columns of Africanbreccia and of granite. The original plan of the building•Captain W. H. Smyth, Ren. obtained, during hii surrey, numerous proof ofih« pffdunencjr of the Icrel of the MeditemnfaQ from « nmotv fiscal periodPERFORATION OF THE COLUMNS. 453could be traced distinctly ; it was of a quadrangular form,seventy feet in diameter, and the roof had been supportedby forty-six noble columns, twenty-four of granite, and therest of marble. The large court was surrounded by apartments,supposed to have been used as bathing-rooms; forathermal spring, still used for medicinal purposes, issues nowjust behind the building, and the water, it is said, of thisspring, was conveyed by marble ducts into the chambers.Many antiquaries have entered into elaborate discussions asto the deity to which this edifice was consecrated ; but SignorCorelli, who has written the last able treatise on the subject *,endeavours to show that all the religious edifices of Greecewere of a form essentially different — that the building, therefore,could never have been a temple — that it correspondedto the public bathing-rooms at many of our watering-places,and, lastly, that if it had been a temple, it could not have beendedicated to Serapis, — the worship of the Egyptian god beingstrictly prohibited at the time when this edifice was in use, bythe senate of Rome.It is not for the geologist to offer an opinion on these topics,and we shall, therefore, designate this valuable relic of antiquityby its generally received name, and proceed to considerthe memorials of physical changes, inscribed on the threestanding columns in most legible characters by the hand ofnature. (See Frontispiece +.) The pillars are forty-two feetin height ; their surface is smooth and uninjured to the heightof about twelve feet above their pedestals. Above this, is azone, twelve feet in height, where the marble has been piercedby a species of marine perforating bivalve — Lithodomus, Cuv.}.The holes of these animals are pear-shaped, the external openingbeing minute, and gradually increasing downwards. At thebottom of the cavities, many shells are still found, notwithstandingthe great numbers that have been taken out by visitors. Theperforations are so considerable in depth and size, that theymanifest a long continued abode of the Lithodomi in the^ Dissertation energetic sua agra Architect degti Antioch.f The representation of the present state of the temple in the frontispiece hasbeen carefully reduced from that given hy the Canonical Andrea de Jorio; Ricerchefid Tempo di Serapide,in PussuoU. Napoli, 1820.t Motion Uthophaga, Lam. Mytilus lithophagns; Lii.454 TBMPLB OF JUPITER serapis*columns ; for, as the inhabitant grows older and increases in 8116,it bores a larger cavity, to correspond with the increasing magnitudeof its shell. We must, consequently, infer a long continuedimmersion of the pillars in sea water, at a time when thelower part was covered up and protected by strata of tuff andthe rubbish of buildings, the highest part at the same time projectingabove the waters, and bdng consequently weathered, butnot materially injured. On the pavement of the temple, lie somecolumns of marble, which are perforated in the same mannerin certain parts, one, for example, to the length of eight feet,while, for the length of four feet, it is uninjured. Severalof these broken columns are eaten into, not only on the exterior,but on the cross fracture and, on some of them, othermarine animals have fixed themselves *. All the granite pilkrsare untouched by Lithodomi. The platform of the Templeis at present about one foot below high water mark, (for thereare small tides in the Bay of Naples,) and the sea, which isonly one hundred feet distant, soaks through the interveningsoil. The upper part of the perforations then are at leasttwenty-three feet above high-water mark, and it is clear, thatthe columns must have continued for a long time in an erectportion, immersed in salt-water. After remaining for manyyears submerged, they must have been upraised to the heightof about twenty-three feet above the level of the sea.So far the information derived from the Temple corroboratesthat before obtained from the new strata in the plain of La Stars,and proves nothing more. But as the temple could not havebeen built originally at the bottom of the sea, it must have firstsunk down below the waves, and afterwards have been elevated.Of such subsidences there are numerous independent proofs inthe Bay of Baise. Not far from the shore, to the north-westof the Temple of Serapis, are the ruins of a Temple of Neptune,and a Temple of the Nymphs, now under water. These buildingsprobably participated in the movement which raised theStarza, but, either they were deeper under water than the Templeof Serapis, or they were not raised up again to so great aheight. There are also two Roman roads under water in theSerpuU contoztuplicata, Linn and Vennilu triqnetra, Lam. Those ipaoM^M ira u the Lithodomnib w ^^'^ inhabitants of IaPalace Near CAPRI UMDBR THE SB A. 455Bay, one reaching from PuzzuoU towards the Lucrine Lake,which may still be seen, and the other near the Castle ofBaiae. The ancient mole too, which exists at the Port ofPuzzuoli, and which is commonly called that of Caligula, hasthe water up to a considerable height of the arches ; whereasBffieslak * justly observes, it is next to certain, that the piersmust formerly have reached the surface before the springing ofthe arches* A modern writer also reminds us, that theseeffects are not so local as some would have us believe ; for on theopposite side of the Bay of Naples, on the Serpentine coast,which, as well as Puzzuoli, is subject to earthquakes, a road,with some fragments of Roman buildings, is covered to somedepth by the sea. In the island of Capri, also, which is situatedsome way at sea, in the opening of the Bay of Naples,one of the palaces of Tiberius is now covered with water f •They who have attentively considered the effects of earthquakesbefore enumerated by us during the last one hundredand forty years, will not feel astonished at these signs of alternateelevation and depression of the bed of the sea and theadjoining coast during the course of eighteen centuries, but,on the contrary, they will be very much astonished if futureresearches fail to bring to light similar indications of change inall regions of volcanic disturbances. That buildings shouldhave been submerged, and afterwards upheaved, without beingentirely reduced to a heap of ruins, will appear no anomaly,when we recollect that in the year 1819* when the delta of theIndus sank down, the houses within the fort of Sindree subsidedbeneath the waves without being overthrown. In like manner,in the year 1692, the buildings around the harbour of PortRoyal, in Jamaica, descended suddenly to the depth of betweenthirty and fifty feet under the sea without falling. Even onsmall portions of land, transported to a distance of a mile, downa declivity, tenements like those near Mileto, in Calabria, werecarried entire. At Valparaiso, buildings were left standing whentheir foundations, together with a long tract of the Chilian coast,were permanently upraised to the height of several feet in 18S2.It is true that, in the year 1760, when the bottom of the seaVoy. dans la Campanile, tome ii., p. 162.f llr. Forby, Phineas Notices of the Bay of Naptoi. Ed. Journ. of SdNa 2, new MriM, p. 28(K October, 18S9«456 TEMPLE OF JUPITER 8BRAPI8.in the harbour of Penco was suddenly uplifted to the extraordinaryelevation of twenty-four feet above its former level, thebuildings of that town were thrown down ; but we might still supposethat a great portion of them would have escaped, had thewalls been supported on the exterior and interior with a deposit,like that which surrounded and filled to the height of ten ortwelve feet the Temple of Serapis at Puzzuoli.The next subject of inquiry, is the era when these remarkablechanges took place in the Bay of Baiae. It appears, thatin the Atrium of the Temple of Serapis, inscriptions werefound in which Septimus Severus and Marcus Aurelius recordtheir labours in adorning it with precious marbles*. Wemay, therefore, conclude, that it existed at least down to thethird century of our era in its original portion. On the otherhandy we have evidence that the marine deposit forming theflat land called La Starza was still covered by the sea in theyear 1580, or just eight years anterior to the tremendous explosionof Monte Nuovo. Mr. Forbes f has lately pointed out thedistinct testimony of an old Italian writer Loffredo, in confirmationof this important point. Writing in 1580, Loffredo declaresthat fifty years previously, the sea washed the base of thehills which rise from the flat land before alluded to, and at thattime he expressly tells us that a person might have fished fromthe site of those ruins which are now called the Stadium. (Seewood cut, No. SO.) Hence it follows, that the subsidence of theground on which the Temple stood, happened at some periodbetween the third century and the beginning of the sixteenthcentury. Now in this interval the only two events which are recordedin the imperfect annals of the dark ages, are the eruptionof the Solfatara in 1198, and an earthquake in 1488 by whichPuzzuoli was ruined. It is at least highly probable, that earthquakes,which preceded the eruption of the Solfatara, which isvery near the Temple, (see wood cut, No.80) caused a subsidence,and the pumice and other matters ejected from that volcanomight have fallen in heavy showers into the sea, and wouldthis immediately have covered up the lower part of the columns.The action of the waves might afterwards have thrown downmany pillars and formed strata of broken fragments of theBriealak, Voy. dans la Campanile, torn. iL, p. 167.t Ed. Join* of Science now wiwf^ No. Jl., p. 281,DATE OF ITS RE-ELEVATION. 457building intermixed with volcanic ejections, before the Litho-domi had time to perforate the lower part of the columns. Inlike manner, the sea acting on other submerged buildings,would naturally have caused a similar stratum, containingworks of art and shells for several miles along the coast.Now it is perfectly evident from Loffredo's statement,that the re-elevation of the low tract called La Starza tookplace after the year 1580, and long before the year 1580 ;and from this alone we might confidently conclude that thechange happened in the year 1538 when Monte Nuovo wasformed. But fortunately we are not left in the slightestdoubt that such was the date of this remarkable event. SirWilliam Hamilton * has given us two original letters describingthe eruption of 15S8, the first of which by Falconii, dated1538, contains the following passages. '* It is now two yearssince there have been frequent earthquakes at Puzzuoli, Naples,and the neighbouring parts. On the day and in the nightbefore the eruption (of Monte Nuovo), above twenty shocksgreat and small were felt. — The next morning (after the formationof Monte Nuovo) the poor inhabitants of Puzzuoliquitted their habitations, &c., some with their children in theirarms, some with sacks full of their goods, others carryingquantities of birds of various sorts that had fallen dead at thebeginning of the eruption, others again with fish which theyhad found, and which were to be met with in plenty on theshore, the sea having left them dry for a considerabletime. — I accompanied Signor Moramaldo to behold the wonderfuleffects of the eruption. The sea had retired on theside of Bai, abandoning a considerable tracts and the shoreappeared almost entirely dry from the quantity of ashes andbroken pumice-stones thrown up by the eruption. I saw twosprings in the newly discovered ruins one before the housethat was the Queen's, of hot and salt-water, &c." So farFalconii — the other account is by Pietro Giacomo di Toledo,which begins thus : *^ It is now two years since this provinceof Campagna has been afflicted with earthquakes, the countryabout Puzzuoli much more so than any other parts : but the27th and the S8th of the month of September last, the earthquakesdid not cease day or night in the town of Puzzuoli ;Campi Fblegnsi; p. 70.458 TBMPLB OF Jupiter 6BRAPI8,that pilun which lies between lake Avernus, the Monte Barbaraand the sea was raised a little and many cracks were made init from some of which issued water ; at the same time the seaimmediately adjoining the plain dried up abotU two hundredpaces so that the fish were left on the sand a prey to the inhabitantsof Puzzuoli. At last, on the 29th of the same month,about two o'clock in the nighty the earth opened, &c." Nowboth these accounts, written immediately after the birth olMonte Nuovo, agree in expressly stating, that the sea retiredand one mentions that its bottom was upraised. To this elevationwe have already seen that Hooke, wring at the close ofthe seventeenth century, alludes as to a well known fact*. Thepreposterous theories, therefore, that have been advanced inorder to dispense with the elevation of the land, in the face c£all this historical and physical evidence, are not entitled to aserious refutation* The flat land, when first upraised, must havebeen more extensive than now, for the sea encroaches somewhatrapidly, both to the north and south-east of PuzsuolL Thecoast has of late years given way more than a foot in a twelvemonth,and I was assured by fishermen in the bay, that it haslost ground near Puzzuoli, to the extent of thirty feet, withintheir memory. It is, probably, this gradual encroachmentwhich has led many authors to imagine that the level of the seais slowly rising in the Bay of Bailee, an opinion by no meanswarranted by such circumstances. In the course of time thewhole of the low land will, perhaps, be carried away, unlesssome earthquake shall modify the surface of the country,before the waves reach the ancient coast-line ; but the removalof this narrow tract will by no means restore the country to itsformer state, for-the old tufaceous hills and the interstratifiedcurrent df trachytic lava which has flowed from the Solfatara*must have participated in the movement of 1638; and these willremain upraised even though the sea may regain its ancientlimits.In 1828 excavations were made below the marble pavementof the Temple of Serapis, and another costly pavement ofmosaic was found, at the depth of five feet or more below theother. The existence of these two pavements at different levelsseems clearly to imply some subsidence previously to all the< Ante,p^S4.Permanency OF THV LSVBL OP THE OCEAN. 4S9changes already alluded to, which had rendered it necessary toconstruct a new floor at a higher level. But to these and othercircumstances bearing on the history of the Temple antecedentlyto the revolutions already explained, we shall not refer at present,trusting that future investigations will set them in aclearer light.In concluding this subject, we may observe, that the interminablecontroversies to which the phenomena of the Bay ofBaise gave rise, have sprung from an extreme reluctance toadmit that the land rather than the sea is subject alternatelyto rise and fall. Had it been assumed that the level of theocean was invariable, on the ground that no fluctuations haveas yet been clearly established, and that, on the other hand, thecontinents are inconstant in their level, as has been demonstratedby the most unequivocal proofs again and again, fromthe time of Strabo to our own times, the appearances of thetemple at Puzzuoli could never have been regarded as enigmatical.Even if contemporary accounts had not distinctlyattested the upraising of the coast, this explanation shouldhave been proposed in the first instance as the most natural,instead of being now adopted unwillingly when all othershave failed. To the strong prejudices still existing in regardto the mobility of the land, we may attribute the rarity ofsuch discoveries as have been recently brought to light in theBay of Bait and the Bay of Conception. A false theory it iswell known may render us blind to facts, which are opposed toour prepossessions, or may conceal from us their true importwhen we behold them. But it is time that the geologist shouldin some degree overcome those first and natural impressionswhich induced the poets of old to select the rock as the emblemof firmness — the sea as the image of inconstancy. Our modernpoet, in a more philosophical spirit, saw in the latter ^< Theimage of Eternity," and has finely contrasted the fleetingexistence of the successive empires which have flourished andfallen, on the borders of the ocean, with its own unchangedstability.■ Their decayHas dried up realms to deceits :— not so thou,Untameable, f aire to thy wild wa?ei* play :Time writes no wrinkle on thine sure brow ;Both M crsaiioii's dawn beheld, thou robert now.Cbiidb Habou^ Canto ir.CHAPTER XXVI.Magnitude of the Bubterranean changes produced by earthquakes at greatdepths below the surface — Obscurity of geological phenomena no pnx>f ofwant of uniformity in the system, because subterranean processes are but littleunderstood — Reasons for presuming the earthquake aud Volcano to have acommon origin — probable analogy between the agency of steam in thoIcelandic geysers, and in volcanos during eruptions — effects of hydrostaticpressure of high columns of lava — Of the condensation of Vapours in theinterior of the earth — that some earthquakes may be abortive eruptions-^Why all volcanos are in islands or maritime tracts— Gases evolved firmavolcanos — regular discharge of heat and of gaseous and earthy matter franthe Bubterranean regions — Cause of the wave-like motion and of the retreat ofthe sea during earthquakes— Difference of circumstances of heat and penmanat great depths — Inferences from the superficial changes brought about Y/jearthquakes — In what matter the repair of land destroyed by aqueous causetakes place— Proofs that the sinking in of the earth's crust somewhat exceedsthe forcing out by earthquakes— Geological consequences of this hypothesis,that there is no ground for presuming that the degree of force exerted byBubterranean movements in a given time has diminished — Concludingremarks.When we consider attentively the changes brought aboutby earthquakes during the last century, and reflect on thelight which they already throw on the ancient history ofthe globe, we cannot but regret that investigations into theeffects of this powerful cause have hitherto been prosecutedwith so little zeal. The disregard of this important subjectmay be attributed to the general persuasion, that former revolutionsof ,the earth were not brought about by causes now inoperation, — a theory which, if true, would fully justify a geologistin neglecting the study of such phenomena. We maysay of the superficial alterations arising from subterraneanmovements, as we have already declared of the visible effects c£active volcanos, that, important as they are in themselves, theyare still more so as indicative of far greater changes in theinterior of the earth^s crust. That both the chemical andmechanical changes in the subterranean regions must often beUNIFORMITY OF THE ACTION OF EARTHQUAKES. 461of a kind to which no counterpart can possibly be found inprogress within the reach of our observation, may be confidentlyinferred ; and speculations on these subjects ought not to be discouraged,since a great step is gained if they render us moreconscious of the extent of our inability to define the amount andkind of results to which ordinary subterranean operations arenow giving rise. It is no longer disputed that a great series ofconvulsions have carried up deposits once formed on the bottomof the ocean to the height of several miles above its level ; andit is not difficult to perceive that the same movements must innumerousplaces have raised rocks to elevations above the levelof the sea, which were once formed at the depth of severalmiles in the bowels of the earth. If, then, there were no spotsdiscoverable which exhibited signs of extraordinary mechanicaland chemical changes, the effects at some former period ofimmense pressure, intense heat, and other conditions far differentfrom those developed on the surface, it might be urgedas a triumphant argument against those who are dissatisfiedwith the proofs hitherto adduced in favour of the mutability ofthe course of Nature.In order to set this in a clear light, let the reader supposehimself acquainted with just one-tenth part of the words ofsome living language, and that he is presented with severalbooks purporting to be written in the same tongue ten centuriesago. If he should find that he comprehends a tenth part ofthe terms in the ancient volumes, and that he cannot divinethe meaning of the other nine-tenths, would he not be stronglydisposed to believe that, for a thousand years, the language hasremained unaltered? Could he, without great labour andstudy, interpret the greater part of what is written in theantique documents, he must feel at once convinced that, inthe interval of ten centuries, a great revolution in the languagehad taken place. He might, undoubtedly, by comparingthe conventional signs already known to him, withthose not previously acquired, and by observing the analogiesand associations of terms in many of the old books, come atlength to discover the true import of much of the ancientwritings, and guess at the meaning of nearly all the rest ; but ifhe is entirely shut out from all communication with those whotioir use the same language he will never fully understand the462 state OF THB Atmosphere Domino BABTRQVA^B.value of some terms. So if a student of Nature, who, whenbe first examines the monuments of former changes upon ourglobe, is acquainted only with one-tenth part of the processesnow going on upon or far below the surface, or in the depthsoi the sea, should still find that be comprehends at one theimport of the signs of all, or even half the changes that wenton in the same regions some hundred or thousand centuriesago, he might declare without hesitation that the ancient laws ofnature have been subverted. Even after toiling for centuriesand learning more both of the present and former state ofthings, he must never expect to gain a perfect insight into allthat formerly happened, so long as his acquaintance is verylimited in regard to much that is now going on. So completelyhas the force of this line of argument been overlookedthat when any one has ventured to presume that all formerchanges were simply the result of causes now in operation,they have invariably been called upon to explain every obscurephenomenon in geology, and if they failed, it was consideredas conclusive against their assumption. Wines, intruth, there is no part of the evidence in favour of the uniformityof the system, more cogent than the fact, that nthmuch that is intelligible, there is still more which is yet novd^mysterious, and inexplicable in the monuments of ancient mutationsin the earth^s crust.Before the immense depth of the sources of volcanic firewas generally admitted, the causes of subterranean movementswere sought in peculiar states of the atmosphere. These wereimagined to afibrd not only prognostic of the convulsions, butto have considerable influence in their production* But thesupposed signs of approaching earthquakes were of a mostuncertain and contradictory character. Aristotle, Pliny, andSeneca, taught that earthquakes were preceded by a serene stateof the air ; whereas several modem writers have been of opinionthat a cloudy sky and sudden storms are the forerunners of thesecommotions. That there is an intimate connexion betweensubterranean convulsions and particular states of the weather isunquestionable ; but as Michell truly remarked, ** it is moreprobable that the air should be affected by the causes ofearthquakes, than that the earth should be affected in so extraordinarya manner, and to so great a depth, by a cause residingin the airsEarthquakes AND Volcanos, THV1R RELATION. 463After violent earthquakes the regular drainage of a country18 obstructed ; lakes and pools are caused by local subsidences orlandslips, and the evaporation of an extensive surface of shallowwater produces unseasonable rains. Fogs proceed from thedamp soil which is traversed by numerous rents and crevicesfilled with water. In addition to these circumstances, the electricaleffect produced by the movement and friction of greatmasses of rock against each other may cause lightning, gustsof wind, luminous exhalations, and other atmospheric phenomena.Rains, moreover, are sometimes derived from volcaniceruptions accompanying earthquakes; for eruptions, as webefore stated, are attended with a copious discharge of aqueousvapour.Before we attempt to enquire farther into the true causesof earthquakes, we shall briefly recapitulate our reasons forconsidering them as originating from the same sources asvolcanic phenomena. In the first place, the regions convulsedby violent earthquakes include within them the site ofaU the active volcanos. Earthquakes, sometimes local, sometimesextending over vast areas, precede volcanic eruptions.Both the subterranean movement and the eruption returnagain and again, at unequal intervals of time, and withunequal degrees of force, to the same places. The duration ofboth may continue for a few hours, or for several consecutiveyears. Paroxysmal convulsions of both kinds are usually followedby long periods of tranquillity. Thermal springs, andthose containing abundance of mineral matter in solution, arecharacteristic of countries where active volcanos or earthquakesare frequent. In districts considerably distant from volcanicvents, the temperature of hot springs has been sometimes raisedby subterranean movements. In addition to these signs of relationand analogy, we may observe, that it is not very easy toconceive how columns of melted matter can be raised to suchgreat heights, as we know them to attain in volcanos, withoutexerting an hydrostatic pressure capable of moving enormousmasses of land ; nor can we be surprised that elastic fluidscapable of forcing up so great a weight of rock in fusion, andof projecting large stones to immense heights in the air, shouldalso cause tremors, vibrations, and violent movements in thesolid crust of the earth. The volcano of Cotopaxi has thrown461 GETSBU or ICELAND.a mass (^ rock, about one hundred cubic yards in volume, tothe distance of ei^t or nine miles, and we may well a»iceivethat the slightest obstruction to the escape such an expansiveforce may convulse a considerable tract in South America.*' If these vapours," says Michell, *' when they find a vent arecapable of shaking a country to the distance of ten or twentymiles round the volcano, what may we not expect from themwhen they are confined P" As there is no doubt that aqueousvapour constitutes the most abundant of the aeriform products<rf volcanic eruptions, it may be welt to consider attentively «case in which steam is exclusively the moving power — theGeysers of Iceland. These' intermittent hot springs rise froma large tract, covered to a considerable depth by a stream oflava; and where thermal waters, and apertures evolving steam,are very common. The great Geyser rises out of a spaciousbasin at the summit of a circular mound, composed of sebaceousincrustations deposited from the spray of its waters. Thediameter of the basin or crater, in one direction, is fifty-sixfeet, and forty-six in another.In the centre is a pipe seventy-eight feet in perpendiculardepth, and from eight to ten feet in diameter, but graduallywidening as it opens into the basin. The inside of the basinCAUSE OP THEIR INTERMITTENT ACTION. 465is whitish, consisting of a siliceous incrustation, and perfectlysmooth, as are two small channels on the sides of the mound,down which the water makes its escape when filled to themargin. The circular basin is sometimes empty, as representedin the above sketch, but is usually filled with beautifully transparentwater in a state of ebullition. During the rise of theboiling water up the pipe, especially when the ebullition ismost violent, and when the water flows over or is thrown up injets, subterranean noises are heard, like the distant firingof cannon, and the earth is slightly shaken. The soundthen increases and the motion becomes more violent, until atlength a column of water is thrown up perpendicularly withloud explosions, to the height of one or two hundred feet.After playing for a time like an artificial fountain, and givingoff great clouds of vapour, the pipe is evacuated, and a columnof steam then rushes up with amazing force and a thunderingnoise, after which the eruption terminates. If stones are throwninto the crater they are instantly ejected, and such is the explosiveforce, that very hard rocks are sometimes shivered intosmall pieces. Henderson found that by throwing a greatquantity of large stones into the pipe of Struck, one of theGeysers, he could bring on an eruption in a few minutes. Thefragments of stone as well as the boiling water were thrown inthat case to a much greater height than usual. After the waterhad been ejected, a column of steam continued to rush up witha deafening roar for nearly an hour ; but the Geyser, as ifexhausted by this effort, did not give symptoms of a fresheruption when its usual interval of rest had elapsed.In the different explanations offered of this singular phenomenon,all writers agree in supposing a subterranean cavity wherewater and steam collect, and where the free escape of the steamis intercepted at intervals, until it acquires sufficient force to dischargethe water. Suppose water percolating from the surfaceof the earth to penetrate into the subterranean cavity A D bythe fissures F F, while at the same time, steam, at an extremelyhigh temperature, such as is commonly given out from therents of lava-currents during congelation, emanates from thefissures CC. A portion of the steam is at first condensed intoJournal gf a Residence in Iceland p. 74.Vol. I. 2 HCauses OP VOLCANIC BKUmOMI./Iy/ S/< \'•I' "^/V *■•*-"•water, and the temperature of the water U raised by the latentheat evolved, until, at last, the lover part of the cavity is filledwith boiling water and the upper with Steam under highprepare. The expansive force of the steam becomes, at length,BO great, that the boiling water is forced up the fissure or ppeB, and a considerable quantity runs over the rim of thebasin. When the pressure is thus diminished, the steam in theupper part of the cavity A expands until all the water D isdriven to E, when this happens, the steam, being the lighter ofthe two fluids, rushes up with great velocity, as on the openingof the valve of a steam-boiler. If the pipe be choked upartificially with stones, even for a few minutes, a great increaseof heat must take place, for it is prevented from escaping in alatent form in steam, so that the water is made to IkhI up in afew minutes, and this brings on an eruption.Now if we suppose a great number of large subterraneancavities at the depth of Several miles below the surface of theHYDROSTATIC Pressure. AfjHearthy wherein melted lava accumulates, and that water penetratingto these is converted into steam, this steam, together withother gases generated by the decomposition of melted rocksmay press upon the lava and force it up the duct of a volcano,in the same manner as it drives a column of water up the pipeof a Geyser. But the weight of the lava being immense, thehydrostatic pressure exerted on the sides and roofs of suchlarge cavities and fissures may well be supposed to occasionnot merely slight tremors, such as agitate the ground before aneruption of the Geyser but violent earthquakes. Sometimesthe lateral pressure of the lower extremity of the high columnof lava may cause the more yielding strata to give way, andto fold themselves in numerous convolutions so as to occupyless space and thereby give relief, for a time, to the fused anddilated matter. Sometimes, on the contrary, a weight equal tothat of the vertical column of lava, pressing on every part ofthe roof, may heave up the superincumbent mass, and forcelava into every fissure which, on consolidation, may support thearch, and cause the land above to be permanently devoted.On the other hand, subsidences may follow the condensation ofvapour when cold water descends through fissures, or when heatis lost by the cooling down of lava.That lava should often break out from the side or base,rather than from the summit of a lofty cone like Etna, hasalways been attributed to the immense hydrostatic pressurewhich the sides of the mountain undergo, before the lava canrise to the crater. This conclusion is too obvious not to havemet with a general reception; yet how trifling must thispressure be when compared to that which the same columnimparts to the reservoirs of aeriform fluids and melted rock,at the depth of many miles or leagues below the surface !If earthquakes be derived from the expansion by heat ofelastic fluids and melted rock, it is perfectly natural that theyshould terminate, either when a volcanic vent permits a portionof the pent up vapours or lava to escape, or when the earth hasbeen so fissured that the vapour is condensed by its admissioninto cooler regions, or by its coming in contact with water.Or relief may be obtained when lava and gaseous fluids have,by distending the strata, made more room for themselves, sothat tl^e weight of the superincumbent mass is sufficient to2H8468 MOST VOLCANOS NEAR THE SEA.repress them. If we regard earthquakes as abortive volcaniceruptions at a great depth, we must expect them tosucceed each other for an indefinite number of times in thesame place, for the same reason that eruptions do ; and it iseasy to conceive that, if the matter has failed several times toreach the surface, the consolidation of the lava first raisedand congealed will strengthen the earth's crust, and becomean additional obstacle to the protrusion of other fused matterduring subsequent convulsions.As most volcanos are in islands or maritime tracts, the neighbourhoodof the sea seems one of the conditions necessary forthe ascent of lava to great heights. Even those volcanos whichlie inland form part of a chain of volcanic hills, and may besupposed to have a subterranean communication with the extremitiesof the chain which are in the neighbourhood of largemasses of salt-water. Thus Jorullo, in Mexico, though itselfno less than forty leagues from the nearest ocean, seems, nevertheless,connected with the volcano of Tuxtla on the one handand that of Colima on the other, the one bordering on theAtlantic, the other on the Pacific ocean. This communicationis rendered the more probable by the parallelism that existsbetween these and several volcanic hills intermediate*. Perhapsthe quantity of water which percolates from the surface ofthe land is sufficient to contribute to the violence of earthquakes,without producing so much steam as is required tobring on a volcanic eruption. But when the sea overlies amass of incandescent lava, and the intermediate crust of theglobe is shaken and fissured by earthquakes, it may well besupposed that a convulsion of a different kind will ensue. Ifan open fissure be caused like that which traversed the plain ofS. Lio, on Etna, in 1669» so that the water descends at onceupon a mass of melted lava, eruptions will probably burst forthalong the line of this aperture, the steam rushing up, togetherwith gaseous emanations from the lava, and carrying up scoriaewith it. But from what we know of the wave-like motion of theground during earthquakes, there is good reason to conclude thata continuous communication will rarely be formed between thesea and a bed of lava at great depth below, because the alternateSee Daubeny's remarks on this subject,««'< Volcanos' p. 3Gd«CONSTANT DISCHARGE OF SUBTERRANEAN HEAT. 469rising and falling of the earth causes chasms to open and againto close in violently. In the same manner, therefore, as yawningfissures shut again after engulphing trees and houses, sogreat masses of water may be swallowed up and the sea mayimmediately afterwards be excluded. Suppose then a volcanicvent to be once formed by a submarine eruption all the waterengulphed will, on penetrating to subterranean reservoirs ofheated lava, be converted into steam, and this steam makingits way through the same channels by which elastic fluidsescape in the intervals between eruptions, will drive melted lavabefore it. Successive eruptions will have a tendency to seekthe same vent, especially if the peak of a cone is raisedabove the water ; for then there will probably be no more thanthe pressure of the atmosphere in a great part of the ductleading to the crater.Volcanos exhale, during eruptions, besides aqueous vapour,the following gases: muriatic acid, sulphur combined withhydrogen or oxygen, carbonic acid and nitrogen, the greaterpart of which would result from the decomposition of saltwater,a fact which, when taken in conjunction with the proximityof nearly two hundred active vents to the sea, and theirabsence in the interior of large continents, is almost conclusiveas to the co-operation of wester and fire in the raising of lavato the surface.We have before suggested the great probability that, inexisting volcanic regions there are enormous masses of matterin a constant state of fusion far below the surface: thisopinion is confirmed by numerous phenomena. Perennialsupplies of hot vapour and aeriform fluids rise to certaincraters, as in Stromboli for example, and Nicaragua, whichare in a state of ceaseless eruption. Sangay in Quito, Popo-catepetl in Mexico, and the volcano of the isle of Bourbon,have continued in incessant activity for periods of sixty orone hundred and fifty years. Numerous sol fat aras, evolvingthe same gases as volcanos, serve as permanent vents of heatgenerated in the subterranean regions. The plentiful evolution,also, of carbonic acid, from springs and fissures throughouthundreds of square leagues, is another regular source of communicationbetween the interior and the surface. Steam, oftenabove the boiling temperature, is emitted for ages without470 CAUSE OF THE WAVS-LIKB MOTION AND RETREATintermission from '^ stuffs," as the Italians term them. Hotsprings in great numbers, especially in tracts where earthquakesare frequent, serve also as regular conductors of heatfrom the interior upwards. Silex, carbonate of lime, muriateof soda, and many earths, alkalies and metals are poured outin a state of solution by springs, and the solid matter which istranquilly removed in this manner may, perhaps, exceed thatwhich issues in the shape of lava.It is to the efficacy of this ceaseless discharge of heat, andof solid as well as gaseous matter, that we probably owe thegeneral tranquillity of our globe ; for were it not that some kindof equilibrium is established between fresh accessions of heatand its discharge, we might expect perpetual convulsions, if weconceive the land and the ocean itself to be incumbent in manyextensive districts on subterranean reservoirs of lava. If therebe reason for wonder, it is, as Pliny observed, that a single dayshould pass without some dreadful explosion. ^' Except projectsomnia miracula, unum diem fuisse quo non cuncta con-flagrant*.'' But the circulation of heat from the interior tothe surface, is probably regulated like that of water from thecontinents to the sea, in such a manner that it is only whensome obstruction occurs to the regular disclaim, that the usualrepose of Nature is broken. Any interruption to the r^ulardrainage of a country causes a flood, and, if there be anyobstruction in the passages by which volcanic matter continuallyrises, an earthquake or a paroxysmal eruption is theconsequence.Michell has observed, that the wave-like motion of theground during earthquakes, appears less extraordinary if we callto mind the extreme elasticity of the earth, and that even themost solid materials are easily compressible. If we supposelarge districts to rest upon the surface of subterranean lakesof melted matter, through which violent motions are propagated,it is easy to conceive that superincumbent solid massesmay be made to vibrate or undulate. The following ingeniousspeculations are suggested by the above mentioned writer.** As a small quantity of vapour almost instantly generated atsome considerable depth below the surface a! the earth will« ffifltMndi, lib. ii, c 107.OF TfiK SEA During Earthquakes* 471produce a vibratory motion, so a very large quantity (whetherit be generated almost instantly, or in any small portion oftime) will produce a wave-like motion. The manner in whichthis wave-like motion will be propagated may in some measurebe represented by the following experiment. Suppose a largecloth, or carpet (spread upon a floor) to be raised at one edge,and then suddenly brought down again to the floor, the airunder it being by this means propelled, will pass along, till itescapes at the opposite side, musing the cloth in a wave all theway as it goes. In like manner, a large quantity of vapourmay be conceived to rise the earth in a wave, as it passesalong between the strata which it may easily separate in anhorizontal direction, there being little or no cohesion betweenone stratum and another. The part of the earth that is firstraised, being bent from its natural form, will endeavour torestore itself by its elasticity, and the parts next to it being tohave their weight supported by the vapour, which will insinuateitself under them, will be raised in their turn, till iteither finds some vent, or is again condensed by the cold intowater, and by that means prevented from proceeding anyfarther ♦.'*In order to account for the retreat of the ocean from theshores before or during an earthquake, the same authorimagines a subsidence at the bottom of the sea, from thegiving way of the roof of some cavity in consequence of avacuum produced by the condensation of steam. For suchcondensation, he observes, might be the first effect of theintroduction of a large body of water into fissures and cavitiesalready filled with steam, before there has been sufficient timefor the heat of the incandescent lava to turn so large a supplyof water into steam, which being soon accomplished causes agreater explosion. Sometimes the rising of the coast mustgive rise to the retreat of the sea, and the subsequent wavemay be occasioned by the subsiding of the shore to its formerlevel ; but this will not always account for the phenomena.During the Lisbon earthquake, for example, the retreat precededthe wave not only on the coast of Portugal, but also atOn the Cause and Phenomena of Earthquakes, Phil. Trans., ?ol. li., } 58—1760.472 HOW EARTHQUAKES REPAIR THE LANDthe island of Madeira and several other places. If theupheaving of the coast of Portugal had caused the retreat,the motion of the waters when propagated to Madeira wouldhave produced a wave previous to the retreat. Nor could themotion of the waters at Madeira have been caused by a differentlocal earthquake, for the shock travelled from Lisbon toMadeira in two hours, which agrees with the time which itrequired to reach other places equally distant *.We $hall not indulge at present in further speculations onthe mode whereby subterranean heat may give rise to the phenomenaof earthquakes and volcanos. No one, however, canfail to be convinced, if he turns his thoughts to the subject,that a great part of the reasoning of the most profound naturalphilosophers and chemists can be regarded as little more thanmere conjecture on matters where the circumstances are so farremoved from those which fall under actual observation. Manyprocesses must be carried on in situations where the pressureexceeds as much that produced by the weight of the loftiestmountains, as the weight of the unfathomed ocean surpasses thatof the atmosphere. The mechanical effects, therefore, of earthquakesat vast depths, may be such as can never be paralleledon the surface. The intensity of heat must often be so farremoved from that which we can imitate by experiments, thatthe elements of solid rocks or fluids may enter into combinationssuch as can never take place within the limited range of ourobservations. Water at a certain depth may, as Michell boldlysuggested, become incandescent without expanding, and remainat rest without any tendency to produce an earthquake. Air,if it ever penetrate to such depths, may become a fluid. SirJames Halls experiments prove, that, under a pressure ofabout one thousand seven hundred feet of sea, corresponding tothat of only six hundred feet of liquid lava, limestone meltswithout giving ofi^ its carbonic acid, so that it is only whencalcareous lavas are forced up to within a slight distance of thesurface, or into a sea of moderate depth, that the carbonic acidbegins to assume a gaseous form, and to assist in bringing ona volcanic eruption.But let us now turn our attention to those superficial changesMichell, Phil. Trans., vol. li. p. 614.DESTROYED BY AQUEOUS CAUSES. 473brought about bj so many of the earthquakes within the lastcentury and a hsJf, before described. Besides the undulatorymovements and the opening of fissures it was shewn thatcertain parts of the earth's crust often of considerable area,both above and below the level of the sea, have been permanentlyelevated or depressed ; examples of elevation by singleearthquakes having occurred, to the amount of from one toabout twenty-five feet, and of subsidence from a few inches toabout fifty feet, exclusively of those limited tracts, as the forestof Aripao, where a sinking down to the amount of three hundredfeet took place. It is evident, that the force of subterraneanmovement does not operate at random, but the samecontinuous tracts are agitated again and again ; and howeverinconsiderable may be the alterations produced during a periodsufficient only for the production of ten or fifteen eruptions ofan active volcano, it is obvious that, in the time required forthe formation of a lofty cone, composed of thousands of lava-currents,shallow seas may be converted into lofty mountains,and low lands into deep seas. We need, therefore, cherishnone of the apprehensions entertained by Buffon, that theinequalities of the earth's surface, or the height and area ofour continents, will be reduced by the action of runningwater ; nor need we participate in the wonder of Ray, that thedry land should not lose ground more rapidly. Neither needwe anticipate with Hutton the waste of successive continentsfollowed' by the creation of others by paroxysmal convulsions.The renovating as well as the destroying causes areunceasingly at work, the repair of land being as constant as itsdecay, and the deepening of seas keeping pace with the formationof shoals. If, in the course of a century, the Gangesand other great rivers have carried down to the sea a mass ofmatter equal to many lofty mountains, we also find that adistrict in Chili, one hundred thousand square miles in area,has been uplifted to the average height of a foot or more, andthe cubic contents of the granitic mass thus added in a fewhours to the land, may have counterbalanced the loss effectedby the aqueous action of many rivers in a century. On theother hand, if the water displaced by fluviatile sediment causethe mean level of the ocean to rise in a slight degree, such subsidencesof its bed, as that of Cutch in 1819> or St. Domingo474 Renovating XFFIHCn OP SAftTHQUAXES.in 1751 9 or Jamaica in 169S, may have compensated hjincreasing the capacity of the great oceanic brain. No rivercan push forward its delta without raising the level of thewhole ocean, although in an infinitesimal degree; and nolowering can take place in the bed of any part of the ocean,without a general sinking of the water, even to the antipodes.If the separate effects of different agents, whether aqueous origneous, are insensible, it is because they are continually noun*erected by each other, and a perfect adjustment takes placebefore any appreciable disturbance is occasioned. How manyconsiderable earthquakes there may be upon an average in thecourse of one year, throughout the wide globe, is a questionthat we cannot decide at present ; but as we have calculatedthat there are about twenty volcanic eruptions annually, weshall, perhaps, not overrate the earthquakes, if we estimatetheir number to be equal. A large number of eruptions areattended by local earthquakes of sufficient violence to modifythe surface in some slight degree, and there are many earth-i>quakes, on the other hand, not followed by eruptions. Even ifwe do not assume, as many have done, that the submarineconvulsions exceed in number and violence those on the land,in spaces of equal area, we must, nevertheless, reckon aboutthree shocks exclusively submarine, for one exclusively confinedto the continents.We have said in a former chapter * that the aqueous andigneous agents may be regarded as antagonist forces, theaqueous labouring incessantly to reduce the inequalities <^the earth's surface to a level, while the igneous are equallyactive in restoring the unevenness of the crust of the globe.But an erroneous theory appears to have been entertained bymany geologists, and is indeed as old as the time of LaxzoroMoro, that the levelling power of running water was opposedrather to the elevating force of earthquakes than to theiraction generally. To such an opinion the numerous wellattested facts of subsidences must always have appeared aserious objection, but the same hypothesis would lead to otherassumptions of a very arbitrary and improbable kind, inasmuchas it would be necessary to imagine the magnitude of ourClap. z. pw 167,PROPORTION OF ELEVATION AHD SUBSIDENCE. 475planet to be always on the increase if the elevation of theearth's surface by subterranean movements exceeded thedepression. The sediment carried into the depths of the seaby rivers, tides, and currents, t^dds to diminish the height ofthe land ; but, on the other hand, it tends, in a degree, toaugment the height of the ocean, since water, equal in volumeto the matter carried in, is displaced. The mean distance,therefore, of the surface, whether occupied by land or waterfrom the centre of the earth, remits unchanged by the actionof rivers, tides, and currents. Now suppose that while theseagents are destroying islands and continents, the restoration ofland should take place solely by the forcing out of the earth^senvelope — it will be seen that this would imply a continualdistension of the whole mass of the earth. For the greaternumber of earthquakes would be submarine, and they wouldcause the sea to rise and submerge the low lands even in agreater degree than would the influx of sediment. Two causeswould, therefore, tend to destroy the land ; submarine earthquakes,and the destroying and transporting power of water ;and in order to counterbalance these effects, shallow seas mustbe upraised into continents, and low lands into mountains.If we first consider the question simply, in regard to themanner whereby earthquakes may prevent running water fromaltering the relative proportion of land and sea, or the heightof the land and depth of the ocean, we shall find that if therising and sinking be equal, things would remain upon thewhole in the same state : because rivers, tides, and currents,add as much to the height of lands which are rising, as theytake from those which have risen.Suppose a large river to carry down sediment into a certainpart of the ocean where there is a depth of two thousand feet,and that the whole space is reduced by the fluviatile depositionsto a shoal only covered by water at high tide ! then leta series of two hundred earthquakes strike the shoal, eachraising the ground ten feet ; the result will be a mountain twothousand feet high. But suppose the same earthquakes hadvisited the same hollow in the bottom of the sea before thesediment of the river had filled it up, their whole force wouldthen have been expended in converting a deep sea into a laval,of changing a shoal into a mountain two thousand feet476 THE WHOLE AMOUNT OF SUBSIDENCEhigh. The superior altitude, then of a district may often bedue to the transportation of matter at a former period to lowerlevels. It would probably be more consistent with the naturalcourse of events, if, instead of a succession of elevator movements,we were to suppose considerable oscillations before thedistrict attained its full height Let there be, for example,three hundred instead of two hundred shocks, each separatedfrom the other by intervals of about fifty years. Let themean alteration of level produced by each earthquake be tenfeet, two hundred and fifty shocks causing a rise, and the otherfifty a sinking in of the ground ; although more time will havebeen consumed by this operation than by the former, we shallstill have the same result, for a tract will be raised to theheight of about two thousand feet. The chief differencewill consist in the superior breadth and depth of the valleys,which will be greater nearly in the proportion of one-third, inconsequenceof the number of landslips, floods, opening ofchasms, and other effects produced by one hundred additionalearthquakes. It should be borne in mind, moreover, that someof the lowering movements, happening towards the close of theperiod of disturbance, may have given rise to strange anomalies,should an attempt be made to reconcile the whole excavationin various hydrographical basins to the levels finally retained.Perhaps, for example, the middle portion of a valley may havesunk down, so that a deep lake may intervene between mountainsand certain low plains, to which their debris had beenpreviously carried.But to return to the consideration of the proportion betweenthe elevation and depression of the earth^s crust, which may benecessary to preserve the uniformity of the general relations ofland and sea, on the surface. The circumstances are in truthmore complicated than those before stated, for, independently ofthe transfer of matter by running water from the continents tothe ocean, there is a constant transportation of mineral ingredientsfrom below upwards, by mineral springs and volcanic vents.As mountain masses are in the course of ages created by thepouring forth of successive streams of lava, so others originatefrom the carbonate of lime and other mineral ingredients withwhich springs are impregnated. The surface of the land, andparts of the bottom of the sea are thus raised, and if we conceiveEXCEEDS THAT OF ELEVATION. 477the dimensions of the planet to remain uniform, we must supposethese external accessions to be counteracted by some actionof an opposite kind. A considerable quantity of earthy mattermay sink down into fissures caused by earthquakes, but thiscannot be deemed sufficient to counterbalance the addition ofmountain masses by the causes before adverted to, and we musttherefore suppose, that the subsidences of the earth^s crust exceedthe elevations caused by subterranean movements. It is tobe expected, on mechanical principles, that the constant subtractionof matter from the interior will cause vacuities, so thatthe surface undermined will fall in during convulsions whichshake the earth^s crust even to great depths, and the sinking downwill be occasioned partly by the hollows left when portions ofthe solid crust are heaved up, and partly when they are underminedby the subtraction of lava and the ingredients of decomposedrocks. The geological consequences which will follow ifwe embrace the theory now proposed are very important, forif there be upon the whole more subsidence than elevation,then we must consider the depth to which former surfaceshave sunk down beneath their original level, to exceed theheight which ancient marine strata have attained above thesea. If, for example, marine strata about the age of ourchalk and green-sand have been lifted up in Europe to anextreme elevation of more than eleven thousand feet, and toa mean height of some hundreds above the level of the sea,we may conclude that certain parts of the earth's surface,which existed whether above or below the waters when thosestrata were deposited, have subsequently sunk down to anextreme depth of more than eleven thousand feet belowtheir original level, and to a mean depth of more than a fewhundreds.In regard to faults, also, we must, according to the hypothesisnow proposed, infer that a greater number have arisen fromthe sinking down than from the elevation of rocks. If wefind, therefore, ancient deposits full of fresh-water remainswhich evidently originated in a delta or shallow estuary, coveredsubsequently by purely marine formations of vast thickness,we shall not be surprised ; for we must expect that a greaternumber of existing deltas and estuary formations will sinkbelow, than those which will rise above their present level.478 CONCLUDING REMARKS.Although it would be rash to attempt to confirm these speculationsby reference to the scanty observations hitherto madeon the effects of earthquakes, yet we cannot but remark, thatthe instances of subsidence on record are far more numerousthan are those of elevation.Those writers who have most strenuously contended for theanalogy of the effects of earthquakes in ancient and modemtimely have nevertheless declared that the energy of the forcehas considerably abated. But they do not appear to havebeen aware that, in order to adduce plausible grounds for sadian hypothesis, they must possess a most extensive knowledgeof the economy of the whole terrestrial system. We can onlyestimate the relative amount of change produced at two distinctperiods, by a particular cause in a given lapse of time, whenwe have obtained some common standard for the measurementof equal portions of time at both periods. We have shownthat, within the lost one hundred and forty years, some hundredthousand square miles of territory have been upheavedto the height of several feet, and that an area of equal, if notgreater extent, has been depressed. Now, they who contend,that formerly more movement was accomplished by earthquakesin the space of one hundred and forty years, must firstexplain the measure of time referred to, for it is obvious thatthey cannot in geology avail themselves df the annual revolutionof our planet round the sun. Suppose thor assume thatthe power of volcanos to emit lava, and of running water totransport sediment from one part of the globe to the other, hasremained uniform from the earliest periods, they might thenattempt to compare the effects of subterranean movements inancient and modern times by reference to one common standard,and to show that, while a certain number of lava-currents wereproduced, or so many cubic yards of sediment accumulated,the elevation and depression of the earth's crust were once muchgreater than they are now. Or, if they should declare that theprogressive rate of change of species in the animal and vegetablekingdoms had always been uniform, they might thenendeavour to disparage the degree of energy now exerted byearthquakes, by showing that, in relation to the mutations ofassemblages of organic species, earthquakes had become comparativelyfeeble. But our present scanty acquaintance, bothCONCLUDING REMARKS.with the animate and inanimate world, can by no means warrantsuch generalizations ; nor have they who contend for thegradual decline of the activity of natural agents, attempted tosupport such a line of argument. That it would be most premature,in the present state of natural history, to reason on thecomparative rate of fluctuation in the species of organic beingsin ancient and modem times, will be more fully demonstratedwhen we proceed, in the next division of our subject, to considerthe intimate connexion between geology, and the study of thepresent condition of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.To conclude : it appears, from the views above explained,respecting the agency of subterranean movements, that theconstant repair of the dry land, and the subserviency of ourplanet to the support of terrestrial as well as aquatic species,are secured by the elevating and depressing power of earthquakes.This cause, so often the source of death and terror tothe inhabitants of the globe, which visits, in succession, everyzone, and fills the earth with monuments of ruin and disorder,is, nevertheless, a conservative principle in the highest degree,and, above all others, essential to the stability of the system.INDEX.Aciubmt of Naples, Royal, their control*very on the destruction of herculaneumand Pompeii, 351Addiaon*s opinion of Bumet*8 theory, 38Adige embankment of the, 184delta of the, 236Adrian, formerly a seaport, now twentymiles inland, 2o6. «Adriatic, Marsilli on the arrangement ofshells in the, 44Donati on the bed of the, 47, 85,— • its form favourable to the growthof deltas, 235■ rapid gain of land in the, 236its depth, 236■ ■ Olivi on the distribution of sedimentin the, 237Africa, marine fossil shells of, mentionedby ancients, 18Malte-Bnm on the heat radiatedby, 106its shores undermined by currents,-i»»- drift sands of the deserts, 301■■ great current alone the coast of, 309^^.^ violently shaken by earthquake ofLisbon in 1755, 439— rise of the sea on the coast of, duringthe earthquake, 439As^cola's theory of fossil remains, 25Anmedhabad, town of, destroyed byearthquake, 1819, 405Air, circulation of in the atmosphere, 117Marlborough, incursions of the sea formerlyvery destructive at, 274'— — its ancient site now under the sea,■ its coast at present protected bysand-banks, 274Aleppo, earthquake of, in 1822, 403Aleutiui isles, eruptions frequent in, 317•— earthquakes m the, 408Alluvial plain of Mississippi, size of, 185• animals inhabiting it, 189Alluvions, volcanic, 349VousAlluvions in Scotland, 433Alps, Saussure on the, 54^- tertiary rocks of the, 136■ relative age of the, 137Acting, his account of the formation ofthe Zuyder Zee, 238Amalphi, 83Amason, great rise of the tides in theriver, 291~ sea discoloured by its waters threehundred miles from its mouth, 292M ibid part of Guiana formed by itsdeposits, 292■ its sediment drifted by currents tothe mouth of the Orinoco, 292^American lakes, may cause deluges, 89America, North, its eastern coast undermined,291Amiata, mount, description of, 202Amici, Vito, on Moro's system, 46Amonoosuckf flood in the valley of, 193Amygdaloids, submarine lavas of Sicilyconverted into, 128Andes, height of perpetual snow on the,volcanos of the, 315Anio, river-flood of the, 196-^— a flood on the, described by Pliny,— once flowed through a chain oflakes, 208Annus Magus, duration of, 9Anoplothenum, a tooth of, said to have« been found at B instead, 153Antics, joined to Lesbos by delta, 13Antilles, earthquake in the smaller, 410Antisana, volcano, 315Apennines, character of their organic remains,126their relative tige, 135Aqueous causing, 168lavas, description of, 349Arabian doctrine of successive revolutionsof the globe, 17— «• gulf, volcano at its entrance, 3242 IINDEX.Arabian writers of the tenth centmy, 21Arbroath, houses, &G., swept away by thesea at, 264Arduino, memoirs of 1759, 49■ on submarine volcanic emotions^— first divided rocks into primary,secondary, and tertiary, 49•— — his views confirmed by.Fortis andDesmarest, 51on submarine lavas and trap rocksof the Vicentin, 85Aristarchus, 197Aristophanes, his ridicule of the mundaneAristotelian system, 15^-^ theory <^ spontaneous generation,Anq, Campo del, volcanic eruption finnthe point called, 333Arve, sediment transported bv the, 232-^— section of the debris deposited bythe, see diagram No. 6, 254Ashes, volcanic, immense quantity ejectedfrom the Tomboio mountain, 1815,••"^^ distance to which they were transported,404ways subject to earthquakes, 10•*^— coast of changed, 21— causes of the extreme cold of part0^107*^ Minor, gain of land on the coast0(308Atchaialaya, drift wood in the river, 188section of the banks of the, 245Atlantic, La Place on the mean depth ofthe, 115its relative level, 293-*— rise of the tide in, 293Atlantis, submersion of, 10Atrio del CavaUo, 344Auvergne, Desmarest on the relative agesof the volcanos of, 59Montlosier on volcanos of, 60salt deposited by springs in, 215carbonic acid gas plentifully disengagedin, 216Ava, Mr. Crawford's discovery of fossilsui,33fossil wood of, M. de la Hire'smemoir on, 1692, (note) 33Avalanches, cattle and men buried by, inSwitzerland, 98Venus, lake, mephitic vapours Formerlyexhaled from, 329— a crater of au extinct volcano, 329Avicenna, on mineralogy, 21Asof sea, said to have been united withthe Caspian, 320^— «- new island thrown up in, 321Adores, icebergs drifted from Baffin'sBa to the. Ill^— new islands thrown np near, 391,-'— siliceous springs of the, 212Baden, gypseous springs of, 212Baffin's say, enormous ioebctgi in,Bagnes, valley of, bursting of a lake inthe,U4BaisB, changes on the coast of the bay o(ground plan of the coast of the hayof; carr woodcut No. 30, 450— section of the strata in the bay oisee woodcut No. 31, 450numerous proof of subsidence inthe bay o{ 454^— re-elevation of the coast of the hayo( 457Bakewell, Mr., Jun., on the Falls of Niagara,181Baku, escape of inflammable gas in thedistrict of, 14—— volcanic tract called the field of firenear, 319Balaxuc, thermal waters ol( in the deltaoftheBhone, 233Baldassari on the grouping of organicremains in the Sienese terntorTjBaltic sea, Celsius' theory of the diminutionof, 40deltas of the, 227 . '^— supposed lowering of the level ofthe, 227— <- action of currents on its shoresBranching, in Sicily, sea deepened byearthquake near, 416Banks, on the basalt of Hecla, 58Barren bland, a supposed crater of elevation,390height of the cone of, &c., 390-^— view of the cone and crsler o( «ewoodcut No. 17, 390-~— supposed section of, 393Basalt Of Hesse, Raspe on the true natureo^ 1768, 58Werner's erroneous theory of; 58of Heda, Banks, Solander, andToil, on, 1772, 58— - of the Vivarais, Ouettard on, 58of Delay and Vivarais, Faujas on,1779,58columnar, of Central France, 346Barsoe, rate of loss of land in the islandof, 295Bassano, Mr. Murchison on the totiazydeposits 0^ 137tNDKX.Batavia, eartliq[iiak0 at, 1699, 444■ the river obstructed and floodcaused, 444cattle, &C., drowned, 444Baa, his chart of the Gidf of MexicoHatfield, Capt, on the gedogy of LakeSuperior, 225Bay of Bengal, its depth opposite themouths of the Gases, 241-«<— of Findhom Locked aip by driftsand, 300Beaches Head, fall of the chalk difiof,Beaufort, Gapt» on the vain of land onthe coast of Asia Minor, 309Beaumont, M. Blue de, on the relativeage of nxmntain chains, 138onthe relative age of the Pyrenees,Beechey, Capt, on the depth at whichcorals mm in Ducis's island, 130■ on reiteration of the Bay of Conception,440Beecher, Capt., on the elevation of ConceptionBay, 440Bell rock, stones of two tons weightthrown up by storms on the, 264Bargain, on waste of Yorkshire coast,B«btau, earthquakes in the province of,Pendant, on travertine of Hungary, 211Bewick, 273Bhooi, town of, destroyed by earthquake,Bias Bosch, new bay formed by the seain Holland, 287Bigsby, Dr., on the height to whichautumnal gales raise the watersof Lake Superior, 226Bima, anchorage at, altered by earthquake,1815, 404Binstead, tooth of an Anoplotherium saidto have been found at, 1 53Bison, found fossil in Yorkshire, 96Bistineau, a new lake formed by theRed River, 190Bitumen, oozing from the bottom of thesea near Trinidad, 218Bituminous springs, 218shales, 219Bixona, town submerged, 19Black lake, 190Black sea, calcareous springs near the, 211Blue mountains in Jamaica shattered byearthquakes, 446Bluffs of Mississippi described, 186Boase, Mr., his account of the Lionnessetradition, 283*— on inroads of sea near Feiizance,283Boase, }ir., on drift sand in Conway, 30 1Bogota, earthquake of, 1827, 401Bologna, institute of, supports diluvialhypothesis, 42Bonajutus, on the subsidence of the coastof Sicily, 445Bore, tidal wave called the, 292» the, very frequent in the Bristolchannel, 292-— — very common in the Gases, 292^^^ its cause and velocity, 29?Boecpmb chine, 281Boscorich, his theory of earthquakes,1772, 53~~ supposed earthquakes to have grownfeebler, 53Bothnia, gradual conversion of the gulfof, into dry-land, 228Bout, M., on the strata of the Pieces,Bourbon, island, Tolcanic, 324Bourdon, river, shoal upheaved at itsmouth, 410Boyle, remarks of on the bottom of thatsea, (note) 30Bracing, his description of Vesuvius beforethe eruption of 1631, 338Brahmins, 7Brander, on the fossils of Hampshire, 52Brentaa, delta of the, 236Breslau, on the subsidence of the moleat Pusiuoli, 455on the temple of Serapis, 456-» on prismatic lavas of VesuviusBrighton, waste of the cliffii of, 279Brine springy of Cheshire, 215Brocchi, his discourse on fossil concha(note) 23mBuon iJumef 8 theory, 41— onthe deposition of the Subapen-ninebeds, 135—^-^ his account of the various writerson the delta of the Po, 236Broderip, Mr., on the opossum of Stones-field,(note) 150shells from Conception Bay examinedby, (note) 441Brongniart, M. Ad., on the fossil plantsoffthe coal formation, 100-^— on the fossil plants of strata betweenthe coal and the chalk, 101——' on the proportion of ferns to otherplants in islands, 123Brongniart, M. Alex., on the comparativeinsignificance of modem lava-streams,375on shells of existing species at greatheights in Sweden, 230Browallius, on the filling up of the gulfof Bothnia. 229JKDBX,BncUand, Dr on foal dephanify ftc, inIndia, (note) 7^— ^ on the rocks of the Bristol coalfield,132i ■ on diootyledonooa wood of northumberlandcoal-field, 147Buffon, hii theory of the earth, 1749, 47■ lus aviteni opposed to that ofHorae, Ray, and Moro, 47■ his theonr reproved by the Sorbonne,47■ his federation'* renouncing histheory of the earth, 47■ on flie secondary origin of mountains,47Bare* town submerged, 19Burnet, his theory m the earth, 37■ on the causes of the deluge, 37general conflagration derived by,•-^ on the seat of Paradise, 38P^-^ praised by Steele AddiKm, andWanton, 38^*— ^ Voltaire's remarks on the theoryof, 66Bunampooter, delta of thc^ 240Butler, bumet's theory concerning Paradise,ridiculed by, 38byron, Lord, cited, on the permanencyof the ocean, 459Cato lake, 190Caesar on the Druids, 19Caithness schists, scales of a tortoise.&c., found in the, 148Calabria, Scilla on the fossils of, 29■ recent fossils of, 94earthquake of 1783 in, 412— geological description of, 414«^— reflections on the earthquake of1783 in, 431Calcaire Grossier, organic remains ofthe, 99Calcareous matter, immense quantityconveyed to the sea, 211- springs of central France, 200•*— springs of the valley of the Elsa,^-— springs of Tuscany, 1201springs between the Caspian andBlack seas, 211Caldera, siliceous sinter of the, 213I central cavity in the isle of Palma,see woodcut No. 16, 388geological description of the, 389•.— supposed by Von Buch to be a craterof elevation, SeCalifornia, five volcanos iu, 316C'AliaOy town destroyed by the sea, 321^i^ part of the coast near, convertedittli) a bay by earthquakes 442Callao, great rise of the sea at, 442Caltalnuca, river, lava excavated by thcjCamden, his account of traditions oflosses of land in Pembrokeshire,&c., 283Campagna di Roma, calcareous depositsof the, 206Canary islands, volcanic emptioiis in the,324, 380Canopus, an island in the time of Scylas,-— — overwhelmed by the sea, 239Cental, Plomb du, described, 395Cape of Good Hope, icebergs sometimesseen off, 111^— lay, rate of encroachment of thesea at, 291Caraccas, earthquakes in the, 1790, 410destroyed by «>>^qi)Ake,.18 12, 407Caring Anam, volcano in eruptionabout 1808, 405Carbonate of lime abundant in the deltaof the Rhone, 235Carbonated springs, 216Carbonic add gas plentifully disengagedin Auvergne, 216its effects on rocks, 217Cardiganshire, andent tradition of theloss of land in, 283CareUi, Signor, on the temple of SereneCarew on St Midiad^s mount, 283Carrack, bed of the sea raised near, 437Caribbee sea, tides scarcely perceptiblein, 293Mariti, river, its course changed by earthquakes,425Carpenter, Dr., on the encroachment ofthe sea at Lyme Regis, 282Casalmaggiore, island carried away byt& Po, opposite to, 182Caspian, Pallas on the former extent ofthe, 54calcareous springs near the, 211-^— evaporation of the, 235subterranean movements violentalong its borders, 3 1 9said to encroach on the land, 319.— inflammable gas, &c, on its westernshores, 319» its level lower than that of the BlackSea, 320> said to have been united with thesea of Asof, 320Cassandra, on the duration of the AnnusMagnus, 9Casas, M., his account of the earthquakeiu Murcia, 400Catania, overwhelmed by lava in 1669,INDEX.Catania destroyed by earthquakes, 445Catastrophes, general, two kinds of taughtby the Stoics, 9Catcott, on the deluge, 1761, 50■ laboured to refute the diluviantheory of Bishop Clayton, 50insisted on the universality of thedeluge, 50refers to traditions of deluges in*different countries, 50Cattegat, devastations caused by thecurrent in the, 294Catwyck, loss of land at, 287Caucasus, Pallas on the calcareous springsof the, 210■ earthquakes frequent in the, 321— « abounds in hot springs, 321■' subsidence caused by earthquakesin the, 437Canaille on the earthquake of Quitoin 1797, 410Caverns in limestone caused by watercharged with carbonic aad, 211on Etna, 366Caves, abundance of animal remains in,Celsius, on the diminution of the Baltic,40, 227controversy caused by the theoryof, 40Censorinus, 15Central France, lavas excavated in, 176-' comparison between its lavas andthose of Iceland, 373Central heat, remarks on the supposeddiminution of, 141Cephalic, earthquakes in the island of,in 1783, 414Cisalpine, on organic remains, 1596, 26Chalk, Mr. Mantel on the fossils of the,of Goslar, error of Werner in hisaccount of the, 57remarks on its deposition, 138Changes now in progress not easily observedby man, 81Chasm near Oppido formed by earthquakeof Calabria, 1783, 420■ in the hill of St. Angelo, formedby the same earthquake, tee woodcutNo. 24, 421Chalet, calcareous spring rising throughgneiss at, 201^ volcanic cone of, 216Chepstow, great rise of the tides at, 257Cheshire, brine springs of, 215Chesil Bandits size and cdmpotttion,281Chesilton, overwhelmed by storm ofNovember, 1824, 282Philip elevation caused by one earthquakein, 80Chill, nnmenms Volcanos in, 314earthquake of 1822 in, 401earthquake of 1 760 in, 437Chimboraxo, height of, insignificant whencompared to the earth's diameterChina, excessive climate of, 107violent earthquakes have been feltin, 319Chines, or narrow ravines, described, 281Christ Church Head promontory, wastesslowly, 280Chronological computations of the ageof deltas, 223Cicero, cited, 29Cimbrian deluge, 295Cinquefrondi, changes of the surfacecaused by landslips in, eee woodcutNo. 27, 427Circular hollows formed by earthquakesin Murcia, 401formed by earthquakes in Chilly1822, 402- formed by earthquake in Calabria1783, see woodcut No. 28,— section of one of these, tee woodcutNo. 29, 429Civitas] Vecchia, granular rock deportedby springs at, 206Clashbinnie, organic remains in the oldred sandstone of, 148Clayton, Bishop, on the deluge, 50Clermont, calcareous springs at, risingthrough volcanic peering, 200Climate, of Europe, Raspe on the former,I change of, in the northern hemisphere,92direct proofs of a change in, 93— proofs of a change of, from size offossil and recent shells in Sicily,&c, 94-.— — proofs from analogy of a changeof, 96■ remarks on the extent of changein, 103on the causes of vicissitudes in,104 .— its connexion with the distributionof land and sea, 105change of, in the plain of Malpai%caused by volcanic eruptions, 124Climates, definition of insular and excessive,97^■^ places having insular or excessiveCoal strata, Mead. Brongniart on thefossil plants of the, 100— > insular character of the plants ofthe, 128nrDBr.Goal strata, rarity of dicotytodonout woodin the, 147u formation, not found in the south ofEurope, 126Colebrooke, Mr. Het., on the crocodilesof the Oanges, 243Colehrooke, Major, on the course of theGanges, 247m on the transportation of matter hythe Ganges, 247Colle, travertin of I 201College, transportation of rodca by the,Collins, on the igneous rocks of theRhine, 1774, 58Colombia, earthquakes in, 437Colonia, his theory of organic remains,« .• first distinguished between marineand land fossil shells, 27Comet, deluge attributed by Whiston toa, 39Concentric travertin of Tivoli, 208Conception, destruction of the town of byearthquake, in 1750, 440■ ■ gnat elevation of the bay of, 440Conflagration of the world, 24i*— of the earth, described by Burnet,Conglomerate forming at the foot of themaritime Alps, 252-»~ forming at the mouth of the Isonxo,■ volcanic, in the Isle of Lancerote,Convergence of deltas, 251Conybeare, Rev. W. D., on the rocks ofthe Bristol coal field, 132Cook, Captain, his conjecture as to theexistence of high land near theSouth Pole, 109Copernican theory, edicts against repealedat Rome in 1818, 62Cordier, Mason the temperature of theinterior of the earth, 142Cordilleras shaken by earthquakes in1812 and 1827, 401, 407Cork dicotyledonous wood in the graywackeof, 147Cornwall, Mr. Boase on waste of the climbof, 283■ land inundated by drift sand in,Cortes, 53Cosmogony distinct from geology, 4■ of the Hindoo, 6Egyptian, 9of the Koran, 22Constantine, deluge vindicated by, 42Cotopaxi, 315Cowper, C7Craters of elevation. Von Bndi's theoryof, considered, 386Crawford, Mr., his discovery of fossils inAva,33Creation, Mahomet's account of the,•^— Moro theory of the, adapted tothe Mosaic account, 43Cremona, lakes filled up or drained near,Crimea, waste of the diei in the, 294Crocodiles of two species in the delta ofthe Ganges, 243Cromer, waste of the cliffs of, 269its ancient site now part of theGerman Ocean, 269Culver cliff*, composed of chalk, 279Ciimana, ewthauake of, 1797, 410town of, destroyed, 410Eminent alone the shores of Egypt, 239•»— along me coast of Africa, 309> sediment of the Amason transportedby, 309Currents from equatorial regions, 108from the Pde to the Equator, 1 18— - section of debris deposited by opposing,Mff diagram No. 6, 254— causes of, 256»i« destroying and transporting powerof, 256in estuaries, their power, 264— in the Straits of Gibraltar, 295^mm^ sediment conveyed to immense distancesby, 308, 310*- gain of land on coast of Syriacaused bj, 308reproductive effects of, 303their course on the British shoresCurves of the Mississippi, 186Cutch, in Bombay, earthquake of, 1819,Cuvier, his £loge of Desmaiest, 60on the opossum of Stonesfield, 150^— his remark on the durability of thebones of men, 154Cyprus, rocks reported to have risen near,during earthquake in 1822, 403DANixiXjOnthe trade-winds, 118Danish Archipelago, undermined by currents,294Dante, embankment of riven noticed by,Antic, waste of the land near. 294Darby, on the drift wood of the Mississippi,187»^— his account of the new lakes formedby the Red River, 190on the marine strata of LoweLouisiana, 191INDBXtfDerby, on fte data oT ilwUinHippi,Daubed) Dr oa the Tolcuiic origin ofthe country round the Dead Sea,■ on the vicinity of Toleanoa to the■ea,468jyAnbuinon, his eulogium of 8niith*tmap of England, 71Davy, Sir H., on the satan of the lakeoftheSolfatara,207■■ on the formation of travertin, 207his theory of progressive development144I on the rebuilding of cities on thesame spot after their destructionby lava, 358Davy Rev. C, on the Lisbon earthquakeof 1755,438Dead Sea, muriatic salts abundant in itswaters, 215the country around it volcanic, 322Dee, river, bridge over, swept away byfloods, 174Deficiency of ancient aeeonnti of earthquakes,399Delay Beene, Mr on the delta of theRhone in the lake of Osoeva, 221De la Hire, on fossil wood from Ava,1692, 33Delhi territory, elephants covered withDeltashaggy hair m the, 99oftheBhone, in Lake of Geneva,-^— proofs of its advance in the lasteighteen centuries, 232•^^ of file Rhone in the Mediterranean,'» its gradual advance, 232-^— in great part composed of calcareousrock, 234of the Po,235-~— of the Isonio, 236oftheTagliameDto,236oftheBrenta, 236of the Adige, 236ofthe Nile, 238-^— changes in, since the time of Homer,238— of the Burrampooter, 240of the Oanges, 240■ animals inhabiting the, 241stratification of the, 253— - of the Mississippi, 245^- its advance since New Orleans wasbuilt, 245*— its stratification, 253Deltas, chronological computations of theage of, 223of Lake Superior 225(tftheBa]tie,287 .Deltas, jeanie, i40remarks on the grouping of stratain, 249 » * »convergence of, 251— independent in same basin, 251of the Po and Adige have becomeconfluent, 251of the Ganges and Burrampooter*have probably become confluentin historical tunes, 252De Luc, his treatise on geology, 1809, 68— affirmed that religion was attackedby geology, 68on the excavation of valleys, 70-^~ his remarks on the age of delay.— his natural chronometers, 301Deluge, of Deucalion, 15^^ — described in the Koran, 22-- ■ ■■ mentioned by Persian magi, 22■ fosiii shells refined to the, 23Ray on the causes of the, 36■ Burnet and Woodward's accountof the, 37 -^attributed by Whiston to a comet,39^all stratified deposits referred tobyWhiston, 39cause of, how explained by Leila.nits, 40■ Scheuchzer*s theory of the, 40I Pluche on the, 41-*'— truth of the, supported by Costing- Catcott's treatise on the, 50Bishop Clayton's explanation ofthe, 50Cimbrian, 295Deluges part of the present count ofNature, 89— local, how caused, 192traditions of different, 320Denmark free from earthquakes, 232Derbyshire, Whitehurst on the rocks of,Deshayes, M., on the fossil shells of theParis basin, 100Desmarest considered geology a branchof physical geography, 4^ Arduino's views confirmed by, 58on Auvergne, 59character of his map o( 59his answer to a Neptunist, 60~- on the separation of England fromFrance, 277Destruction and renovation of the world,an oriental doctrine, 9Deterioration of mankind, 9origin of the doctrine, 10Deuoslion's deluge, Aristotle's opinion oLIndex.Dicotyledonous wood in the coal ionia ofNorthumberland, 147■ in the graywacke of Cork, 147Dikes in Vesuvius, how formed, 342Diluvial theory, 29p rogieei of geology retarded bythe, 30^ opposed by geologists of TNiacany, 42■ supported by Institute of Boloffna,42Darlington height, rapid waste 0^266Diodorus Stimulus on early eruptions ofEtna, 363Dion Cassius, his account of the enjfiionof Vesuvius in 79, 332Dioscoridea, 25Disputations, scholastic, effect of in darkaces, 26(, rormatiiDoUart, formation of the estuary of the,Dolomieu on the strata of the Val diNotoo, Vicentin, and Tyrol, 60■ on the ancient lavas of Etna, 59■ on the decomposition of granite, 217on the earthquake of 1783 in Calabria,413Don, transportation of rocks by the river,Donati, his investigation of the bed of theAdriatic, 1750, 47, 85, 236Dorsetshire, description of a landslip in,Dover, waste of the chalk diflk of, 276■ depth of the sea near, 276formation of the Straits o( 277Dranse, river draining the Valley ofBagnes, 194shifted its course after the d^b&deof IBIS in Valley of Bagnes, 195Drift sand of the African deserts, citiesburied under, 301wood of the Mississippi, 187, 245Wrongs, granitic rocks of Shetland wornaway by the sea, tee woodcutsNo. 9 and 10, 262Druids, their belief in future catastrophesof the world, 19Dude's Isle, Captain Beechey on the formationof coral in, 130Dufr£noy, M., on the relative age of thePyrenees, 138Dunes, hills of blown sand, coast of Norfolkprotected by, 268■ on coast of France, 300i-^ near the estuary of the Tay, 300on the shores of the Nile, 300punish, its gradual destruction by thesea, 272» ■ Gardner's account of the destruction0^272Puiham, magnesian limestone o( invadedby the sea, 266Eabtb, antiquity of Oie, 24^— ^ centre of gravity of the, a bargainit supposed by Ray, 36-*-— axis of the, has not changed accordsing to Newton and Laplace, 39— - a change in the axis of the, a leadingdora in Burnet's tbeoty, 39■ inorganic causes of change on mila.sunace, 167Earthquake in Murda, 1829, 400in Bogota, 1827, 401in Cl, 1822,401in Aleppo, 1822, 403in the Ionian rules, 1820, 403-^— in the island of Sumbawa 1815^of Cutch, 1819,405in Caraccas, 1812, 407in South Carolina, 1811, 407in the Aleutian isles, 1806, 408in Quito, 1797,410in Cumana, 1797, 410in Caraccas, 1790, 410in Sicily, 1790, 411in Java, 1786,411in Calabria, 1783, 412— duration of the shocks, 412numerous accounts o^ 413extent of the territory convulsed, 414in Java, 1772,436in the Caucasus, 1772, 437in Java, 1771, 437in Colombia, 1766, 437in Chi, 1760, 437in the Adores, 1757, 438in Lisbon, 1755,438i-in St. Domingo, 1751,440^-— in Conception, 1750, 440in Peru, 1746,442in Kamtschatka, 1737, 443in Martinique, 1 727, 443in Iceland, 1725, 443in Tenerifie, 1706, 443in Java, 1699, 444in Quito 1698, 445in Sadly, 1693, 445in the moluccas, 1693, 445-^— in Jamaica, 1692, 445Earthquakes, Asia always subject to 10Egypt nearly exempt from, 10Strabo's theory of, 18, 34Hooke on the changes caused by, 34under the sea, Hooxe's opinion oLsimultaneous extent of, mentionedby Booke, 34-^— Lazzoro Moro on, 1740, 42■ Generelli's account of, 45- Michell on the cause and phenomenao( 50-originality of MicheU'stbepiyot 6QINDEX.Barili<iiiake8| Rupees theory of, 1763, 51BoscoYich on the e£bcts of, 1 772, 53■ Hutton's theory of, no adraiice onthatofHooke,63■ Hutton's theory of, compared toOenerelli'B, 64energy o^ probably inform aa regardsthe whole earth, 64■ force of, confined for ages to oneplace, 64their gradual operation in formerages, 88earth's surface continually remodelled,113-^— in the basin of the Mississippi in1812, 191all countries liable to slight shocksof, 324their effects, 399> deficiency of ancient accounts o^*« atmospheric phenomena attending,difficulty of measuring the effectsof, 416excavation of Valleys aided by, 433■ reflections on those of the nineteenthcentury, 409■ reflections on those of the last onehundred and forty years, 447, 473•— *- deficiency of historical records concerning,447renovating effects of, 474, 479 .uniformity of the action of, 460>■ opinions of the ancients concerning,^-^ and volcanos, their relation, 463cause of the wave-like motion of,and retreat of the sea during, 470EccheUensis, Abraham, 17Sdmouston island at the mouth of theGanges, 242Egypt hills of, known by the priests tocontain fossil shell, 7i— * nearly exempt from earthquakes,1 1, 323Egyptian theory of eternal succession ofevents, 156^— cosmogony, 9Elephant, fossil in India, (note) 8■ fossil, in ice on shores of the NorthSea, 54-^— fossil tusks of the, found at Puglia,-^— fossil of Italy, Targioni on the, 49Elephants covered with shaggy bur inthe Delhi territory, 99Elevation of land by earthquakes Hookeon the, 34^— V of continents, not by paroxysmalcrujitionsy 88EleraHon craters, Von Inches theory of*considered, 386of the coast of Chili, 402of the Bay of Conception, 441^ and subsidence, proportion of, 476-Elk, fossil, noticed by Generelli, 44Elsa, travertin formed by the, 201Embankment, system of in Italy, 184— noticed by Dante in the fourteenthcentury, 184—— gain of land in the Adriatic morerapid in consequence of, 236Engelhard, on the Caspian sea, 319England, Smith's map of, 70D'Aubuisson'seulogiumon Smith'smap of, 71-«»* waste of land on the east coast of, 266—encroachments of the sea on thesouth coast of, 278slight shocks of earthquakes felt in,Epomeo, Monte, structure, height, &c^28I of submarine origin, 329volcanic cones on, 329Equinoxes, procession of the, 110Eratosthenes, 18Eruptions, volcanic, number of per yearErsgebir^ mistake of Werner as to themica slate of the, 57Escher, M., on the flood in the valley ofBagnes, 195Essex inroads of the sea on the coast of,Estuary of the Thames both gains andknew land, 275Estuaries described, 265-^— new ones formed by the sea in Holland,289■ kept open by the combined influenceof tides and currents, 304-«-*- tide longer flowing down than upin some, 304-^— gain of land in, does not compensateloss of coaiBit, 304Examples, Voltaire's requires on the discoveryof Cbssil bones near, 66Etangs, or rait lakes in the delta of theRhone, 234Etna, Dolomieu on ancient lavas of, 59difference between the lavas of, andthose of submarine volcanos, 128lavas of, excavated by rivers, 177- quantity of lava poured out in 1669by, 248^'^ comparison between the lavas of,and the sediment of the Ganges.unusually active during the greatpause in the eruptions of Yesit-vis, 334Index.Btnsy its eonaimiieaM i&1444, 393■ laid to be an andent crater of elevation,394^— - iii hearty dreumfereDoe, fte, 361■ I divided by natura into three regions,361^— frequent deetruetioDa of its oone^»— minor volcanos on, 362■■ buried cones on the flanks of,•— — has been in activity from the earliesttimes, 363■ If^^^ eruption of 1669, 364•^— formation of Monti Rossi on, 364fissures on the sides of, 364• ■ towns and villages on, overflowedby the lava of 1669,365■ subterranean caverns on, 366■' eruptions of 1811 and 1819, 367■ I cones thrown up in 1819, 368great fl(K>ds caused by the meltingof snow on, 369■ glacier found under lava on, 369— manner of preserving snow on thehigher regions of, 370■Mm its appearance during Calabriannearthquake, 430Enganean His, ancient lavas o( 325Engulphing of houses, fte., during Cala-brianearthquake, 420Euphrates, Pliny on the gain of land atits mouth, 291Euxine burst its barrier, according toStrato, 18— gradually filling up, 18-"»* cliffs undermined by currents inthe, 294Evaporation, quantity of water carried offby, 23bExcavation of valleys, 431^» Hutton and De Luc's theory ofthe, 70Excessive dilates, description of, 106Extinct spedes, Hooke's remarks on,Underside, overwhelmed by the sea, 295Eyfel, 192Fabio Colonia, 27Fair Island, action of the sea on the sandstoneof, 263Falconii on the elevation of the coast ofthe Bay of Bai, 457Falloppio, his doctrine concerning organizedfossils, 25Fall of Niagara, 179of St. Mary, only outlet to LakeSuperior, 226Faiquharson, Rev. J., on the great floodsinScoUandinl829^174 |Fanja^ on th Vdnr and Vhmu^ 1 779|Fault in the tower of Teiranuora earnedby an fwirthiraakf, set woodcutNo. 20, 417Ferishta,7Fernay &c.,BiUcifiedby apringain Sft.Mii*caelia. 213Ferrara, his account of the lava poured.out from Etna in 1669, 248— his account of floods on Etna,*- on earthquake of 1790 in Sidls^Ferruginous springs, 214Fetlar, effect of lightning on the rocksof, 260Fes frequently suffers from earthquakes^Fife, coast o( submarine forests on the.-^— encroachments of the tea on tli»coast of, 265Findhoru, town of, swept away by thesea, 264Fissures, sulphur, &c, ejected by, in SUcily,4llI sulphureous vapours emitted by, inJava, 411-»— different elevation of the sides of,in Calabria, caused by earthgnafceof 1783, 416•*— near Polistena, caused by earthquake.Me woodcut No. 19, 417■ near Jerocame^ see woodcut 2%■ cause of the opening and doingo( 419^ dimensions of new ones in Calabria,421Fitton, Dr., on the Maastricht beds, 140Flamborough Head washed into caves bythe ocean, 266Fleming, Dr., on uniformity in climate,»— his remark on the food of the fossilelephant, 97■ on submarine forests in the estuariesof the Tay and Forti, 265,Flint, on the length of the course of theMississippi, 185— - on the population of the Mississippivallevi 189— on the earthquakes in the Mississippi valley, 408Floods, bursting of lakes, ftc., 192in North America, 193in the valley of Bagnes, 194in Scotland, August, 1829, 174 -at livoU, 196 .fNDBX.Floods on Etna, eaofed by mdtiDg ofNoir, 369Florence of Worcester, his ftcootintof astorm in Nov. 1099, 282Florin, his account of the Cimbrian Deluge,295FlnTiatile formations mentioned by Steno,Foal, advance of the delta of the Nilenear the city of, 238Folkestone subsidence of land at, 278Fontenelle, his eulogy on Palissy, 27Forbes, Mr., on the subsidences in theBay of Bailie, 455•— ^- on the temple of Serapis, 456Fbrfarshire, encroachments of the sea onthe coast of, 264Formosa, violent earthquakes in, 318Forsythi his description of the climate ofItaly, 360Fortis, on the Arabian doctrine of newgenera and species, 17i^-~ and Testa, their controversy onfossil fish of Monte Bolca, 52■ views of Arduino confirmed by, 58Fossa Grande on Vesuvius described, 395Fossil shells, attributed to a " plastic -— Lister's opinion of, 31— speculations concerning their nature, 29■ formerly all referred to the Deluge,■ plants of the coal strata, 102Fosnls, Brander's argument against, referringto the deluge, 52Fourier, Baron, on the temperature ofthe spaces surrounding our atmosphere,120on central heat, 141Fracastoro, his opinion concerning organicremains, 23France, art of mining how taught in, 55I its coast the constant prey of thewaves, 283villages of, washed away by the sea,French, their great progress in the studyof organic remains, 72Fresh-water formations of the Paris basin,Fresh-water and marine strata, alternationsof, described by Generelli, 44Freyberg, school of, 63Funeral, rise of the sea during earthquakeat, 439Game Tor, a volcano in Arabian gulf,Oaoges, delta of the, 240its ancient moatha^ 241Ganges, site and rate of advanced of iiidelta, 241inundations of the, 244-^— Rennell on the quantity of earthymatter in the waters of the, 247-^^- Rennell on the quantity of waterdischarged by the, 247^-^ and Burrampooter not yet completelyunited, 253I gratification of the deposits in itsdelta, 253Garachico, in Teneriffe, overwhelmed l^lava, 443Gardner, his account of the destructionof Dunwichbythesea, 272Gas, inflammable, escape of, 14Gases exhaled by volcanos, 469Gaulish Druids, 19Gemmellaro, his account of the enqttionof Etna in 1811,367^— his discovery of ice under lava, 370Generation, spontaneous, theory of, 26Generelli, his exposition of the state ofgeology in Europe in the middle of18th century, 43«<^— on organic remains, 44on vegetable productions found indifferent states of maturity, 44on fossil elephants, elks, &c., 44-^-~ on alternations of marine and freshwaterstrata, 44"— on grouping of marine animals instrata, 44teaches that fossils cannot be accountedfor by the deluge, 45•— »• his explanation of the imbeddingof marine animal in mountains,*- on the effects of earthquakes inrecent times, 45^ waste of land by running water describedby, 45^* his opinion that mountains couldnot be so great if their ruins werenot repaired, 45-^-^ his theory of primary rocks, 63his theory of earthquakes comparedto Button's, 64Geneva, lake of, men drowned aboveMartigny floated into the, 195-i— > gradually filling up, 221^. Sr. De la Beche on the delta ofthe Rhone in the, 221Geognosy of Werner, 55Geography, proofs of former changes inphysical, 125Geological evidence, its value depends onthe assumption of uniformity ofnature, 165Geological Society of London, solutionof, 71INDEX.Geological Bodeiv, good effeeU resultingfrom the foundation of the, 72Geological theories, causes of error in, 76Geology defined, 1compared to history, 1■ its relation to other physical sciences,2« distinct from cosmogony, 3-^— considered hy Werner as part ofmineralogy, 4causes of its retardation, 29, 67, 75state of, in Europe, before middleof last century, 44I applied to the art of mining byWerner, 55•*— remarks of Kirwan and De Luc, onthe connexion of, with religion, 68modem progress of, 73« practical advantages derived fromthe study of, 74Georgia, in the island of, perpetual snowto the level of the sea, 110Gerbanites, an Arabian sect, on extinctionof species, 17German Ocean gradually filling up, 306Germany, art of mining, how taught in,Geysers of Iceland, 213; iee woodcutNo. 32, 464«— • cause of their intermittent action,^— - supposed section of the subterraneanreservoir and pipe of one ofthe, tee woodcut No. 33, 466Giant Greco, fall of the cliffs on the seacoastnear, during earthquake of1783, 429Gibraltar, depth of the Mediterraneannear, 237Glacier discovered under lava on Etna,Glaciers of Spitsbergen, 109transportation of rocks by, 175Glen Tilt, granite veins o( discovered byButton, 62Gloucestershire, gain of land in, 283Go.d«j« doc«n, whence derived. 9,Goodwin Sands, 276Gorge, deep, said to occur in all elevationcraters, 390Gothland, Linnaeus on the increase ofland near, 228Graham, Mrs., on the earthquake of Chiliin 1822, 402Grampianss, Button's examination of the,Granite, disintegration of, in Auvergne,v-^ veins, Button's discovery gf, inGlen Tilt, 62Granite vein importance of their discovery,62of the Harte, Werner on the, 57Granitic rocks of Shetland, action of thesea on, tee woodcuts No. 9 and10, 262Granular rock deported by springs, 206Grecian archipelago, Raspe on the newisles of the, 52volcanos of the, 385—— ~ chart and section of, see woodenNo. 15,385Greenland, why colder than Lapland, 107— > sometimes shaken by earthquakes,Grimaldi, on the earthquake of 1783 illCalabria, 413— on the dimensions of the new fissuresand ravines in Calabria, 421-.^— on the effects of the Calabriann earthquakeon springs, 423Grind of the Navir, passage forced bythe sea in the Shetland islands, seewoodcut No. 8, 261Grouse, Dr., on the baths of San FSiippOjGrotto delle Cane, 216Guarapica river, new rock thrown up inthe, 437Guatemala, active volcanos in, 316Ouettard, on the Vivarais, 58Guiana, its maritime district formed brthe sediment of the Amason, 292Gulf stream, 108Scoresby*s remarks on the, 108its extent and velocity, 258Gunnel, Mr., on the loss of land in theIsle of Shei^>ey, 275Hall, Sir James, his experiments on rocks,62, 348, 472Hall, Captain, on the Falls of Niagara*-^— on the islands in the Mississippi,on drift wood of the Mississippi,188,245Hamilton, Sir W., on the thickness of themass covering Herculaneum, 352on the earthquakes 1 783 in Calabria,413I on the number of persons whoperished during the Calabriaearthquake, 430■ on the great landslip near Tki»»nova, 424on landslips near Mileto, 426on the earthquakes attending tfaaeruption of Monte Nuovo, 457Hampshire, Bender on the fossils of, 53Harlbucht, its bay formed in the Guicentury, ^9nn>EX.HJarfaoeker, on the quantity of sedimentin the waters of the Rhine, 246Harte, Werner on the granite of the, 57Har&n^Ra8hid,21Harwich, rapid decay of the cliffs at, 275•»— will probably soon become anisland, 275Heat, laws which flare the diffusionof, 105Hebe, Bishop, on the animals inhabitingthe Himalaya mountains, 99Heda, Banks and others on the columnarbasalt of, 59■ length of some of its eruptions, 371Helice and Burn, submerged beneath thesea by an earthquake, 323Heligolaad destroyed by the sea, 289Henderson, on the eruption of SkaptlurJokul in 1783, 372Herculaneum and Pompeii, silence ofcontemporary historians concerning,332> and Pompeii, how destroyed, 349— and Pompeii, reflections on theburied cities of, 359Herculaneum, thickness and compositionof the mass covering, 352•*— was a sea-port, 353-— — discovered accidentally, 353I its former dimensions not yetknown, 353but a slight part of open for inspection,353objects preserved in, 354stalactite formed in the galleriesof, 354>—— inscriptions on the temples at, 354-— > rolls of papyri, still legible, foundin, 356Herodotus, on the delta of the Nile, 238■ on the country round Memphis, 239on the forsworn of Egypt by theNile, 239I on the time which the Nile mightrequire to fill up the ArabianGulf, 239Hesse, Werner on the basalt of, 58Hibbert, Dr., on the drifting of rockmasses by the sea in Shetlandislands, 259^.— on the ebbed of lightning on therocks of Fetlar, 260•*^ his account of the Oriud of theNavir in Shetland, 261Hiera, new island in the Gulf of Santorn, 386Hillsides Ness, action of the sea on thefrantic rocks of, mv woodcut No.0,263Himalaya mountains, Bishop Ilcber onthe animals inhabiting the, 99Himalaya, height of perpetual snow onthe, 122Hindoo cosmogony, 5Hindostan subject to earthquakes, 324History and geology compared, 2Hoes on the changes in the level of theCaspian, 22his remarks on the persecution ofOmar, 22-^— on the formation of marble bysprings near Lake Urmia, 211on encroachments of the sea inNorth America, 291■ on the encroachments of the sita inthe Baltic, 294on earthquakes in Syria and Judea,Holbach, his theory, 1753, 41Holland, inroads of the sea in, 286^^ towns destroyed by the sea in, 287its coast probably more protectedonce, 290Holland, hypothesis of, 1753, 49Holm sand, account of, 271Homer, gain of land on the coast ofEgypt known to, 238«— on the distance of Pharos fromS^t,238Hooke, his ** Discourse of Earthquakes,"1688 to 1703, 31■ on local distribution of species, 32on extinct species, 32-«.» on duration of species, 33— contends that fossils are not '*luBUtnaturae," 33on modes of ratification, 33on simultaneous extent of earthquakes,34on the deluge, 35— on the elevation of the coast ofChi, 442— on the earthquake of Java in 1699,on the elevation of the coast of theBayofBais, 458Hooker, Dr., accounts of the eruption ofSkaptiir Jokul confirmed by, 372his view of the crater of the greateeyser, tee woodcut No. 32, 464Hordwell, loss of land at, 280Honiton, on JoruUo, account of, 378Horsfiel^ Dr., on earthquake of 1786in Java, 411^ his account of the eruption of in Java, 436Roxburgh, Capt., on icebergs in lowlatitudes, 111on the advance of the Gangeticdelta, 242Hunger, stratification of the warp of the.iNDtX.Number, encroachiiieiit of the im in tiestuary, 267Humboldt, Baron, on Indian rite afterthe earthquake of 1 766, 8*^— on the laws governing the distributionof plants, 101on the laws which regulate thediffusion of heat, 105on Isochronal lines, 106— on the distribution of ferns, 112on the irregular distribution of landand sea, 121.— — on the transportation of sedimentby currents, 310his theory of elevation craters considered,386■ on the eruption of Jorullo, 377■ his theory to account for the con*verity of the plain of Malpais, 377•«— his account of the earthquake ofCaraccas, 1812, 407on the earthquake in Quito in 1 797,on the earthquake in Cumana,— on the earthquake in the Caraccas,1790,410* his account of the Tolcanic eruptionin Tenerifie. 443Hungary, art of mining, how taught in,~- travertin of, 21 1Huntington, its diffs undermined, 267Hurst Castle shingle bank, 280Hutchins, his account of a landslip inDorsetshire, 281-Hutchinson, John, his "Moses's Principia,"1724, 39I ridicules Woodward's theory, 40objects to Newton's theory of gravitation,40Hntton, first to distinguish betweengeology and cosmology, 4m attempted to give fixed principlesto geology, 61- on igneous rocks, 61■ said geology was not concernedwith ** questions as to the originof things," 61on granite, 62^ represented oldest rocks as derivatives,63•»— his theory of earthquakes fell shortof that of Hooke, Moro, &c., 63alternate periods of disturbanceand repose required by the theoryof, 64■ his theory of earthquakes comparedto Generelli's, 64■ possessed but little knowledge oforganic remains, 64HuttOB, his fheoiTWilliams, 67-^— answers Kirwan, 69■ on the excavation of valleys, 70Huttonian theory, 60characteristic feature of tfaa, 63its defects, 63^— ^ causes which led to the violent factionagainst it, 65Hythe, encroachments of the sea at, 278Ion, animals imbedded in, 98— predominance of in the AntarcticCircle, 109■ ■ ■! Scoiesby on the quantity wluchfloats beneath the surface. 111~ on the formation of field, 119•«•*. transportation of rocks by means of,175, 299Icebergs, Dr. Richardson on the connexionof, 98- in the Mckenzie Rive, 98their enormous site in BaiBn*B Bay,distance to which they an floatedfrom the Poles, 111seen off the Cape of Good Hope,Captain Roxburgh on, in low latitudes111•— - Capta Scoresbyby on the weidbt ofearth, ftc, transported by, 1 liquantity of ice below the surfacein, 111leeUnd, geysers o^ 464silex deposited by the geysers of, 213- volcanic region of, 32l-—^ volcanic eruptions in, 371- eruption of Skaptiff Jokul in 1783,submarine eruption in, 372comparison between the lavas of,and those of central France, 373loss of lives, &c., by the eruptionof 1783 in, 374I new island thrown up off the coastof, in 1783, 391— elevation and subsidence in, 443Imperative, theory of 1590, 27Indian festival after the earthquake ofCumana, in 1766, 8Indus, subsidence in the channel of the1819, 406Ingleborough Hill, calcareous tufa depositedat, 21 1Inland seas, deltas of, 227Instinct, Mr. Dugald Stewart on the uniformityof in animals, 161Insular climates, description of, 106Invemesshire, inroads of the tea on tlwcoast o( 263IMDBX.loniaa Idea, earthquake in, 1820, 403new island thrown up near, 403IppoUto, Count, on the earthquake of1783 in Calabria, 413Iiawadi, liquefied wood ol noticed in1692, 33■ recent discoveries there of fossilanimals and Vegetable, 33■ supposed petrifying power of the,Ireland, great rise of the sea during Lisbonearthquake on the coast of, 439Ischia, recent fossils o^ 94• ■ silex in the hot springs o( 214early eruptions in, 327' ■ abandoned by the Greek on accountof the eruptions, 327^-— amount of its population, 328-i— eruption of 1032 in, 333Island, new, thrown up, in 1820, off theIonian Isles, 403^1 new one thrown up near Kamt-sehatkain 1806,408«- new one thrown up off the coast ofIcehindinl783,391Islands, new, Raspe on those in the GrecianArchipelago and the Azores,^- new, eighteen thrown up in theAdores m 1757, 438■ Pliny's enumeration of new, 20I character of the vegetation in small,I animals in, 129"^^ in the Mississippi, 186I formed by the sediment of theGanges, 242, 243Isle of Palma, description of, 388^— of Purbeck, line of vortical chalkin, 280— of Wight, rise of the tides at, 257> ' of Wight, continued action of thesea on its shores, 279Italian geologists, their priority, 28I geologists of the 18th century, 41■ geologists, reserve of the earlier,explained, 68Italy, extent of marine formations of,first jointed out by Vallisneri, 41■ organic remains of the south of,I 94— Forth's description of the climateof, 360Isonzo, delta of the, 236> its present mouth several miles tothe west of its ancient bed, 237■ conglomerate formed by the, 237Isothermal lines, Humboldt on, 106JabmCi new estuary near the mouth of theWeser; 289Jamaica, earthquakes A«quent in, 316- earthquake of 1692 in, 445•*^ buildings submerged without beingdestroyed, in the harbour of, 455Japan, village in Java, engulphed byearthquake, 411Jan Mayer's Island volcanic, 324Java, number of volcanos in, 318 ^earthquake of 1786 in, 411— rivulet swallowed up hy fiseuzee insI village engulphed in, 41*1I volcanic eruption and earthquakesin 1772, 436land raised by earthquake in, 437earthquake of 1699 in, 444Jesse, active volcanic vents in the islandof, 317Jones, Sir William, on antiquity ofMend's Institutes, 5Jorio, Andrea de, on flie Temple of Serapis,453Jorullo, eruption of, 316eruption of, in 1759, 376its height, &c., 377eruption of in 1819, 379-^— if thrown up in the sea would havebeen protected by its lava, 409Jura, Saussure on the, 54relative age of the, 138Jutland will probably become an island,■ terrific inundations in, 295Kaktschatka, seven active volcanos in,earthquakes in, 443— subsidences and elevations in, 443— ^ new island thrown up to the northof, 408Kill refutes Burnet's and Whistlestheories, 39Kent, loss of land on the coast of, 276Kerg^len*s land, land quadrupeds in, 129Simmering clay, 281Kincardineshire,' village in, washed awayby the sea, 264King, Capt., on the extent of coral reefiion the coast of Australia, 130Kirwan, his Geological Essays, 1 799, 68-^— on the connexion of geology andreligion, 68believed all rocks to be of aqueousorigin, 68-^— adduced the Mosaic writings toconfirm his opinions, 68— his remarks on the age of deltas,Ktfnig, Mr., on the fossils brought bvCapt. Any from MehiUe Island,xofindex:Konui, cosmogony of the, 22Fossa, his history of the Patriarchs andProphets, (note) 23Kurile IsIim, nine active volcanos in the,LACUSTRnfB formation, none yet discoveredof the carboniferous era,Lake Erie, rapid fining up of, 182■ of Geneva, delta of Rhone in the,Parentis filled up by the Nile, 239Superior, deltas of, 225>■ Superior, greatest depth and extent0^225^— ^ Superior, height of above the searSuperior, currents in, 226«— Superior, nature fits sediment, 226I Superior, analogy between its depositsand the marls, &c, of CentralFrance, 227I inundation caused by the burstingof a, in the valley of Bagnes, 194formed by subsidence in the Caracas,411-*— formed by the earthquake nearSeminary, 422Lakes, bursting of, 192filling up of, 223•*— formed by hardships in Calabria,■ formation of, in the basin of theMississippi, 190-— — fined by earthquakes in the valleyof the Mississippi, 408— number of new ones formed in Calabriaby earthquakes of 1 783, 427Lancashire, submarine forests on thecoast of, 283Lancerote, volcanic eruption in, 381villages overflowed by lava in, 381cattle in, suffocated by putrid vapours,381■ thirty new cones thrown up in, 382-^-^ recent eruption in the island of, 384Land, irregular distribution of, 121quantity of in northern and southeyhemispheres, 121^— animals, why rare in oldest strata,Vanguard Fort, waste of the point onwhich it stands, 274Landslips in Dorsetshire, 281near Mileto, holies carried down aravine, but uninjured, 426in Calabria, lakes formed by, 424at Fra Raymond, see woodcut No.26, 425^— in Jamaica during earthquake, 446Langsdorf, on the new island ihnivn xa^near Kamtschatka, 408Languedoc, Marsilli on the deronda ofthe coast o^ 235Laplace decides against change in thaearth's axis, 39■ on the mean depth of the Atlanticand Pacific Oceans, 115■ proved that no contraction of thaglobe had taken place for 2000years, 141Lapland, why milder than GreenUndyl 07Lapidifying juice, 25Latitude only one of the causes whichinfluence climate, 111Laoreana, ravines filled up with modduring earthquake of 1783 near,Lava, excavation of in Central Fraaee,.*<^— of Etna excavated by rivers, 177mineralogical composition of thatcut through by the Simeto, 1 78effects of decomposition on, 346flowing under water, 348Lavas, parallel between those of Icelandand Central France, 373— comparative volume of ardent andmodem, 374^— - pretended distinction between ancientand modem, 384Laxsoro Moro, tee MoroLehman, treatise of, 1759, 49-— divided mountains into three dashesLeibnitz, his Protogssa, 1680, 40imagined this planet to have beena burning luminous mass, 40^-— his theory of gradual refrigeration,• diluvial theory of, 40■ universal ocean of, waters howlowered, 40— his theory afterwards adopted byBuffon and De Luc, 40Leman Lake, delta of the Rhone in the,Lesbos, Antics joined to, by delta, 13Leybucht, its bay formed in thirteenthcentury, 289Lightning, remarkable effect of in theShetland islands, 260Lima destined by earthquake, 442Limestone, caverns how formed in, 21 1Lincolnshire, incursions of the sea on thecoast of, 267its coast protected by embankments,Linnaeus advocates Cebius*s theory, 40— his remark on the filling up of thatGulf of Bothnia, 228/INDEX.Lionnesse, tradition in Cornwall, 283Lipari, 19happy his account of the destruction ofHerculaneum and Pompeii, 351Gipsies, 15easier, the first to propose geologicalmaps, 31described fossil shells as turbinatedand bivalve stones, 3 1Lisbon, earthquakes at, 323earthquake of, 1755, 438subsidence of the quay at, 438area over which the earthquake of,extended, 439■ great wave caused by the earthquakeof, 439the shocks felt far out at sea, 439velocity of the shocks at, 440Lloyd, Mr., on the relative levels of theAtlantic and Pacific, 293Locked, on the gain of land on coast ofGuiana, 310Loch Lomond, agitation of its watersduring Lisbon earthquake, 440Locke, panegyrists Whiston's theory, 39Loffiredo, on the elevation of the recentdeposits in the Bay of Bais, 456London, height of the tides at, 257London clay, organic remains of the,100, 152Lontuc, river, in Chili, converted into alake by landslips 438Lough Neagh, supposed petrifying powerof, 214Louisiana, Darby on the marine strataof lower, 191Lowestoft*, small rise of the tides at, 257»— current off the coast of, 271-^— roads, their breadth and depth, 273Ness, description of, 272rise of the tides at, 272■ diffs undermined near, 272Lubeck, 229Luckipour, its inhabitants swept away bythe Ganges, 244new islands formed near, 243Luckput, subsidence in the channel ofthe Indus near, 406Lutea, rapid advance of the land at, inthe Gulf of Bothnia, 228Luzon, three active volcanos in, 318Lyme Regis, gradual decay of the liascliffii of, 282Macedonia always subject to earthquakes,Mackenzie river, formation of icebergson the shores of the, 98drift wood of the, 102. a calcareous formation near itsmouth, 127Vol. I.Macmurdo, Captain, on the earthquakeof Cutch in Bombay, 1819, 406Madagascar said to contain active Volcanos,324Madeira, earthquakes violent in, 324Maastricht, calcareous beds of, 139Dr. Fitton on the calcareous bedsof, 140Magdalena, fish destroyed by earthquakein the river, 401Magnesia, sulphate of, deposited byspring m Tuscany, 204Magnesian limestone and travertin compared,205Mahometan doctors opposed to cultivationof science, 21Mahomet, his cosmogony, 23Majoli, first taught that shelly strata wenraised by volcanic explosions,1597.26Mallet, Captain, on petroleum of Trinidad,218Malpaii, recent change of climate in theplain of, 124theories to account ibr the convexityof the plain of, 377, 387Malte-Brun, on the neat derived by thewestern jnrt of the old contentfrom Africa, 107^ on the comparative insignificanceof the height of mountains, 113Mammoth, on the climate, &c^ probablyrequired by the, 96■ bones of the, found in Yorkshire, 96Siberian, 97Dr. Fleming on the, 97Man, unfavourable position of, for observingchanges now in progress,~~ recent origin of, 153^^ his remains only found in the mostmodem strata, 153■ ■ remains of, not more perishablethan those of other animals, 154- remarks on the superiority o( 155analogy of changes caused by, tothose produced oy other animalsManette, 77Manfred, on the quantity of sediment inriver water, 246Mantel, Mr., on the fossils of the chalk,Manwantaras, oriental cycle of ages, 6Maracaybo, lake, subsidence of its watersduring earthquake, 407Marble deposited fi'om springs, 211Maritime Alps, conglomerates formingalong the base of the, 252Marsilli, on the arrangement of shells inthe Adriatic, 44, 472 KINDEX.Martini, on the deposits of the eoait ofLanguedoc, 235Mertigny, destruction of by floods, 195Martinique, subsidence of a hill in, 443Martins, his remark on the arborescentferns in Brasil, 101ICaftodon, &c., found in Subapenninehills, 151Materia pinus, hostile referred to, 25Matters, village of, swept away by thesea in one night, 264Rattan on fossils of Volterra, 42Mattioli, ]us hypothesis as to the natureof organic remains, 25Mediterranean said to have bunt throughthe columns of Hercules, 18■ Soldanii on the microscopic testaceousthe, 52~— organic remains of living speciesfound in the islands of the, 93«-^ lat depth of the, 237, 298its depth near the delta of the Nile,■ rise of the tides in the, 257*— Dr. Wollaston's analysts of itswaters, 296*— * remarks on the deposition of saltin the, 297»— - permanency of the level of the, 452Melville Island, tropical character of thefossils of, 101Mend's institutes, 5astronomical theories in, 6Mephitic vapours emitted by 'volcanoesduring eruptions, 329■ cattle in Lancerote and Quitokilled by, 329birds killed by, on Vesuvius, 330Mercator on organic remains, 26Mer de glace, 98Mese, formerly an island, now far inland,Messina, ebb and flow in the Straits of,^^ its shore rent by earthquake, 418.» « subsidence of the quay at, 416■ fall of the cliflb near, during Cala-brianearthquake, 429Mesua Collins described by PompousMela, 233Method in Messina, volcanic eruptionin, 323Metshuka, hill of, in part swallowed upby earthquake, 437Meuse, valley of the, 171river, 287Mexico, excavation of valleys in, 176tides in the Gulf of, 245•— — volcanic chain extending through,•— - active volcanos io, 316Michell, on the cause and phenomena ofearthquakes, 1760, 50originate of his views, 50— on the horizontally of strata inlow countries, 50■ on their fractured state near mountainchains, 50■ on the geology of Yorkshire, 50■ his writings me from physico^heo-logical speculations, 50on the origin of mineral springs,on the earthquake at Lisbon, 3S9,■ on the connexion between the stateof the atmosphere and earthquakes,462on the expansive force of steam,— on the cause of the wave-like motionof earthquakes, 470- on the cause of the retreat of thesea during earthquakes, 471Mileto, subsidence of houses near, tenementsnot destroyed, 486Milford Haven, rise of tides at, 257Millennium, 24Burnet's account of the, 38Milo, island, active solfatara in, 323Mindanao in eruption, 1784, 318Mineral composition of lavas, 396Mineral waters, their connexion with volcanicphenomena, 199ingredients most common in, 199Mining,, geology applied to the art of, byWerner, 55*«— art of, how taught in Eng^d,France, ftc., 55Mississippi, basin of the, 185length of its course, depth, andvelocity, 185sise of its alluvial plain, 185its surface, not increased by thejunction of other rivers, 185— its course slowly progressing eastwards,186■ immense curves in Its eouxie frequentlycut through, 186at a time swept away by,islands in the, 187drift wood of the, 245earthquakes in the valley of the,191,316,407new lakes and islands in the valleyof the, caused by earthquakes^intermediate character of its data,stratification of the deposita in itsdelta, 253IKSEX.Missouri, its junction with the Mississippi,185Modem progress of Geology, 73Molino delle Haldane, ravelin, 201Moluccas, volcanic eruption in the, 445Compilers, overflowed by lava, 366« articles preserved under the lavain, 366Monfidcone, baths of, on an island in thetime of the Romans, 237Mont Blanc, mer de glace on, 98Monte Barbaro, description of, «e(f woodcutNo. 12,336*- Bolca, controversy on the fossilfish of, 52■ Bernardo on Etna, its height, &c,362NuciUaonEtna^ almost submerged,-— Nuovo, account of the formationof, see woodcut No. 11, 335—i— Nuovo, coast of the Bay of Baiaeelevated during the edition of,Nuovo, height, depth of crater, &c.,■ Nuovo, elevation of the coast near,mentioned by Hooke, 34-^— Peregrine, perforated by shells, 2311 Peluso, its height diminished bylava<uiTent of 1444, 363» Rotaro, of recent aspect 327■ Rotaro, like volcanos in Auvergne,-^^ Somma, M. Necker, on the structureof, 394^— Somma, M. Necker's views on,confirmed by Mr. Scrope, 394■ I Somma, its formation analogous tothat of Vesuvius, 394Vice, siliceous incrustations of, 214Monticello and Covelli, on Vesuvianminerals, 347Monti Rossi, formed in 1669, tee woodcutNo. 14, 364Montlosier, on the volcanos of Auvergne,1788, 60Montpelier, cannon imbedded in crystallinerock, in the museum at, 234Montrose, no delta formed by the riversin the bar of, 264Morea, cities submerged in the 323MorOyLaziaro, on earthquakes, 1740, 42■ accounts for geological phenomenaby earthquakes, 42■ his description of the new islandwhich rose in 1707, in the Mediterranean,42■■ ridicules theories then in vogueconcerning organic remains, 42m faults and dislocations describedby, in proof of his theory, 43Moro, Lazar, objects to the theories ofBurnet and Woodward, 43— adapts his theory to the Mosaicaccount of the creation, 43-» on the formation of the secondarydata, 43»-— taught that the sea acquired itssaltness from volcanic exhalations,43-^— not acquainted with the writings ofHooke and Ray, 42derived aii stratified rocks tramvolcanic ejections, 46— his theory of primary rocks, 63Morocco, village in, and ten thousandpeople swallowed up in 1 755, 439-^— earthquakes at, 323Moselle, sinuosities of the river, 171Moses Principia of Hutchinson, 40Mountain^hains, on the elevation of, 79Mountain or transition limestone, greatextent of, 127foundation near the mouth of theMackenzie, 127^ fossil saurian found in, 129, 148Mud eruption from T^guragua in Quito,1797, 410Mnrchison, Mr., on the tertiary depositsof the Salzburg Alps, 136■ on schists of Caithness, 148on the Lomb du Cental, 395Murcia in Spain, earthquake of 1829, 400Murrayshire, town swept away by thesea, 264Muschelkalkstein, 133Mundane egg of Egyptian cosmogony, 1 1^ ridiculed by Aristophanes, 12Nasus, history of the volcanic districtround, 326«-^~ Royal Academy of, their accountof the earthquake of 1783, 413Natchitoches lake, 190Nature, uniformity of the order of. 85,105,164,311,337Necker, M., on Mouth Somma, 394Needles, Isle of Wight, composed ofchalk, 280Neptune, temple of, under water in theBay of Bais, 454Neptunists and Vidcanists, rival factionsof, 60Newhaven, its cliffs undermined, 278New Holland, proportion of ferns to otherplants in, 123New Kameni, account of the foundationfin 1707, 386-^— covered with living shells whenfirst thrown up, 393New Madrid shaken by earthquakes1811,4082K2INDEX.Newhaven, arsenal and dock overflowedby the sea, 265New York, excessive climate of, 107New Zealand has no indigenous landquadrupeds, 129Niagara, excavation caused by the recedingcataract of, 89falls 0^179Capt. Hall on, 180■ Mr. Bakewell, Jun. on, 181width, &c. of the falls of, 180■ their gradual recession, 181probably once at Queenstown, 181probable time which they will requireto reach Lake Erie, 181Nicaragua, volcanos in, 316Nice, depth of the Mediterranean near,237, 252- tertiary conglomerate of, 238Nicobar destroyed by earthquake, 364Niebuhr cited, 74Nile, delta of the, 238■ its delta modified since the time ofHomer, 238— its ancient mouths, 238Ripon, great number of volcanos in, 318Norfolk, waste of the cliffs of, 267■■ ancient villages washed away in, 269■ gain of land on its coast, 270Norte, transportation of sediment by theriver, 310North America, animals imbedded in iceand snow in, 98Northmavine, blocks of stone drifted bythe sea, aee woodcut No. 7, 260Northstrand, account of its destructionby the sea, 290Northumberland, dicotyledonous woodfound in the coal-field o^ 147^ land destroyed by the sea in, 266Notre Dame des Ports, formerly a harbour,now a league from theshore, 233Norway free from earthquakes, 232Norwich once situated on an arm of thesea, 269Nugent, Dr., on the Pitch Lake of Trinidad,218Nymphs, temple of, under water in theBayofBaisB, 454Nye, a new island formed in 1783, 372•Obsbqusnb, his account of an eruptionin Ischia, 92 B.C., supposed erroneous,334Obsidian, regarded by Peruvians as ofaqueous origin, 60Ocean, permanency of the level of the, 459Oceanic deltas, 240Qdoardi, on the distinct ages of the Apennineand Subapennine strata, 51Ogvgian deluge, 320, 332Ohio, junction of with the Mississippi, 185Old red sandstone, scales of fish foundin the, 148Oui considered fossil remains as sportsnature, 1552,26on the distribution of sediment inthe Adriatic, 237Omar, persecuted for his work on the<< Retreat of the Sea," 21Oolitic series, remains of cetacea in the,Opossum, remains of an, found in theStonesfield site, 150Oppido, the central point of the Cala-brianearthquake, 415, 420■'•'■ houses unsullied in, 420chasm in a hill near, see woodcutNo. 23, 420Orcia, river, 203Organic life, effect of changes in landand sea on, 1 13Organic remains, controversy as to thereal nature of, 23marine, referred by some to theMosaic deluge, 23-— theory of Majoli concerning, 1597,■ not referable to the deluge accordingto Palissy, 1580, 26Moro on, 42•— Generelli on, 44— * progress of the French in the study0^72-— — importance of the study of, 72■ contemporary origin of rocks provedby, 72-— — growing importance of the studyof, 73^— unity of the system in distanteras proved by, 73from the lias to the chalk, inclusive,133abrupt transition from those ofthe secondary to those of thetertiary rocks, 139of the oldest strata, 147Orinoco, subsidence of a small island tathe, 437Orkney Islands, promontory of Santacut off by the sea, 263Orpheus, on the duration of the AnnusMagnus, 9Orwell river has shifted its course veryrecently, 274Otranto, fossils of, 94Ovid, his account of the Pythagoreansystem, 12Outcome, village of, in great part destroyedby the sea, 266— rate of encroachment at, 266INDEX.Oxygen, its action on rocks, 169Pacific ocean, La Place ten (he meandepth of the, 115i^— shelly limestone noir forming inthe south, 130its mean height above the Atlanticavast theatre of igneous action,Padua, Arduino on the mountains of, 49Psstum, formation of limestone near,Pakefield, waste of the cliffii at, 272village nearly swept away, 272Palermo, rocks in the bay perforated byshells, 231its outline not changed in last twothousand years, 23 iPalestine shaken by earthquakes, 321Paley, Dr., on the uniformity of the planof nature, 159Palissy, first French writer who assertedthe true nature of organic remains,Pallid, on the mountain<chains of Siberia,54on the former greater extent of theCaspian Sea, o4on the fossil bones of Siberia, 54fossil rhinoceros found entire by,■-^— on the calcareous springs of theCaucasus, 210■ on the action of parents in theEuxine, 294on the former union of the Caspianand Azof Seas, 320• on the new island in the Sea ofAiof, 321Palma, geological description of the isleof, 388view of the isle of, and of the Caldera,tee woodcut No. 16, 388Panama, rise of the tides in the Bay of,Papandayang, volcanic eruption of, 436^— its cone truncated, 437Papa Stour, Shetland, waste of the graniticrocks of, 263Paradise, Burnet on the seat of, 38Papyrus rolls still legible discovered inHerculaneum, 356— importance of their discovery entirelyoverlooked, 357Paris Basin, alternation of marine andfreshwater beds of the, first noticedbySoldani,52-— freshwater formations of the, 99»^~ M. Deshayes on the fossil shells ofthe, 100Paris Basin, organic remains of the, 151number of shells found in the, 151Parma, recent organic remains at, 94marshes and lakes filled up near,thickness of the tertiary marlsnear, 237Parrot, on the Caspian sea, 319Parry, Captain, highest northern latitudereached by, 109Pass ManzaneUi, waterfalls in the lavaof, 178Paste, three volcanos in, 316Patriots dialogues, 41Pedamentina, description of the, 343Pelagian formations, their internal arrangement,310Pembrokeshire, tradition of great lossof land in, 283Pennant, on the encroachments of thesea on the Yorkshire coast, 266,267Penzance, loss of land near, 282Perforating shells, 231Persian Magi on the deluge, 22Derbyshire, scales of fish in the old redsandstone of, 148Peru, only one volcano yet known in, 315subject to earthquakes, 315earthquake of 1746 in, 442- volcanos in eruption at the sametime in, 442Petroleum springs in Sicily, 218on the Irawadi, 218Pharos joined to Egypt by delta of Nile,■ formerly an island, 238— Homer on its distance from Egypt,Strabo's remark on Homes accountof the isle of, 238Phillips, Mr., on the rapid decay of theYorkshire coast, 266Phlegrean fields, volcanos of, see woodcutNo. 12, 336Physical Geography, proofs of formerchanges in, 125Physico-theological systems ridiculed bythe Italians, 4 1Pichinco volcano, 315Pietro Mala, escape of inflammable gasat, 14Pignataro, on the earthquake of Calabriain 1783, 413Pitch Lake of Trinidad, Dr. Nugent onthe, 218Pitea, gain of land at, in the Gulf ofBothnia, 228Pius VII., edict against Galileo and theCopernican system, repealed by,Plants, fossil, of the coal strata, lOQFlints Baron Humboldt onifatUwi so-geminithe distribution ot, 101Plastic force, fossil shells ascribed top 23Plastic vise, theory of 77Plastic clay, destitute of mammiferousremains, 152PlaiO| remarks on Egyptian cosmogonyin the * Sinuous' of, 9PUyfidr, on theHuttonian Theory, 65, 69I on extinction of species, 86^— on the instability of the earth'ssurface, 197Pliny the elder, 20on the delta of the Rhone, 232■ his account of the islands at themouth of the Texel, 288■ on the gain of land at the mouthsof the Tigris and Euphrates, 290■ his wonder that a day should passwithout general conflagration, 470-i— killed by eruption of VesuviusA.D. 79, 331Pliny the younger his account of theeruption of Vesuvius in the year79, 331■ does not mention the overwhelmingof Herculaneum and Pompeii, 331Plomb du Cantal, description of the, 395Plo organic remains ascribed to aplastic virtue,' by, 31Pluche, theory of; 1732, 41Plutarch, 9Po, river, frequent shifting of its ooufae,■ embankment of the, 184-^— its surface above the houses ofFerrara, 184delta of the, 235m^^ and Adige, their upon not yetcomplete, 253foiai del Ordo enlarged by earthquakes,Polistena, fissures caused by earthquakenear, see woodcut No. 19, 4l7■ circular subsidence near, tee woodcutNo. 25, 422«— part of the town o( detached intoa contiguous ravine, by landslips,Pompeii, how destroyed, 349■ section of the mass enveloping, 350i—^ depth to which the ashes of theeruption of 1822 covered, 350•^— has not been overflowed by lava, 352-^— was a sea port, 353- on»lburth now excavated, 354number of skeletons found in, 364**— objects preserved in, 354-r— rolls of papyrus illegible in, 356Pompous Mela, his description of Mese,Pomponiofl Bfida, on tbt origin of Lak*Flevo, 288Pontus, his account of the eniptimi inIschia, 333Pont Leoeano, quarries of travertin at,Pont Gibaud, g^etas rocks decomposedby carbonic acid, 216— calcareous springs near, 201Poole Bay cut deeply into by the waves,Popayau, volcanos in, 316-^— shaken during earthquake of Bogota,1827, 401Port au Prince destroyed by earthquakein 1751, 440Portland, Hooke's remarks on the fossilammonites of, 33— its peninsula continually wastes, 28 1Port Royal, subsidence of the houses,&c., 446Portugal, frequent earthquakes in, 323^ &e mountains ole shattered by earthquakeo^ 1755, 438Port Valais ancient town in the delta ofthe Rhone, 221Po Vecchio, a deserted channel of thePo, 183Provost, M., on the gypseous sidings ofBaden, near Vienna, 212Richard, Dr., on the cosmogony of theEgyptians, 9'— — on the Egyptian theory of eternalsuccession, 156Priory of Grail, its last remains sweptaway by the waves, 265Procida, remarks ancient writers on,327Progressive development of organic life,theory of, 144Promontories, their efibct in protectinglow shores, 264Psalmody, formerly an island, 233PugUa, fosBU elephant found at, 25Purbeck, its peninsula continually wasting,281Purchas, on the elevation of the coast ofChi, 442Pussuoli, Temple of Serapis near, 449■ groined plan of the environs o^tee woodcut No. 30, 450■ sections on the shore to the northof, 451date of the re-elevation of the coastof, 457-^-« rate of the encroachment of thesea near, 458Pyrenees, their relative age, height, ftc-« M. Boue on the strata of the, 138M. Dufrenoy on the relative agtofthoy 138IMDBX.008.FjnrenMt/M. Eii« de Beaumont on therelative age of the, 138Pythagoras, on Etna, 313Pythagorean system, 12QuADRinnANOcs mammals not found fossil,152Quebec, excessive climate o^ 107Quern destroyed by earthquake, 1797,Quilotoa, Lake, cattle killed by suffocatingvapours from, 410Quintero elevated by earthquake of 1 822,to the height of four feet, 402Quirini, theory of, 30Quito, earthquake o^ 1797, 410—— extent of the district convulsed, 410•^— earthquake, 1698, 445Raft, the, an immense mass of drifttimber in the Mississippi, 187Raffles, Sir S., his account of the eruptionin Sumbawa, 1815, 404Ramaszini ridicules Burnet's theory, 41Raspe on islands shifting their position(note), 14his theory, 1763, 51■ on earthquakes, 51• on the systems of Hooke, Ray,More, Buffon and others, 51— on the former heat of the climateof Europe, 52<— — on new islands raised within thetime of history among the Azores,ftc., 52*— • his admiration of Hooke's writings,52— on the basalt of Hesse, 58^-— on the elevation of the coast ofChili, 442Ravenna mannerly a sea-port, now fourmiles inland, 236Ravines, size of those formed by Gala-brianearthquake m 1783, 421in Calabria filled up with mud duringearthquake of 1783, 427Ray, his physico-theology 35— on earthquakes, 35-^— on the erects of running water, 36on the encroachment of the seaupon the shores, 36■ on the consuming of the world byfire, 36— his remarks on Woodward's diluvialtheory, 37on the encroachment of the sea atDunwich, 273Recreation of species after catastrophestaught by the ancients, 17■ taught by the Gerbanites, an Arabiansect, 17Recover cliff, encroachment of the seaOD, 275Recupero, his account of the advance ofa lava current, 366Red River, formation of new lakes by the,• and Mississippi, their junction probablyvery recent, 252Refrigeration, Leibnitz's theory of, 40Rennell, Major, on the delta of the 6an<ages, 241— — on the new islands formed by theGanges, 243^ on the quantity of water dischargedby the Ganges per second, 247on the proportion of sediment in it!waters, 247-— ^ on the causes of currents, 258his description of the wave calledthe Bore, 292•^— on the drift sand at the mouth ofthe Nile, 300Renovation and destruction of the world,an oriental dogma, 9Reproductive effects of running water,Resina overflowed by lava, 338Rhine, description of its course, 285— inroads of the sea upon its delta, 286size of its present delta, 286Rhinoceros fossil, found entire by Pallidin Siberia, 54Rhone, delta of the, in the Mediterranean.marine and freshwater shells in itsdelta, 234•— — • delta of the, in the Lake of Geneva,^^ debris deposited at its confluencewith the Arve, ««e diagram No. 6.Ricdoli, Signer, on the formation of agranular kind of travertin, 206Richardson, Dr., on imbedding of animalsin snow, 98■ on the formation of icebergs, 98■ on a calcareous formation near theMackenzie river, 127Riobamba destroyed by earthquake 410Rivers, difference in the sediment transportedby, 90• sinuosities of,'Me diagram No. 2, 1 70'^—' two equal, when they become confluentdo not occupy bed of doublesurface, 173Rocks, first divided into primary, secondary,and tertiary, by Arduino, 49-^— Kirwan on the aqueous origin ofaU, 68i^— hardest, rendered fit for soils bjoxygen of the atmosphere, 169INDEX.Rocks) ipeci^c gravity of, compared towater, 172effect of caiHwnic acid on, 217Roman road between Aix and Nismes,roads under water in the Bay ofBaiae, 454Rome principally btiilt of travertin, 20SRomney marsh, land gained from thesea, 278Bronchi, old Roman bride of, foundburied in fluviatile silt, 237Ross, Captain, on icebergs in BafiBii'sBay, 109Rostock, 229Rotaro, Monte, of recent aspect, 327structure of, 328Other, river, ancient vessel found in itsold bed, 278Runnn, river in Bombay, subsidence of itschannel, 406Rye formerly destroyed by the sea, 278Sabine, Captain, on the distance to whichthe waters of the A mason discolourthe sea, 292^^— on the velocity of the current crossingthe mouth of the Amason,Sabina, island of, 409Sacoo, flood on the river, 193Salamanca, university of, 69Salt, remarks on its deposition in theMediterranean, 297Salt springs, in Sicily, 215— in Cheshire, 215in Auvergne, 215in Ana, 22Samothracian deluge, 320Sand, estuaries blotted up by blown,■ cones of, thrown up during Cala-brianearthquake, 428■ blown, estuaries silted up hy inHampshire, &c., 300Santa, its promontory cut off by the sea,Sandown Bay, excavated by the sea, 280Sands of the Libyan desert, 301Sandstone, old red, sides of fish foundin the, 148Sandwich laud, perpetual snow in, downto the level of the sea beach, 1 10San Filippo, travertin formed by thewaters of the baths of, 203■ medallions formed by the travertinat, 204Santa Maura, earthquake in, 403Santorin, geological structure of, 385■ chart and section of, tee woodcutNo. 15,385Santorin, new islands in the gulf ole 386depth of the sea near, 386San Vignone, travertin of, 202Saracens, learning of the, 21Saussure on the Alps and Jura, 54Saxony, errors of Werner in the geologyof, 57■ Werner on the basalts of, 58Scandinavia represented as an island bythe ancients, 227ScarpelUni, Professor at Rome, 69*Chercher, account of his theory, 1708,on the remodelling of the earth atthe deluge, 40Scheveningen, waste of the cliff ot, 2S7Scilla on the nature of organic remains,1670, 29fall of the cliffs from the rock of,^— irruption of the sea on the rock o^Scoresbyby, Captain, on the Gulf stream,^— on the quantity of ice which floatsbelow surface, I IIon the formation of field ice, 119 -Scotland, highest mountains not coveredby perpetual snow in, 1 1 1great floods in, August, 1829, 174waste of the East coast of, 263slight earthquakes felt in, 325gppeat thickness of alluvions in, 433Scrope, Mr. O. P., on the excavation ofvalleys, 171^~ his account of the eruption of Vesuviusin 1 822, 340his account of the formation ofthe politic glories at Pompeii,-^— on the eruption of Etna in 1811,^^— his account of the advance of thelavaof 1819, 368■ on the cause of the convexity of theplain of Malpais, 377on Monte Somma, 394•-^— on the columnar basalts of Vesuvius,346-~^ on the eruption of the Solfatara, 346Scylax, Canopus an island in the time of,Sea does not change its level but land, 18>— said to diminish by Omar the Arabian,21-^— encroachment of noticed by Ray, 36Moro on the manner in which itacquired its saltness, 43-^— its influence on climate, 111^— immense quantity of calcareous matterconveyed to th 211INDEX.Sea, its encroachment on the Shetlandisles, 259on the E. coast of Scotland,on the £. coast of England,on the S. coast of England,on the W. coast of England,•^— great rise of at Sumbawa duringeruption, 404earthquake of Lisbon felt at, 439great rise of, during Lisbon earthquake,439cause of its retreat during earthquakes,471Seaford, its shingle bank swept awayand town inundated, 279Sea-ports, changes of level best seen in,Secondary strata, Moro on the formationof, 43time required for the formationof, 87inference as to climate fromthe fossils of the, 100organic remains of the, 150Sedgwick, Professor, on the tertiarydeposits of the Salzburg Alps,-^— ■ on the Caithness schists, 148on the Magnesian limestone,Sediment, its distribution in the Adriatic,■^-^ in river water, 246•^-^ quantity of, in the Yellow river, 246Reunell on the quantity of, in theOanges, 247■ of the Ganges compared to thelavas of Etna, 248Seminary, new lake formed by earthquakenear, 422landslips near, 426Sena, wood lapidified by the, 201Seneca on a future delu^, 17Serapis, temple of (see frontispiece), 449g^und plan of the environs ofthe, tee woodcut No. 30, 450Corelli, Signer, on the, 453perforation of the columns ofthe, 453■ date of its re-elevation, 456Severn, rise of the tides in the estuary ofthe, 257gain of laud on the borders of itsestuary, 283Shakspeare, cited, 149Shakspeare's cliff decays rapidly, 276Shales, bituminous, 219Sheppey, isle of, organic remains of the,rapid decay of the cliffs, 275Sherrineham, chalk cUffs undermined bythe sea, 268rate of encroachment at, 268Shetland Islands, action of the sea on the,rock masses drifted by the seain, 259effect of lightning on rocks inthe, 260pas sage forced by the sea inthe, 261^> — ^> action of the sea on the graniticrocks of, aee woodcuts No. 9and 10, 262Siberia, Pallas on the mountains of, 54Pallas on the fossil bones of, 54Rhinoceros found by Pallas entirein the frozen soil o{ 54Siberian Mammoths, 97Sicily, title deeds of monasteries in, referto destruction of world, 24organic remains of existing speciesfound in, 94- change of submarine lavas of, intoamygdaloids, 128earthquake of, 1 790, 411great subsidence in, 41 1■ sulphur, petroleum, &c. emitted byfigures in, 411earthquakes in, 1693, 445.100,000 people killed in, 445and Syria, alternations of earthquakesin, 322Sidon, its ancient site two miles from thesea, 308Sienese territory, Baldassari on the groupingof organic remains in the marlsof the, 47Sienna, fossil shells of, 94Silex, deposited by the Geysers of Iceland,213— deposited by the housings ofIschia, 214^ deposited by springs in St.Bfichael's,piles of lVajan*s bridge convertedinto, 214Siliceous springs of the Azores, 212Signification of Plants in St. Michael, 213Silla, subsidence of the mountain, 407Simeto,lava excavated by the, see diagramNo. 3, 178Sindree, subsidence of the fort and villageof, houses not thrown down, 406Skapta, river, its channel filled by lava,SkaptSir Jokul, eruption of in 1783, 372volume of the lava-current of, 373INDEX.SlMwiek, WMta of the coast of, 289S. lao on Etna, great fissures in theplain of, 364Sloane, Sir Hans, on earthquake of 1692in Jamaica, 446S. Ludo, torrents of mud caused byearthquake near, 427Smeaton, on the effect of winds on thesurface of water, 257Smith, agreement of hii system withWerner's, 58■ his 'Tabular view of the Britishstrata,* ] 790, 70<— his Map of England, 70-^— priority of his arrangement, 71■ ■ adopted provincial names in hisclassification, 71Smyrna, volcanic country round, 322Smyth, Capt on the permanency of thelevel of the Mediterranean, 452on the height of Etna, 361•^— on the depth of the Mediterraneanopposite the mouth of the Rhone,^- on the temperature of the Mediterranean(note), 53Snow, height of perpetual in the Andes,perpetual, height of in Himalayamountains, 122Sodom, catastrophe of mentioned byHooke, 34Solander on basalt of Heda, 58Soldanii, theory of, 1780, 52■I on microscopic testacea of Mediterranean,52■ alternation of marine and freshwaterbeds of Paris basin, first noticedb^,52Solent, its channel becoming broader,Self tara, lake of the, carbonic acid in itswaters, 207-— a half-extinguished volcano, seewoodcut No. 12, p. 336, 330— « tradition of an eruption from the,effects of the exhalations on itsstructure, 346— the temple of Senq>is probably submergedduring the eruption ofthe, 456Solon on submersion of Islands Atlantis,Somersetshire, land gained in, 283Somma, great numb* of dikes in, 345Sorbonne, Buffon's * Declaration' madeto the college of the, 48Sore, volcanic eruption in the island of,Dorian, great fissures near, 416SoriAno, change of relative level a^ 416■ levelled to the ground by earth*quakesin 1783, 425landslips near, see wooden No.26,425South Carolina, earthquake of, 1811, 407South Downs, waste of the plastic dayon the, 279South Sea Islands, pro po r ti on of ferns tophanerog^amic plants in, 123Spada, his theory of marine remain1737, 42Spain, earthquakes in the southron pastof, 323Spallanzani, on analogy of deposits ofancient and modem seas, 53Spanish lake, 190Spades, re-creation of alluded to bySeneca, 17Spheroidal structure of the travertin ofSan Filippo, 204travertin of Tivoli, 208Spina, andent dty in the data of thePo, 236Spitsbergen, animals inhabiting, 98glades of, 109Springs, Vallisneri on the origin of, 41-« matter introduced into lakes andseas by, 90transporting power of, 198■ mineral ingredients in, 198mineral, most abundant in volcanicregions, 199temperature of, altered by earthquakes,199■ Michell, on the origin of mineral.— geographical disdibutiQa o^ 200^« calcareous, rise through all rockformations, 200^ depicting sulphate of magnesia•^— calcareous between theBlack Seas, 211ferruginous, 214brine, 215waters of, affected by earthqoakfttin Cambria, 423Spontaneous generation, theory of, 26Spurn Point, its rapid decay, 266• will in time become an island, 267Stable, objects preserved in the burieddty of, 358St. Andrew's, land swept away bytlMsea, 265Start Island, separated from Santa bythe sea, 263Staunton, Sir George, on the quantityof sediment in the Yellow river, 246*- his remarks on the time requiredto fil up the Yellow sea, 246INDEX.Bi Coming subsidence of the eoait of, |dunoff earthquake, 440Steele, on Burnet's theory, 38Stelluti, his theory of organic remains,Steno, his theory, 1669, 27«— foaejl Bells compared with theirrecent analogues by, 28«— - dissected a bark to compare withf088U,28-»— his awe of popular prejudices, 28Stephenson, his account of the eruptionof 1783 inlceUnd, 372Steppes, Russian, geology of the, 3208t.£ubal's in Portugal, engulphed byearthquake, 439Stevenson, Mr., his account of drift-stonesthrown on the Bell Rock, 265-— on the depth of the German ocean,-— on the bed of the German ocean,Stewart, Duffsld, on the Egyptian theoriesof eternal succession, 156— on the uniformity of animal in-sUnct, 161St. Helena, height of the tides at, 257Si. Ago greatly injured by earthquakein 1822, 401St. Madras houses and men destroyedby earthquakes in 1783, in theisland of, 414St. Michael, siliceous springs o( 212St. Michael's Mount, tradition of inroadsoftheseaat,283Stonesfield, opossum of, 103Storm of November, 1824, effect of, 279,280, 282Stour and Avon, cliffs at their mouth constantlyundermined, 280Strabo, his theory of elevation by earthquakes,18his description of the delta of theRhone, 232his remark on Homer's accountof Pharos, 238—— on a volcanic eruption in Messina,-^— his account of the formation of thel8]eofProcida,327■ on an eruption in Ischia, 327Straits of Dover, Desmarest on the fonn»-tion of, 277their depth, 277Straits of Staveren formed in the 13thcenter, 277, 288Straits of Gibraltar, description of thecurrents in the, 296-— supposed under-current in the,•— - ore becoming wider, 299Straits of Pnusis, tide of the Amason stillsensible at the, 291Stralsond, 229Strata formed by currents in the Mediterranean,308Stratification of new deposits in deltas, 253^— of debris deposited by currents, seediagram No. 6, 254-^— of submarine volcanic products, 390Strato, hypothesis of, 18Stromboh, its appearance during Cala-brianearthquakes, 430St. Sebastian, overflowed by volcanicalluvions, 349St. Vincent's, volcanic eruption in, 407Sub^wnnine shells, arranged in familleas in the bed of the Adriatic, 47'■ ■■ proportion of living species amongthe, 94better known than those existing inseas of northern regbns, 151Subapenuine strata, mammiferous remainsof the, 151-»— Baldassari on the, 51Odoardi on the distinct age of the,early theories of Italian get^ogtstt,concerning, 84-^— their relative age, see woodcutNo. 1, 136Submarine forests, in the estuaries of theTay and Forth, 265■ remarks on their origin, 270— of Lancashire, 283Submarine lavas, compactness of, 128Submarine volcanic rocks, character of,Submarine volcanos, 391Subsidence in the Island of Sombawa,■ ■ of the channel of the Indus, duringearthquake, 1819, 406^— of tiM mountain Sulla, 407in the Caraccas, 1790, 411inSicUy, 1790,411■ of the quay at Messina during theearthquake of 1783, 416■ of houses in Catansaro, withoutbeing injured, 426— of the quay at Lisbon, 438of the coast of St Domingo, 440of the coast of Sicily, 445*— in Jamaica, 446^— numerous proofs of, in the Bay ofBaiae, buildings not destroyed, 454and elevation, proportion of, 476greater than elevation, 477Subterranean volcanic rocks, 397Successive development of organic life,Suffolk, diffs undermined, 271INDEX.Suffolk, retreat of the sea on the coast of,Sullivan's Island, land carried away faythe sea at, 291Sulphur Island, emits vapour, 318Sumatra, linear direction of the volcanosin, 319Simihawa. volcanic eruption in the islandof,' 1815, 403Sunderland, parts of the delta of theGanges, 241Sunderland, Professor Sedgwick on themagnesian limestone of, 205Sussex, remarks on the weald formationof, 130its coast constantly the prey of thesea, 279Swanage Bay, excavated by the sea, 280Swatch of no ground, description of, 242• its size and depth, 242Sweden, shells of existing species foundat great heights in, 230free from earthquakes, 232Sykes, on petroleum springs of the Bur-manempire, 218Syria, gain of land on its coasts, 308earthquakes in, 321and Sicily, earthquakes alternatelyin, 322Tabular view of the British strata, bySmith, 1790, 70Tacitus on eruption of Vesuvius in 79, 331Tangaran river, its channel stopped upby landslips, 444Parliament, delta of the, 236conglomerate forming by the, 237Tampico, sediment transported by, 310Carmina, relative age of the limestoneof, 126Targioni on the geology of Tuscany, 49^ on the origin of valleys, 49■ on the fossil elephants of Italy, 49found no difference in the depositsof hot and cold springs, 201Tay, encroachment of the sea in itsestuary, 264Taylor, Mr. John, on the art of mining inEngland, 55Taylor, Mr. R. C., on waste of CromerCutis, 269— on gain of land on coast of Norfolk,270on the rise of the tides at Lowestoff,Temperature, Raspe on the former high,of Europe, 52of Adriatic, Fortis on, 53- of Mediterranean higher than that ofsea without the Straits of Gibraltar,Temperature, great changes in, 103difference of, in places in the samelatitudes, 106causes of change in, 112*— causes required to effect a generalchange in, 115Temruk, violent earthquakes frequentround, 321Teneriffe, its peak an active solitary,volcanic eruptions of, 380lateral eruptions of, in 1706, 443Semi, limestone forming near, 2(>6Terranuova, great subsidence near, 411shift or fault in the Tower of,woodcut No. 20, 417great landslips near, 424Tertiary marls, their thicknessParma, 237Tertiary strata, remarks on the depositionof the, 150Testa on shells common to Mediterraneanand equinoctial seas, 53Testa and Fortis, letters of, on fossil fishof MonteBolca,53Texel, waste of the islands at its mouth,Teyda, peak of, a counterpart of BarrenIsland, 390Thames, gain and loss of land in itsestuary, 275tide in its estuary longer in flowingdown than up, 304Thanet, Isle of, loss of land in, 276rate of encroachment in the, 276Thompson, Dr., on siliceous incrustationsnear Monte Vico, 214Thrace always subject to earthquakes,Thucydides, his account of the earlseruptions of Etna, 364Thuringerwald, Professor Sedgwick onthe strata of, 133Tibur, growth of its delta accelerated bycarbonate of lime, 207Tides, height of, in the Bay of Bengal,their destroying and transportingpower, 256height to which they rise, 257effect of winds on the, 257in the Atlantic and Pacific, 293in the Caribbean Sea, 293Tiflis, numerous earthquakes in modemtimes at, 321Tigris and Euphrates, their union a modemevent, 252Pliny's remark ou the rapid gainof land at its mouth, 291Tignaux, Tower of, in the delta of theBone; 233INDEX.Time, efSscta of prepossessions ia regardto the duration of past, 76^— every error as to quantity of, fatalto sound views in geology, 78~'— consequence of underrating thequantity of past, 80great periods required to explainformation of secondary strata 87tivoli, flood at, 196Toledo Signer, on the elevation of thecoast of the Bay of Baiae, 457Tomboro, volcano, great eruption from in1815, 404— — town of, submerged, 405Torre del Greco, overflowed by lava, 358"^^ town of, again built on its ancientsite, 358fertility of the country around, 358columnar lavas of Vesuvius seen at,Torre del Annunziata, columnar lava of« Vesuvius seen at, 345Torrents, action of, in widening valleys,Forum, overwhelmed by the sea, 289Tradition, of the submersion of the Lion-esse,283■ of great losses of land in Pembrokeshire,&c., 283<— of the destruction of the southwesternpart of Brittany, 284Travertin, formed by the Elsa, 201of San Vignone cut off by the riverOrcia, see diagram No. 4, 202of Hungary, 211of San Filippo,203a foot of, formed in every fourmonths at San Filippo, 204spheroidal structure of, 204comparison between, and the Englishmagnesian limestone, 205oolitic, recent formation of, inland384Xiessa, travortin formed by the spray ofthe sea on the rocks of, 384Trinidad, subsidence in, and land replacedby a small pitch lake, 218■ violently shaken by earthquakes,Toil on the columnar basalt of Heda, 58Truncated volcanic cones, 392Tunguragua volcano, 315■ great mud eruption from, 410T^mza river, its course changed by earthquake,401Tuscan geologists opposed to diluvialtheory, 42Tuscany, Steno on the geology of, 28• Targioni on the geology of, 49■ " • calcareous springs of, 201Tyre now far inland, 308Tyrol, Dolomieu ontiie, 60UoDEVATXA, M. Brongniart on the fossilshells of, 230UUoa, his diluvial theory, 441Urmia, Lake, marble deposited fromsprings near, 211its size, &c., 321Universal formations of Werner, 57Universal ocean, of Leibnitz, 40adopted by Buffon and De Luc,— causes which led Vallisneri tobelieve in, 41— disOTOvcd by organic remain nUnalaschka, new island thrown up near,Uniformity of Nature, 85, 105, 164, 311,Playfair, on the, 86- Dr. Pales remarks on the, 159Uniformity of volcanic operations in Italyin ancient and modem times,of the action of earthquakes, 460Val d'Arno, organic remains of the, 152Val di Notoo, Dolomieu on the strata ofthe, 60submarine lavas of the, 325Valecillo, water ejected through fissuresduring earthquakes in, 407Vale of Oosau, Professor Sedgwick andMr. Murchison on the tertiary depositsof the, 136Valle cas Furnas, hot springs of the, 213Valley del Bove,lava of 1819 poured intothe, 318Valley of Calanna, lava of 1819 pouredover the head of the, 368Valleys, Targioni on the origin of, 49-^ De Luc's theory of the excavationof, 70Button's theory of the excavationof, 70excavation of, in Central France.matter transported by rivers almostall subtracted from, 249the excavation of, greatly assistedby earthquakes, 431Vallisneri on the origin of springs, 41drew first sketch of marine depositsof Italy, 4 1on the danger of connecting theoriesin physical science with thesacred writings, 41contends against St. Jerome andothers as to the origin of springs,universal ocean of, 41contends against Woodward's diluvialtheory, 42INDEX.Vallinsri, on primary rocks, 02Valparaiso, soundings in the harbour of,changed by earthquake in 1822,-»- country round permanently elevatedin 1822, to the height ofthree feet, 402-^— houses not thrown down when itscoast was elevated, 455Van Siemens Land, climate of, 111Veins, mineral, remarks on their formation,423Vera Cruz destroyed by earthquake, 443Vernon, Rev. W. v., his memoir on bonesof the mammoth, bison, ftc., inYorkshire, 96Vtnion, Rev. C. V.,fosBil saurian,&c., foundin mountain limestone bv, 129Verona, petrifaction found at, 23■ Spada on the fossils of, 42-^— ^Ajduino on the mountains of, 49Veronese, Majoli's remarks on the shellsof the, 26Vertebrae animals in the oldest strataVesta, temple of, 197Vetttvius, excavation of volcanic tuff onthe side of,in 1822, 176early history of, 330■ recognised as a volcano by Strabo,account of the great eruption A.D.79, 330first recorded eruption of lava by,^- eruption of 1631, 338eruption of 1822, 340•>— depth of the crater of, 340■ structure of the cone of, 341■ dikes in, how formed, 342■ probable section of, we woodcutNo. 13, 344■ mineralogical description of thelavas of, 345■ columnar lavas of, 345■ account of the minerals found inthe lavas of, 347Vetch, Capt, on the recent eruption ofJorullo, 379Vevey, depth of lake of Gtoeva near,Vicentin, Dolomieu on the 60Arduino on the submarine lavas ofthe, 85Vicenza, Arduino on the mountains of, 49Vienna, gypseous springs of, 212Villft Franca, disintegration of primaryboulders by carbonic acid at, 21/Villages, forty destroyed by one eruptionin Java in 1772, 436Villarica volcano in perpetual activity, 315Virgil, died, 157Viterbo, tray e rt in deposited at the Buli-came of, 206Vito Amid on Moro's system, 46Vivarais, Ouettard on the basalts of the,1775, 58Faujas on the basaltic lavas of the,1779, 58Vivensio, his account of the earthquakeof Cambria in 1783,412— on the filling up of vi^ys by land-sups,427-**- on Uie formation of lakes by landslips,427Volcanic vents, remarks on their poseidon,Volcanic regions, their geographicalboundaries, 314— * of the Andes, 314■■ extending from the Aleutian islesto the Moluccas, 317of the old word, 318Volcanic cones, truncation of, 392Volcanic products, mineral compositionof, 395Volcanic rocks, subterranean, 397Volcanic eruption, in Sumbawa, 1815, 403in St. Vincent, 1812, 407— distance to which its explosionswere heard, 407Volcanic eruptions, causes of, 467■ average number of per annum, 397Volcanos, safety valves according toStrabo, 19^> duration of past time proved byextinct, 88extinct ones not to be inducted withthose in activity, 325destroying and renovating agencyof the Campaniann, 359> why most are near the sea, 468Volcanos of Auvergne, Desmarest ontheir relative ages, 59Montlosier on the, 1788, 60Voltaire, his dislike of cultivators of geology,65bad faith o( on geological subjects,^ his remarks on the systems ofBurnet and Woodward, 66■ ■ - on the discovery of fossil bonenear Stamped, 66Volterra, remarks of M attach on thefossil shdls of, 42Von Buch, shells of existing species inSweden found at great heights by,^ his theory of the gradual rising ofthe shores the Baltic, 231■ his account of the volcanic eruptionin Lancerote, 381«» his theory of toleration cram eon*hindered, 386I anJcCilih■T.IINDEX.PI Von Buch, on the new island thrown upj near Kamtschatka, 406VulcanistM, persecution of, in England, 67and Neptuuists, factions of, 60Waal, river, 286Water, action of running, 168■ its power on freezing, 169solvent power of, 169— excavating power of, 1 70transporting power of, 171velocity of running, greatest at lur*face and least at bottom, 172— its power in moving stones, 174Galleries, theory of 53Wallace, Dr., fossils in Ava discoveredby, 33Walton Nase, diffii annually undermined,Warp of the Humber, stratification ofthe, 254Wanton, his eulogy on Burnet, 38Weald clay, on the formation of the, 1 34^ Webster, Dr., on the hot springs of Fur-anas,213Webster, Mr., on the decay of the chalkcliffii of Sussex, 278Weddell, Captain, high latitude reachedby in the antarctic circle, 109Werner, Professor of mineralogy at Frey-berg,1775, 55\ geology of, 55-«— applied geology to the art of mineexcursive character of his lectures, 5 6,1 -»— his sweeping generalizations, 56- faith of his scholars in his doctrines,his views eventually prejudicial tothe progress of geology, 56universal formations o^ 56— — his errors in the geology of his owncountry, 57• — on the granite of the Harts mountains,57principal merit of the system of, 57^ his erroneous theory of basalt, 58his observation on basalt confinedto Saxony and Hesse, 58taught that there were no Volcanosin the primeval ages, 58technical terms o^ 71Wemerian error, why adopted in England,60West Indian isles, active volcanos in, 317West Indies, Hooke on an earthquake inthe, 34— — earthquake of Lisbon felt in, 439Weymouth, height to which the tide risesat, 257Whirlwinds violent during the eruptionof Tomboro in Sumbawa, 404Whiston, his Theory of the Earth, 38—proposed a new interpretation ofGenesis, 39- his theory paneg^sed by Locke, 39attacked and refuted by Kill, 39White Mountains, landslips m the, 193Whitehurst, theory o^ 1776, 53—. « on the rocks of Derbyshire, 53on the depth to which the quay atLisbon subsided, 439Williams, his Natural History of the mineralkingdom, 1789, 67misrepresents Buttons theory 67Winchester destroyed by the ses 278Winds, trade, 118Winds, currents caused by the, 257sand drifted by the, 300Wismar, 229Wollaston, Dr., on the water of the Mediterranean,296Wood, dicotyledonous, in the coal strataof Northumberland, 147-^— in the graywacke of Cork,Woodward, his theory of the Earth, 1695,all geological phenomena referredby, to the creation and deluge, 37^-^ Ray's remarks on, 37his theory ridiculed by Hutchinson,- Voltaire's remarks on the theory of,Woodwardian theory, 80Vallisneris's remarks on the, 41Xai«thob, the Lydian, his theory, 18Yarmouth, sea does not encroach at, 269large estuary silted up, 270— rise of the tide at, 270Yellow never. Sir G. Staunton on thequantity of sediment in the, 246Yorkshire, bones of the mammoth foundin, 96-^— * Pennant's account of the invasionof its coasts by the sea, 266its coast continually wasting, 266Zamtb, earthquakes in the island of in1783, 414Sings, peninsula converted into an island,Zuyder Zee, account of its sensation, 288L«adflai: PUnlad bj W* CMW»,Biaiiiftfd-Bti«M;