PRINCIPLESGEOLOGY,BEINGAN ATTEMPT TO EXPLAIN THE FORMER CHANGESOF THE EARTH'S SURFACE,BY REFERENCE TO CAUSES NOW IN OPERATION.CHARLES LYELL, ESQ., F.R.S.,FOR. SEC. TO THB Gaol. SOC., PROF. OF Gaol. TO KING'S COLL., LONDONIN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. III.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.MDCCCXXXIIl.GIFT OFI/.L.c j t .^ . JLQNDDN: c^ ' < PIvINTEO BY^VllXlAM C t.OWES,MATTHEW LIBRARYTOFrederick Imply Hutchison, ESQ., F.R.S.,$c. 8fc. 8fc.LATE PRESIDENT OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY.MY DEAR Hutchison,I HAVE great pleasure in dedicating this volume toyou, as it contains the results of some of our joint laboursin the field, in Auvergne, Velay, and Piedmont results whichhad not yet been communicated to the public through anyother channel.When we quitted England together for a tour on the continent,in May, 1828, the first sketch only of my ' Principles ofGeology ' was finished. Since that time you have watched theprogress of the work with friendly interest, and, as Presidentof the Geological Society, have twice expressed in your AnniversaryAddresses, your participation in many of my views,which were warmly controverted by others. The eulogywhich you have lately pronounced from the chair, on the lastpart of my work, (whether I attribute your approval to theexercise of an unblessed judgment or to the partiality of afriend,) could not fail to be most gratifying to my feelings,and I trust that you will long enjoy health and energy tocontinue to promote with enthusiasm the advancement of yourfavourite science.Believe me, my dear Hutchison,Yours, &c. &c.CHARLES LYELL.M126633PREFACE.THE original MS. of the 'Principles of Geology'was delivered to the publisher at the close of theyear 1827, when it was proposed that it shouldappear in the course of the year following, in twovolumes octavo. Since that time many causes haveconcurred to delay the completion of the work, and,in some degree, to modify the original plan. In May,1828, when the preliminary chapters on the Historyof Geology, and some others which follow them inthe first volume, were nearly finished, I becameanxious to visit several parts of the continent, inorder to acquire more information concerning thetertiary formations. Accordingly, I set out in May,1828, in company with Mr. Murchison, on a tourthrough France and the north of Italy, where we examinedtogether many districts which are particularlymentioned in the body of this work. We visitedAuvergne, Velay, Cantal, and the Vivarais, andafterwards the environs of Aix, in Provence, andthen passed by the Maritime Alps to Savona, thencecrossing to Piedmont by the Valley of the Bermuda.At Turin we found Signor Bonelli engaged in thearrangement of a large collection of tertiary shellsVlll PREFACE.obtained chiefly from the Italian strata; and as I hadalready conceived the idea of classing the differenttertiary groups, by reference to the proportionalnumber of recent species found fossil in each, I wasat pains to learn what number Signor Bonelli hadidentified with living species, and the degree ofprecision with which such identifications could bemade. With a view of illustrating this point, heshowed us suites of shells common to the Sub-apenninebeds and to the Mediterranean, pointingout that in some instances not only the ordinary typeof the species, but even the different varieties hadtheir counterparts both in the fossil and recent series.The same naturalist informed us that the fossil shellsof the hill of the Superga, at Turin, differed as agroup from those of Parma and other localities ofthe Subapennine beds of northern Italy; and, on theother hand, that the characteristic shells of theSuperga agreed with the species found at Bordeauxand other parts of the South of France.I was the more struck with this remark, as Mr. Mur-chironand myself had already inferred that the highly-inclinedstrata of the Valley of the Bormida, whichagree with those of the Superga, were older thanthe more horizontal Subapennine marls, by which theplains of the Tanaro and the Po are skirted.When we had explored some parts of the Licentiatogether, Mr. Murchison re-crossed the Alps, while Idirected my course to the south of Italy, first stayingPREFACE. IXat Parma, where I studied, in the cabinets of SignerGuidotti, a beautiful collection of Italian tertiaryshells, consisting of more than 1000 species, manyof which had been identified with living testacea.Signor Guidotti had not examined his fossils withreference to their bearing on geological questions,but computed, on a loose estimate, that there wereabout 30 per cent, of living species in the Subapenninebeds. I then visited Florence, Sienna, and Rame,and the results of my inquiries respecting the tertiarystrata of those territories will be found partly inthe body of the work, and partly in the cataloguesgiven in Appendix II.On my arrival at Naples I became acquainted withSignor O. G. Costa, who had examined the fossilshells of Otranto and Calabria, and had collectedmany recent testacea from the seas surrounding theCalabriann coasts. His comparison of the fossil andliving species had led him to a very different resultin regard to the southern extremity of Italy, from thatto which Signors Guidotti and Bonelli had arrived inregard to the north, for he was of opinion that few ofthe tertiary shells were of extinct species. In confirmationof this view, he showed me a suite of fossilshells from the territory of Otranto, in which nearlyall the species were recent.In October, 1828, I examined Ischia, and obtainedfrom the strata of that island the fossil shells namedin Appendix II. ; p. 57. They were all, with two orPREFACE.three exceptions, recognized by Signor Costa asspecies now inhabiting the Mediterranean, a circumstancewhich greatly astonished me, as I procuredsome of them at the height of 2000 feet above thelevel of the sea (Vol. iii. p. 126).Early in November, 1828, I crossed from Naples toMessina, and immediately afterwards examined Etna,and collected on the flanks of that mountain, nearTrezza, the fossil shells alluded to in the third volume(p. 79, and Appendix II., p. 53). The occurrence ofshells in this locality was not unknown to the naturalistsof Catania, but having been recognized bythem as recent species, they were supposed to havebeen carried up from the sea-shore to fertilize thesoil, and therefore disregarded. Their position iswell known to many of the peasants of the country, bywhom the fossils are called * robe di dilution.'In the course of my tour I had been frequently ledto reflect on the precept of Descartes, ' that a philosophershould once in his life doubt every thing hehad been taught;' but I still retained so much faithin my early geological creed as to feel the most livelysurprise, on visiting Sortino, Pentalica, Syracuse, andother parts of the Val di Not, at beholding a limestoneof enormous thickness filled with recent shells,or sometimes with the mere casts of shells, resting onmarl in which shells of Mediterranean species wereimbedded in a high state of preservation. All ideaof attaching a high antiquity to a regularly stratifiedPREFACE.limestone, in which the casts and impressions of shellsalone were discernible, vanished at once from mymind. At the same time, I was struck with the identityof the associated igneous rocks of the Val di Notwith well known varieties of e trap ' in Scotland andother parts of Europe, varieties, which I had alsoseen entering largely into the structure of Etna. Ioccasionally amused myself with speculating on thedifferent rate of progress which Geology might havemade, had it been first cultivated with success atCatania, where the phenomena above alluded-to, andthe great elevation of the modern tertiary beds inthe Val di Not, and the changes produced in thehistorical era by the Calabriann earthquakes, wouldhave been familiarly known.From Cape Passage I passed on by Spaccaforno andLicata to Girgenti, where I abandoned my design of exploringthe western part of Sicily, that I might returnagain to the Val di Not and the neighbourhood ofEtna, and verify the discoveries which I had made.With this view I travelled by Caltanisetta, Piazza,Caltagirone, Vizzini, Militello, Palagonia, Lago Naftia,and Ragusa, to Castrogiovanni, and from thence toPalermo, at which last place I procured the shellsnamed in Appendix II. p. 55. The sections on thisnew route confirmed me in my first opinions respectingthe Val di Not, as will appear by the 6th, 8th, and9th chapters of the third Volume.When I again reached Naples, in January, 1829, IXll PREFACE,found that Signer 0. G. Costa had examined the tertiaryfossils which I had sent to him from differentparts of Sicily, and declared them to be for the mostpart of recent species. I then bent my course homeward,seeing at Genoa, Professor Vivianii and Dr. Tasso,the last of whom put into my hands his memoirs onthe strata of Albenga (see vol. iii. p. ICG), in which Ifound, that, according to his list of shells,, the tertiaryformations at the foot of the maritime Alps containedabout 50 per cent, of recent species..1 nejctbre-visited Turin, and communicated to SignorJJpnelli the result of my inquiries respecting the tertiarybeds of the south of Italy, and of Sicily, uponwhich he kindly offered to review his fossils, someof which had been obtained from those countries, andto compare them with the Subapennine shells ofnorthern Italy. He also promised to draw up immediatelya list of the shells characteristic of the greensandof the Superga, and common to that locality andBordeaux, that I might publish it at the end of mysecond volume; but the death of this amiable andzealous naturalist soon afterwards deprived me of thebenefit of his assistance.I had now fully decided on attempting to establishfour sub-divisions of the great tertiary epoch, thesame which are fully illustrated in the present work.I considered the basin of Paris and London to be thetype of the first division; the beds of the Superga, ofthe second ; the Subapennine strata of northern Italy,PREFACE. Xlll'.of the third ; and Ischia and the Val di Not, of thefourth. I was also convinced that I had seen proofs,during my tour in Auvergne, Tuscany and Sicily ofvolcanic rocks contemporaneous with the sedimentarystrata of three of the above periods.I On my return to Paris, in February, 1829, I communicatedto M. Desnoyers some of the new views towhich my examination of Sicily had led me, and myintention to attempt a classification of the differenttertiary formations in chronological order, by referenceto the comparative proportion of living species ofshells found fossil in each. He informed me, thatduring my tour he had been employed in printing thefirst part of his memoir, not yet published, ' on theTertiary Formations more recent than the Paris basin,'in which he had insisted on the doctrine 'of the successionof tertiary formations of different ages Atthe end of the first part of his memoir, which waspublished before I left Paris*, he annexed a note onthe accordance of many of my views with his own,and my intention of arranging the tertiary formationschronologically, according to the relative number offossils in each group, which were identifiable withspecies now living.At the same time I learned from M. Desnoyers,that M. Deshayes had, by the mere inspection of thefossil shells in his extensive museum, convinced himselfthat the different tertiary formations might beAnn. des Sci, Nat., tome xvi. p. 214.XIV PREFACE.arranged in a chronological series. I accordingly lostno time in seeing M. Deshayes, who explained to methe data on which he considered that the three tertiaryperiods mentioned in the Tables, Appendix I.,might be established. I at once perceived that thefossils obtained by me in my tour would form but aninconsiderable contribution to so great a body ofzoological evidence as M. Deshayes had already inhis possession. I therefore requested him to examinemy shells when they arrived from Italy, and expressedmy great desire to obtain his co-operation in my work,in which, as will appear in the sequel, I was fortunateenough to succeed.| Tie preparation of my first volume had now been| suspended for nine months, and was not resumed untilmy return to London in the beginning of March,1829. Before the whole was printed another summerarrived, and I again took the field to examine 'theCrag,' on the coasts of Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk.The first volume appeared at length in January, 1830,after which I applied myself to perfect what I hadwritten on 'the changes in the organic world,' asubject which merely occupied four or five chaptersin my original sketch, but which was now expandedinto a small treatise. Before this part was completedanother summer overtook me, and 'I then set out ona geological expedition to the south of France, thePyrenees, and Catalonia.On my return to Paris, in September, 1830, IPREFACE. XVstudied for six weeks in the museum of M. Deshayes,examining his collection of fossil and recent shells,and profiting by his instructions in conchology. Ashehad not yet published any of the general resultsdeducible from his valuable collection, I requestedhim to furnish me with lists of those species of shellswhich were common to two or more tertiary periods,as also the names of those known to occur both insome tertiary strata and in a living state. This heengaged to do, and we agreed that the informationshould be communicated in a tabular form. Afterseveral modifications of the plan first proposed for theTables, we finally agreed upon the manner in whichthey should be constructed, and the execution wasleft entirely in the hands of M. Deshayes, in whosename they were to appear in my second volume.The tables were sent to me in the course of thefollowing spring (1831), and additions and correctionsseveral months later. They contained not only theinformation which I had expected, but much more, forthe names of several hundred species were added, asbeing common to two or more formations of the sameperiod, whereas it was originally proposed to insertthose only which were known to be common to two ormore distinct periods. Thus, for example, more than50 shells are now included in the tables, on theground that they are common to the tertiary strataboth of the London and Paris basins, although theyXVI PREFACE.only occur in the Eocene period to which the strataof those basins belong. The names thus added willincrease the value of the tables, and give a more completeview of the point to which fossil conchology hasnow reached ; at the same time, it must be admittedthat tables of shells cannot be perfected on this planasthe science advances from year to year, withoutsoon outgrowing the space which could reasonably beallotted to fossil conchology in a work on geology, forthey would soon embrace the names of the greaternumber of known shells, nearly all of these beingcommon to different groups of strata of the sameperiod. Some of the catalogues which I have givenin Appendix II., of fossil shells from the neighbourhoodof the Red Sea, and from some other localities,may illustrate this remark, as they lead us to anticipatethat, at no distant time, we may find a large proportionof all the Recent species in a fossil state.In treatises on fossil conchology, such as I trustM. Deshayes will soon publish, we cannot have toocomplete a catalogue of all the species which havebeen found fossil in every locality, together with theirsynonyms; but in geological works we can only illustratethe more important theoretical points by cataloguesof those shells which arc either characteristicof particular periods, as being exclusively confined tothem, or which show the connexion of two periods,by being common to each. For this purpose wePREFACE. XVIImust select certain normal groups which do notapproximate too closely to each other, and enumerateby name the species common to more than one ofthese. Thus, for example, we might omit in ourtables the Newer Pliocene formations altogether, andenumerate the shells common to the Recent and OlderPliocene beds.I have arranged the tertiary formations in fourgroups, as I had determined to do before I wasacquainted with M. Deshayes; and in his tables hehas referred the shells to three periods, according towhich he had classed them before he had any communicationwith me. No confusion, however, will arisefrom this want of conformity between the tables andmy classification, since I have named two of myperiods (the Newer and Older Pliocene) as subdivisionsof one of his ; and by reference to the SynopticalTable, at p. 61, the reader will see which localitiesmentioned in M. Deshayes's Tables belong to theNewer and which to the Older Pliocene period.In the summer of 1831 I made a geologicalexcursion to the volcanic district of the Eifel, and onmy return I determined to extend my work to threevolumes, the second of which appeared in January,1832. The last volume has been delayed till now bymany interruptions, among which I may mention atour, in the summer of 1832, up the valley of theRhine, when I examined the loess (vol. iii. p. 151),VOL. III. cXV111 PREFACE.and a visit, on my way home through Switzerland, tothe Valorsine, where I had an opportunity of verifyingthe observations of M. Necker on the graniteveins and altered stratified rocks of that district. Imay also mention the time occupied in the correctionof the second edition of the first and second volumes,and the delivery of a course of Lectures in May andJune, 1832, at King's College, London, on whichoccasion I had an opportunity of communicating tothe scientific world a great part of the views nowexplained in my last volume.London, April, 1833.CONTENTS.Vor. III.CHAPTER I.PAGEConnexion between the subjects treated of in the former parts of this workand those to be discussed in the present volume Erroneous assumption ofthe earlier geologists respecting the discordance of the former and actualcauses of change Opposite system of inquiry adopted in this work Illustrationsfrom the history of the progress of Geology of the respective meritsof the two systems Habit of indulging conjectures respecting irregular andextraordinary agents not yet abandoned Necessity in the present state ofscience of prefixing to a work on Geology treatises respecting the changesnow in progress in the animate and inanimate world * . 1CHAPTER II.Arrangement of the materials composing the earth's crust The existingcontinents chiefly composed of subaqueous deposits Distinction betweensedimentary and volcanic rocks Between primary, secondary, and tertiaryOrigin of the primary Transition formations Difference between secondaryand tertiary strata Discovery of tertiary groups of successive periodsParis basin London and Hampshire basins Tertiary strata of Bordeaux,Piedmont, Touraine, &c. Subapennine beds English crag More recentdeposits of Sicily, &c. . . . . . 8CHAPTER III.Different circumstances under which the secondary and tertiary formationsmay have originated Secondary series formed when the ocean prevailed:Tertiary during the conversion of sea into land, and the growth of a continentOrigin of interruption in the sequence of formations The areas where newdeposits take place are always varying Causes which occasion this transferenceof the places of sedimentary deposition Denudation augments the discordancein age of rocks in contact Unconformability of overlying formationsIn what manner the shifting of the areas of sedimentary depositionmay combine with the gradual extinction and introduction of species to producea series of deposits having distinct mineral and organic characters 23c 2CONTENTS.CHAPTER IV.PAGEChronological relations of mineral masses the first object in geologicalclassification Superposition, proof of more recent origin Exceptions in regardto volcanic rocks Relative age proved by included fragments of olderrocks Proofs of contemporaneous origin derived from mineral charactersVariations to which these characters are liable Recurrence of distinct rocksat successive periods Proofs of contemporaneous origin derived from organicremains Zoological provinces are of limited extent, yet spread over widerareas than homogeneous mineral deposits Different modes whereby dissimilarmineral masses and distinct groups of species may be proved to havebeen contemporaneous-T>CHAPTER V.Classification of tertiary formations in chronological order Comparativevalue of different classes of organic remains Fossil remains of teistacea themost important Necessity of accurately determining species Tables of shellsby M. Deshayes Four subdivisions of the Tertiary epoch Recent formationsNewer Pliocene period Older Pliocene period Miocene periodEocene period The distinct zoological characters of these periods may notimply sudden changes in the animate creation The recent strata form acommon point of departure in distant regions Numerical proportion ofrecent species of shells in different tertiary periods Mammiferous remainsof the successive tertiary eras Synoptical Table of Recent and Tertiaryformations .CHAPTER VI.Newer Pliocene formations Reasons for considering in the first place themore modern periods Geological structure of Sicily Formations of theVal di Not of newer Pliocene period Divisible into three groups Greatlimestone Schistose and arenaceous limestone Blue marl with shellsStrata subjacent to the above Volcanic rocks of the Val di Not DikesTuis and Peperinos Volcanic conglomerates Proofs of long intervalsbetween volcanic eruptions Dip and direction of newer Pliocene strataof Sicily . . f,'2CHAPTER VII.Marine and volcanic formations at the base of Etna Their connexionwith the strata of tin: Val di Not Day of TiT/./a Cycloplan isles l-'us.-ilbulls of Rceut species Basalt and altered rocks in the Isle of ('\cL.psCONTENTS. XXlPAGESubmarine lavas of the bay of Trezza not currents from Etna Internalstructure of the cone of Etna Val eli Calanna Val del Bove not an ancientcrater Its precipices intersected by countless dikes Scenery of the Val delBove Form, composition, and origin of the dikes Lavas and brecciasintersected by them . 75CHAPTER VIII.Speculations on the origin of the Val del Bove on Etna SubsidenceAntiquity of the cone of Etna Mode of computing the age of volcanosTheir growth analogous to that of exogenous trees Period required for theproduction of the lateral cones of Etna Whether signs of Diluvial Wavesare observable on Etna . . . . . .95CHAPTER IX.Origin of the newer Pliocene strata of Sicily Growth of submarine formationsgradual Rise of the same above the level of the sea probably causedby subterranean lava Igneous newer Pliocene rocks formed at great depths,exceed in volume the lavas of Etna Probable structure of these recent subterraneanrocks Changes which they may have superinduced upon stratain contact Alterations of the surface during and since the emergence of thenewer Pliocene strata Forms of the Sicilian valleys Sea cliffs Proofs ofsuccessive elevation Why the valleys in the newer Pliocene districts correspondin form to those in regions of higher antiquity Migrations ofanimals and plants since the emergence of the newer Pliocene strata Somespecies older than the stations they inhabit Recapitulation . 103CHAPTER X,Tertiary formations of Campania Comparison of the recorded changes inthis region with those commemorated by geological monuments Differencesin the composition of Somma and Vesuvius Dikes of Somma, their originCause of the parallelism of their opposite sides Why coarser grained inthe centre Minor cones of the Phlegrsean Fields Age of the volcanic andassociated rocks of Campania Organic remains External configuration ofthe country, how produced No signs of diluvial waves Marine NewerPliocene strata visible only in countries of earthquakes Illustrations fromChili Peru Parallel roads of Coquimbo West-indian archipelagoHonduras East-indian archipelago Red Sea . . . 118CHAPTER XLNewer Pliocene fresh-water formations Valley of the Elsa Traversing ofRome Osseous breccias Sicily Caves near PalermoExtinct animalsXX11 CONTENTS.PAGEin newer Pliocene breccias Fossil bones of Marsupial animals in Australiancaves Formation of osseous breccias in the Morea Newer Pliocene allusionsDifference between alluviums and regular subaqueous strata Theformer of various ages Marine alluvium Grooved surface of rocks Erraticblocks of the Alps Theory of, deluges caused by paroxysmal elevationsuntenable How ice may have contributed to transport large blocks from theAlps European alluviums chiefly tertiary Newer Pliocene in Sicily Lossof the Valley of the Rhine Its origin Contains recent shells . 1 37CHAPTER XII.Geological monuments of the older Pliocene period Subapennine formationsOpinions of Brocchi Different groups termed by him Subapennineare not all of the same age Mineral composition of the Subapennine formationsMarls Yellow sand and gravel Subapennine beds how formedIllustration derived from the Upper Val d'Arno Organic remains of Sub-apenninehills Older Pliocene strata at the base of the Maritime AlpsGenoa Savona Albenga Nice Conglomerate of Valley of Magnan Itsorigin Tertiary strata at the eastern extremity of the Pyrenees . 155CHAPTER XIII.Crag of Norfolk and Suffolk Shown by its fossil contents to belong to theolder Pliocene period Heterogeneous in its composition Superincumbentlacustrine deposits Relative position of the crag Forms of stratificationStrata composed of groups of oblique layers Cause of this arrangementDislocations in the crag produced by subterranean movements Protrudedmasses of chalk Passage of marine crag into alluvium Recent shells in adeposit at Sheppey, Ramsgate, and Brighton 171CHAPTER XIV.Volcanic rocks of the older Pliocene period Italy Volcanic region of Lotin Catalonia Its extent and geological structure Map Number of conesScoriae Lava currents Ravines in the latter cut by water Ancient alluviumunderlying lava Jets of air called ' Bufadors ' Age of the Cataloniavolcanos uncertain Earthquake which destroyed Olot in 1421 Sardinianvolcanos District of the Eifel and Lower Rhine Map Geological structureof the country Peculiar characteristics of the Eifel volcanos Lake cratersTrass Crater of the Roderberg Age of the Eifel volcanic rocks uncertainBrown coal formation . . , . * 183CHAPTER XV.Miocene period Marine formations Faluns of Touraine Comparison ofthe Faluns of trie Loire and the English Crag Basin of the Gironde andCONTENTS. XX111PAGELandes Fresh-water limestone of Saucats Position of the limestone ofBlaye Eocene strata in the. Bordeaux basin Inland cliff near Dax Strataof Piedmont Superga Valley of the Bormida Molasse of SwitzerlandBasin of Vienna Styria Hungary Volhynia and Podolia Montpellier 202CHAPTER XVI.Miocene alluviums Auvergne Mont Perrier Extinct quadrupedsVelay Orleanais Alluviums contemporaneous with Faluns of TouraineMiocene fresh-water formations Upper Val d'Arno Extinct mammaliaCoal of Cadibona Miocene volcanic rocks Hungary Transylvania StyriaAuvergne Velay . . . . . 217CHAPTER XVII.Eocene period Fresh-water formations Central France Map Ligned' Auvergne Sandstone and conglomerate Tertiary Red marl and sandstonelike the secondary ' new red sandstone' Green and white foliated marlsIndusial limestone Gypseous marls General arrangement and origin of theTravertin Fresh-water formation of the Limagne Puy en Velay Analogyof the strata to those of Auvergne Cantal Resemblance of Aurillac limestoneand its flints to our upper chalk Proofs of the gradual deposition ofmarl-concluding remarks . . 225CHAPTER XVIII.Marine formations of the Eocene period Strata of the Paris basin how faranalogous to the lacustrine deposits of Central France Geographical connexionof the Limagne d' Auvergne and the Paris basin-chain of lakes inthe Eocene period Classification of groups in the Paris basin Observationsof M. C. Prevost Sketch of the different subdivisions of the Paris basinContemporaneous marine and fresh-water strata Abundance of Cerithia inthe Calcaire grossier Upper marine formation indicates a subsidencePart of the Calcaire grossier destroyed when the upper marine strata originatedAll the Parisian groups belong to one great epoch Microscopicshells Bones of quadrupeds in gypsum In what manner entombed Numberof species All extinct Strata with and without organic remains alternatingOur knowledge of the physical geography, fauna, and flora of theEocene period considerable Concluding remarks * . .241CHAPTER XIX.Volcanic rocks of the Eocene period Auvergne Igneous formationsassociated with lacustrine strata Jill of Gergovia Eruptions in CentralXXIV CONTENTS.P.VGRFrance at successive periods Mont Dor an extinct volcano Clay Plomb(lu Cantal Train of minor volcanos stretching from Auvergne to the VivaraisMonts Domes Puy de Come Puy Rouge Ravines excavated throughlava Currents of lava at different heights Subjacent alluviums of distinctages The more modern lavas of Central France may belong to the Mioceneperiod The integrity of the cones not inconsistent with this opinion Noeruptions dining the historical era Division of volcanos into ante-diluvianand post-diluvian inadmissible Theories respecting the effects of the Floodconsidered Hypothesis of a partial flood Of a universal deluge Theoryof Dr. Buckland as controverted by Dr. Fleming Recapitulation . 257CHAPTER XX.Eocene formations, continued Basin of the Cotentin, or Valognes RennesBasin of Belgium, or the Netherlands Aixin Provence Fossil insectsTertiary strata of England Basins of London and Hampshire Differentgroups Plastic clay and sand London clay Bagshot sand Fresh-waterstrata of the Isle of Wight Palaeotherium and other fossil mammalia ofBinstead English Eocene strata conformable to chalk Outliers on theelevated parts of the chalk Inferences drawn from their occurrence Sketchof a theory of the origin of the English tertiary strata . , 275CHAPTER XXI.Denudation of secondary strata during the deposition of the EnglishEocene formations Valley of the Weald between the North and South DownsMap Secondary rocks of the Weald divisible into five groups North andSouth Downs Section across the valley of the Weald Anticlinal axisTrue scale of heights Rise and denudation of the strata gradual Chalkescarpments once sea-cliffs Lower terrace of ' firestonc,' how causedParallel ridges and valleys formed by harder and softer beds No ruins ofthe chalk on the central district of the Weald Explanation of this phenomenonDouble system of valleys, the longitudinal and the transverseTransverse how formed Gorges intersecting the chalk Lewes CoombTransverse valley of the Adur . . . . .285CHAPTER XXII.Denudation of the Valley of the Weald, continued The alternative of theproposition that the chalk of the North and South Downs were once continuous,considered Dr. Buckland on the Valley of Kingsdere Rise anddenudation of secondary rocks gradual Concomitant deposition of tertiarystrata gradual Composition of the latter such as would result from thewreck of the secondary rocks Valleys and furrows on the chalk how causedCONTENTS. XXVPAGEAuvergne, the Paris basin, and south-east of England one region of earthquakesduring the Eocene period Why the central parts of the London andHampshire basins rise nearly as high as the denudation of the WealdEffects of protruding force counteracted by the levelling operations of waterThickness of masses removed from the central ridge of the Weald Greatescarpment of the chalk having a direction north-east and south-westCurved and vertical strata in the Isle of Wight These were convulsed afterthe deposition of the fresh-water beds of Headen Hill Elevations of landposterior to the crag Why no Eocene alluviums recognizable Concludingremarks on the intermittent operations of earthquakes in the south-east ofEngland, and the gradual formation of valleys Recapitulation . 303CHAPTER XXIII.Secondary formations Brief enumeration of the principal groups Nospecies common to the secondary and tertiary rocks Chasm between theEocene and Maestricht beds Duration of secondary periods Former continentsplaced where it is now sea Secondary fresh-water deposits why rarePersistency of mineral composition why apparently greatest in older rocksSupposed universality of red marl formations Secondary rocks why moreconsolidated Why more fractured and disturbed Secondary volcanic rocksof many different ages . . . 324CHAPTER XXIV.On the relative antiquity of different mountain-chains Theory of M. Elsede Beaumont His opinions controverted His method of proving that differentchains were raised at distinct periods His proof that others werecontemporaneous His reasoning why not conclusive His doctrine of theparallelism of contemporaneous lines of elevation Objections Theory ofparallelism at variance with geological phenomena as exhibited in GreatBritain Objections of Mr. Conybeare How far anticlinal lines formed atthe same period are parallel Difficulties in the way of determining therelative age of mountains 337CHAPTER XXV.On the rocks usually termed { Primary ' Their relation to volcanic andsedimentary formations The { primary ' class divisible into stratified andunstratified Unstratified rocks called Plutonic Granite veins Their variousforms and mineral composition Proofs of their igneous origin Granitesof the same character produced at successive eras Some of these newer thancertain fossiliferous strata Difficulty of determining the age of particulargranites Distinction between the volcanic and the plutonic rocks Trappeanrocks not separable from the volcanic Passage from trap into graniteTheory of the origin of granite at every period from the earliest to the mostrecent . 352XXVI CONTENTS.CHAPTER XX VI.On the stratified rocks usually called ' primary' Proofs from the dispositionof their strata that they were originally deposited from water Alternationof beds varying in composition and colour Passage of gneiss intogranite Alteration of sedimentary strata by trappean and granitic dikesInference as to the origin of the strata called 'primary' Conversion of argillaceousinto hornblende schist The term 'Hypogene' proposed as a substitutefor primary l Metamorphic ' for ( stratified primary ' rocks No regular orderof succession of hypogene formations Passage from the metamorphic tothe sedimentary strata Cause of the high relative antiquity of the visiblehypogene formations That antiquity consistent with the hypothesis thatthey have been produced at each successive period in equal quantities Greatvolume of hypogene rocks supposed to have been formed since the Eoceneperiod Concluding remarks . . . . . 365Table I. Showing the relations of the various classes of rocks, the Alluvial,the Aqueous the Volcanic, and the Ilypogene, of different periods 386Table II. Showing the order of superposition of the principal Europeangroups of sedimentary strata mentioned in this work . . 389Notes in explanation of the Tables of fossil shells in Appendix I. . 393Appendix I. Tables of fossil shells by Monsieur G. P. Deshayes . 1Appendix II. Lists of fossil Shells chiefly collected by the author in Sicilyand Italy, named by M. Deshayes . . .53Glossary, containing an explanation of geological and other scientific termsused in this work . . . . .61Index . . . .85LIST OF PLATES AND WOOD-CUTSIN THE THIRD VOLUME,PLATES.Frontispiece. View of the volcanos around Olot, in Catalonia.See p. 186, This view is taken from a sketch by the author ;an attempt is made to represent by colours the different geologicalformations of which the country is composed. The blueline of mountains in the distance are the Pyrenees, which are tothe north of the spectator, and consist of primary and ancientsecondary rocks. In front of these are the secondary formations,described in chap, xiv., coloured purplish-grey ofdifferent tints, to express different distances. The flank ofthe hill, in the foreground, called Costa di Pujou, is composedpartly of secondary rocks, which are seen to the left ofa small bridle-road, and partly of volcanic, the red colourexpressing lava and scoriae.Several very perfect volcanic cones, chiefly composed of redscoriae, and having craters on their summits, are seen in theimmediate neighbourhood of Olot, coloured red. The levelplain on which that town stands has clearly been produced bythe flowing down of many lava-streams from those hills intothe bottom of a valley, probably once of considerable depth,like those of the surrounding country, but which has been in agreat measure filled up by lava.The reader should be informed, that in many impressions ofthis plate Montsacopa is mis-spelt ' Montescopa,' and MountGarrinada is mis-spelt ' Granada.'Plate I. The shells represented in this plate have beenselected by M. Deshayes as characteristic of the Pliocene periodof the Tables, Appendix I. The greater part of them arecommon both to the older and newer Pliocene periods of thiswork. Eight of the species, Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13, and 14,are now living, but are given as being also found in the OlderPliocene formations. Fusus crispus is not found either recentXXV111 LIST OF PLATES.or in the Miocene or Eocene formations, but occurs both in theNewer and Older Pliocene strata. Mitra plicatula has beenfound only in the older Pliocene deposits. The Turbo rufouswas considered as exclusively Pliocene when selected by M.Deshayes, but M. Bone has since found it in the Miocenestrata at Vienna and Moravia (see Tables, Appendix I. p. 2G).Buccinum semistriatum is also a Miocene shell,, but was insertedas being peculiarly abundant in the Pliocene strata.Plate II. All the shells figured in this plate, except CarolinaAjar, are very characteristic of the Miocene formations;that is to say, they are found in that period and no other.Cardita Ajar is also very common in the Miocene strata, butis also a Recent species. It has not yet been observed in anyPliocene deposit.Plate III. The species of shells figured in this plate arecharacteristic of the Eocene period, as being exclusively confinedto deposits of that period, and for the most part abundantin them.Plate IV. The microscopic shells of the order Cephalicfigured in this plate, are characteristic of the Eoceneperiod, and are distinct from the microscopic shells of the OlderPliocene formations of Italy. The figures are from unpublisheddrawings by M. Deshayes, who has selected some of themost remarkable types of form. The reader will observe, thatthe minute points, figures 4, 8, 11, 14, and 18, indicate thenatural size of the species which are represented. (For observationson these shells see p. 251.)Plate V. Geological Map of the south-cast of England,exhibiting the Denudation of the Weald. This map has beencompiled in great part from Mr. Greenough's Geological Mapof England, and Mr. Mantelll's Map of the south-east ofEngland. (Illustrations of Gcol. of Sussex, and fossils ofVulgate Forest, 1 827.) The eastern extremity of the i denudation' is reduced from Mr. Murchison's Map of that district.(Geol. Trans., 2nd series, vol. ii. part i. plate 14.) The objectof this map is fully explained in chapters xxi. and xxii. of thisvolume.LIST OF WOOD-CUTS.No. Page1. Diagram showing the order of succession of stratified masses . 152. Diagram showing the relative position of the Primary, Secondary,and Tertiary strata . . . . 163. Diagram showing the relative age of the strata of the Paris basin, andthose of the basin of the Loire, in Touraine . . 204. Diagram showing the same in the strata of Suffolk and Piedmont 215. Diagram containing sections in the Val di Not, Sicily . . 64k*l Horizontal sections of dikes near Palagonia . . G98. Section of horizontal limestone in contact with inclined strata of Tuffin the hill of Novera, near Vizzini . . .709. Section of calcareous grit and peperino, east of Palagonia, south sideof the pass . 7210. Section of the same beds on the north side of the pass . . 7211. Outline view of the cone of Etna from the summit of the limestoneplatform of Primosole . . . . 751 2. Section from Paterno by Lago di Naftia to Palagonia . . 7613. Section of beds of clay and sand capped by columnar basalt and conglomerateat La Motta, near Catania . . 7714. View of the Isle of Cyclops, in the Bay of Trezza . . 7915. Diagram showing the contortions in the newer Pliocene strata of theIsle of Cyclops . 8016. Horizontal section showing the invasion of the newer Pliocene strataof the Isle of Cyclops by lava . . . .8117. Wood-cut showing the great valley on the east side of Etna . 8318. Diagram explanatory of the origin of the Valleys of Calanna and St.Giacomo, on Etna . . . . .8619. View of dikes at the base of the Serre del Solfizio, Etna . 9020. View of tortuous dikes or veins of lava, Punto di Guimento, Etna . 9121. View of the rocks Fiuochio, Capra, and Musara, in the Val del Bove 9222. View from the summit of Etna into the Val del Bove . 9323. View of the Valley called Gozzo degli Martini, below Melilli . 11024. Diagram showing the manner of obliteration of successive lines of sea-cliff 1 1 125. View of dikes or veins of lava at the Punto del Nasone, on Somma 12226. Diagram showing the superposition of alluvium and cave deposits containingextinct quadrupeds to a limestone containing recent shells 13927. Diagram showing the position of the Cave of San Caro, near Palermo 14128. Diagram showing the position of Tertiary strata at Genoa . 166XXX LIST OF WOOD-CUTS.No.29. Section from Monte Calvo to the sea by the Valley of Magnan, nearNice . . . . . .16730. Diagram showing the manner in which the Crag may be supposed torest on the chalk . , .17331. Section of shelly crag near Walton, Suffolk . . 17432. Section at the light-house near Happisborough . . 17433. Section of Little Cat Cliff, showing the inclination of the layers ofqttartzose sand in opposite directions . . . 17534. Lamination of shelly sand and loam, near the Signal-House, Walton 17535. Diagram illustrative of the successive deposition of strata . .17636. Section of ripple marks caused by the wind on loose sand . 17637. Bent strata of loam in the cliffs between Cromer and Runton . 17838. Folding of the strata between East and West Runton . 17839. Section in the cliffs east of Sherringham . .17840. Section east of Sherringham, Norfolk . . . 17941. Side view of a promontory of chalk and crag, at Trimmingham, Norfolk 17942. Northern protuberance of chalk, Trimmingham , 1 8043. Map of the volcanic district of Catalonia . * . 18444. Section of volcanic sand and ashes in a valley near Olot . .18745. Section above the bridge of Cellent . . . 18846. Section at Castell Follit . . . * 19047. Superposition of rocks in the volcanic district of Catalonia . 1 9248. Map of the volcanic district of the Lower Rhine . . 19449. View of the Gemunden Maar . . . .19550. Section of the same and other contiguous lake-craters . 1 9651. Section of tertiary strata overly ing chalk near Dax . . 20752. Section explaining the position of the Eocene strata in the Bordeaux basin 20953. Section of Inland cliff near Dax . . . 21054. Position of the Miocene alluviums of Mont Perrier (or Blade) 21755. Section of the fresh water formation of Cadibona i. . 22 156. Map of Auvergne, Cantal, Velay, &c. . , . 22657. Section of Vertical marls near Clermont . . . 231g|* J Superposition of the formations of the Paris basin . . 24360. Section of the Hill of Gergovia near Clermont . . 25961. Lavas of Auvergne resting on alluviums of different ages . , 26762. Map of the principal tertiary basins of the Eocene period . 27563. Section from the London to the Hampshire basin across the Valley ofthe Weald . . ' . . .28864. Section of the country from the confines of the basin of London to thatof Hants, with the principal heights above the level of the sea on atrue scale . . . , . . 28865. View of the chalk escarpment of the South Downs, taken from theDevil's Dike, looking towards the west and south-west . . 290LIST OF WOOD-CUTS. XXXINo. Page66. Chalk escarpment as seen from the hill above Steyning, Sussex. Thecastle and village of Chamber in the foreground . . 29167. Section of lower terrace of firestone . . .29268. Diagram explanatory of anticlinal and synclinal lines . . 293^' J Sections illustrating the gradual denudation of the Weald Valley 294, 29571. Section from the north escarpment of the South Downs to Barcombe 29672. Section of cliffs west of Sherringham . . . 29773. View of the transverse valley of the Adur in the South Downs . 29974. Supposed section of a transverse valley 30075. View of Lewes Coomb . 30176. Section of a fault in the cliff-hills near Lewes . . 30177. Hypothetical section to illustrate the question of the denudation of theWeald Valley . . . . .30478. Ground plan of the Valley of Kingsclere . . .30579. Section across the Valley of Kingsclere from north to south . 30580. Section of the Valley of Kingsclere with the heights on a true scale 30681. Hypothetical section illustrating the denudation of the Weald Valleyand the contemporaneous origin of the Eocene strata . 31082- \ Diagrams illustrative of the relative antiquity of mountain-chains 340, 341oo.)84. Diagram showing the relative position of the Hypogene sedimentaryand volcanic rocks . . . . 35385. Granite veins traversing stratified rocks . . . 35486. Granite veins traversing gneiss at Cape Wrath in Scotland . 35487. Granite veins passing through hornblende slate, Carnsilver Cove,Cornwall . . . . . .35588. View of the junction of granite and limestone in Glen Tilt . 35689. Lamination of clay-slate, Montagne de Seguinat, near Gavarnie, inthe Pyrenees . . . . .36690. Junction of granite with Jurassic or oolite strata in the Alps . 37191. Diagram showing the different order of position in the Plutonic andSedimentary formations of different ages . . . 38892. Diagram to explain the meaning of the term ' fault ',' Glossary . 6893. Diagram to explain the term ' salient angle,' Glossary 79ERRATA.Page 89, line 1 1 from the top, for vivid, read livid.103, line 10 from the top, for newer, read older.1 04, line 9 from the top, for Colosseum, read Coliseum.110, No. of wood-cut, /or No. 22, read No. 23.1 1 1, Ditto, for No. 23, read No. 24.192, line 10 from the bottom, for with, read without.193, line 2 from the bottom, for Von Oyenhausen, read Von Oeynhausen.193, line 3 from the bottom, for M. Noeggerath, read M. Noeggerath.197, line 19 from the top,/o;' Moseberg, read Mosenberg.Stan*7ir,u- <V fjuus ,.--/',- 807V-,,i. proc. .IL. Jiitifimun semi2? Miirn pUca&uIa ///>,./. ^; //.: .MIOCZ.,'f/;:jJB0C3XE TEMTUIMY'-f\IPRINCIPLES OF GEOLOGY.CHAPTER I.Connexion between the subjects treated of in the former parts of this work andthose to be discussed in the present volume Erroneous assumption of theearlier geologists respecting the discordance of the former and actual causesof change Opposite system of inquiry adopted in this work Illustrationsfrom the history of the progress of Geology of the respective merits of thetwo systems Habit of indulging conjectures respecting irregular and extraordinaryagents not yet abandoned Necessity in the present state of scienceof prefixing to a work on Geology treatises respecting the changes now inprogress in the animate and inanimate world.HAVING considered, in the preceding volumes, the actual operationof the causes of change which affect the earth's surface andits inhabitants, we are now about to enter upon a new divisionof our inquiry, and shall therefore offer a few preliminaryobservations, to fix in the reader's mind the connexion betweentwo distinct parts of our work, and to explain in what mannerthe plan pursued by us differs from that more usually followedby preceding writers on Geology.All naturalists, who have carefully examined the arrangementof the mineral masses composing the earth's crust, andwho have studied their internal structure and fossil contents,have recognized therein the signs of a great succession of formerchanges ; and the causes of these changes have been the objectof anxious inquiry. As the first theorists possessed but a scantyacquaintance with the present economy of the animate andinanimate world, and the vicissitudes to which these are subject,we find them in the situation of novices, who attemptto read a history written in a foreign language, doubting aboutthe meaning of the most ordinary terms; disputing, forVOL. in. B2 <c< METKoWciF THEORIZING IN GEOLOGY. [Ch. I.example, whether a shell was really a shell, whether sand andpebbles were the result of aqueous trituration, whether stratificationwas the effect of successive deposition from water;and a thousand other elementary questions which now appearto us so easy and simple, that we can hardly conceive them tohave once afforded matter for warm and tedious controversy.In the first volume we enumerated many prepossessionswhich biassed the minds of the earlier inquirers, and checkedan impartial desire of arriving at truth. But of all the causesto which we alluded, no one contributed so powerfully to give1 rise to a false method of philosophizing as the entire unionsseriousness of the first geologists of the extent of their own/ ignorance respecting the operations of the existing agents ofchange.They imagined themselves sufficiently acquainted with themutations now in progress in the animate and inanimate world,to entitle them at once to affirm, whether the solution of certainproblems in geology could ever be derived from the observationof the actual economy of nature, and having decided thatthey could not, they felt themselves at liberty to indulge theirimaginations,, in guessing at what might be, rather than in inquiringwhat is; in other words, they employed themselves inconjecturing what might have been the course of nature at aremote period, rather than in the investigation of what was thecourse of nature in their own times.It appeared to them more philosophical to speculate on thepossibilities of the past, than patiently to explore the realitiesof the present, and having invented theories under the influenceof such maxims, they were consistently unwilling to test theirvalidity by the criterion of their accordance with the ordinaryoperations of nature. On the contrary, the claims of each newhypothesis to credibility appeared enhanced by the great contrastof the causes or forces introduced to those now developedin our terrestrial system during a period, as it has been termed,of repose.\ Never was there a dogma more calculated to foster indolence,Ch. I.] METHODS OF THEORIZING IN GEOLOGY. 3and to blunt the keen edge of curiosity, than this assumptionof the discordance between the former and the existing causesof change. It produced a state of mind unfavourable in thehighest conceivable degree to the candid reception of the evidenceof those minute,, but incessant mutations, which everypart of the earth's surface is undergoing, and by which thecondition of its living inhabitants is continually made to vary.The student, instead of being encouraged with the hope ofinterpreting the enigmas presented to him in the earth's structure,instead of being prompted to undertake laboriousinquiries into the natural history of the organic world, andthe complicated effects of the igneous and aqueous causes nowin operation, was taught to despond from the first. Geology, itwas affirmed, could never rise to the rank of an exact science,the greater number of phenomena must for ever remain inexplicable,or only be partially elucidated by ingenious conjectures.Even the mystery which invested the subject was said toconstitute one of its principal charms, affording, as it did, fullscope to the fancy to indulge in a boundless field of speculation.The course directly opposed to these theoretical views consistsin an earnest and patient endeavour to reconcile the formerindications of change with the evidence of gradual mutationsnow in progress ; restricting us, in the first instance, to knowncauses, and then speculating on those which may be in activityin regions inaccessible to us. It seeks an interpretation ofgeological monuments by comparing the changes of which theygive evidence with the vicissitudes now in progress, or whichmay be in progress.We shall give a few examples in illustration of the practicalresults already derived from the two distinct methods of theorizing,for we have now the advantage of being enabled tojudge by experience of their respective merits, and by the relativevalue of the fruits which they have produced.In our historical sketch of the progress of geology, the readerhas seen that a controversy was maintained for more than acentury, respecting the origin of fossil shells and bones wereB 24 METHODS OF THEORIZING IN Geology. [Ch. I.they organic or inorganic substances ? That the latter opinionshould for a long time have prevailed, and that these bodiesshould have been supposed to be fashioned into their presentform by a plastic virtue, or some other mysterious agency, mayappear absurd ; but it was, perhaps, as reasonable a conjectureas could be expected from those who did not appeal, inthe first instance, to the analogy of the living creation, asaffording the only source of authentic information. It wasonly by an accurate examination of living testacea, and by acomparison of the osteology of the existing vertebrated animalswith the remains found entombed in ancient strata, that thisfavourite dogma was exploded, and all were, at length, persuadedthat these substances were exclusively of organic origin.In like manner, when a discussion had arisen as to the natureof basalt and other mineral masses, evidently constituting a particularclass of rocks, the popular opinion inclined to a beliefthat they were of aqueous, not of igneous origin. These rocks,it was said, might have been precipitated from an aqueous solution,from a chaotic fluid, or an ocean which rose over the continents,charged with the requisite mineral ingredients. Allare now agreed that it would have been impossible for humaningenuity to invent a theory more distant from the truth ; yetwe must cease to wonder, on that account, that it gained somany proselytes, when we remember that its claims to probabilityarose partly from its confirming the assumed want of allanalogy between geological causes and those now in action.By what train of investigation were all theorists brought roundat length to an opposite opinion, and induced to assent to theigneous origin of these formations ? By an examination ofthe structure of active volcanos, the mineral composition oftheir lavas and ejections, and by comparing the undoubted productsof fire with the ancient rocks in question.We shall conclude with one more example. When theorganic origin of fossil shells had been conceded, their occurrencein strata forming some of the loftiest mountains in theworld, was admitted as a proof of a great alteration of theCh. I.] METHODS OF THEORIZING IN GEOLOGY. 5relative level of sea and land, and doubts were then entertainedwhether this change might be accounted for by the partialdrying up of the ocean, or by the elevation of the solid land.The former hypothesis, although afterwards abandoned bygeneral consent, was at first embraced by a vast majority. Amultitude of ingenious speculations were hazarded to showhow the level of the ocean might have been depressed, andwhen these theories had all failed., the inquiry, as to whatvicissitudes of this nature might now be taking place, was, asusual, resorted to in the last instance. The question was agitated,whether any changes in the level of sea and land hadoccurred during the historical period, and, by patient research,it was soon discovered that considerable tracts of land hadbeen permanently elevated and depressed, while the level ofthe ocean remained unaltered. It was therefore necessary toreverse the doctrine which had acquired so much popularity,and the unexpected solution of a problem at first regarded asso enigmatical, gave perhaps the strongest stimulus ever yetafforded to investigate the ordinary operations of nature. Forit must have appeared almost as improbable to the earlier geologists,that the laws of earthquakes should one day throw lighton the origin of mountains, as it must to the first astronomers,that the fall of an apple should assist in explaining the motionsof the moon.Of late years the points of discussion in geology have beentransferred to new questions, and those, for the most part, ofa higher and more general nature ; but, notwithstanding therepeated warnings of experience, the ancient method of philosophisinghas not been materially modified.We are now, for the most part, agreed as to what rocks areof igneous, and what of aqueous origin, in what manner fossilshells, whether of the sea or of lakes, have been imbedded instrata, how sand may have been converted into sandstone,and are unanimous as to other propositions which are not of acomplicated nature; but when we ascend to those of a higherorder, we find as little disposition, as formerly, to make a strenuouseffort, in the first instance, to search out an explanation in6 METHODS OF THEORIZING IN GEOLOGY. [Ch. Lthe ordinary economy of Nature. If, for example, we seek forthe causes why mineral masses are associated together in certaingroups ; why they are arranged in a certain order which is neverinverted ; why there are many breaks in the continuity of theseries; why different organic remains are found in distinct setsof strata ; why there is often an abrupt passage from an assemblageof species contained in one formation to that in anotherimmediately superimposed, when these and other topics of anequally extensive kind are discussed, we find the habit ofindulging conjectures, respecting irregular and extraordinarycauses, to be still in full force.We hear of sudden and violent revolutions of the globe, ofthe instantaneous elevation of mountain chains, of paroxysmsof volcanic energy, declining according to some, and accordingto others increasing in violence, from the earliest to the latestages. We are also told of general catastrophes and a successionof deluges, of the alternation of periods of repose anddisorder, of the refrigeration of the globe, of the sudden annihilationof whole races of animals and plants, and other hypotheses,in which we see the ancient spirit of speculation revived,and a desire manifested to cut, rather than patiently to untie,the Gordian knot.In our attempt to unravel these difficult questions, we shalladopt a different course, restricting ourselves to the known orI possible operations of existing causes ; feeling assured that we'have not yet exhausted the resources which the study of thepresent course of nature may provide, and therefore that we arenot authorized, in the infancy of our science, to recur to extraordinaryagents. We shall adhere to this plan, not only onthe grounds explained in the first volume, but because, as wehave above stated, history informs us that this method hasalways put geologists on the road that leads to truth, suggestingviews which, although imperfect at first, have been foundcapable of improvement, until at last adopted by universalconsent. On the other hand, the opposite method, that ofspeculating on a former distinct state of things, has led invariablyto a multitude of contradictory systems, which have beenCh. I.] METHODS OF THEORIZING IN GEOLOGY. 7overthrown one after the other, which have been found quiteincapable of modification, and which are often required to beprecisely reversed.In regard to the subjects treated of in our first two volumes,if systematic treatises had been written on these topics, weshould willingly have entered at once upon the description ofgeological monuments properly so called, referring to otherauthors for the elucidation of elementary and collateral questions,just as we shall appeal to the best authorities inconchology and comparative anatomy, in proof of many positionswhich, but for the labours of naturalists devoted tothese departments, would have demanded long digressions.When we find it asserted; for example, that the bones of afossil animal at Meninges were those of man, and the factadduced as a proof of the deluge, we are now able at once todismiss the argument as nugatory, and to affirm the skeletonto be that of a reptile, on the authority of an able anatomist ;and when we find among ancient writers the opinion of the giganticstature of the human race in times of old, grounded on themagnitude of certain fossil teeth and bones, we are able to affirmthese remains to belong to the elephant and rhinoceros, on thesame authority.But since in our attempt to solve geological problems, weshall be called upon to refer to the operation of aqueous andigneous causes, the geographical distribution of animals andplants, the real existence of species, their successive extinction,and so forth, we were under the necessity of collecting togethera variety of facts, and of entering into long trains of reasoning,which could only be accomplished in preliminary treatises.These topics we regard as constituting the alphabet andgrammar of geology ; not that we expect from such studies toobtain a key to the interpretation of all geological phenomena,but because they form the groundwork from which we mustrise to the contemplation of more general questions relating tothe complicated results to which, in an indefinite lapse of ages,the existing causes of change may give rise.CHAPTER II.Arrangement of the materials composing the earth's crust The existing continentschiefly composed of subaqueous deposits Distinction between sedimentaryand volcanic rocks Between primary, secondary, and tertiaryOrigin of the primary Transition formations Difference between secondaryand tertiary strata Discovery of tertiary groups of successive periods Parisbasin London and Hampshire basins Tertiary strata of Bordeaux, Piedmont,Touraine, &c. Subapennine beds English crag More recent depositsof Sicily, &c.GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE MATERIALS COMPOSINGTHE EARTH'S CRUST.WHEN we examine into the structure of the earth's crust (bywhich we mean the small portion of the exterior of our planetaccessible to human observation), whether we pursue our investigationsby aid of mining operations, or by observing the sectionslaid open in the sea cliffs, or in the deep ravines of mountainouscountries, we discover everywhere a series of mineral masses,which are not thrown together in a confused heap, but arrangedwith considerable order ; and even where their original positionhas undergone great subsequent disturbance, there still remainproofs of the order that once reigned.We have already observed, that if we drain a lake, we frequentlyfind'at the bottom a series of recent deposits disposedwith considerable regularity one above the other ; the uppermost,perhaps, may be a stratum of peat, next below a morecompact variety of the same, still lower a bed of laminatedshell marl, alternating with peat, and then other beds ofmarl, divided by layers of clay. Now if a second pit be sunkthrough the same continuous lacustrine deposit, at some distancefrom the first, we often meet with nearly the same series ofbeds, yet with slight variations ; some, for example, of thelayers of sand, clay, or marl may be wanting, one or more ofCh It -j SUBAQUEOUS DEPOSITS.them having thinned out and given place to others, or sometimesone of the masses, first examined, is observed to increasein thickness to the exclusion of other beds. Besides thislimited continuity of particular strata, it is obvious that thewhole assemblage must terminate somewhere ; as, for example,where they reach the boundary of the original lake-basin, andwhere they will come in contact with the rocks which form theboundary of, and, at the same time, pass under all the recentaccumulations.In almost every estuary we may see, at low water, analogousphenomena where the current has cut away part of some newly-formedbank, consisting of a series of horizontal strata of peat,sand, clay, and, sometimes, interposed beds of shells. Each ofthese may often be traced over a considerable area, some extendingfarther than others, but all of necessity confined withinthe basin of the estuary. Similar remarks are applicable, on amuch more extended scale, to the recent delta of a great river,like the Ganges, after the periodical inundations have subsided,and when sections are exposed of the river-banks and the cliffsof numerous islands, in which horizontal beds of clay and sandmay be traced over an area many hundred miles in length, andmore than a hundred in breadth.Subaqueous deposits. The greater part of our continents areevidently composed of subaqueous deposits ; and in the mannerof their arrangement we discover many characters precisely similarto those above described ; but the different groups of strataare, for the most part, on a greater scale, both in regard to depthand area, than any observable in the new formations of lakes,deltas, or estuaries. We find, for example, beds of limestoneseveral hundred feet in thickness, containing imbedded corals andshells, stretching from one country to another, yet always givingplace, at length, to a distinct set of strata, which either rise upfrom under it like the rocks before alluded to as forming theborders of a lake, or cover and conceal it. In other places,we find beds of pebbles, and sand, or of clay of great thickness.The different formations composed of these materials10 VOLCANIC AND PRIMARY ROCKS. [Ch. II.usually contain some peculiar organic remains ; as, for example,certain species of shells and corals, or certain plants.Volcanic rocks. Besides these strata of aqueous origin, wefind other rocks which are immediately recognized to be theproducts of fire, from their exact resemblance to those whichhave been produced in modern times by volcanos, and thuswe immediately establish two distinct orders of mineral massescomposing the crust of the globe the sedimentary and thevolcanic.Primary rocks. But if we investigate a large portion of acontinent which contains within it a lofty mountain range, werarely fail to discover another class, very distinct from either ofthose above alluded to, and which we can neither assimilate todeposits such as are now accumulated in lakes or seas, nor to thosegenerated by ordinary volcanic action. The class alluded to,consists of granite, granitic schist, roofing slate, and many otherrocks, of a much more compact and crystalline texture than thesedimentary and volcanic divisions before mentioned. In theunstratified portion of these crystalline rocks, as in the granitefor example, no organic fossil remains have ever been discovered,and only a few faint traces of them in some of the stratifiedmasses of the same class; for we should state, that a considerableportion of these rocks are divided, not only into strata,but into laminae, so closely imitating the internal arrangementof well-known aqueous deposits, as to leave scarcely any reasonabledoubt that they owe this part of their texture to similarcauses.These remarkable formations have been called primitive,from being supposed to constitute the most ancient mineralproductions known to us, and from a notion that they originatedbefore the earth was inhabited by living beings, andwhile yet the planet was in a nascent state. Their high relativeantiquity is indisputable ; for in the oldest sedimentary strata,containing organic remains, we often meet with rounded pebblesof the older crystalline rocks, which must therefore have beenconsolidated before the derivative strata were formed out ofCh, II.]ORIGIN OF THE PRIMARY ROCKS. 11their ruins, They rise up from beneath the rocks of mechanicalorigin, entering into the structure of lofty mountains, so as toconstitute, at the same time, the lowest and the most elevatedportions of the crust of the globe.Origin of primary rocks. Nothing strictly analogous tothese ancient formations can now be seen in the progress offormation on the habitable surface of the earth, nothing,at least, within the range of human observation. The firstspeculators, however, in Geology, found no difficulty in explainingtheir origin, by supposing a former condition of theplanet perfectly distinct from the present, when certain chemicalprocesses were developed on a great scale, and wherebycrystalline precipitates were formed, some more suddenly, inhuge amorphous masses, such as granite ; others by successivedeposition and with a foliated and stratified structure, as inthe rocks termed gneiss and mica-schist. A great part ofthese views have since been entirely abandoned, more especiallywith regard to the origin of granite, but it is interesting totrace the train of reasoning by which they were suggested.First, the stratified primitive rocks exhibited, as we beforementioned, well-defined marks of successive accumulation,analogous to those so common in ordinary subaqueous deposits.As the latter formations were found divisible into naturalgroups, characterized by certain peculiarities of mineral composition,so also were the primitive. In the next place, therewere discovered, in many districts, certain members of theso-called primitive series, either alternating with, or passingby intermediate gradations into rocks of a decidedly mechanicalorigin, containing traces of organic remains. From suchgradual passage the aqueous origin of the stratified crystallinerocks was fairly inferred ; and as we find in the different strataof subaqueous origin every gradation between a mechanicaland a purely crystalline texture ; between sand, for example,and saccharoid gypsum, the latter having, probably, been precipitatedoriginally in a crystalline form, from water containingsulphate of lime in solution, so it was imagined that, in a12 STRATIFIED PRIMARY ROCKS. [Ch. II.former condition of the planet, the different degrees of crystallizationin the older rocks might have been dependent onthe varying state of the menstruum from which they wereprecipitated.The'presence of certain crystalline ingredients in the compositionof many of the primary rocks, rendered it necessaryto resort to many arbitrary hypotheses, in order to explaintheir precipitation from aqueous solution, and for this reason adifference in the condition of the planet, and of the pristineenergy of chemical causes, was assumed. A train of speculationoriginally suggested by the observed effects of aqueousagents was thus pushed beyond the limits of analogy, and itwas not until a different and almost opposite course of inductionwas pursued, beginning with an examination of volcanicproducts, that more sound theoretical views were established.Granite of igneous origin. As we are merely desirous, inthis chapter, of fixing in the reader's mind the leading divisionsof the rocks composing the earth's crust, we cannot enter, atpresent, into a detailed account of these researches, but shallonly observe, that a passage was first traced from lava into othermore crystalline igneous rocks, and from these again to granite,which last was found to send forth dikes and veins into the contiguousstrata in a manner strictly analogous to that observedin volcanic rocks, and producing at the point of contact suchchanges as might be expected to result from the influence of aheated mass cooling down slowly under great pressure from astate of fusion. The want of stratification in granite suppliedanother point of analogy in confirmation of its igneous origin ;and as some masses were found to send out veins throughothers, it was evident that there were granites of different ages,and that instead of forming in all cases the oldest part of theearth's crust, as had at first been supposed, the granites wereoften of comparatively recent origin, sometimes newer than thestratified rocks which covered them.Stratified primary rocks. The theory of the origin of theother crystalline rocks was soon modified by these new viewsCh. II.]TRANSITION FORMATIONS. 13respecting the nature of granite. First it was shown, by numerousexamples, that ordinary volcanic dikes might produce greatalterations in the sedimentary strata which they traversed, causingthem to assume a more crystalline texture, and obliteratingall traces of organic remains, without, at the same time, destroyingeither the lines of stratification, or even those which mark thedivision into laminae. It was also found, that granite dikes andveins produced analogous, though somewhat different changes ;and hence it was suggested as highly probable, that the effects towhich small veins gave rise, to the distance of a few yards, mightbe superinduced on a much grander scale where immense massesof fused rock, intensely heated for ages, came in contact at greatdepths from the surface with sedimentary formations. The slowaction of heat in such cases, it was thought, might occasion a stateof semi-fusion, so that, on the cooling down of the masses, thedifferent materials might be re-arranged in new forms, accordingto their chemical affinities, and all traces of organic remains mightdisappear, while the stratford and lamellar texture remained.May be of different ages. According to these views, theprimary strata may have assumed their crystalline structure atas many successive periods as there have been distinct eras ofthe formation of granite, and their difference of mineral compositionmay be attributed, not to an original difference of theconditions under which they were deposited at the surface, butto subsequent modifications superinduced by heat at greatdepths below the surface.The strict propriety of the term primitive, as applied to graniteand to the granitiform and associated rocks, thus becamequestionable, and the term primary was very generally substituted,as simply expressing the fact, that the crystallinerocks, as a mass, were older than the secondary, or those whichare unequivocally of a mechanical origin and contain organicremains.Transition formations. The reader may readily conceive,even from the hasty sketch which we have thus given of thesupposed origin of the stratified primary rocks, that they may14 SUCCESSION OF STRATIFIED MASSES. [Ch. II.occasionally graduate into the secondary ; accordingly, an attemptwas made, when the classification of rocks was chieflyderived from mineral structure, to institute an order calledtransition, the characters of which were intermediate betweenthose of the primary and secondary formations. Some of theshales, for example, associated with these strata, often passedinsensibly into clay slates, undistinguishable from those of thegranitic series ; and it was often difficult to determine whethersome of the compound rocks of this transition series, calledgreywacke, were of mechanical or chemical origin. Theimbedded organic remains were rare, and sometimes nearlyobliterated ; but by their aid the groups first called transitionwere at length identified with rocks, in other countries,, whichhad undergone much less alteration, and wherein shells andzoophytes were abundant.The term transition, however, was still retained, althoughno longer applicable in its original signification. It was nowmade to depend on the identity of certain species of organizedfossils ; yet reliance on mineral peculiarities was not fairlyabandoned, as constituting part of the characters of the group.This circumstance became a fertile source of ambiguity andconfusion; for although the species of the transition stratadenoted a certain epoch, the intermediate state of mineralcharacter gave no such indications, and ought never to havebeen made the basis of a chronological division of rocks.Order of succession of stratified masses. All the subaqueousstrata which we before alluded to as overlying the primary,were at first called secondary ; and when they had been founddivisible into different groups, characterised by certain organicremains and mineral peculiarities, the relative position of thesegroups became a matter of high interest. It was soon foundthat the order of succession was never inverted, although thedifferent formations were not extensively distributed ; so that,if there be four different formations, as a, b, c, d, in the annexeddiagram (No. 1), which, in certain localities, may be seenin vertical superposition, the uppermost or newest of them,Ch. II.] CHARACTER OF THE TERTIARY STRATA. 15a, will in other places be in contact with c, or with the lowestNo. 1.of the whole series, c?, all the intermediate formations beingabsent.Tertiary formations. After some progress had been madein classifying the secondary rocks, and in assigning to eachits relative place in a chronological series, another division otsedimentary formations was established, called tertiary, as beingof newer origin than the secondary. The fossil contents ofthe deposits belonging to this newly-instituted order are, uponthe whole, very dissimilar from those of the secondary rocks,not only all the species, but many of the most remarkableanimal and vegetable forms, being distinct. The tertiary formationswere also found to consist very generally of detachedand isolated masses, surrounded on all sides by primary andsecondary rocks, and occupying a position, in reference to thelatter, very like that of the waters of lakes, inland seas, andgulfs, in relation to a continent, and, like such waters, beingoften of great depth, though of limited area. The imbeddedorganic remains were chiefly those of marine animals, but withfrequent intermixtures of terrestrial and freshwater species sorarely found among the secondary fossils. Frequently therewas evidence of the deposits having been purely lacustrine, acircumstance which has never yet been clearly ascertained inregard to any secondary group.We shall consider more particularly, in the next chapter,how far this distinction of rocks into secondary and tertiary isfounded in nature, and in what relation these two orders ofmineral masses may be supposed to stand to each other. Butbefore we offer any general views of this kind, it may be usefulto present the reader with a succinct sketch of the principalTERTIARY STRATA OF THE PARIS BASIN.[Ch. II.points in the history of the discovery and classification of thetertiary strata.Paris Basin. The first series of deposits belonging to thisclass, of which the characters were accurately determined, werethose which occur in the neighbourhood of Paris, first describedby MM. Cuvier and Brongniart*. They were ascertained tofill a depression in the chalk (as the beds d, in diagram No. 2,rest upon c), and to be composed of different materials, somno.2.a, Primary rocks.b, Older secondary formations, c, Chalk.d, Tertiary formation.times including the remains of marine animals, and sometimesof freshwater. By the aid of these fossils, several distinct alternationsof marine and freshwater formations were clearly shownto lie superimposed upon each other, and various speculationswere hazarded respecting the manner in which the sea hadsuccessively abandoned and regained possession of tracts whichhad been occupied in the intervals by the waters of rivers orlakes. In one of the subordinate members of this Parisianseries, a great number of scattered bones and skeletons of landanimals were found entombed, the species being perfectly dissimilarfrom any known to exist, as indeed were those of almostall the animals and plants of which any portions were discoveredin the associated deposits.We shall defer, to another part of this work, a more detailedaccount of this interesting formation, and shall merely observein this place, that the investigation of the fossil contents ofthese beds forms an era in the progress of the science. TheEnvirons de Paris, 1811.Ch.II.] TERTIARY STRATA OF SUCCESSIVE PERIODS. 17French naturalists brought to bear upon their geological researchesso much skill and proficiency in comparative anatomyand conchology, as to place in a strong light the importance ofthe study of organic remains, and the comparatively subordinateinterest attached to the mere investigation of the structure andmineral ingredients of rocks.A variety of tertiary formations were soon afterwards foundin other parts of Europe, as in the south-east of England, inItaly, Austria, and different parts of France, especially in thebasins of the Loire and Gironde, all strongly contrasted tothe secondary rocks. As in the latter class many differentdivisions had been observed to preserve the same mineral charactersand organic remains over wide areas, it was natural thatan attempt should first be made to trace the different subdivisionsof the Parisian tertiary strata throughout Europe, forsome of these were not inferior in thickness to several of thesecondary formations that had a wide range.But in this case the analogy, however probable, was notfound to hold good, and the error, though almost unavoidable,retarded seriously the progress of geology. For as often as anew tertiary' group was discovered, as that of Italy, for example,an attempt was invariably made, in the first instance, todiscover in what characters it agreed with some one or moresubordinate .members of the Parisian type. Every fancied pointof correspondence was magnified into undue importance, andsuch trifling circumstances, as the colour of a bed of sandor clay, were dwelt upon as proofs of identification, while thedifference in the mineral character and organic contents of thegroup from the whole Parisian series was slurred over andthrown into the shade.By the influence of this illusion, the succession and chronologicalrelations of different tertiary groups were kept out ofsight. The difficulty of clearly discerning these, arose fromthe frequent isolation of the position of the tertiary formationsbefore described, since, a proportion as the areas occupiedby them are limited, it is rare to discover a place where oneVOL. in. C18 ORIGIN OF THE EUROPEAN TERTIARY [Ch. II.set of strata overlap another, in such a manner that thegeologist might be enabled to determine the difference of ageby direct superposition.ORIGIN OF THE EUROPEAN TERTIARY STRATA ATSUCCESSIVE PERIODS.We shall now very briefly enumerate some of the principalsteps which eventually led to a conviction of the necessity ofreferring the European tertiary formations to distinct periods,and the leading data by which such a chronological series maybeestablished.London and Hampshire Basins. Very soon after the investigation,before alluded to, of the Parisian strata, those ofHampshire and of the basin of the Thames were examined inour own country. Mr. Webster found these English tertiarydeposits to repose, like those in France, upon the chalk ornewest rock of the secondary series. He identified a greatvariety of the shells occurring in the British and Parisianstrata, and ascertained that, in the Isle of Wight, an alternationof marine and freshwater beds occurred, very analogousto that observed in the basin of the Seine*. But no two setsof strata could well be more dissimilar in mineral composition,and they were only recognized to belong to the same era, byaid of the specific identity of their organic remains. The discordance,in other respects, was as complete as could well beimagined, for the principal marine formation in the one countryconsisted of blue clay, in the other of white limestone, and avariety of curious rocks in the neighbourhood of Paris, hadno representatives whatever in the south of England.Subapennine Beds. The next important discovery of tertiarystrata was in Italy, where Brocchi traced them along theflanks of the Apennines, from one extremity of the peninsulato the other, usually forming a lower range of hills, called byhim the Subapenninesf . These formations, it is true, hadWebster in EnglefielU's Isle of Wight and Geol. Trans., vol. ii. p. 161.f Conch. Foss. Subap., 1814.Ch. II.] STRATA AT SUCCESSIVE PERIODS. 19been pointed out by the older Italian writers, and some correctideas, as we have seen, had been entertained respecting theirrecent origin, as compared to the inclined secondary rocks onwhich they rested*. But accurate data were now for the firsttime collected, for instituting a comparison between them andother members of the great European series of tertiary formations.Brocchi came to the conclusion that nearly one-half ofseveral hundred species of fossil shells procured by him fromthese Subapennine beds were identical with those now livingin existing seas, an observation which did not hold true inrespect to the organic remains of the Paris basin. It mighthave been supposed that this important point of discrepancywould at once have engendered great doubt as to the identity,in age, of any part of the Subapennine beds to any one memberof the Parisian series ; but, for reasons above alluded to,this objection was not thought of much weight, and it wassupposed that a group of strata, called ' the upper marine formation,'in the basin of the Seine, might be represented by allthe Subapennine clays and yellow sand.English Crag. Several years before, an English naturalist,Mr. Parkinson, had observed, that certain shelly strata, inSuffolk, which overlaid the blue clay of London, containeddistinct fossil species of testacea, and that a considerable portionof these might be identified with species now inhabitingthe neighbouring sea-|-. These overlying beds, which wereprovincially termed c Crag,' were of small thickness, and werenot regarded as of much geological importance. But whenduly considered, they presented a fact worthy of great attention,viz., the superposition of a tertiary group, inclosing, likethe Subapennine beds, a great intermixture of recent speciesof shells, upon beds wherein a very few remains of recent orliving species were entombed.Mr. Conybeare, in his excellent classification of the EnglishSee vol. i. p. 51, for opinions of Odoardi, in 1761.t Geol. Trans., vol. i. p. 324. 1811.C 220 ORIGIN OF THE EUROPEAN TERTIARY [Ch. II.strata*, placed the crag as the uppermost of the British series,and several geologists began soon to entertain an opinion thatthis newest of our tertiary formations might correspond in ageto the Italian strata described by Brocchi.Tertiary Strata of Touraine. The next step towards establishinga succession of tertiary periods was the evidenceadduced to prove that certain formations, more recent thanthe uppermost members of the Parisian series, were also olderthan the Subapennine beds, so that they constituted depositsof an age intermediate between the two types above alludedto. M. Desnoyers, for example, ascertained that a group ofmarine strata in Touraine, in the basin of the Loire (e, diagramNo. 3), rest upon the uppermost subdivision of theNo. 3.TouraineC, Chalk and other secondary formations.d, Tertiary formation of Paris basin.e, Superimposed marine tertiary beds of the Loire.Parisian group d, which consists of a lacustrine formation, extendingcontinuously throughout a platform which intervenesbetween the basin of the Seine and that of the Loire. Theseoverlying marine strata, M. Desnoyers assimilated to the Englishcrag, to which they bear some analogy, although their organicremains differ considerably, as will be afterwards shown.A large tertiary deposit had already been observed in thesouth-west of France, around Bordeaux and Dax, and a descriptionof its fossils had been published by M. de Basterotf .Many of the species 'were peculiar, and differed from those ofthe strata now called Subapennine ; yet these same peculiarand characteristic fossils reappeared in Piedmont, in a series ofOutlines of the Geology of England and Wales, 1 822.f Mem. de la Soc. d'Hist, Nat. de Paris, tome ii, 1825.Ch. II.] STRATA AT SUCCESSIVE PERIODS. 21strata inferior in position to the Subapennines (as e underlies,diagram No, 4).No. 4.SuffolkC, Chalk and older formations.d, London clay (older tertiary).e, Tertiary strata of same age as beds of the Loire.f } Crag and Subapennine tertiary deposits.This inferior group, e, composed principally of green sand,occurs in the hills of Mont Ferrat, and beds of the same age areseen in the valley of the Bormida. They also form the hill ofthe Superga, near Turin, where M. Bonelli formed a large collectionof their fossils, and identified them with those discoverednear Bordeaux and in the basin of the Gironde.But we are indebted to M. Deshayes for having proved, bya careful comparison of the entire assemblage of shells found inthe above-mentioned localities, in Touraine, in the south-eastof France, and in Piedmont, that the whole of these threegroups possess the same zoological characters, and belong tothe same epoch, as also do the shells described b}' M. ConstantPrevost, as occurring in the basin of Vienna*.Now the reader will perceive, by reference to the observationsabove made, and to the accompanying diagrams, that oneof the formations of this intervening period, e, has been foundsuperimposed upon the highest member of the Parisian series,d ; while. another of the same set has been observed to under \lie the Subapennine beds, f. Thus the chronological series,d, e, f, is made out, in which the deposits, originally calledtertiary, those of the Paris and London basins, for example,occupy the lowest position, and the beds called ' the Crag,'and f the Subapennines,' the highest.Tertiary Strata newer than the Subapennine. The fossilSur la Constitution, &c. du bassin de Vienna, Douro. d Phys., Nov. 1820.22 NEWEST TERTIARY STRATA. [Ch. II.remains which characterize each of the three successiveperiods above alluded to, approximate more nearly to theassemblage of species now existing, in proportion as theirorigin is less remote from our own era, or, in other words, therecent species are always more numerous, and the extinct morerare, in proportion to the low antiquity of the formation. Butthe discordance between the state of the organic world indicatedby the fossils of the Subapennine beds and the actualstate of things is still considerable, and we naturally ask, arethere no monuments of an intervening period ? no evidences ofa gradual passage from one condition of the animate creationto that which now prevails, and which differs so widely ?It will appear in the sequel, that such monuments are notwanting, and that there are marine strata entering into thecomposition of extensive districts, and of hills of no triflingheight, which contain the exuviae of testacea and zoophytes,hardly distinguishable, as a group, from those now peoplingthe neighbouring seas. Thus the line of demarcation betweenthe actual period and that immediately antecedent, is quiteevanescent, and the newest members of the tertiary series willbe often found to blend with the formations of the historicalera.In Europe, these modern strata have been found in the districtaround Naples, in the territory of Otranto and Calabria,and more particularly in the island of Sicily ; and the bareenumeration of these localities cannot fail to remind the reader,that they belong to regions where the volcano and the earthquakeare now active, and where we might have anticipatedthe discovery of emphatic proofs, that the conversion of seainto land had been of frequent occurrence at very modernperiods.CHAPTER III.Different circumstances under which the secondary and tertiary formations mayhave originated Secondary series formed when the ocean prevailed : Tertiaryduring the conversion of sea into land, and the growth of a continent Originof interruption in the sequence of formations The areas where new depositstake place are always varying Causes which occasion this transference of theplaces of sedimentary deposition Denudation augments the discordance inage of rocks in contact Unconformability of overlying formations In whatmanner the shifting of the areas of sedimentary deposition may combine withthe gradual extinction and introduction of species to produce a series of depositshaving distinct mineral and organic characters.DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE SECONDARYAND TERTIARY FORMATIONS MAY HAVE ORIGINATED.WE have already glanced at the origin of some of the principalpoints of difference in the characters of the primary andsecondary rocks, and may now briefly consider the relation inwhich the secondary stand to the tertiary, and the causes ofthat succession of tertiary formations described in the lastchapter.It is evident that large parts of Europe were simultaneouslysubmerged beneath the sea when different portions of the secondaryseries were formed, because we find homogeneous mineralmasses, including the remains of marine animals, referable tothe secondary period, extending over great areas; whereas thedetached and isolated position of tertiary groups, in basinor depressions bounded by secondary and primary rocks,favours the hypothesis of a sea interrupted by extensive tractsof dry land.State of the Surface when the Secondary Strata were formed.Let us consider the changes that must be expected to accompanythe gradual conversion of part of the bed of an ocean intoa continent, and the different characters that might be imparted21 DIFFERENT ORIGIN OF SECONDARY [Ch. III.to subaqueous deposits formed during the period when the seaprevailed, as contrasted with those that might belong to thesubsequent epoch when the land should predominate. First,we may suppose a vast submarine region, such as the bed ofthe^vvestern Atlantic, to receive for ages the turbid waters ofseveral great rivers, like the Amazon, Orinoco, or Mississippi,each draining a considerable continent. The sediment thusintroduced might be characterized by a peculiar colour andcomposition, and the same homogeneous mixture might bespreadout over an immense area by the action of a powerfulcurrent, like the Gulf-stream. First one submarine basin, andthen another, might be filled, or rendered shallow, by the influxof transported matter, the same species of animals and plantsstill continuing to inhabit the sea, so that the organic, as wellas the mineral characters, might be constant throughout thewhole series of deposits.In another part of the same ocean, let us suppose masses ofcoralline and shelly limestone to grow, like those of the Pacific,simultaneously over a space several thousand miles in length,and thirty or forty degrees of latitude in breadth, while volcaniceruptions give rise, at different intervals, to igneousrocks, having a common subaqueous character in differentparts of the vast area.It is evident that, during such a state of a certain quarterof the globe, beds of limestone and other rocks might beformed, and retain a common character over spaces equal to alarge portion of Europe.State of the Surface when the Tertiary Groups were formed.But when the area under consideration began to be convertedinto land, a very different condition of things wouldsucceed. A series of subterranean movements might first giverise to small rocks and isles, and then, by subsequent elevations,,to larger islands, by the junction of the former. Theselands would consist partly of the mineral masses before described,whether coralline, sedimentary, or volcanic, and partlyCh. III.]AND TERTIARY STRATA. 25of the subjacent rocks, whatever they may have been, whichconstituted the original bed of the ocean. Now the degradationof these lands would commence immediately upon theiremergence, the waves of the sea undermining the cliffs, andtorrents flowing from the surface, so that new strata wouldbegin to form in different places ; and in proportion as thelands increased, these deposits would augment.At length by the continued rising and sinking of differentparts of the bed of the ocean, a number of distinct basinswould be formed, wherein different kinds of sediment, eachdistinguished by some local character, might accumulate.Some of the groups of isles that had first risen would, inthe course of ages, become the central mountain ranges of continents,and different lofty chains might thus be characterizedby similar rocks of contemporaneous origin, the componentstrata having originated under analogous circumstances in theocean before described.Finally, when large tracts of land existed, there would be avariety of disconnected gulfs, inland seas, and lakes, each receivingthe drainage of distinct hydrographical basins, andbecoming the receptacles of strata distinguished by markedpeculiarities of mineral composition. The organic remainswould also be more varied, for in one locality freshwater specieswould be imbedded, as in deposits now forming in the lakes ofSwitzerland and the north of Italy; in another, marine species,as in the Aral and Caspian ; in a third region, gulfs of brackishwater would be converted into land, like those of Bothnia andFinland in the Baltic ; in a fourth, there might be great fluviatileand marine formations along the borders of a chain ofinland seas, like the deltas now growing at the mouths of theDon, Danube, Nile, Po, and Rhone, along the shores of theAzof, Euxine, and Mediterranean. These deposits wouldeach partake more or less of the peculiar mineral character ofadjoining lands, the degradation of which would supply sedimentto the different rivers.Now if such be, in a great measure, the distinction between26 CAUSES OP THE SUPERPOSITION [Ch. Ill,the circumstances under which the secondary and tertiaryseries originated, it is quite natural that particular tertiarygroups should occupy areas of comparatively small extent,that they should frequently consist of littoral and lacustrinedeposits, and that they should often contain those admixturesof terrestrial freshwater, and marine remains, which are sorare in secondary rocks. It might also be expected, that thetertiary volcanic formations should be much less exclusivelysubmarine, and this we accordingly find to be the case.CAUSES OF THE SUPERPOSITION OF SUCCESSIVE FORMATIONSHAVING DISTINCT MINERAL AND ORGANIC CHARACTERS,But we have still to account for those remarkable breaks inthe series of superimposed formations, which are common bothto the secondary and tertiary rocks, but are more particularlyfrequent in the latter.The elucidation of this curious point is the more important,because geologists of a certain school appeal to phenomena ofthis kind in support of their doctrine of great catastrophes,out of the ordinary course of nature, and sudden revolutionsof the globe.It is only by carefully considering the combined action of allthe causes of change now in operation, whether in the animateor inanimate world, that we can hope to explain such complicatedappearances as are exhibited in the general arrangementof mineral masses. In attempting, therefore, to trace theorigin of these violations of continuity, we must re-considermany of the topics treated of in our two former volumes, suchas the effects of the various agents of decay and reproduction,the imbedding of organic remains, and the extinction ofspecies.Shifting of the Areas of Sedimentary Deposition. By revertingto our survey of the destroying and renovating agents,it will be seen that the surface of the terraqueous globe maybedivided into two parts, one of which is undergoing repair,while the other, constituting, at any one period, by far theCh. III.] OF SUCCESSIVE FORMATIONS. 27largest portion of the whole, is either suffering degradation,or remaining stationary without loss or increment. The readerwill assent at once to this proposition, when he reflects thatthe dry land is, for the most part, wasting by the action ofrain, rivers, and torrents, while the effects of vegetation have,as we have shown, only a conservative tendency, being veryrarely instrumental in adding new masses of mineral matterto the surface of emerged lands ; and when he also reflects thatpart of the bed of the sea is exposed to the excavating actionof currents, while the greater part, remote from continentsand islands, probably receives no new deposits whatever, beingcovered for ages with the clear blue waters uncharged withsediment. Here the relics of organic beings, lying in the oozeof the deep, may decompose like the leaves of the forest inautumn, arid leave no wreck behind, but merely supplynourishment, by their decomposition, to succeeding races ofmarine animals and plants.The other part of the terraqueous surface is the receptacleof new deposits, and in this portion alone, as we pointed out inthe last volume, the remains of animals and plants becomefossilized. Now the position of this area, where new formationsare in progress, and where alone any memorials of thestate of organic life are preserved, is always varying, and mustfor ever continue to vary ; and, for the same reason, that portionof the terraqueous globe which is undergoing waste, alsoshifts its position, and these fluctuations depend partly on theaction of aqueous, and partly of igneous causes.In illustration of these positions we may observe, that thesediment of the Rhone, which is thrown into the lake of Geneva,is now conveyed to a spot a mile and a half distant fromthat where it accumulated in the tenth century, and six milesfrom the point where the delta began originally to form. Wemay look forward to the period when the lake will be filled up,and then a sudden change will take place in the distributionof the transported matter ; for the mud and sand broughtdown from the Alps will thenceforth, instead of being deposited28 SHIFTING OF THE AREAS[Ch. III.near Geneva, be carried nearly two hundred miles southwards,where the Rhone enters the Mediterranean.The additional matter thus borne down to the lower deltaof the Rhone would not only accelerate its increase, but mightaffect the mineral character of the strata there deposited, andthus give rise to an upper group, or subdivision of beds, havinga distinct character. But the filling up of a lake, and theconsequent transfer of the sediment to a new place, may sometimesgive rise to a more abrupt transition from one groupto another ; as, for example, in a gulf like that of the St. Lawrence,where no deposits are now accumulated, the river beingpurged of all its impurities in its previous course through theCanadian lakes. Should the lowermost of these lakes be atany time filled up with sediment, or laid dry by earthquakes,the waters of the river would thenceforth become turbid, andstrata would begin to be deposited in the gulf, where a newformation would immediately overlie the ancient rocks nowconstituting the bottom. In this case there would be anabrupt passage from the inferior and more ancient, to thenewer superimposed formation.The same sudden coming on of new sedimentary deposits,or the suspension of those which were in progress, must frequentlyoccur in different submarine basins where there arecurrents which are always liable, in the course of ages, tochange their direction. Suppose, for instance, a sea to befilling up in the same manner as the Adriatic, by the influx ofthe Po, Adige, and other rivers. The deltas, after advancingand converging, may at last come within the action of atransverse current, which may arrest the further deposition ofmatter, and sweep it away to a distant point. Such a currentnow appears to prey upon the delta of the Nile, and to carryeastward the annual accessions of sediment that once addedrapidly to the plains of Egypt.On the other hand, if a current charged with sediment varyits course, a circumstance which, as we have shown, must happento all of them in the lapse of ages, the accumulation ofCh. III.]OF SEDIMENTARY DEPOSITION. 29transported matter will at once cease in one region, and commencein another.Although the causes which occasion the transference of theplaces of sedimentary deposition are continually in action inevery region, yet they are most frequent where subterraneanmovements alter, from time to time, the levels of land, andthey must be immense during the successive elevations anddepressions which must be supposed to accompany the rise ofa great continent from the deep. A trifling change of levelmay sometimes throw a current into a new direction, or alterthe course of a considerable river. Some tracts will be alternatelysubmerged and laid dry by subterranean movements ;in one place a shoal will be formed, whereby the waters willdrift matter over spaces where they once threw down theirburden, and new cavities will elsewhere be produced, bothmarine and lacustrine, which will intercept the waters bearingsediment, and thereby stop the supply once carried to somedistant basin.We have before stated, that a few earthquakes of moderatepower might cause a subsidence which would connect the seaof Azof with a large part of Asia now below the level of theocean. This vast depression, recently shown by Humboldt toextend over an area of eighteen thousand square leagues, surroundsLake Aral and the Caspian, on the shores of whichseas it sinks in some parts to the depth of three hundred feetbelow the level of the ocean. The whole area might thus suddenlybecome the receptacle of new beds of sand and shells,probably differing in mineral character from the masses previouslyexisting in that country, for an exact correspondencecould only arise from a precise identity in the whole combinationof circumstances which should give rise to formationsproduced at different periods in the same place.Without entering into more detailed explanations, the readerwill perceive that, according to the laws now governing theaqueous and igneous causes, distinct deposits must, at differentperiods, be thrown down on various parts of the earth's surface,30 CAUSES OF DIFFERENCE[Ch. III.and that, in the course of ages the same area may become, againand again, the receptacle of such dissimilar sets of strata.During intervening periods, the space may either remain unaltered,or suffer what is termed denudation., in which case asuperior set of strata are removed by the power of runningwater, and subjacent beds are laid bare, as happens wherever asea encroaches upon a line of coast. By such means, it is obviousthat the discordance in age of rocks in contact mustoften be greatly increased.The frequent unconformability in the stratification of theinferior and overlying formation is another phenomenon intheir arrangement, which may be considered as a natural consequenceof those movements that accompany the gradual conversionof part of an ocean into land ; for by such convulsionsthe older set of strata may become rent, shattered,, inclined,and contorted to any amount. If the movement entirely ceasebefore a new deposit is formed in the same tract, the superior.strata may repose horizontally upon the dislocated series. Buteven if the subterranean convulsions continue with increasing-violence,the more recent formations must remain comparativelyundisturbed, because they cannot share in the immense derangementpreviously produced in the older beds, while thelatter, on the contrary, cannot fail to participate in all themovements subsequently communicated to the newer.Change of Species everywhere in progress. If, then, it beconceded, that the combined action of the volcanic and theaqueous forces would give rise to a succession of distinct formations,and that these would be sometimes unconformable, letus next inquire in what manner these groups might becomecharacterized by different assemblages of fossil remains.We endeavoured to show, in the last volume, that the hypothesisof the gradual extinction of certain animals and plants,and the successive introduction of new species, was quite consistentwith all that is known of the existing economy of theanimate world ; and if it be found the only hypothesis whichis reconcilable with geological phenomena, we shall haveCh. III.] OF ORGANIC REMAINS. 31strong grounds for conceiving that such is the order of nature.Fossilization of Plants and Animals partial. We haveseen that the causes which limit the duration of species are notconfined, at any one time, to a particular part of the globe;and, for the same reason, if we suppose that their place issupplied, from time to time, by new species, we may supposetheir introduction to be no less generally in progress.Hence, from all the foregoing premises, it would follow, thatthe change of species would be in simultaneous operation everywherethroughout the habitable surface of sea and land ;whereas the fossilization of plants and animals must always beconfined to those areas where new strata are produced. Theseareas, as we have proved, are always shifting their position, sothat the fossilizing process, whereby the commemoration ofthe particular state of the organic world, at any given time,is effected, may be said to move about, visiting and revisitingdifferent tracts in succession.In order more distinctly to elucidate our idea of the workingof this machinery, let us compare it to a somewhat analogouscase that might easily be imagined to occur in the historyof human affairs. Let the mortality of the population of alarge country represent the successive extinction of species,and the births of new individuals the introduction of newspecies. While these fluctuations are gradually taking placeeverywhere, suppose commissioners to be appointed to visiteach province of the country in succession, taking an exactaccount of the number, names, and individual peculiarities ofall the inhabitants, and leaving in each district a register containinga record of this information. If, after the completionof one census, another is immediately made after the sameplan, and then another, there will, at last, be a series ofstatistical documents in each province. When these arearranged in chronological order, the contents of those whichstand next to each other will differ according to the lengthof the intervals of time between the taking of each census.32 EFFECTS OF DENUDATION.[Ch. III.If, for example, all the registers are made in a single year,the proportion of deaths and births will be so small duringthe interval between the compiling of two consecutive documents,that the individuals described in each will be nearlyidentical ; whereas, if there are sixty provinces, and the surveyof each requires a year, there will be an almost entire discordancebetween the persons enumerated in two consecutive registers.There are undoubtedly some other causes besides the merequantity of time which may augment or diminish the amountof discrepancy. Thus, for example, at some periods a pestilentialdisease may lessen the average duration of human life,or a variety of circumstances may cause the births to beunusually numerous, and the population to multiply ; or, a provincemay be suddenly colonized by persons migrating fromsurrounding districts.We must also remind the reader, that we do not propose theabove case as an exact parallel to those geological phenomenawhich we desire to illustrate ; for the commissioners are supposedto visit the different provinces in rotation, whereas thecommemorating processes by which organic remains becomefossilized, although they are always shifting from one area toanother, are yet very irregular in their movements. They mayabandon and revisit many spaces again and again, before theyonce approach another district ; and besides this source ofirregularity, it may often happen, that while the depositingprocess is suspended, denudation may take place, which may becompared to the occasional destruction of some of the statisticaldocuments before mentioned. It is evident, that where suchaccidents occur, the want of continuity in the series may becomeindefinitely great, and that the monuments which follownext in succession will by no means be equidistant from eachother in point of time.If this train of reasoning be admitted, the frequent distinctnessof the fossil remains, in formations immediately in contact,would be a necessary consequence of the existing laws ofCh. III.] CAUSE OF VIOLATIONS OF CONTINUITY. 33sedimentary deposition, accompanied by the gradual birth anddeath of species.We have already stated, that we should naturally look forachange in the mineral character in strata thrown down atdistant intervals in the same place ; and, in like manner, wemust also expect, for the reason last set forth, to meet occasionallywith sudden transitions from one set of organic remains toanother. But the causes which have given rise to such differencesin mineral characters, have no necessary connexion withthose which have produced a change in the species of imbeddedplants and animals.When the lowest of two sets of strata are much dislocatedover a wide area, the upper being undisturbed,there is usually a considerable discordance in the organic remainsof the two groups ; but this coincidence must not beascribed to the agency of the disturbing forces, as if they hadexterminated the living inhabitants of the surface. The immenselapse of time required for the development of so great aseries of subterranean movements, has in these cases allowedthe species also throughout the globe to vary, and hence thetwo phenomena are usually concomitant.Although these inferences appear to us very obvious, weareaware that they are directly opposed to many populartheories respecting catastrophes ; we shall, therefore, endeavourto place our views in a still clearer light before the reader.Suppose we had discovered two buried cities at the foot ofVesuvius, immediately superimposed upon each other, with agreat mass of tuff and lava intervening, just as Portico andResina, if now covered with ashes, would overlie Herculaneum.An antiquary might possibly be entitled to infer, from the inscriptionson public edifices, that the inhabitants of the inferiorand older town were Greeks, and those of the modern, Italians.But he would reason very hastily, if he also concluded fromthese data, that there had been a sudden change from the Greekto the Italian language in Campania. Suppose he afterwardsfound three buried cities, one above the other, the intermediateVOL. III. D34 CAUSE OF VIOLATIONS OF CONTINUITY. [Ch. III.one being Roman, while, as in the former example, the lowestwas Greek, and the uppermost Italian, he would then perceivethe fallacy of his former opinion, and would begin to suspectthat the catastrophes, whereby the cities were inhumed, mighthave no relation whatever to the fluctuations in the language ofthe inhabitants ; and that, as the Roman tongue had evidentlyintervened between the Greek and Italian, so many otherdialects may have been spoken in succession, and the passagefrom the Greek to the Italian may have been very gradual,some terms growing obsolete, while others were introducedfrom time to time.If this antiquary could have shown that the volcanic paroxysmsof Vesuvius were so governed as that cities should beburied one above the other, just as often as any variationoccurred in the language of the inhabitants, then, indeed, theabrupt passage from a Greek to a Roman, and from a Romanto an Italian city, would afford proof of fluctuations no lesssudden in the language of the people.So in Geology, if we could assume that it is part of the planof nature to preserve, in every region of the globe, an unbrokenseries of monuments to commemorate the vicissitudes of theorganic creation, we might infer the sudden extirpation ofspecies, and the simultaneous introduction of others, as oftenas two formations in contact include dissimilar organic fossils.But we must shut our eyes to the whole economy of theexisting causes, aqueous, igneous, and organic, if we fail toperceive that such is not the plan of Nature.CHAPTER IV.Chronological relations of mineral masses the first object in geological classificationSuperposition, proof of more recent origin Exceptions in regard tovolcanic rocks Relative age proved by included fragments of older rocksProofs of contemporaneous origin derived from mineral characters Variationsto which these characters are liable Recurrence of distinct rocks at successiveperiods Proofs of contemporaneous origin derived from organic remainsZoological provinces are of limited extent, yet spread over wider areas thanhomogeneous mineral deposits Different modes whereby dissimilar mineralmasses and distinct groups of species may be proved to have been contemporaneous.DETERMINATION OF THE RELATIVE AGES OF ROCKS.IN attempting to classify the mineral masses which composethe crust of the earth, the principal object which the geologistmust keep in view, is to determine with accuracy their chronologicalrelations, for it is abundantly clear, that different rockshave been formed in succession ; and in order thoroughly tocomprehend the manner in which they enter into the structureof our continents, we should study them with reference to thetime and mode of their formation.We shall now, therefore, consider by what characters therelative ages of different rocks may be established, whereby wemay be supplied at once with sound information of the greatestpractical utility,, and which may throw, at the same time, thefullest light on the ancient history of the globe.Proofs of relative age by superposition.It is evident that where we find a series of horizontal strata,of sedimentary origin, the uppermost bed must be older thanthose which it overlies, and that when we observe one distinctset of strata reposing upon another, the inferior is the olderof the two. In countries where the original position of mineralD 236 DETERMINATION OF THE [Ch. IV.masses has been disturbed, at different periods, by convulsionsof extraordinary violence, as in the Alps and other mountainousdistricts, there are instances where the original position ofstrata has been reversed ; but such exceptions are rare, and areusually on a small scale, and an experienced observer cangenerally ascertain the true relations of the rocks in question,by examining some adjoining districts where the derangementhas been less extensive.In regard to volcanic formations, if we find a stratum of tuffor ejected matter, or a stream of lava covering sedimentarystrata, we may infer, with confidence, that the igneous rock isthe more recent ; but, on the other hand, the superposition ofaqueous deposits to a volcanic mass does not always prove theformer to be of newer origin. If, indeed, we discover strata oftuff with imbedded shells, or, as in the Valentine and otherplaces, rolled blocks of lava with adhering shells and corals,we may then be sure that these masses of volcanic origin coveredthe bottom of the sea, before the superincumbent strata werethrown down. But as lava rises from below, and does notalways reach the surface, it may sometimes penetrate a certainnumber of strata, and then cool down, so as to constitute asolid mass of newer origin, although inferior in position. It is,for the most part, by the passage of veins proceeding fromsuch igneous rocks through contiguous sedimentary strata, orby such hardening and other alteration of the overlying bed, asmight be expected to result from contact with a heated mass,that we are enabled to decide whether the volcanic matter waspreviously consolidated, or subsequently introduced.Proofs by included fragments of older rocks.A geologist is sometimes at a loss, after investigating a districtcomposed of two distinct formations, to determine therelative ages of each, from want of sections exhibiting theirsuperposition. In such cases, another kind of evidence, of acharacter no less conclusive, can sometimes be obtained. Onegroup of strata has frequently been derived from the degradesIV.] RELATIVE AGES OF ROCKS. 37tion of another in the immediate neighbourhood, and may beobserved to include within it fragments of such older rocks.Thus, for example, we may find chalk with flints, and inanother part of the same country, a distinct series, consisting ofalternations of clay, sand, and pebbles. If some of these pebblesconsist of flints, with silicified fossil shells of the samespecies as those in the chalk, we may confidently infer, that thechalk is the oldest of the two formations.We remarked in the second chapter, that some granite musthave existed before the most ancient of our secondary rocks,because some of the latter contain rounded pebbles of granite.But for the existence of such evidence, we might not have feltassured that all the granite which we see had not been protrudedfrom below in a state of fusion, subsequently to theorigin of the secondary strata.Proofs of contemporaneous origin derived from mineralcharacters.When we have established the relative age of two formationsin a given place, by direct superposition, or by otherevidence, a far more difficult task remains, to trace the continuityof the same formation, or, in other cases, to find meansof referring detached groups of rocks to a contemporaneousorigin. Such identifications in age are chiefly derivable fromtwo sources mineral character and organic contents; but theutmost skill and caution are required in the application ofsuch tests, for scarcely any general rules can be laid down respectingeither, that do not admit of important exceptions.If, at certain periods of the past, rocks of peculiar mineralcomposition had been precipitated simultaneously upon thefloor of an ' universal ocean,' so as to invest the whole earth in asuccession of concentric coats, the determination of relativedates in geology might have been a matter of the greatest simplicity.To explain, indeed, the phenomenon would havebeen difficult, or rather impossible, as such appearances wouldhave implied a former state of the globe, without any analogy38 DETERMINATION OF THE [Ch. IV,to that now prevailing. Suppose, for example, there were threemasses extending over every continent, the upper of chalkand chloride sand ; the next below, of blue argillaceous limestone; and the third and lowest of red marl and sandstone ;we must imagine that all the rivers and currents of the worldhad been charged, at the first period, with red mud and sand ;at the second, with blue calcareo-argillaceous mud ; and at asubsequent epoch, with chalky sediment and chlorine sand.But if the ocean were universal, there could have been noland to waste away by the action of the sea and rivers, and,therefore, no known source whence the homogeneous sedimentarymatter could have been derived. Few, perhaps, of theearlier geologists went so far as to believe implicitly in suchuniversality of formations, but they inclined to an opinion, thatthey were continuous over areas almost indefinite; and sincesuch a disposition of mineral masses would, if true, have beenthe least complex and most convenient for the purposes of classification,it is probable that a belief in its reality was oftenpromoted by the hope that it might prove true. As to theobjection, that such an arrangement of mineral masses couldnever result from any combination of causes now in action, itnever weighed with the earlier cultivators of the science, sincethey indulged no expectation of being ever able to account forgeological phenomena by reference to the known economy ofnature. On the contrary, they set out 5 as we have already seen,with the assumption that the past and present conditions of theplanet were too dissimilar to admit of exact comparison.But if we inquire into the true composition of any stratum,or set of strata and endeavour to pursue these continuouslythrough a country, we often find that the character of themass changes gradually, and becomes at length so different,that we should never have suspected its identity, if we had notbeen enabled to trace its passage from one form to another.We soon discover that rocks dissimilar in mineral compositionhave originated simultaneously; we find, moreover,evidence in certain districts, of the recurrence of rocks of proc.IV.] RELATIVE AGES OF ROCKS. 39wisely the same mineral character at very different periods ; as,for example, two formations of red sandstone, with a greatseries of other strata intervening between them. Such repetitionsmight have been anticipated, since these red sandstonesare produced by the decomposition of granite, gneiss, and mica-schist; and districts composed exclusively of these, must againand again be exposed to decomposition, and to the erosiveaction of running water.But notwithstanding the variations before alluded to inthe composition of one continuous set of strata, many rocksretain the same homogeneous structure and composition,throughout considerable areas, and frequently, after a changeof mineral character, preserve their new peculiarities throughoutanother tract of great extent. Thus, for example, we maytrace a limestone for a hundred miles, and then observe that itbecomes more arenaceous, until it finally passes into sand orsandstone. We may then follow the last-mentioned formationthroughout another district as extensive as that occupied by thelimestone first examined.Proofs of contemporaneous origin derived from organicremains.We devoted several chapters, in the last volume, to showthat the habitable surface of the sea and land may be dividedinto a considerable number of distinct provinces, each peopledby a peculiar assemblage of animals and plants, and we endeavouredto point out the origin of these separate divisions Itwas shown that climate is only one of many causes on whichthey depend, and that difference of longitude, as well as latitude,is generally accompanied by a dissimilarity of indigenousspecies of organic beings.As different seas, therefore, and lakes are inhabited at thesame period, by different species of aquatic animals and plants,and as the lands adjoining these may be peopled by distinctterrestrial species, it follows that distinct organic remains areimbedded in contemporaneous deposits. If it were otherwise40 CONTEMPORANEOUS ORIGIN OF ROCKS [Ch. IV.if the same species abounded in every climate, or even inevery part of the globe where a corresponding temperature,and other conditions favourable to their existence were found,the identification of mineral masses of the same age, by meansof their included organic contents, would be a matter of muchgreater facility.But, fortunately, the extent of the same zoological provinces,especially those of marine animals, is very great, so that weareentitled to expect, from analogy, that the identity of fossilspecies, throughout large areas, will often enable us to connecttogether a great variety of detached and dissimilar formations.Thus, for example, it will be seen, by reference to our firstvolume, that deposits now forming in different parts of theMediterranean, as in the deltas of the Rhone and the Nile,are distinct in mineral composition ; for calcareous rocks areprecipitated from the waters of the former river, while pebblesare carried into its delta, and there cemented, by carbonate oflime, into a conglomerate; whereas strata of soft mud and finesand, are formed exclusively in the Nilotic delta. The Po,again, carries down fine sand and mud into the Adriatic ; butsince this sediment is derived from the degradation of a differentassemblage of mountains from those drained by the Rhoneor the Nile, we may safely assume that there will never be anexact identity in their respective deposits.If we pass to another quarter of the Mediterranean, as, forexample, to the sea on the coast of Campania, or near the baseof Etna in Sicily, or to the Grecian archipelago, we find in allthese localities that distinct combinations of rocks are in progress.Occasional showers of volcanic ashes are falling intothe sea, and streams of lava are flowing along its bottom ;and in the intervals between volcanic eruptions, beds of sandand clay are frequently derived from the waste of cliffs, or theturbid waters of rivers. Limestones, moreover, such as theItalian travertins, are here and there precipitated from thewaters of mineral springs, while shells and corals accumulatein various localities. Yet the entire Mediterranean, where theCh. IV.] PROVED BY ORGANIC REMAINS. 41above-mentioned formations are simultaneously in progress,may be considered as one zoological province ; for, althoughcertain species of testacea and zoophytes may be very local, andeach region may probably have some species peculiar to it, stilla considerable number are common to the whole sea. If,therefore, at some future period, the bed of this inland seashould be converted into land, the geologist might be enabled,by reference to organic remains, to prove the contemporaneousorigin of various mineral masses throughout a space equal inarea to a great portion of Europe. The Black Sea, moreover,is inhabited by so many identical species, that the delta of theDanube and the Don might, by the same evidence, be shownto have originated simultaneously.Such identity of fossils, we may remark, not only enables usto refer to the same era, distinct rocks widely separated fromeach other in the horizontal plane, but also others which maybeconsiderably distant in the vertical series. Thus, for example,we may find alternating beds of clay, sand, and lava,two thousand feet in thickness, the whole of which may beproved to belong to the same epoch, by the specific identity ofthe fossil shells dispersed throughout the whole series. Itmay be objected, that different species would, during the samezoological period, inhabit the sea at different depths, and thatthe case above supposed could never occur ; but, for reasonsexplained in the last volume*, we believe that rivers and tidalcurrents often act upon the banks of littoral shells, so that a seaof great depth may be filled with strata, containing throughouta considerable number of the same fossils.The reader, however, will perceive, by referring to what wehave said of zoological provinces, that they are sometimes separatedfrom each other by very narrow barriers, and for thisreason contiguous rocks may be formed at the same time, differingwidely both in mineral contents and organic remains.Thus, for example, the testacea, zoophytes, and fish of the RedSea, may be considered, as a group, to be very distinct fromChap. xvii. p. 280.42 CONTEMPORANEOUS ORIGIN OF ROCKS [Ch. IV,those inhabiting the adjoining parts of the Mediterranean,although the two seas are only separated by the narrow isthmusof Suez. We shall show, in a subsequent chapter, that calcareousformations have accumulated, on a great scale, in the liedSea, in modern times, and that fossil shells of existing speciesare well preserved therein ; while we know that, at the mouthof the Nile, large deposits of mud are amassed., including theremains of Mediterranean species. Hence it follows that if,at some future period, the bed of the Red Sea should be laiddry, the geologist might experience great difficulties in endeavouringto ascertain the relative age of these formations,which, although dissimilar both in organic and mineral characters,were of synchronous origin.There might, perhaps, be no means of clearing up the obscurityof such a question, yet we must not forget that thenorth-western shores of the Arabian Gulf, the plains of E^vpt.5*7 *and the isthmus of Suez, are all parts of one province of terrestrialspecies. Small streams, therefore, occasional land-floods,and those winds which drift clouds of sand along the deserts,might carry clown into the Tied Sea the same shells of fluviatileand land tcstacea, which the Nile is sweeping into its delta,together with some remains of terrestrial plants, whereby thegroups of strata, before alluded to, might, notwithstanding thediscrepancy of their mineral composition, and marine organicfossils, be shown to have belonged to the same epoch.In like manner, the rivers which descend into the CaribbeanSea and Gulf of Mexico on one side, and into the Pacific onthe other, carry down the same fluviatile and terrestrial spoilsinto seas which are inhabited by different groups of marinespecies.But it will much more frequently happen, that the coexistenceof terrestrial species, of distinct zoological and botanicalprovinces, will be proved by the specific identity of the marineorganic remains which inhabited the intervening space. Thus,for example, the distinct terrestrial species of the south ofEurope, north of Africa, and north-west of Asia, mi-lit all beCh. IV.]PROVED BY ORGANIC REMAINS. 43shown to have been contemporaneous, if we suppose the riversflowing from those three countries to carry the remains ofdifferent species of the animal and vegetable kingdoms into theMediterranean.In like manner, the sea intervening between the northernshores of Australia and the islands of the Indian ocean, containsa great proportion of the same species of corallines andtestacea, yet the land animals and plants of the two regions arevery dissimilar, even the islands nearest to Australia, as Java,New Guinea, and others, being inhabited by a distinct assemblageof terrestrial species. It is well known that there arecalcareous rocks, volcanic tuff, and other strata in progress, indifferentparts of these intermediate seas, wherein marineorganic remains might be preserved and associated with theterrestrial fossils above alluded to.As it frequently happens that the barriers between differentprovinces of animals and plants are not very stronglymarked, especially where they are determined by differences oftemperature, there will usually be a passage from one set ofspecies to another, as in a sea extending from the temperate tothe tropical zone. In such cases, we may be enabled to prove,by the fossils of intermediate deposits, the connexion betweenthe distinct provinces, since these intervening spaces will beinhabited by many species, common both to the temperate andequatorial seas.On the other hand, we may be sometimes able, by aid of apeculiar homogeneous deposit, to prove the former coexistenceof distinct animals and plants in distant regions. Suppose, forexample, that in the course of ages the sediment of a river, likethat of the Red River in Louisiana, is dispersed over an areaseveral hundred leagues in length, so as to pass from the tropicsinto the temperate zone, the fossil remains imbedded in redmud might indicate the different forms which inhabited, at thesame period, those remote regions of the earth.It appears, then, that mineral and organic characters, althoughoften inconstant, may, nevertheless, enable us to establish the44 WIDE RANGE OF MARINE TESTACEA. [Ch. IV.contemporaneous origin of formations in distant countries. Asthe same species of organic beings usually extend over widerareas than deposits of a homogeneous composition, they aremore valuable in geological classification than mineral peculiarities; but it fortunately happens, that where the one criterionfails, we can often avail ourselves of the other. Thus, forexample, sedimentary strata are as likely to preserve the samecolour and composition in a part of the ocean reaching from theborders of the tropics to the temperate zone, as in any otherquarter of the globe; but in such spaces the variation of speciesis always most considerable.In regard to the habitations of species, the marine tribes areof more importance than the terrestrial, not only because theyare liable to be fossilized in subaqueous deposits in the greatestabundance, but because they have, for the most part, awider geographical range. Sometimes, however, it may happen,as we have shown, that the remains of species of someoneprovince of terrestrial plants and animals may be carrieddown into two seas inhabited by distinct marine species ; andhere again we have an illustration of the principle, that whenone means of identification fails, another is often at hand toassist us.In conclusion, we may observe, that in endeavouring toprove the contemporaneous origin of strata in remote countriesby organic remains, we must form our conclusions from a greatnumber of species, since a single species may be enabled tosurvive vicissitudes in the earth's surface, whereby thousandsof others are exterminated. When a change of climate takesplace, some may migrate and become denizens of other latitudes,and so abound there, as to characterize strata of a subsequentera. In the last volume we have stated our reasons for inferringthat such migrations are never sufficiently general tointerfere seriously with geological conclusions, provided we donot found our theories on the occurrence of a small number offossil species.CHAPTER V.Classification of tertiary formations in chronological order Comparative value ofdifferent classes of organic remains Fossil remains of testacea the most of accurately determining species Tables of shells byM. Deshayes Four subdivisions of the Tertiary epoch Recent formationsNewer Pliocene period Older Pliocene period Miocene period Eocene periodThe distinct zoological characters of these periods may not imply suddenchanges in the animate creation The recent strata form a common point ofdeparture in distant regions Numerical proportion of recent species of shellsin different tertiary periods Mammiferous remains of the successive tertiaryeras Synoptical Table of Recent and Tertiary formations.CLASSIFICATION OF TERTIARY FORMATIONS t INCHRONOLOGICAL ORDER.WE explained in the last chapter the principles on which therelative ages of different formations may be ascertained, and wefound the character to be chiefly derivable from superposition,mineral structure, and organic remains. It is by combiningthe evidence deducible from all these sources, that we determinethe chronological succession of distinct formations, andthis principle is well illustrated by the investigation of thoseEuropean tertiary strata to the discovery of which we havealready alluded.It will be seen, that in proportion as we have extended ourinquiries over a larger area, it has become necessary to interrogatenew groups of an age intermediate between those first examined,and we have every reason to expect that, as the scienceadvances, new links in the chain will be supplied, and that thepassage from one period to another will become less abrupt.We may even hope, without travelling to distant regions,without even transgressing the limits of western Europe, torender the series far more complete. The fossil shells, forexample, of many of the Subalpine formations, on the northernlimits of the plain of the Po ; have not yet been carefully coleCLASSIFICATION OF TERTIARY FORMATIONS [Ch. V.elected and compared with those of other countries, and we arealmost entirely ignorant of many deposits known to exist inSpain and Portugal.The theoretical views developed in the last chapter, respectingbreaks in the sequence of geological monuments, will explainour reasons for anticipating the discovery of intermediategradations as often as new regions of great extent are explored.Comparative value of different classes of organic remains.In the mean time, we must endeavour to make the most systematicarrangement in our power of those formations which arealready known, and in attempting to classify these in chronologicalorder, we have already stated that we must chieflydepend on the evidence afforded by their fossil organic contents.In the execution of this task, we have first to considerwhat class of remains are most useful, for although every kindof fossil animal and plant is interesting, and cannot fail tothrow light on the former history of the globe at a certainperiod, yet those classes of remains which are of rare and casualoccurrence, are absolutely of no use for the purposes of generalclassification. If we have nothing but plants in one assemblageof strata, and the bones of mammalia in another, we can obviouslydraw no conclusion respecting the number of species oforganic beings common to two epochs ; or if we have a greatvariety, both of vertebrated animals and plants, in one series,and only shells in another, we can form no opinion respectingthe remoteness or proximity of the two eras. We might, perhaps,draw some conclusions as to relative antiquity, if we couldcompare each of these monuments to a third ; as, for example, ifthe species of shells should be almost all identical with thosenow living, while the plants and vertebrated animals were all extinct; for we might then infer that the shelly deposit was themost recent of the two. But in this case it will be seen thatthe information flows from a direct comparison of the species ofcorresponding orders of the animal and vegetable kingdoms,of plants with plants, and shells with shells ; the only mode ofCh. V.]IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER. 47making a systematic arrangement by reference to organicremains.Although the bones of mammalia in the tertiary strata, andthose of reptiles in the secondary, afford us instruction of themost interesting kind, yet the species are too few, and confinedto too small a number of localities, to be of great importance incharacterizing the minor subdivisions of geological formations.Skeleton of fish are by no means frequent in a good state ofpreservation, and the science of ichthyology must be fartheradvanced, before we can hope to determine their specific characterwith sufficient precision. The same may be said offossil botany, notwithstanding the great progress that hasrecently been made in that department ; and even in regard tozoophytes, which are so much more abundant in a fossil statethan any of the classes above enumerated, we are still greatlyimpeded in our endeavour to classify strata by their aid, inconsequenceof the smallness of the number of recent specieswhich have been examined in those tropical seas where theyoccur in the greatest profusion.Fossil remains of testacea of chief importance. The testaceaare by far the most important of all classes of organic beingswhich have left their spoils in the subaqueous deposits ; theyare the medals which nature has chiefly selected to record thehistory of the former changes of the globe. There is scarcelyany great series of strata that does not contain some marine orfreshwater shells, and these fossils are often found so entire,especially in the tertiary formations, that when disengaged fromthe matrix, they have all the appearance of having been justprocured from the sea. Their colour, indeed, is usually wanting,but the parts whereon specific characters are foundedremain unimpaired ; and although the animals themselves aregone, yet their form and habits can generally be inferred fromthe shell which covered them.The utility of the testacea, in geological classification, isgreatly enhanced by the circumstance, that some forms areproper to the sea, others to the land, and others to freshwater.48 CLASSIFICATION OF TERTIARY FORMATIONS [Ch. V.Rivers scarcely ever fail to carry down into their deltas someland shells, together with species which are at once fluviatileand lacustrine. The Rhone, for example, receives annually,from the Durance, many shells which are drifted down in anentire state from the higher Alps of Dauphine, and thesespecies, such as Bulimus montague, are carried down into thedelta of the Rhone to a climate far different from that of theirnative habitation. The young hermit crabs may often be seenon the shores of the Mediterranean, near the mouth of theRhone, inhabiting these univalves, brought down to them fromso great a distance*. At the same time that some freshwaterand land species are carried into the sea, other individuals ofthe same become fossil in inland lakes, and by this means welearn what species of freshwater and marine testacea coexistedat particular eras ; and from this again we are able to make outthe connexion between various plants and mammifers imbeddedin those lacustrine deposits, and the testacea which lived in theocean at the same time.There are two other characters of the molluscous animalswhich render them extremely valuable in settling chronologicalquestions in Geology. The first of these is a wide geographicalrange, and the second (probably a consequence of the former),is the superior duration of species in this class. It is evidentthat if the habitation of a species be very local, it cannot aid usgreatly in establishing the contemporaneous origin of distantgroups of strata, in the manner pointed out in the last chapter ;and if a wide geographical range be useful in connecting formationsfar separated in space, the longevity of species is noless serviceable in establishing the relations of strata considerablydistant from each other in point of time.We shall revert in the sequel to the curious fact, that intracing back these series of tertiary deposits, many of the existingspecies of testacea accompany us after the disappearance ofall the recent mammalia, as well as the fossil remains of livingM. Marcel de Serres pointed out this fact to me when I visited Montpellier,July, 1828.Ch. V.] IX CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER. 49species of several other classes. We even find the skeletons ofextinct quadrupeds in deposits wherein all the land and freshwatershells are of recent species*.Necessity of accurately determining species. The readerwill already perceive that the systematic arrangement of strata,so far as it rests on organic remains, must depend essentiallyon the accurate determination of species, and the geologistmust therefore have recourse to the ablest naturalists, who havedevoted their lives to the study of certain departments oforganic nature. It is scarcely possible that they who are continuallyemployed in laborious investigations in the field, andin ascertaining the relative position and characters of mineralmasses, should have leisure to acquire a profound knowledge offossil osteology, conchology, and other branches; but it isdesirable that, in the latter science at least, they should becomeacquainted with the principles on which the specific charactersare determined, and on which the habits of species are inferredfrom their peculiar forms. When the specimens are in an imperfectstate of preservation,, or the shells happen to belong togenera in which it is difficult to decide on the species, exceptwhen the inhabitant itself is present, or when any othergrounds of ambiguity arise, we must reject, or lay small stressupon, the evidence, lest we vitiate our general results byfalse identifications and analogies. We cannot do better thanconsider the steps by which the science of botanical geographyhas reached its present stage of advancement, and endeavour tointroduce the same severe comparison of the specific characters,in drawing all our geological inferences.Tables of shells by M. Deshayes. In the Appendix the readerwill find a tabular view of the results obtained by the comparisonof more than three thousand tertiary shells, with nearly fivethousand living species, all of which, with few exceptions, arecontained in the rich collection of M. Deshayes. Having enjoyedan opportunity of examining, again and again, the specimenson which this eminent conchologist has founded his identifiesvol. i. chap. vi.VOL. III. E50 M. DESHAYES' TABLES OF SHELLS. [Ch. V.tons, and having been witness to the great time and labourdevoted by him to this arduous work, I feel confidence in theresults, so far as the data given in his list will carry us. It wasnecessary to compare nearly forty thousand specimens, in orderto construct these tables, since not only the varieties of everyspecies required examination, but the different individuals, also,belonging to each which had been found fossil in various localities.The correctness of the localities themselves was ascertainedwith scrupulous exactness, together with the relativeposition of the strata ; and if any doubts existed on these questions,the specimens were discarded as of no geological value. Alarge proportion of the shells were procured, by M. Deshayeshimself, from the Paris basin, many were contributed by differentFrench geologists, and some were collected by myselffrom different parts of Europe.It would have been impossible to give lists of more thanthree thousand fossil shells in a work not devoted exclusivelyto conchology ; but we were desirous of presenting the readerwith a catalogue of those fossils which M. Deshayes has beenable to identify with Jiving species, as also of those which arecommon to two distinct tertiary eras. By this means a comparisonmay be made of the testacea of each geological epoch,with the actual state of the organic creation, and, at the sametime, the relations of different tertiary deposits to each otherexhibited. The number of shells mentioned by name in thetables, in order to convey this information, is seven hundredand eighty-two, of which four hundred and twenty-six havebeen found both living and fossil, and three hundred and fifty-sixfossil only, but in the deposits of more than one era. Anexception, however, to the strictness of this rule, has been madein regard to the fossil shells common to the London and Parisbasins, fifty-one of which have been enumerated by name,though these formations do not belong to different eras.It has been more usual for geologists to give tables of characteristicshells ; that is to say, of those found in the strataof one period and not common to any other. These typicalspecies are certainly of the first importance, and some of themCh. V.]DETERMINATION OF SPECIES. 51will be seen figured in the plates, illustrative of the differenttertiary eras ; but we were more anxious, in this work, to placein a clear light, a point of the greatest theoretical interest, whichhas been often overlooked or controverted, viz., the identity ofmany living and fossil species, as also the connexion of thezoological remains of deposits formed at successive periods.The value of such extensive comparisons, as those of whichthe annexed tables of M. Deshayes give the results, dependsgreatly on the circumstance, that all the identifications have Ibeen made by the same naturalist. The amount of variationwhich ought to determine a species is, in cases where they approachnear to each other, a question of the nicest discrimination,and requires a degree of judgment and tact that can hardlybe possessed by different zoologists in exactly the same degree.The standard, therefore, by which differences are to be measured,can scarcely ever be perfectly invariable, and one greatobject to be sought for is, that, at least, it should be uniform.If the distinctions are all made by the same naturalist, and hisknowledge and skill be considerable, the results may be reliedon with sufficient confidence, as far as regards our geologicalconclusions.If one conchologist should inform us that out of 1122 speciesof fossil testacea, discovered in the Paris basin, he has onlybeen enabled to identify thirty-eight with recent species, whileanother should declare, that out of two hundred and twenty-sixSicilian fossil shells, no less than two hundred and sixteen belongedto living species, we might suspect that one of theseobservers allowed a greater degree of latitude to the variabilityof the specific character than the other; but when, in both instances,the conclusions are drawn by the same eminent conchologist,we are immediately satisfied that the relations of thesetwo groups, to the existing state of the animate creation, are asdistinct as are indicated by the numerical results.It is not pretended that the tables, to which we refer, compriseall the known tertiary shells. In the museums of Italythere are magnificent collections, to which M. Deshayes had noE252 SUBDIVISIONS or [Ch. V.access, and the additions to the recent species in the cabinetsof conchologists in London, have been so great of late years,that in many extensive genera the number of species has beenmore than doubled. But as the greater part of these newly-discoveredshells have been brought from the Pacific and otherdistant seas, it is probable that these accessions would not materiallyalter the results given in the tables,, and it must, at allevents, be remembered, that the only effect of such additionalinformation would be to increase the number of identificationsof recent with fossil species, while the proportional number ofanalogues in the different periods might probably remainnearly the same.SUBDIVISIONS OF THE TERTIARY EPOCH.Recent formations. We shall now proceed to consider thesubdivisions of tertiary strata which may be founded on theresults of a comparison of their respective fossils, and to givenames to the periods to which they each belong. The tertiaryepoch has been divided into three periods in the tables ; weshall. however ; endeavour to establish four, all distinct from theactual period, or that which has elapsed since the earth has beentenanted by man. To the events of this latter era, which weshall term the recent, we have exclusively confined ourselves inthe two preceding volumes. All sedimentary deposits, all volcanicrocks, in a word, every geological monument, whetherbelonging to the animate or inanimate world, which appertainsto this epoch, may be termed recent. Some recent species, therefore,are found fossil in various tertiary periods, and, on theother hand, others, like the Dodo, may be extinct, for it is sufficientthat they should once have coexisted with man, to makethem referable to this era.Some authors apply the term contemporaneous to all theformations which have originated during the human epoch ;but as the word is so frequently in use to express the synchronousorigin of distinct formations, it would be a source of greatinconvenience and ambiguity, if we were to attach to it a technicalsense.Ch. V.] THE TERTIARY EPOCH. 53We may sometimes prove, that certain strata belong to therecent period by aid of historical evidence, as parts of the deltaof the Po, Rhone, and Nile, for example; at other times, bydiscovering imbedded remains of man or his works ; but whenwe have no evidence of this kind, and we hesitate whether toascribe a particular deposit to the recent era, or that immediatelypreceding, we must generally incline to refer it to thelatter, for it will appear in the sequel, that the changes of thehistorical era are quite insignificant when contrasted with thoseeven of the newest tertiary period.Never Pliocene period. This most modern of the foursubdivisions of the whole tertiary epoch, we propose to call theNewer Pliocene, which, together with the Older Pliocene, constituteone group in the annexed tables of M. Deshayes.We derive the term Pliocene from vXsiav, major, and x/vor,recens, as the major part of the fossil testacea of this epoch arereferable to recent species*. Whether in all cases there mayhereafter prove to be an absolute preponderance of recentspecies, in every group of strata assigned to this period in thetables, is very doubtful; but the proportion of living species,where least considerable, usually approaches to one-half of thetotal number, and appears always to exceed a third ; and as ouracquaintance with the testacea of the Mediterranean, and someother seas, increases, it is probable that a greater proportionwill be identified.In the terms Pliocene, Miocene, and Eocene, the Greek diphthongs ei andai are changed into the vowels i and e, in conformity with the idiom of our language.Thus we have Eugenia, an inaugural ceremony, derived from iv andKKIVOS, recens; and as examples of the conversion of ei into i, we have icosahedron.I have been much indebted to my friend, the Rev. W. Wheel, for assistingme in inventing and anglicizing these terms, and I sincerely wish that the numerousforeign diphthongs, barbarous terminations, and Latin plurals, which havebeen so plentifully introduced of late years into our scientific language, had beenavoided as successfully as they are by French Naturalists, and as they were by theearlier English writers, when our language was more flexible than it is now. Butwhile I commend the French for accommodating foreign terms to the structure oftheir own language, I must confess that no naturalists have been more scholarsin their mode of fabricating Greek derivatives and compounds, many of thelatter being a bastard offspring of Greek and Latin.54 SUBDIVISIONS OF [Ch. V.The newer Pliocene formations, before alluded to, pass insensiblyinto those of the Recent epoch, and contain an immensepreponderance of recent species. It will be seen that of twohundred and twenty-six species, found in the Sicilian beds,only ten are of extinct or unknown species, although the antiquityof these tertiary deposits, as contrasted with our mostremote historical eras, is immensely great. In the volcanicand sedimentary strata of the district round Naples, the proportionappears to be even still smaller.Older Pliocene period. These formations, therefore, andothers wherein the plurality of living species is so very decided,we shall term the Newer Pliocene, while those of the tertiaryperiod immediately preceding may be called the Older Pliocene.To the latter belong the formations of Tuscany, and of the Sub-apenninehills in the north of Italy, as also the English Crag.It appears that in the period last mentioned, the proportionof recent species varies from upwards of a third to somewhatmore than half of the entire number ; list it must be recollected,that this relation to the recent epoch is^o^jiniof itszoological characters, and that certain peculiar species of, also distinguish its deposits from all other strata. The"relative position of the beds referable to this era has been explainedin diagrams Nos. 3 and 4, letter, chapter II.Miocene period. The next antecedent tertiary epoch weshall name Miocene, from /w,ewv, minor, and xatvor, recens, aminority only of fossil shells imbedded in the formations of thisperiod, being of recent species. The total number of Mioceneshells, referred to in the annexed tables, amounts to 1021, ofwhich one hundred and seventy-six only are recent, being inthe proportion of rather Jessjhan eighteen in one hundred.Of species common to this period, and to the two divisions ofthe Pliocene epoch before alluded to, there are one hundred andninety-six, whereof one hundred and fourteen are living, andthe remaining eighty-two extinct, or only known as fossil.As there are a certain number of fossil species which arecharacteristic of the Pliocene strata before described, so alsoV.]THE TERTIARY EPOCH. 55there are many shells exclusively confined to the Mioceneperiod. We have already stated, that in Touraine and inthe South of France near Bordeaux, in Piedmont, in thebasin of Vienna, and other localities, these Miocene formationsare largely developed, and their relative position has beenshown in diagrams Nos. 3 and 4, letter e, chapter II.Eocene period. The period next antecedent we shall callEocene, from MS, aurora, and xouvof, recens, because the extremelysmall proportion of living species contained in thesestrata, indicates what may be considered the first commencement,or dawn, of the existing state of the animate creation.To this era the formations first called tertiary, of the Paris andLondon basins, are referable. Their position is shown in thediagrams Nos. 3 and 4, letter d, in the second chapter.The total number of fossil shells of this period already known,is one thousand two hundred and thirty-eight, of which numberforty-two only are living species, being nearly in the proportionof threejindyj L half jn j onjg , Jmndr^d . Of fossil species,not known as recent, forty-two are common to the Eocene andMiocene epochs. In the Paris basin alone, 1122 species havebeen found fossil, of which thirty-eight only are still living.The geographical distribution of those recent species whichare found fossil in formations of such high antiquity as thoseof the Paris and London basins, is a subject of the highestinterest.It will be seen by reference to the tables, that in the moremodern formations, where so large a proportion of the fossilshells belong to species still living, they also belong, for themost part, to species now inhabiting the seas immediately adjoiningthe countries where they occur fossil ; whereas therecent species, found in the older tertiary strata, are frequentlyinhabitants of distant latitudes, and usually of warmer climates.Of the forty-two Eocene species, which occur fossil in England,France, and Belgium, and which are still living, about halfnow inhabit within, or near the tropics, and almost all the restare denizens of the more southern parts of Europe. If some56 SUBDIVISIONS OF [Ch. V.Eocene species still flourish in the same latitudes where theyare found fossil, they are species which, like Lucina divaricata,are now found in many seas, even those of different quarters ofthe globe, and this wide geographical range indicates a capacity ofenduring a variety of external circumstances, which may enablea species to survive considerable changes of climate and other revolutionsof the earth's surface. One fluviatile species (Melaniainquinata), fossil in the Paris basin, is now only known in thePhilippine islands, and during the lowering of the temperatureof the earth's surface, may perhaps have escaped destruction bytransportation to the south. We have pointed out in the secondvolume (chap, vii), how rapidly the eggs of freshwater speciesmight, by the instrumentality of water-fowl, be transportedfrom one region to another. Other Eocene species, which stillsurvive and range from the temperate zone to the equator, mayformerly have extended from the pole to the temperate zone,and what was once the southern limit of their range may nowbe the most northern.Even if we had not established several remarkable facts inattestation of the longevity of certain tertiary species, we mightstill have anticipated that the duration of the living species ofaquatic and terrestrial testacea would be very unequal. Forit is clear that those which now inhabit many different regionsand climates, may survive the influence of destroying causes,which might extirpate the greater part of the species now living.We might expect, therefore, some species to survive severalsuccessive states of the organic world, just as Nestor was saidto have outlived three generations of men.The distinctness of periods may indicate our imperfect information.In regard to distinct zoological periods, the readerwill understand, from our observations in the third chapter,that we consider the wide lines of demarcation that sometimesseparaledifferent tertiary epochs, Us quite unconnected withextraordinary revolutions of the surface of the globe, and asarising, partly, like chasms in the history of nations, out of thepresent imperfect state of our information, and partly fromCh. V.] THE TERTIARY EPOCH. 57the irregular manner in which geological memorials are preserved,as already explained. We have little doubt that itwill be necessary hereafter to interrogate other periods, andthat many of the deposits, now referred to a single era,, will befound to have been formed at very distinct periods of time, sothat, notwithstanding our separation of tertiary strata into fourgroups, we shall continue to use the term contemporaneouswith a great deal of latitude.We throw out these hints, because we are apprehensive lestzoological periods in Geology, like artificial divisions in otherbranches of Natural History, should acquire too much importance,from being supposed to be founded on some great interruptionsin the regular series of events in the organic world,whereas, like the genera and orders in zoology and botany,we ought to regard them as invented for the convenience ofsystematic arrangement, always expecting to discover intermediategradations between the boundary lines that we have firstdrawn.In Natural History we select a certain species as a generictype, and then arrange all its congeners in a series, accordingto the degrees of their deviation from that type, or accordingas they approach to the characters of the genus which precedesor follows. In like manner, we may select certain Geologicalformations as typical of particular epochs ; and havingaccomplished this step, we may then arrange the groups referredto the same period in chronological order, according as theydeviate in their organic contents from the normal groups, oraccording as they approximate to the type of an antecedent orsubsequent epoch.If intermediate formations shall hereafter be found betweenthe Eocene and Miocene, and between those of the last periodand the Pliocene, we may still find an appropriate place for all,by forming subdivisions on the same principle as that whichhas determined us to separate the lower from the upper Pliocenegroups. Thus, for example, we might have three divisionsof the Eocene epoch, the older, middle, and newer ; and58 NUMERICAL PROPORTION OF RECENT SHELLS [Ch. V.three similar subdivisions, both of the Miocene and Plioceneepochs. In that case, the formations of the middle periodmust be considered as the types from which the assemblage oforganic remains in the groups immediately antecedent or subsequentwill diverge.The Recent strata form a common point of departure in allcountries. We derive one great advantage from beginning ourclassification of formations by a comparison of the fossils of themore recent strata with the species now living, namely, the acquisitionof a common point of departure in every region of theglobe. Thus, for example, if strata should be discovered inIndia or South America, containing the same small proportionof recent shells as are found in the Paris basin, they also mightbe termed Eocene, and, on analogous data, an approximationmight be made to the relative dates of strata placed in the arcticand tropical regions, or the comparative age ascertained ofEuropean deposits, and those which are trodden by our antipodes.There might be no species common to the two groups; yetwe might infer their synchronous origin from the commonrelation which they bear to the existing state of the animatecreation. We may afterwards avail ourselves of the datesthus established, as eras to which the monuments of precedingperiods may be referred.Numerical proportion of recent shells in the different Tertiaryperiods. There are seventeen species of shells discovered,which are common to all the tertiary periods, thirteen of whichare still living, while four are extinct, or only known as fossil*.These seventeen species show a connexion between all thesegeological epochs, whilst we have seen that a much greaternumber are common to the Eocene and Miocene periods, and astill greater to the Miocene and Pliocene.We have already stated, that in the older tertiary formations,we find a very small proportion of fossil species identical withSee the Talks of M. Jkshaycs in Appendix I.Ch. V.] IN DIFFERENT TERTIARY PERIODS. 59those now living, and that, as we approach the superior andnewer sets of strata, we find the remains of existing animalsand plants in greater abundance. It is almost as difficult tofind an unknown species in some of the newer Pliocene deposits,although very ancient and elevated at great heightsabove the level of the sea, as to meet with recent species inthe Eocene strata.This increase of existing species, and gradual disappearanceof the extinct, as we trace the series of formations from theolder to the newer, is strictly analogous, as we before observed,to the fluctuations of a population such as might be recordedat successive periods, from the time when the oldest of theindividuals now living was born to the present moment. Thedisappearance of persons who never were contemporaries of thegreater part of the present generation, would be seen to havekept pace with the birth of those who now rank amongst theoldest men living, just as the Eocene and Miocene species areobserved to have given place to those Pliocene testacea whichare now contemporary with man.In reference to the organic remains of the different groupswhich we have named, we may say that about a thirtieth partof the Eocene shells are of recent species, about one-fifth ofthe Miocene, more than a third, and often more than half, ofthe older Pliocene, and nine-tenths of the newer Pliocene.Mammiferous remains of the successive tertiary eras. Butalthough a thirtieth part of the Eocene testacea have beenidentified with species now living, none of the associated remains belong to species which now exist, either inEurope or elsewhere. Some of these equalled the horse, andothers the rhinoceros, in size, and they could not possibly haveescaped observation, had they survived down to our time.More than forty of these Eocene mammifers are referable to adivision of the order Pachydermata, which has now only fourliving representatives on the globe. Of these, not only thespecies but the genera are distinct from any of those whichhave been established for the classification of living animals.60 TERTIARY MAMMIFEROUS REMAINS. [Qh. V.In the Miocene mammalia we find a few of the generic formsmost frequent in the Eocene strata associated with some ofthose now existing, and in the Pliocene we find an intermixtureof extinct and recent species of quadrupeds. There is, therefore,a considerable degree of accordance between the resultsdeducible from an examination of the fossil testacea, and thosederived from the mammiferous fossils-but although the latterare more important in respect to the unequivocal evidenceafforded by them of the extinction of species, yet, for reasonsbefore explained, they are of comparatively small value in thegeneral classification of strata in Geology.It will appear evident, from what we have said in the lastvolume respecting the fossilization of terrestrial species, thatthe imbedding of their remains depends on rare casualties, andthat they are, for the most part, preserved in detached alluvionscovering the emerged land, or in osseous breccias andstalagmites formed in caverns and fissures, or in isolated lacustrineformations. These fissures and caves may sometimesremain open during successive geological periods, and the alluvions,spread over the surface, may be disturbed, again andagain, until the mammalia of successive epochs are mingledand confounded together. Hence we must be careful, whenwe endeavour to refer the remains of mammalia to certain tertiaryperiods, that we ascertain, not only their association withtestacea of which the date is known, but, also, that the remainswere intermixed in such a manner as to leave no doubt of theformer coexistence of the species.In the next page will be found a Synoptical Table of theRecent and Tertiary formations alluded to in this chapter.N.B. By aid of this table, the reader will be able to referalmost all the localities of the Pliocene formations enumeratedin the Tables of M. Deshayes (Appendix I.) to the newer orolder division of the Pliocene period established in the foregoingchapter.Synoptical Table of Recent and Tertiary Formations.PERIODS.CharacterofFormations.Localities of the different Formations.I. RECENT.Marine. / Coral formations of Pacific.I Delta of Po, Ganges, &c.Freshwater. j Modern deposits in Lake SuperiorLake of Geneva Marl lakes ofI Scotland Italian travertin, &c.Volcanic.II. TERTIARY.Marine.1. NewerPliocene.Freshwater.Volcanic.Marine.2. OlderPliocene.Freshwater.Volcanic.Marine.3. Miocene. -.Freshwater.Volcanic.Marine.4. Eocene. 4Freshwater.Volcanic.I Jorullo Monte Nuovo Modernlavas of Iceland, Etna, Vesuvius,I &c.f Strata of the Val di Not in Sicily.I Ischia, Morea? Uddevalla.Valley of the Elsa around Colle inTuscany.Older parts of Vesuvius, Etna, andIschia Volcanic rocks of theVal di Not in Sicily.Northern Subapennine formations, asat Parma, Asti, Sienna, Perpignan,Nice English Crag.Alternating with marine beds nearthe town of Sienna.Volcanos of Tuscany and Campagnadi Roma.j Strata of Touraine, Bordeaux, Valley\oftheBormida, and the Superganear Turin Basin of Vienna.f Alternating with marine at Saucats,I twelve miles south of Bordeaux.(Hungarian and Transylvanian volcanicrocks.Part of the volcanos of Auvergne,Cantal, and Velay ?Paris and London Basins.Alternating with marine in Paris basinIsle of Wight purely lacustrinein Auvergne, Cantal, andVelay.Oldest part of volcanic rocks of Auvergne.CHAPTER VI.Newer Pliocene formations Reasons for considering in the first place the moremodern periods Geological structure of Sicily Formations of the Val di Notof newer Pliocene period Divisible into three groups Great limestone-schistsand arenaceous limestone Blue marl with shells Strata subjacentto the above Volcanic rocks of the Val di Not Dikes Ruffs and PeperinosVolcanic conglomerates Proofs of long intervals between volcanic eruptionsDip and direction of newer Pliocene strata of Sicily.NEWER PLIOCENE FORMATIONS.HAVING endeavoured, in the last chapter, to explain the principleson which the different tertiary formations may be arrangedin chronological order, we shall now proceed to considerthe newest division of formations, or that which we have namedthe newer Pliocene.It may appear to some of our readers, that we reverse thenatural order of historical research by thus describing, in thefirst place, the monuments of a period which immediately precededour own era, and passing afterwards to the events ofantecedent ages. But, in the present state of our science, thisretrospective order of inquiry is the only one which can conductus gradually from the known to the unknown, from thesimple to the more complex phenomena. We have alreadyexplained our reasons for beginning this work with an examination,in the first two volumes, of the events of the recentepoch, from which the greater number of rules of interpretationin geology may be derived. The formations of the newerPliocene period will be considered next in order, because thesehave undergone the least degree of alteration, both in positionand internal structure, subsequently to their origin. They aremonuments of which the characters are more easily decipheredthan those belonging to more remote periods, for they have beenless mutilated by the hand of time. The organic remains, moreCh. VI.] GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF SICILY. 63especially of this era, are most important, not only as being inamore perfect state of preservation, but also as being chieflyreferable to species now living ; so that their habits are knownto us by direct comparison, and not merely by inference fromanalogy,, as in the case of extinct species.Geological structure of Sicily. We shall first describe anextensive district in Sicily, where the newer Pliocene strata arelargely developed, and where they are raised to considerableheights above the level of the sea. After presenting the readerwith a view of these formations, we shall endeavour to explainthe manner in which they originated, and speculate on thesubterranean changes of which their present position affordsevidence.The island of Sicily consists partly of primary and secondaryrocks, which occupy, perhaps, about two-thirds of its superficialarea*, and the remaining part is covered by tertiaryformations, which are of great extent in the southern and centralparts of the island, while portions are found borderingnearly the whole of the coasts.Formations of the Val di Noto.-If we first turn our attentionto the Val di Not, a district which intervenes betweenEtna and the southern promontory of Sicily, we find a considerabletract, containing within it hills which are from one totwo thousand feet in height, entirely composed of limestone,marl, sandstone, and associated volcanic rocks, which belong tothe newer Pliocene era. The recent shells of the Mediterraneanabound throughout the sedimentary strata, and there areabundant proofs that the igneous rocks were the produce ofsuccessive submarine eruptions, repeated at intervals duringthe time when the subaqueous formations were in progress.These rising grounds of the Val di Not are separated fromthe cone of Etna, and the marine strata whereon it rests, by thelow level plain of Catania, just elevated above the level of thesea, and watered by the Simeto, The traveller who passesWe may shortly expect a full account of the Geology of this island fromProfessor Hoffmannn, who has devoted more than a year to its examination.NKWF.R PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. VI.from Catania to Syracuse, has an opportunity of observing,on the sides of the valley, many deep sections of the modernformations above described, especially if he makes a slightdetour by Sortino and the Valley of Pentalica.The whole series of strata, in the Val di Not, is divisibleinto three principal groups, exclusive of the associated volcanicrocks. The uppermost mass consists of limestone,, which sometimesacquires the enormous thickness of seven or eight himdred feet, below which is a series much inferior in thickness,consisting; of a calcareous sandstone, conglomerate and schistoseO ' Olimestone, and beneath this again, blue marl. The whole ofthe above groups contain shells and zoophytes, nearly all ofwhich arc referable to species now inhabiting the contiguoussea.Castrojriovanni. No. 5.Girgenti.a, Great limestone of Val di Not.It, Schistose and arenaceous limestone of Floridia ; &c.c, Blue marl with shells.d, White laminated marle,Blue clay and gypsum, c. without shells.Great limestone formation (a, diagram No. 5). In mineralcharacter this rock often corresponds to the yellowish whitebuilding-stone of Paris, well known by the name of Calcaireogrowler, but it often passes into a much more compact stone.In the deep ravine-like valleys of Sortino and Pentalica, it isseen in nearly horizontal strata, as solid and as regularly beddedas the greater part of our ancient secondary formations. Itabounds in natural caverns, which, in many places, as in thevalley of Pentalica, have been enlarged and multiplied by artificialexcavations.Ch. VI.] SICILY VAL DI NOTO. 65The shells in the limestone are often very indistinct, sometimesnothing but casts remaining, but in many localities,especially where there is a slight intermixture of volcanic sand,they are more entire, and, as we have already stated, can almostall be identified with recent Mediterranean testacea. Severalspecies of the genus Pecten, are exceedingly numerous, particularlythe large scallop (P. Jacobus)) now so common onthe coasts of Sicily. The shells which I collected from thislimestone at Syracuse, Villasmonde, Militello (V. di Not), andGirgenti, have been examined by M. Deshayes, and foundto be all referable to species now living, with three or fourexceptions*.The mineral characters of this great calcareous formationvary considerably in different parts of the island. In the south,near the town of Not, the rock puts on the compactness,together with the spheroidal concretionary structure of some ofthe Italian travertins. At the same place, also, it contains theleaves of plants and reeds, as if a stream of freshwater, chargedwith carbonate of lime and terrestrial vegetable remains, hadentered the sea in the neighbourhood. At Spaccaforno, andother places in the south of Sicily, a similar compact variety ofthe limestone occurs, where it is for the most part pure white,often very thick bedded, and occasionally without any lines ofstratification. This hard white rock is often four or five hundredfeet in thickness, and appears to contain no fossil shells.It has much the appearance of having been precipitated fromthe waters of mineral springs, such as frequently rise up at thebottom of the sea in the volcanic regions of the Mediterranean .As these springs give out an equal quantity of mineral matterat all seasons, they are much more likely to give rise to unstratifiedmasses, than a river which is swoln and charged withFor lists of these see Appendix II. I procured at Villasmonde, seven species ;at Militello, ten j in the limestone of Girgenti, of which the ancient temples arebuilt, ten species ; from the limestone and subjacent clay at Syracuse, twenty-sixspecies ; in the limestone and clay near Palermo, also belonging to the newer Plioceneformation, one hundred shells.VOL. III. F66 NfcWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. VI.sedimentary matter of different kinds, and in unequal quantities,at particular seasons of the year.The great limestone,, above mentioned, prevails not only inthe Val di Not, but reappears in the centre of the island,capping the hill of Castrogiovanni, at the height of three thousandfeet above the level of the sea. It is cavernous there, asat Sortino and Syracuse, and contains fossil shells and casts ofshells of the same species*.Schistose and arenaceous limestone, fyc. (b, diagram No. 5).The limestone above-mentioned passes downwards into a whitecalcareous sand, which has sometimes a tendency to an ooliticand politic structure, analogous to that which we have describedwhen speaking of the travertin of Tivoli. At Floridia, nearSyracuse, it contains a sufficient number of small calcareouspebbles to constitute a conglomerate, where also beds of sandylimestone are associated, replete with numerous fragments ofshells, and much resembling, in structure, the English corn-brass.A diagonal lamination is often observable in the calcareoussandy beds analogous to that represented in the firstvolume (chap. xiv. diagram No. 6), and to that exhibited inmany sections of the English crag, to which we shall afterwardsallude.In some parts of the island this sandy calcareous division, b yseems to be represented by yellow sand, exactly resemblingthat so frequently superimposed on the blue shelly marl of theSubapennines in the Italian peninsula. Thus, near Gram-michele,on the road to Caltagirone, beds of incoherent yellowsand, several hundred feet in thickness, with occasional layersof shells, repose upon the blue shelly marl of Caltagirone.When we consider the arenaceous character of this formation,the disposition of the laminae, and the broken shells sometimesimbedded in it, it is difficult not to suspect that it wasDr. Daubeny correctly identified the Val di Not limestone of Syracuse withthat of the summit of Castrogiovanni. Jameson, Ed. Phil. Journ., No.xxv.p. 107,July, 1825.f Vol. i. chap. xii.Ch. VI.] SICILY VAL Dl NOTO. 67formed in shallower water, and nearer the action of superficialcurrents, than the superincumbent limestone, which was evidentlyaccumulated in a sea of considerable depth. If weadopt this view, we must suppose a considerable subsidence ofthe bed of the sea, subsequent to the deposition of the arenaceousbeds in the Val di Not.Blue marl with shells (c, diagram No. 5). Under the sandybeds, last mentioned, is found an argillaceous deposit of variablethickness, called Crcta in Sicily. It resembles the blue marlof the Subapennine hills, and, like it, encloses fossil shells andcorals in a beautiful state of preservation. Of these I collecteda great abundance from the clay, on the south side of theharbour of Syracuse, and twenty species in the environs ofCaltanisetta, all of which, with three exceptions, M. Deshayeswas able to identify with recent species *. From similar bluemarl, alternating with yellow sand, at Caltagirone, at an elevationof about five hundred feet above the level of the sea, Iobtained forty species of shells, of which all but six were recognizedas identical with recent species f. The position of thisargillaceous formation is well seen at Castrogiovanni and Girgenti,as represented in the sections, diagram No. 5. In bothof these localities, the limestone of the Val di Not re-appears,passing downwards into a calcareous sandstone, below which isa shelly blue clay.Strata beneath the blue war. The clay rests, in both localities,on an older series of white and blue marls, probablybelonging to the tertiary period, but of which I was unable todetermine the age, having procured from it no organic remainssave the skeletons of fish which I found in the white thinly-laminatedmarls J.See list of these shells, Appendix II.f See Appendix II.I 1 found these fossil fish in great abundance on the road, half a mile northwestof liadusa, on the road to Castrogiovannij where the marls are fetid, andnear Castrogiovanni in gypseous marls, at the mile-stone No. 88, and between thatand No. 89. Lord Northampton has since presented to the Geological SocietyF 2G8 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. VI.These marls arc sometimes gypseous, and belong to a greatargillaceous formation which stretches over a considerable partof Sicily, and contains sulphur and salt in great abundance.The strata of this group have been in some places contorted inthe most extraordinary manner, their convolutions often resemblingthose seen in the most disturbed districts of primary clayslate.But we wish, at present, to direct the reader's exclusive attentionto strata decidedly referable to the newer Plioceneera, and we have yet to mention the igneous rocks associatedwith the sedimentary formations already alluded to.Volcanic Rocks of the Val di Koto. The volcanic rocksoccasionally associated with the limestones, sands, and marlsalready described, constitute a very prominent feature throughoutthe Val di Not. Great confusion might have been expectedto prevail, where lava and ejected sand and scoriae areintermixed with the marine strata, and, accordingly, we find itoften impossible to recognize the exact part of the series towhich the beds thus interfered with belong.Sometimes there are proofs of the posterior origin of the lava,and sometimes of the newer date of the stratified rock, for wefind dikes of lava intersecting both the marl and limestone,while, in other places, calcareous beds repose upon lava, andare unaltered at the point of contact. Thus the shelly limestoneof Capo Santa Croce rests in horizontal strata upon amassof lava, which had evidently been long exposed to the actionof the waves, so that the surface has been worn perfectlysmooth. The limestone is unchanged at its junction with theigneous rock, and incloses within it pebbles of the lava*.The volcanic formations of the Val di Not usually consistof the most ordinary variety of basalt with or without olivine.The rock is sometimes compact, often very vesicular. Thesome which lie obtained from the same localities, but I have met with no zoologistswho could name the species.This locality is described by Professor Iluilinann, Arcliiv fur Mineralogy. Xc.Berlin, 13-Jl.Ch. VI.]VOLCANIC ROCKS VAL DI NOTO.vesicles are occasionally empty , both in dikes and currents,and are in some localities filled with calcareous spar,, arragonite,and zeolites. The structure is, in some places, spheroidal, inothers, though rarely, columnar. I found dikes of amygdaloid,wacke, and prismatic basalt, intersecting the limestone atthe bottom of the hollow, called Gozzo degli Martini, belowMelilli.Dikes. Dikes of vesicular and amygdaloidal lava are alsoseen traversing peperino, west of Palagonia, near a mill by theroad side.No. 6. No. 7.>V 'I'DHorizontal section of Dikes near Palagonia.a, Lava.b, Peering, consisting of volcanic sand, mixed with fragments of lava andof limestone.In this case we may suppose the peperino to have resultedfrom showers of volcanic sand and scoria?, together with fragmentsof limestone thrown out by a submarine explosion,similar to that which lately gave rise to the volcanic island off*Sciacca. When the mass was, to a certain degree, consolidated,it may have been rent open, so that the lava ascendedthrough fissures, the walls of which were perfectly even and parallel.After the melted matter that filled the rent had cooleddown, it must have been fractured and shifted horizontallyby a lateral movement.In the second figure, No. 7, the lava has more the appearanceof a vein which forced its way through the peperino, availingitself, perhaps, of a slight passage opened by rents causedby earthquakes. Some of the pores of the lava, in these dikes,are empty, while others are filled with carbonate of lime.70 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch.Vl.The annexed diagrams (Nos. 6 and 7) represent a groundplan of the rocks as they are exposed to view on a horizontalsurface. We think it highly probable that similar appearanceswould be seen, if we could examine the floor of the sea inthat part of the Mediterranean where the waves have recentlywashed away the new volcanic island, for when a superincumbentmass of ejected fragments has been removed by denudation,we may expect to see sections of dikes traversing tuff, orinother words, sections of the channels of communication bywhich the subterranean lavas reached the surface.On the summit of the limestone platform of the Val di Not,I more than once saw analogous dikes, not only of lava but ofvolcanic tuff, rising vertically through the horizontal strata,and having no connexion with any igneous masses now apparenton the surface. In regard to the dikes of tuff or peperino,we may suppose them to have been open fissures at the bottomof the sea, into which volcanic sand and scoriae were driftedby a current.Ruffs and Peperinos. In the hill of Novera, between Viz-zincand Militelli, a mass of limestone, horizontally stratified,conies in contact with inclined strata of tuff (see diagram No, 8),No. 8.A, Limestone.aa, Calcareous breccia with fragments oflava.b, Black tuff.c, Tuff.while a mixed calcareous and volcanic breccia, a a, supportsthe inclined layers of tuff, c. The vertical fissure, 6 b, is filledwith volcanic sand of a different colour. An inspection of thissection will convince the reader that the limestone must havebeen greatly dislocated during the time that the submarineeruptions were taking place.At the town of Vizzini, a dike of lava intersects the argillaceousstrata, and converts them into siliceous schist, which hasCh. VI.] VOLCANIC Ruffs AND PEPERINOS. 71been contorted and shivered into an immense number of fragments.We have stated that the beds of limestone, clay, and sand,in the Val di Not, are often partially intermixed with volcanicejections, such as may have been showered down into the seaduring eruptions, or may have been swept by rivers from theland. When the volcanic matter predominates, these compoundrocks constitute the peperinos of the Italian mineralogists,some of which are highly calcareous, full of shells, andextremely hard, being capable of a high polish like marble.In some parts of the Val di Not they are variously mottledwith spots of red and yellow, and contain small angular fragments,similar to the lapilli thrown from volcanos.It is recorded that, during the late eruption off the southerncoast of Sicily, opposite Sciacca, the sea was in a state of violentebullition, and filled, for several weeks continuously, with redor chocolate-coloured mud, consisting of finely-comminutedscoriae. During this period, it is clear that the waves and currentsthat have since had power to sweep away the island, anddisperse its materials far and wide over the bed of the sea, mustwith still greater ease have carried to vast distances the fine redmud, which was seen boiling up from the bottom, so that it mayhave entered largely into the composition of modern peperinos.Professor Hoffmannn relates that, during the eruption (June,1831), the surface of the sea was strewed over, at the distanceof thirty miles from the new volcano, with so dense a coveringof scoriae, that the fishermen were obliged to part it with theiroars, in order to propel their boats through the water. It is,therefore, quite consistent with analogy, that we should findthe ancient tuffs and peperinos so much more generally distributedthan the submarine lavas.In the road which leads from Palagonia to Lago Naftia, andat the distance of about a mile and a half from the formerplace, there is a small pass where the hills, on both sides, consistof a calcareous grit, intermixed with some grains of volcanicsand.NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. VI.No. 9.Section of calcareous writ and pcperino^ cost of Patagonia. South tide of pass*Vertical height about thirty feet.No. 10.Section of the same beds on the north side of the pass.The disposition of the strata, on both sides of the pass, is mostsingular, and remarkably well exposed, as the harder layershave resisted the weathering of the atmosphere and project inrelief. The sections exhibited on both sides of the pass arenearly vertical, and do not exactly correspond, as will be seenin the annexed diagrams (Nos. 9 and 10). It is somewhatdifficult to conceive in what manner this arrangement of theOlayers was occasioned, but we may, perhaps, suppose it to havearisen from the throwing down of calcareous sand and volcanicmatter, upon steep slanting banks at the bottom of the sea, inwhich case they might have accumulated at various angles ofbetween thirty and fifty degrees, as may be frequently 'seen inthe sections of volcanic cones in Ischia and elsewhere. Thedenuding power of the waves may, then, have cut oil' the upperCh. VI.]SICILY VAL DI NOTO. 73portion of these banks, so that nearly horizontal layers mayhave been superimposed unconformably, after which anotherbank may have been formed in a similar manner to the first.Volcanic conglomerates. In the Val di Not we sometimesmeet with conglomerates entirely composed of volcanic pebbles.They usually occur in the neighbourhood of masses of lava,and may, perhaps, have been the shingle produced by thewasting cliffs of small islands in a volcanic archipelago. Theformation of similar beds of volcanic pebbles may now be seenin progress on the beach north of Catania, where the wavesare undermining one of the modern lavas of Etna ; and thesame may also be seen on the shores of Ischia.Proofs of gradual accumulation. In one part of the greatlimestone formation near Lentini, I found some imbedded volcanicpebbles, covered with full-grown repulse, supplying abeautiful proof of a considerable interval of time having elapsedbetween the rounding of these pebbles and their inclosure in asolid stratum. I also observed, not far from Vizzini, a verystriking illustration of the length of the intervals which occasionallyseparated the flows of distinct lava-currents. A bed ofoysters, perfectly identifiable with our common eatable species,no less than twenty feet in thickness, is there seen resting upona current of basaltic lava ; upon the oyster-bed again is superimposeda second mass of lava, together with tuff or peperino.Near Galieri, not far from the same locality, a horizontal bed,about a foot and a half in thickness, composed entirely of acommon Mediterranean coral (Gary sophy Ilia cespitosa, Lam),is also seen in the midst of the same series of alternatingigneous and aqueous formations. These corals stand erectas they grew, and after being traced for hundreds of yards, areagain found at a corresponding height on the opposite side ofthe valley.Dip and direction. The disturbance which the newerPliocene strata have undergone in Sicily, subsequent to theirdeposition, differs greatly in different places; in general,however, the beds arc nearly horizontal, and are not often74 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. VI.highly inclined. The calcareous schists, on which part of thetown of Lentini is built, are much fractured, and dip at anangle of twenty-five degrees to the north-west. In some of thevalleys in the neighbourhood an anticlinal dip is seen, the bedson one side being inclined to the north-west, and on the otherto the south-east.Throughout a considerable part of Sicily which I examined,the dips of the tertiary strata were north-east and south-west ;as, for example, in the district included between Terranuova,Girgenti, Caltanisetta, and Piazza., where there are severalparallel lines, or ridges of elevation, which run north-west andsouth-east.75 )CHAPTER VII.Marine and volcanic formations at the base of Etna Their connexion with thestrata of the Val di Not Bay of Trezza Cyclopian isles Fossil shells ofrecent species Basalt and altered rocks in the Isle of Cyclops Submarinelavas of the Bay of Trezza not currents from Etna Internal structure of thecone of Etna Val di Calanna Val del Bove not an ancient crater Its precipicesintersected by countless dikes Scenery of the Val del Bove Form,composition, and origin of the dikes Lavas and breccias intersected by them.MARINE AND VOLCANIC FORMATIONS AT THE BASE OFETNA.THE phenomena considered in the last chapter suggest manytheoretical views of the highest interest in Geology ; but beforewe enter upon these topics we are desirous of describing someformations in Valdemone, which are analogous to those of theVal di Not, and to point out the relation of such rocks to themodern lavas of Etna.If the traveller passes along the table-land, formed by thegreat limestone of the Val di Not, until it terminates suddenlynear Primosole, he there sees the plain of Catania at his feet,No. 11.HLMiuardohView of Etna from the summit of the limestone platform of Primosole,a, Highest cone. , Montagnuola. c, Monte Ricardo, with smaller lateralcones above. d } Town of Licodiadei Monaco. e, Marine formation called creta,argillaceous and sandy beds with a few shells, and associated volcanic rocks./, Escarpment of stratified subaqueous volcanic tuff, &c., north-west of Catania.g, Town of Catania, k, i, Dotted line expressing the highest boundary alongwhich the marine strata are occasionally seen, k, Plain of Catania. /, Limestoneplatform of Primosole of the newer Pliocene, m, La Motta di Catania.76 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch.VII.and before him, to the north, the cone of Etna (see diagramNo. 11). At the base of the cone he beholds a low line ofhills e, e (No. 11), formed of clays and marls, associated withyellowish sand, similar to the formation provincially termedCreta,' in various parts of Sicily.This marine formation, which is composed partly of volcanicand partly of sedimentary rocks, is seen to underlie the modernlavas of Etna. To what extent it forms the base of the mountaincannot be observed, for want of sections of the lower partof the cone, but the marine sub-Etnean beds are not observedto rise to a greater elevation than eight hundred, or, at theutmost, one thousand feet above the level of the sea. Weshould remind the reader, that the annexed drawing is not asection, but an outline view of Etna, as seen from Primosole,so that the proportional height of the volcanic cone, which is,in reality, ten times greater than that of the hills of ' Creta,' atits base, is not represented, the summit of the cone being tenortwelve miles more distant from the plain of Catania, thanLaconia.Connexion of the sub-Etnean strata with those of the Val diNot. These marine strata are found both on the southern andeastern foot of Etna, and it is impossible not to infer that theybelong to the inferior argillaceous series of the Val di Not,which they resemble both in mineral and organic characters.In one locality they appear on the opposite sides of the Valleyof the Simeto, covered on the north by the lavas of Etna, andon the south by the Val di Not limestone.Val di Not. No. 12. Etna.Section from Palermo by Lago di Naftla to Patagonia.a, Plain of the Simeto. b, Base of the cone of Etna, composed of modern lavas.c, Limestone of the Val di Not. d t Clay, sand, and associated submarine volcanicrocks.If in the country adjacent to the Lago di Naftia, throughCh. VII.]SUR-ETNEAN FORMATIONS.which the annexed section is drawn, and in several other districtswhere the ( creta ' prevails, together with associated submarinelavas, and where there is no limestone capping, a volcanoshould now burst forth, and give rise to a great cone, theposition of such a cone would exactly correspond to that of themodern Etna, with relation to the rocks on which it rests.Southern base of Etna. The marine strata of clay and sandalready alluded to,, alternate in thin layers at the southern baseof Etna, sometimes attaining a thickness of three hundred feet,or more, without any intermixture of volcanic matter. Crystalsof selenite are dispersed through the clay, accompanied by afew shells, almost entirely of recent Mediterranean species.This formation of blue marl and yellow sand greatly resemblesin character that of the Italian Subapennine beds, and, likethem, often presents a surface denuded of vegetation, in consequenceof the action of the rains on soft incoherent materials.In travelling by Paterno, Misterbianco, and La Motta, wepass through deep narrow valleys excavated through these beds,which are sometimes capped, as at La Motta, by columnarbasalt, accompanied by strata of tuff and volcanic conglomerate.(Diagram No. 13.)No. 13.La Motta near Catania.The latter rock is composed of rolled masses of basalt, whichmay either have originated when first the lava was producedin a volcanic archipelago, or subsequently when the whole countrywas rising from beneath the level of the sea. Its occurrencein this situation is striking, as not a single pebble can be78 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch.VII.observed in the entire thickness of subjacent beds of sand andclay.The dip of the marine strata, at the base of Etna, is by nomeans uniform ; on the eastern side, for example, they are sometimesinclined towards the sea, and at others towards the mountain.Near the aqueduct at Sterno, on the southern side, Iobserved two sections, in quarries not far distant from eachother, where beds of clay and yellow sand dipped, in one locality,at an angle of forty-five degrees to the east-south-east, and inthe other at a much higher inclination in the opposite direction.These facts would be of small interest, if an attempt had notbeen made to represent these mixed marine and volcanic depositswhich encircle part of the base of Etna, as the outermargin of a so-called ( elevation crater.'Near Catania the marine formation, consisting chiefly ofvolcanic tuff thinly laminated, terminates in a steep inland cliff,or escarpment, which is from six hundred to eight hundred feetin height. A low flat, composed of recent lava and volcanicsand, intervenes between the sea and the base of this escarpment,which may be well seen at Easano. (f, diagramNo.il.)Eastern side of Etna Bay of Trezza. Proceeding northwardsfrom Catania, we have opportunities of examining thesame sub-Etnean formations laid open more distinctly in themodern sea cliffs, especially in the Bay of Trezza and in theCyclopian islands (Dei Earaglioni), which may be regarded asthe extremity of a promontory severed from the main land.Numerous are the proofs of submarine eruptions of high antiquityin this spot, where the argillaceous and sandy beds havebeen invaded and intersected by lava, and where those peculiartufaceous breccias occur which result from ejections of fragmentarymatter, projected from a volcanic vent. I observed manyangular and hardened fragments of laminated clay (creta), indifferentstates of alteration, between La Trezza and Nizzitta,and in the hills above Aci Castello, a town on the main landcontiguous to the Cyclopian isles, which could not be mistakenSee vol. i. chap. xxii.Ch. VII.]SICILY CYCLOPIAN ISLES.by one familiar with Somma and the minor cones of Ischia, foranything but masses thrown out by volcanic explosions. Fromthe tuffs and marls of this district I collected a great variety ofmarine shells*, almost all of which have been identified withspecies now inhabiting the Mediterranean, and for the most part,now frequent on the coast immediately adjacent. Some fewof these fossil shells retain part of their colour, which is thesame as in their living analogues.The largest of the Cyclopian islets, or rather rocks, is distanttwo hundred yards from the land, and is only three hundredyards in circumference, and about two hundred feet in height.The summit and northern sides are formed of a mass of stratifiedmarl (creta), the lamina? of which are occasionally subdividedby thin arenaceous layers. These strata rest on a massof columnar lava (see wood-cut, No. 14) f, which appears tohave forced itself into, and to have heaved up the stratified mass.No, 14.View of the Isle of Cyclops in the Bay of Trezza.See, in Appendix No. II., a list, by M.Deshayes, of sixty-five species, whichI procured from the hills called Monte Cavalaccio, Rocca di Ferro, and Rocca diBempolere (or Borgia).t This cut is from an original drawing by my friend Capt.W. H.Smyth, Ren,SONEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. VII.This theory of the intrusion of the basalt is confirmed by thefact, that in some places the clay has been greatly altered, andhardened by the action of heat, and occasionally contorted inthe most extraordinary manner, the lamination not having beenobliterated, but, on the contrary, rendered much more conspicuousby the indurating process.The annexed wood-cut (No. 15) is a careful representationof a portion of the altered rock, a few feet square, where thealternate thin laminae of sand and clay have put on the appearancewhich we often observe in some of the most contorted ofthe primary schists.No. 15.Contortions in the newer Pliocene strata, Isle of Cyclops.A great fissure, running from east to west, nearly dividesthe island into two parts, and lays open its internal structure.In the section thus exhibited, a dike of lava is seen first cuttingthrough an older mass of lava, and then penetrating thesuperincumbent tertiary strata. In one locality ^ the lava ramifiesand terminates in thin veins, from a few feet to a few inchesin thickness (see diagram No. 16).Ch.VIL]CYCLOPIAN ISLES.No. 16.N tf-^.\ ' V ' 'be a bNewer Pliocene strata invaded by lava Isle of Cyclops (horizontal section).a, Lava. 6, laminated clay and sand, c, the same altered.The arenaceous laminae are much hardened at the point of contact,and the clays are converted into siliceous schist. In thisisland the altered rocks assume a honeycombed structure ontheir weathered surface, singularly contrasted with the smoothand even outline which the same beds present in their usualsoft and yielding state.The pores of the lava are sometimes coated, or entirely filled,with carbonate of lime, and with a zeolite resembling analcime,which has been called cyclopite. The latter mineral has alsobeen found in small fissures traversing the altered marl,, showingthat the same cause which introduced the minerals into thecavities of the lava, whether we suppose sublimation or aqueousinfiltration, conveyed it also into the open rents of the contiguoussedimentary strata.Lavas of the Cyclopian Isles not currents from Etna. Thephenomena of the Bay of Trezza are very important, for it isevident that the submarine lavas were produced by eruptionson the spot, an inference which follows not only from the presenceof dikes and veins, but from those tuffs above Castellod'Aci, which contain angular fragments of hardened marl, evidentlythrown up, together with the sand and scoriae, by volcanicVOL. III.G82 NKWKR PLTOCKN'E PERIOD. [Chi. VII.explosions. We may., therefore, suppose this volcanic actionto have been as independent of the modern vents of Etna, asthat which ive rise to the analogous formations in the Val diO ONot. It is quite evident that the lavas of the Cyclopian islesare not the lower extremities of currents which flowed downfrom the highest crater of Etna, or from the region wherelateral eruptions are now frequent, lavas which, after enteringthe sea. were afterwards upraised into their present position.It is more probable that the basalts of the Bay of Trezza, andthose along the southern foot of Etna, at La Motta, Sterno,Patcrno, Laconia, and other places, originated in the same seain which the eruptions of the Val di Not took place.There are, however, as we have observed., no sections toprove that the central and oldest parts of Etna repose on similarsubmarine formations. The modern lavas of the volcano arccontinually extending their area,, and covering, from time totime, a larger portion of the marine strata ; but we know notwhere this operation commenced, so that we cannot demonstratethe posteriority of the whole cone to these newer Pliocenestrata.We might imagine that when the volcanos of the Val di Notwere in activity, and when the eruptions of the Bay of Trezzawere taking place, Etna already existed as a volcano, theupper part only of the cone projecting above the level of thewaters, as in the case of Stromboli at present. By such anhypothesis, we might refer the origin of the older part of Etnato the same period as that of the sedimentary strata and volcanicrocks of the Val di Not.But, for our own part, we see no grounds for inclining tosuch a theory, since we must admit that a sufficient scries ofages has elapsed since the limestone of the Val di Not was deposited,to allow the same to be elevated to the height of fromtwo thousand to three thousand feet, in which case there mayalso have been sufficient time for the growth of a volcanic pilelike Etna, since the newer Pliocene strata now seen at the baseof the volcano originated.Ch. VII.]ETNA.INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF THE CONE OF ETNA.In our first volume we merely described that part of Etnawhich has been formed during the historical era; an insignificantportion of the whole mass. Nearly all the remaindermay be referred to the tertiary period immediately antecedentto the recent epoch. We before stated, that the great cone is,in general, of a very symmetrical form, but is broken, on itseastern side, by a deep valley, called the Val del Bove*, which,No. 17.Great valley on the east side of Etna.a, highest cone, b, Montagnuola. c, Head of Val del Bove. d, d, Serre delSolfizio. e, Zaffarana. /, One of the lateral cones, g, Month Rossi.commencing near the summit of the mountain,, descends intothe woody region, and is then continued, on one side, by asecond and narrower valley, called the Val chi Calanna. Belowthe latter another, named the Val di St. Giacomo, begins, along narrow ravine, which is prolonged to the neighbourhoodof Zaffarana (e, No. 17), on the confines of the fertile region.These natural incisions, into the side of the volcano, are of suchIn the provincial dialect of the peasants called ' Val del Bue,' for herethe herdsmanin reduced valle mugienliumProspect errantes gvegcs. 'Dr. Buckland was, I believe, the first English geologist who examined this valleywith attention, and I am indebted to him for having described it to me, beforemy visit to Sicily, as move worthy of attention than any single spot in that island,or perhaps in Europe. I have already stated, that the view of this valley, whichI have given in the frontispiece of the second volume, dees not pretend to conveyany idea of the grandeur of the scene.G 284 NEWER PLIOCKNE PERIOD. [Ch. VII.depth that they expose to view a great part of the structure ofthe entire mass, which, in the Val del Bove, is laid open to thedepth of from four thousand to five thousand feet from thesummit of Etna. The geologist thus enjoys an opportunityof ascertaining how far the internal conformation of the conecorresponds with what he might have, anticipated as the resultof that mode of increase which has been witnessed during thehistorical era.It is clear, from what we before said of the gradual mannerin which the principal cone increases, partly by streams of lavaand showers of volcanic ashes ejected from the summit, partlyby the throwing up of minor hills and the issuing of lava-currentson the flanks of the mountain, that the whole cone mustconsist of a series of cones enveloping others, the regularity ofeach being only interrupted by the interference of the lateralvolcanos.We might, therefore, have anticipated that a section of Etna,as exposed in a ravine which should begin near the summit andextend nearly to the sea, would correspond very closely to thesection of the ancient Vesuvius, commencing with the escarpmentof Somma, and ending with the Fossa Grande; but withthis difference, that where the ravine intersects the woodyregion of Etna, indications must appear of changes broughtabout by lateral eruptions. Now the section before alluded to,which can be traced from the head of the Val del Bove to theinferior borders of the woody region, fully answers such expectations.We find, almost everywhere, a series of layers oftuff and breccia inter stratified with lavas, which slope gently tothe sea, at an angle of from twenty to thirty degrees ; and aswe rise to the parallel of the zone of lateral eruptions, and stillmore as we approach the summit, we discover indications ofdisturbances, occasioned by the passage of lava from below,,and the successive inhumation of lateral cones.J'fd dl CfdtniiHt. On leaving Zaffarana, on the borders ofthe fertile region, we enter the ravine-like valley of St. Giacomo,and see on the north side, or on our right as we ascend;Ch.VII.] VA L DI Savanna. 85rising ground composed of the modern lavas of Etna. Onour left, a lofty cliff, wherein a regular series of beds isexhibited, composed of tuffs and lavas, descending with agentle inclination towards the sea. In this lower part of thesection there are no intersecting dikes, nor any signs of minorcones interfering with the regular slope of the alternating volcanicproducts. If we then pass upwards through a defile,,called the ' Foretell di Calanna,' we enter a second valley, thatof Calanna, resembling the ravine before mentioned, but widerand much deeper. Here again we find, on our right, manycurrents of modern lava, piled one upon the other, and on ourleft a continuation of our former section, in a perpendicularcliff from four hundred to five hundred feet high. As thislofty wall sweeps in a curve, it has very much the appearanceof the escarpment which Somma presents towards Vesuvius,and this resemblance is increased by the occurrence of two orthree vertical dikes which traverse the gently-inclined volcanicbeds. When I first beheld this precipice, I fancied that Ihad entered a lateral crater, but was soon undeceived, bydiscovering that on all sides, both at the head of the valley,in the hill of Zocolaro, and at its side and lower extremity,the dip of the beds was always in the same direction, all slantingto the east, or towards the sea, instead of sloping to thenorth, east, and south, as would have been the case had theyconstituted three walls of an ancient crater.It is not difficult to explain how the valleys of St. Giacomoand Calanna originated, when once the line of lofty precipiceson the north side of them had been formed. Many lava-currentsflowing down successively from the higher regions ofEtna, along the foot of a great escarpment of volcanic rock,have at length been turned by a promontory at the head of thevalley of Calanna, which runs out at right angles to the greatline of precipices. This promontory consists of the hills calledZocolaro and Calanna, and of a ridge of inferior height whichconnects them. (See diagram No. 18.)8GM:\VI: R PLIOCENE pi: RIO D.[Ch. VII.No. 13.A, Zocolaro. B, Monte di Calanna.C, Plain at the head of the Valley of Calanna.a, Lava of 1819 descending the precipice and flowing through the valley.b, Lavas of 1811 and 1819 flowing round the hill of Calanna.The flows of melted matter have been deflected from theircourse by this projecting mass, just as a tidal current, aftersetting against a line of sea-cliffs,, is often thrown off into anew direction by some rocky headland.Lava-streams, it is well known, become solid externally, evenwhile yet in motion, and their sides may he compared to tworocky walls, which are sometimes inclined at an angle of fortyfivedegrees. When such streams descend a considerable slopeat the base of a line of precipices,, and are turned from theircourse by a projecting rock, they move right onwards in a newdirection., so as to leave a considerable space (as in the Valleyof Calanna) between them and the cliffs which may be continuousbelow the point of deflection.It happened in 1811 and 1819, that the flows of lava overtoppedthe ridge intervening between the hills of Zocolaro andCalanna, so that they fell in a cascade over a lofty precipice,and began to fill up the valley. (Sec letter a, diagram No. 18.)The narrow cavity of St. Giacomo will admit of an explanationprecisely similar to that already offered for Calanna.Ch. VII.] VAL DEL BOVE. 87Fal del Bove. After passing up through the defile, calledthe e Rocca di Calanna,' we enter a third valley of trulymagnificent dimensions the Val del Bove a vast amphitheatrefour or five miles in diameter,, surrounded by nearlyvertical precipices, varying from one thousand to above threethousand feet in height, the loftiest being at the upper end,and the height gradually diminishing on both sides. Thefeature which first strikes the geologist as distinguishing thisvalley from those before mentioned, is the prodigious multitudesof vertical dikes, which are seen in all directions traversingthe volcanic beds. The circular form of this greatchasm, and the occurrence of these countless dikes, amountingperhaps to several thousands in number, so forcibly recalledto my mind the phenomena of the Atrio del Cavallo, onVesuvius, that I imagined once more that I had entered avast crater, on a scale as far exceeding that of Somma, as Etnasurpasses Vesuvius in magnitude.But having already been deceived in regard to the crescent-shapedprecipice of the valley of Calanna, I began attentivelyto explore the different sides of the great amphitheatre, in orderto satisfy myself whether the semicircular wall of the Val delBove had ever formed the boundary of a crater, and whetherthe beds had the same aqua-versal dip which is so beautifullyexhibited in the escarpment of Somma. If the supposedanalogy between Somma and the Val del Bove should hold true,the tuffs and lavas, at the head of the valley, would dip to thewest, those on the north side towards the north, and those onthe southern side to the south. But such I did not find to betheinclination of the beds ; they all dip towards the sea, ornearly east, as was before seen to be the case in the Valley ofCalanna.There are undoubtedly exceptions to this general rule, whichmight deceive a geologist who was strongly prepossessed witha belief that he had discovered the hollow of an ancient crater.It is evident that, wherever lateral cones are intersected in theprecipices, a series of tuffs and lavas, very similar to those which83 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD, [Ch. VII.enter into the structure of the great cone, will be seen dippingat a much more rapid angle.The lavas and tuffs, which have conformed to the sides ofEtna, dip at angles of from fifteen to twenty-five degrees, whilethe slope of the lateral cones is from thirty-five to fifty degrees.Now, wherever we meet with sections of these buried cones inthe precipices bordering the Val del Bove, (and they are frequentin the cliffs called the Serre del Solfizio, and in thosenear the head of the valley not far from the rock of M sara,)we find the beds dipping at high angles and inclined in variousdirections*.Scenery of the Val del Bove. Without entering at presentinto any further discussions respecting the origin of the Val delBove, we shall proceed to describe some of its most remarkablefeatures. Let the reader picture to himself a large amphitheatre,five miles in diameter, and surrounded on three sidesby precipices from two thousand to three thousand feet inheight. If he has beheld that most picturesque scene in thechain of the Pyrenees, the celebrated e cirque of Gavarnie,'he may form some conception of the magnificent circle of precipitousrocks which inclose, on three sides, the great plainof the Val del Bove. This plain has been deluged by repeatedstreams of lava, and although it appears almost levelwhen viewed from a distance, it is, in fact, more uneventhan the surface of the most tempestuous sea. Besides theminor irregularities of the lava, the valley is in one part interruptedby a ridge of rocks, two of which, Musara and Capra,are very prominent. It can hardly be said that theylike giants standTo sentinel enchanted land ;'for although, like the Trosachs, they are of gigantic dien''I perceive that Professor Hoffmannn, who visited the Val del Bove after meinJanuary, 1831 } , lias speculated on its structure as corresponding to that of theSo called elevation craters, which hypothesis would require that there should he aquanquam versal dip, such as I have above alluded to. I can only account for thisdifference of opinion, by supposing the Professor to have overlooked the phenomenaof the buried cones. Arclu'v fair Miueralo^ie, c. Berlin. 1831.Ch. VII.]SCENERY OF THE VAL DEL BOVE. 89sons, and appear almost isolated as seen from many points, yetthe stern and severe grandeur of the scenery which they adornis not such as would be selected by a poet for a vale of enchantment.The character of the scene would accord far betterwith Milton's picture of the infernal world ; and if we imagineourselves to behold in motion, in the darkness of the night,, oneof those fiery currents, which have so often traversed the greatvalley, we may well recallyon dreary plain, forlorn and wild,The seat of desolation, void of lightSave what the glimmering of these vivid flamesCast pale and dreadful.'The face of the precipices already mentioned is broken inthe most picturesque manner by the vertical walls of lava whichtraverse them. These masses usually stand out in relief, areexceedingly diversified in form, and often of immense altitude.In the autumn., their black outline may often be seen relievedby clouds of fleecy vapour which settle behind them,, and donot disperse until midday, continuing to fill the valley whilethe sun is shining on every other part of Sicily, and on thehigher regions of Etna.As soon as the vapours begin to rise, the changes of sceneare varied in the highest degree, different rocks being unveiledand hidden by turns, and the summit of Etna often breakingthrough the clouds for a moment with its dazzling snows, andbeing then as suddenly withdrawn from the view.An unusual silence prevails, for there are no torrents dashingfrom the rocks, nor any movement of running water inthis valley, such as may almost invariably be heard in mountainousregions. Every drop of water that falls from theheavens, or flows from the melting ice and snow, is instantlyabsorbed by the porous lava ; and such is the dearth of springs,that the herdsman is compelled to supply his flocks, during thehot season, from stores of snow laid up in hollows of the mountainduring winter.The strips of green herbage and forest-land, which haveNEWER PLIOCKNE PERIOD.[Ch.VII.here and there escaped the burning lavas, serve, by contrast, toheighten the desolation of the scene. When I visited thevalley, nine years after the eruption of 1819, 1 saw hundreds oftrees, or rather the white skeletons of trees, on the borders ofthe black lava, the trunks and branches being all leafless, anddeprived of their bark by the scorching heat emitted from themelted rock ; an image recalling those beautiful linesAs when heaven's fireHath scath'd the forest oaks, or mountain pines,With singed top their stately growth, though bare,Stands on the blasted heath.'Form, composition, and origin of the Dikes. But withoutindulging the imagination any longer in descriptions of scenery,we may observe, that the dikes before mentioned form unquestionablythe most interesting geological phenomenon in the Valdel Bove.No. 19.ADikes at the base of the Serre del So.fizio, Etna.Some of these are composed of trachyte, others 01 compactCh. VII.]DIKES ON ETNA.blue basalt with olivine. They vary in breadth from two totwenty feet and upwards, and usually project from the face ofthe cliffs, as represented in the annexed drawing (No. 19).They consist of harder materials than the strata which theytraverse, and therefore waste away less rapidly under the influenceof that repeated congelation and thawing to which therocks in this zone of Etna are exposed. The dikes are, forthe most part, vertical, but sometimes they run in a tortuouscourse through the tuffs and breccias, as represented in diagram,No. 20. In the escarpment of Somma where, as weNo. 20.Veins of Lava. Punto di Guimento.before observed, similar walls of lava cut through alternatingbeds of sand and scoriae, a coating of coal-black rock, approachingin its nature and appearance to pitch-stone, is seen at thecontact of the dike with the intersected beds. I did not observesuch parting layers at the junction of the Etnean dikeswhich I examined, but they may perhaps be discoverable.The geographical position of these dikes is most interesting,as they occur in that zone of the mountain where lateral eruptionsare frequent ; whereas, in the valley of Calanna, which isbelow that parallel, and in a region where lateral eruptions areextremely rare, scarcely any dikes are seen, and none whateverstill lower in the valley of St. Giacomo. This is preciselywhat we should have expected, if we consider the verticalfissures now filled with rock to have been the feeders of lateralNEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. VII.cones, or, in other words, the channels which gave passage tothe lava-currents and scoriae that have issued from vents in theforest-zone.Some fissures may have been filled from above, but I didnot see any which, by terminating downwards, gave proof ofsuch an origin. Almost all the isolated masses in the Val delBove, such as Capra, Musara, and others, are traversed bydikes, and may, perhaps, have partly owed their preservationto that circumstance, if at least the action of occasional floodshas been one of the destroying causes in the Val del Bove ; forthere is nothing which affords so much protection to a mass ofstrata against the undermining action of running water, as aperpendicular dike of hard rock.In the accompanying drawing (No. 21) the flowing of theNo. 21.Few of the rocks Finochio, Capra, and Musara, Fal del Bove.lavas of 1811 and 1819, between the rocks Finochio, Capra, andMusara, is represented. The height of the two last-mentionedisolated masses has been much diminished by the elevation oftheir base, caused by these currents. They may, perhaps, betheremnants of cones, which existed before the Val del Bovewas formed, and may hereafter be once more buried by thelavas that are now accumulating in the valley.Ch. VII.] LAVAS AND BRECCIAS OF THE VAL DEL BOVE.From no point of view are the dikes more conspicuous thanfrom the summit of the highest cone of Etna ; a view of someof them are given in the annexed drawing*.View from the summit of Etna into the Val del Bove.The small cone and crater immediately below were among those formed during theeruptions of 1810 and 1811.Lavas and breccias. In regard to the volcanic masses whichare intersected by dikes in the Val del Bove, they consist,in great part, of gravestone lavas, of an intermediate characterbetween basalt and trachyte, and partly of the trachytic varietiesof lava. Beds of scoriae and sand, also, are very numerous,alternating with breccias formed of angular blocks ofigneous rock. It is possible that some of the breccias may bereferred to aqueous causes, as we have before seen that greatThis drawing is part of a panoramic sketch which I made from the summitof the cone, December 1st, 1828, when every part of Etna was free from cloudsexcept the Val del Bove.94 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. VII.floods do occasionally sweep down the flanks of Etna wheneruptions take place in winter, and when the snows are meltedby lava.Many of the angular fragments may have been thrown outbyvolcanic explosions, which, falling on the hardened surfaceof moving lava-currents, may have been carried to a considerabledistance. It may also happen, that when lava advancesvery slowly, in the manner of the flow of 1819, describedin the first volume*, the angular masses resulting from thefrequent breaking of the mass as it rolls over upon itself, mayproduce these breccias. It is at least certain, that the upperportion of the lava-currents of 1811 and 1819, now consist ofangular masses to the depth of many yards.D'Aubuisson has compared the surface of one of the ancientlavas of Auvergne to that of a river suddenly frozen over bythe stoppage of immense fragments of drift-ice, a descriptionperfectly applicable to these modern Etnean flows.Chap. xxi.'chapterVIII.Speculations on the origin of the Val del Bove on EtnaSubsidencesAntiquityof the cone of Etna Mode of computing the age of volcanos Their growthanalogous to that of exogenous trees Period required for the production ofthe lateral cones of Etna Whether signs of Diluvial Waves are observable onEtna.ORIGIN OF THE VAL DEL BOVE.BEFORE concluding our observations on the cone of Etna, thestructure of which was considered in the last chapter, we desireto call the reader's attention to several questions : first, inregard to the probable origin of the great valley already described; secondly, whether any estimate can be made of thelength of the period required for the accumulation of the greatcone ; and, thirdly, whether there are any signs on the surfaceof the older parts of the mountain, of those devastating waveswhich, according to the theories of some geologists, have sweptagain and again over our continents.Origin of the Val del Bove. We explained our reasons inthe last chapter for not assenting to the opinion,, that the greatcavity on the eastern side of Etna was the hollow of an immensecrater, from which the volcanic masses of the surrounding wallswere produced. On the other hand, we think it impossible toascribe the valley to the action of running water alone ; for ifit had been excavated exclusively by that power, its depthwould have increased in the descent ; whereas, on the contrary,the precipices are most lofty at the upper extremity, and diminishgradually on approaching the lower region of the volcano.The structure of the surrounding walls is such as we shouldexpect to see exhibited on any other side of Etna, if a cavity ofequal depth should be caused, whether by subsidence, or bythe blowing up of part of the flanks of the volcano, or by eitherof these causes co-operating with the removing action of runningwater.96 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. VIII.It is recorded, as we have already seen in our history ofearthquakes, that in the year 1772 an immense subsidence tookplace on Papandayang, the largest volcano in the island ofJava, and that, during the catastrophe, an extent of ground,fifteen miles in length and six in breadth, gave way, so that noless than forty villages were engulphed, and the cone lost noless than four thousand feet of its height*.Now we might imagine a similar event, or a series of subsidencesto have formerly occurred on the eastern side of Etna,although such catastrophes have not been witnessed in moderntimes, or only on a very trifling scale. A narrow ravine, abouta mile long, twenty feet wide, and from twenty to thirty-six indepth, has been formed, within the historical era, on the flanksof the volcano, near the town of Mascalucia ; and a small circulartract, called the Cisterna, near the summit, sank down inthe year 1792, to the depth of about forty feet, and left on allsides of the chasm a vertical section of the beds, exactly resemblingthose which are seen in the precipices of the Val delBove. At some remote periods, therefore, we might supposemore extensive portions of the mountain to have fallen in duringgreat earthquakes.But some geologists will, perhaps, incline to the opinion,that the removed mass was blown up by paroxysmal explosions,such as that which, in the year 79, destroyed the ancientcone of Vesuvius, and gave rise to the escarpment of Somma.The Val del Bove, it will be remembered, lies within the zoneof lateral eruptions, so that a repetition of volcanic explosionsmight have taken place, after which the action of runningwater may have contributed powerfully to degrade the rocks,and to transport the materials to the sea. We have beforealluded to the effects of a violent flood, which swept throughthe Val del Bove in the year 1755, when a fiery torrent of lavahad suddenly overflowed a great depth of snow in winter f.In the present imperfect state of our knowledge of the his-vol.i. chap. xxv.t See vol. i. chap. xxi.Ch. VIII.J ANTIQUITY OF THE CONE OF ETNA. 97tory of volcanos, we have some difficulty in deciding on therelative probability of these hypotheses ; but if we embrace thetheory of explosions from below, the cavity would not constitutea crater in the ordinary acceptation of that term, stillless would it accord with the notion of the so-called ' elevationcraters.'ANTIQUITY OF THE CONE OF ETNA.We have stated in a former volume, that confined notionsin regard to the quantity of past time, have tended, morethan any other prepossessions, to retard the progress ofsound theoretical views in Geology ; the inadequacy of ourconceptions of the earth s antiquity having cramped the freedomof our speculations in this science, very much in the sameway as a belief in the existence of a vaulted firmament onceretarded the progress of astronomy. It was not until Descartesassumed the indefinite extent of the celestial spaces, and removedthe supposed boundaries of the universe, that justopinions began to be entertained of the relative distances ofthe heavenly bodies ; and until we habituate ourselves to contemplatethe possibility of an indefinite lapse of ages havingbeen comprised within each of the more modern periods of theearth's history, we shall be in danger of forming most erroneousand partial views in Geology.Mode of computing the aye of volcanos.' If history had bequeathedto us a faithful record of the eruptions of Etna, anda hundred other of the principal active volcanos of the globe,during the last three thousand years, if we had an exactaccount of the volume of lava and matter ejected during thatperiod, and the times of their production, we might, perhaps,be able to form a correct estimate of the average rate of thegrowth of a volcanic cone. For we might obtain a mean resultfrom the comparison of the eruptions of so great a number ofvents, however irregular might be the development of theigneous action in any one of them, if contemplated singlyduring a brief period.VOL. III. H98 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. VIII,It would be necessary to balance protracted periods of inactionagainst the occasional outburst of paroxysmal explosions.Sometimes we should have evidence of a repose of seventeencenturies, like that which was interposed in Ischia, between theend of the fourth century, u. c., and the beginning of the fourteenthcentury of our era *. Occasionally a tremendous eruption,like that of Jorullo, would be recorded, giving rise, atonce, to a considerable mountain.If we desire to approximate to the age of a cone such asEtna, we ought first to obtain some data in regard to the> c3 Othickness of matter which has been added during the historicalera, and then endeavour to estimate the time requiredfor the accumulation of such alternating lavas and beds ofsand and scoriae as are superimposed upon each other in theVal del Bove ; afterwards we should try to deduce, from observationson other volcanos, the more or less rapid increase ofburning mountains in all the different stages of their growth.Mode of increase of volcanos analogous to that of exogenoustrees. There is a considerable analogy between the mode ofincrease of a volcanic cone and that of trees of exogenous growth.These trees augment, both in height and diameter, by the successiveapplication externally of cone upon cone of new ligneousmatter, so that if we make a transverse section near the base ofthe trunk, we intersect, a much greater number of layers thannearer to the summit. When branches occasionally shoot outfrom the trunk they first pierce the bark, and then, after growingto a certain size, if they chance to be broken off, they maybecome inclosed in the body of the tree,, as it augments in size,forming knots in the wood, which are themselves composed oflayers of ligneous matter, cone within cone.In like manner a volcanic mountain, as we have seen, consistsof a succession of conical masses enveloping others, whilelateral cones, having a similar internal structure, often project,in the first instance, like branches from the surface of the maincone, and then becoming buried again, are hidden like the knotsof a tree.See vol. i, chaps, xix,Ch.VIIL]MODE OF INCREASE OF VOLCANOS. 99We can ascertain the age of an oak or pine, by countingthe number of concentric rings of annual growth, seen in atransverse section near the base, so that we may know the dateat which the seedling began to vegetate. The Baobab-tree ofSenegal (Adansonia digitated) is supposed to exceed almostany other in longevity ; Adamson inferred that one whichhe measured, and found to be thirty feet in diameter, hadattained the age of 5150 years. Having made an incisionto a certain depth, he first counted three hundred ringsof annual growth, and observed what thickness the tree hadgained in that period. The average rate of growth of youngertrees, of the same species, was then ascertained, and the calculation,made according to a supposed mean rate of increase.De Candle considers it not improbable, that the celebratedTaxodium of Chapultepec, in Mexico (Cupressus disticha,Linn), which is one hundred and seventeen feet in circumference,may be still more aged*.It is, however, impossible, until more data are collectedrespecting the average intensity of the volcanic action, to makeanything like an approximation to the age of a cone like Etna,because, in this case, the successive envelopes of lava and scoriaeare not continuous, like the layers of wood in a tree, and affordus no definite measure of time. Each conical envelope is madeup of a great number of distinct lava-currents and showers ofsand and scoriae, differing in quantity, and which may havebeen accumulated in unequal periods of time. Yet we cannotfail to form the most exalted conception of the antiquity of thismountain, when we consider that its base is about ninety milesin circumference ; so that it would require ninety flows of lava,each a mile in breadth at their termination, to raise the presentfoot of the volcano as much as the average height of one lava-current.There are no records within the historical era which leadto the opinion, that the altitude of Etna has materially variedOn the Longevity of Trees, Bibliot. Univ., May, 1831.H3100 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. VIII.within the last two thousand years. Of the eighty most conspicuousminor cones which adorn its flanks, only one of thelargest, Month Rossi, has been produced within the times ofauthentic history. Even this hill, thrown up in the year1669, although 450 feet in height, only ranks as a cone ofsecond magnitude. Monte Ricardo, near Bronze, rises, evennow, to the height of 750 feet, although its base has beenelevated by more modern lavas and ejections. The dimensionsof these larger cones appear to bear testimony to paroxysmsof volcanic activity, after which we may conclude,from analogy, that the fires of Etna remained dormant for manyyears since nearly a century of rest has sometimes followed aviolent eruption in the historical era. It must also be remembered,that of the small number of eruptions which occur inacentury, one only is estimated to issue from the summit ofEtna for every two that proceed from the sides. Nor do allthe lateral eruptions give rise to such cones as would beenumerated amongst the smallest of the eighty hills aboveenumerated ; some produce merely insignificant continues,soon destined to be buried, as we before explained.How many years then must we not suppose to have beenexpended in the formation of the eighty cones? It is difficultto imagine that a fourth part of them have originated duringthe last thirty centuries. But if we conjecture the whole ofthem to have been formed in twelve thousand years, how inconsiderablean era would this portion of time constitute inthe history of the volcano ! If we could strip off from Etnaall the lateral continues now visible, together with the lavasand scoriae that have been poured out from them, and fromthe highest crater, during the period of their growth, the diminutionof the entire mass would be extremely slight ! Etnamight lose, perhaps, several miles in diameter at its base, andsome hundreds of feet in elevation, but it would still be theloftiest of Sicilian mountains, studded with other cones, whichwould be recalled, as it were, into existence by the removal ofthe rocks under which they are now buried.Ch.VIII.] DILUVIAL WAVES. 101There seems nothing in the deep sections of the Val delBove, to indicate that the lava currents of remote periodswere greater in volume than those of modern times ; andthere are abundant proofs that the countless beds of solidrock and scoriae were accumulated, as now, in succession.On the grounds, therefore, already explained, we must inferthat a mass, eight thousand or nine thousand feet in thickness,must have required an immense series of ages anteriorto our historical periods, for its growth ; yet the whole mustbe regarded as the product of a modern portion of the newerPliocene epoch. Such, at least, is the conclusion that wedraw from the geological data already detailed, which show-thatthe oldest parts of the mountain, if not of posterior dateto the marine strata which are visible around its base, were atleast of coeval origin.Whether signs of Diluvial Waves are observable on Etna.Some geologists contend, that the sudden elevation of largecontinents from beneath the waters of the sea, have again andagain produced waves which have swept over vast regions ofthe earth, and left enormous rolled blocks strewed over thesurface*. That there are signs of local floods of extremeviolence, on various parts of the surface of the dry land, isincontrovertible, and in the former volumes we have pointed outcauses which must for ever continue to give rise to such phenomena; but for the proofs of these general cataclysms wehave searched in vain. It is clear that no devastating wavehas passed over the forest zone of Etna, since any of the lateralcones before mentioned were thrown up ; for none of theseheaps of loose sand and scoriae could have resisted for a momentthe denuding action of a violent flood.To some, perhaps, it may appear that hills of such incoherentmaterials cannot be of immense antiquity, because the mereaction of the atmosphere must, in the course of several thousandyears, have obliterated their original forms. But there isno weight in this objection, for the older hills are covered withSedgwick, Anniv. Address to the Geol. Soc., p. 35. Feb. 1831.102 freer PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. VIII.trees and herbage, which protect them from waste ; and inregard to the newer ones, such is the porosity of their componentmaterials, that the rain which falls upon them is instantlyabsorbed, and, for the same reason that the rivers on Etna havea subterranean course, there are none descending the sides ofthe minor cones.No sensible alteration has been observed in the form ofthese cones since the earliest periods of which there are memorials; and we see no reason for anticipating, that in the courseof the next ten thousand or twenty thousand years they willundergo any great alteration in their appearance, unless theyshould be shattered by earthquakes, or covered by volcanicejections.We shall afterwards point out, that, in other parts of Europe,similar loose cones of scoriae, which we believe to be of higherantiquity than the whole mass of Etna, stand uninjured atinferior elevations above the level of the sea.CHAPTER 'IX.Origin of the newer Pliocene strata of Sicily Growth of submarine formationsgradual Rise of the same above the level of the sea probably caused by subterraneanlava Igneous newer Pliocene rocks, formed at great depths, exceedin volume the lavas of Etna Probable structure of these recent subterraneanrocks Changes which they may have superinduced upon strata in contactAlterations of the surface during and since the emergence of the newer Pliocenestrata Forms of the Sicilian valleys Sea cliffs Proofs of successive elevationWhy the valleys in the newer Pliocene districts correspond in form tothose in regions of higher antiquity Migrations of animals and plants sincethe emergence of the newer Pliocene strata Some species newer than thestations they inhabit Recapitulation.ORIGIN OF THE NEWER PLIOCENE STRATA OF SICILY.HAVING in the last two chapters described the tertiary formationsof the Val di Not and Valdemone, both igneous andaqueous, we shall now proceed more fully to consider theirorigin, and the manner in which they may be supposed to haveassumed their present position. The consideration of thissubject may be naturally divided into three parts : first, weshall inquire in what manner the submarine formations wereaccumulated beneath the waters ; secondly, whether theyemerged slowly or suddenly, and what modifications in-theearth's crust, at considerable depths below the surface, may beindicated by their rise ; thirdly, the mutations which the surfaceand its inhabitants have undergone during and since theperiod of emergence.Growth of Submarine formations.' First, then 5 we are toinquire in what manner the subaqueous masses, whether volcanicor sedimentary, may have been formed. On this subjectwe have but few observations to make, for by reference to ourformer volumes, the reader will learn how a single stratum,whether of sand, clay, or limestone, may be thrown down at thebottom of the sea, and how shells and other organic remains104 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. IX.may become imbedded therein. He will also understand howone sheet of lava, or bed of scoriae and volcanic sand, may bespreadout over a wide area, and how, at a subsequent period,a second bed of sand, clay, or limestone, or a second lava-streammay be superimposed, so that in the lapse of ages amountain mass may be produced.It is enough that we should behold a single course of bricksor stones laid by the mason upon another, in order to comprehendhow a massive edifice, such as the Colosseum at Rome,was erected ; and we can have no difficulty in conceiving thata sea, three hundred or four hundred fathoms deep, might befilled up by sediment and lava, provided we admit an indefinitelapse of ages for the accumulation of the materials.The sedimentary and volcanic masses of the newer Plioceneera, which, in the Val di Not, attain the thickness of two thousandfeet, are subdivided into a vast number of strata and lava-streams,each of which were originally formed on the subaqueoussurface, just as the tuffs and lavas whereof sectionsare laid open in the Val del Bove, were each in their turn externaladditions to the Etnean cone.It is also clear, that before any part of the mass of submarineorigin began to rise above the waters, the uppermost stratumof the whole must have been deposited ; so that if the date ofthe origin of these masses be comparatively recent, still more soisthe period of their rise above the level of the sea.Subaqueous formations how raised. In what manner, then,and by what agency, did this rise of the subaqueous formationstake place ? We have seen that since the commencementof the present century, an immense tract of country in Cutch,more than fifty miles long and sixteen broad, was permanentlyupraised to the height of ten feet above its former position,and the earthquake which accompanied this wonderful variationof level, is reported to have terminated by a volcaniceruption at Bhooi. We have also seen*, that when the MonteNuovo was thrown up, in the year 1538, a large fissure ap-vol.i. chap. xi$.Ch. IX.] SUBAQUEOUS FORMATIONS HOW RAISED. 105preached the small town of Tripergola, emitting a vivid light,and throwing out ignited sand and scoriae. At length thisopening reached a shallow part of the sea close to the shore,and then widened into a large chasm, out of which were dischargedblocks of lava, pumice, and ashes. But no currentof melted matter flowed from the orifice, although it is perfectlyevident that lava existed below in a fluid state, since so manyportions of it were cast up in the form of scoriae into the air.We have shown that the coast near Puzzuoli rose, at that time,to the height of more than twenty feet above its former level,and that it has remained permanently upheaved to this day *.On a review of the whole phenomena, it appears most probablethat the elevated country was forced upwards by lavawhich did not escape, but which, after causing violent earthquakes,during several preceding months, produced at lengtha fissure from whence it discharged gaseous fluids, togetherwith sand and scoriae. The intruded mass then cooled downat a certain distance below the uplifted surface, and constituteda solid and permanent foundation.If an habitual vent had previously existed near Puzzuoli,such as we may suppose to remain always open in the principalducts of Vesuvius or Etna, the lava might, perhaps, haveflowed over upon the surface, instead of heaving upwards thesuperficial strata. In that case, there might have been thesame conversion of sea into land, the only difference being, thatthe lava would have been uppermost, instead of the tufaceousstrata containing shells, now seen in the plain of La Stanza, andon the site of the Temple of Serapis.Subterranean lava the upheaving cause. The only feasibletheory, indeed, that has yet been proposed, respecting thecauses of the permanent rise of the bed of the sea, is thatwhich refers the phenomenon to the generation of subterraneanlava. We have stated, in the first volume, that the regionsnow habitually convulsed by earthquakes, include within themthe site of all the active volcanos. We know that the expandi. chap. xxv.106 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. IX,sive force of volcanic heat is sufficiently great to overcome theresistance of columns of lava, several miles or leagues in height,forcing them up from great depths, and causing the fluidmatter to flow out upon the surface. To imagine, therefore,that this same power, which is so frequently exerted in differentparts of the globe, should occasionally propel a columnof lava to a considerable height, yet be unable to force itthrough the superincumbent rocks, is quite natural.Whenever the superimposed masses happen to be of a yieldingand elastic nature, they will bend, and instead of breaking,so as to afford an escape to the melted matter through afissure, they will allow it to accumulate in large quantitiesbeneath the surface, sometimes in amorphous masses, andsometimes in horizontal sheets. So long as such sheets ofmatter retain their fluidity, and communicate with the columnof lava which is still urged upwards, they must exert anenormous hydrostatic pressure on the overlying mass, tendingto elevate it, and an equal force on the subjacent bedspressing them down, and probably rendering them more compact.If we consider how great is the volume of lava thatsometimes flows out on the surface from volcanic vents, wemust expect that it will produce great changes of level so oftenas its escape is impeded.Let us only reflect on the magnitude of Iceland, an islandtwo hundred and sixty miles long by two hundred in breadth,and which rises, at some points, to the height of six thousandfeet above the level of the sea. Nearly the entire mass is representedto be of volcanic origin ; but even if we suppose someparts to consist of aqueous deposits, still that portion may bemore than compensated by the great volume of lava whichmust have been poured out upon the bottom of the surroundingsea during the growth of the entire island ; for we knowthat submarine eruptions have been considerable near the coastduring the historical era. Now if the whole of this lava hadbeen prevented from reaching the surface, by the weight andtenacity of certain overlying rocks, it might have given rise toCh. IX.]SUBTERRANEAN LAVAS. 107the gradual elevation of a tract of land nearly as large asIceland. We say nearly, because the lava which cooled downbeneath the surface, and under considerable pressure, wouldbe more compact than the same when poured out in the openair, or in a sea of moderate depth, or shot up into the atmosphereby the explosive force of elastic vapours, and thus convertedinto sand and scoriae.According to this theory, we must suppose the action of theupheaving power to be intermittent, and, like ordinary volcaniceruptions, to be reiterated again and again in the same region,at unequal intervals of time and with unequal degrees of force.If we follow this train of induction, which appears so easyand natural, to what important conclusions are we led ! Thereader will bear in mind that the tertiary strata have attainedin the central parts of Sicily, as at Castrogiovanni, for example,an elevation of about three thousand feet above the levelof the sea, and a height of from fifty to two thousand feet indifferentparts of the Val di Not. In this country, therefore,we must suppose a solid support of igneous rock to have beensuccessively introduced into part of the earth's crust immediatelysubjacent, equal in volume to the upraised tract, and thisgeneration of subterranean rock must have taken place duringthe latter part of the newer Pliocene period. The dimensionsof the Etnean cone shrink into insignificance, in comparison tothe volume of this subterranean lava; and, however staggeringthe inference might at first appear, that the oldest foundationsof Etna were laid subsequently to the period when theMediterranean became inhabited by the living species of testaceaand zoophytes, yet we may be reconciled to such conclusions,when we find incontestable proofs of still greater revolutionsbeneath the surface within the same modern period.Probable structure of the recent subterranean rocks of fusion.Let us now inquire what form these unerupted newer Pliocenelavas of Sicily have assumed ? For reasons already explained,we may infer that they cannot have been converted108 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. IX.into tuffs and pcperinos, nor can we imagine that, underenormous pressure, they could have become porous, since weobserve, that the lava which has cooled down under a moderatedegree of pressure, in the dikes of Etna and Vesuvius, has acompact and porphyritic texture, and is very rarely porous orcellular. No signs of volcanic sand, scoria breccia, or conglomerateare to be looked for, nor any of stratification, for allthese imply formation in the atmosphere, or by the agency ofwater. The only proofs that we can expect to find of thesuccessive origin of different parts of the fused mass, will beconfined to the occasional passage of veins through portionspreviously consolidated. This consolidation would take placewith extreme slowness, when nearer the source of volcanic heatand under enormous pressure, so that we must anticipate aperfectly crystalline and compact texture in all these subterraneanproducts.Now geologists have discovered, as we before stated, greatabundance of crystalline and unstratified rocks in various partsof the globe, and these masses are particularly laid open to ourview in those mountainous districts where the crust of the earthhas undergone the greatest derangement. These rocks varyconsiderably in composition, and have received many names,such as granite, syenite, porphyry, and others. That theymust have been formed by igneous fusion, and at many distincteras, is now admitted ; and their highly crystalline texture issuch as might result from cooling down slowly from an intensely-heatedstate. They answer, therefore, admirably to the conditionsrequired by the above hypothesis, and we therefore deemit probable that similar rocks have originated in the netherregions below the island of Sicily, and have attained a thicknessof from one thousand to three thousand feet, since the newerPliocene strata were deposited.It is, moreover, very probable, that these fused masses havecome into contact with subaqueous deposits far below the surface,in which case they may, in the course of ages, have greatlyCh. IX.] FORMS OF THE SICILIAN VALLEYS* 109altered their structure, just as dikes of lava render more crystallinethe stratified masses which they traverse, and obliterateall traces of their organic remains.Suppose some of these changes to have been superinducedupon subaqueous deposits underlying the tertiary formations ofSicily, it is important to reflect that in that case no geologicalproofs would remain of the era when the alterations had takenplace; and if, at some future period, the whole island should beuplifted, and these rocks of fusion, together with the alteredstrata, should be brought up to the surface, it would not beapparent that they had assumed their crystalline texture in thenewer Pliocene period. For aught that would then appear,they might have acquired their peculiar mineral texture atepochs long anterior, and might be supposed to have beenformed before the planet was inhabited by living beings ; insteadof having originated at an era long subsequent to theintroduction of the existing species.CHANGES OF THE SURFACE DURING AND SINCE THE EmergenceOF THE NEWER PLIOCENE STRATA.Valleys. Geologists who are accustomed to attribute a greatportion of the inequalities of the earth's surface to the excavatingpower of running water during a long series of ages, willprobably look for the signs of remarkable freshness in theaspect of countries so recently elevated as the parts of Sicilyalready described. There is, however, nothing in the externalconfiguration of that country which would strike the eye of themost practised observer, as peculiar and distinct in characterfrom many other districts in Europe which are of much higherantiquity. The general outline of the hills and valleys wouldaccord perfectly well with what may often be observed in regardto other regions of equal altitude above the level of thesea.It is true that, towards the central parts of the island wherethe argillaceous deposits are of great thickness, as around ,Caltanisetta, and Piazza, the torrents are observedHO NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. Ixannually to deepen the ravines in which they flow, and the travelleroccasionally finds that the narrow mule-path, instead ofwinding round the head of a ravine, terminates abruptly in adeep trench which has been hollowed out, during the precedingwinter, through soft clay. But throughout a great part ofItaly, where the marls and sands of the Subapennine hills areelevated to considerable heights, the same rapid degradation isoften perceived.In the limestone districts of the Val di Not, the strata arefor the most part nearly horizontal, and on each side of thevalley form a succession of ledges or small terraces, instead ofdescending in a gradual slope towards the river-plain in themanner of the argillaceous formations. When there is a bendin the valley, the exact appearance of an amphitheatre with arange of marble seats is produced. A good example of thisconfiguration occurs near the town of Melilli, in the Val diNot, as seen in the annexed view (No. 22). In the south ofNo. 22.Valley called Goxzo degli Martin, Mow Melilli.the island, as near Spaccaforno, Scicli and Medica, precipitousrocks of white limestone, ascending to the height of five hundredfeet, have been carved out into the same form.A careful examination of the mode of decomposition of therock would be requisite, in order fully to explain this phenomenon.There is probably a tendency to a vertical fracture inCh.IX.] PROOFS OF SUCCESSIVE ELEVATION. Illthis as in many other limestones, which, when exposed to theaction of frost, scale off in small fragments at right anglesto the plane of stratification. It might have been expectedthat; in this case, a talus composed of a breccia of the limestonewould be found on each ledge, so that the slope wouldbecome gradual, but perhaps the fragments instead of accumulatingmay decompose and be washed away by the heavy rains.The line of some of the valleys near Lentini has evidentlybeen determined mainly by the direction of the elevatory force,as there is an anticlinal dip in the strata on either side of thevalley. The same is, probably, the case in regard to the greatvalley of the Anapo, which terminates at Syracuse.Sea-cliffs proofs of successive elevation. No decisive evidencecould be looked for in the form of the valleys to determinethe question, whether the subterranean movements whichupheaved the newer Pliocene strata in Sicily were very numerousor few in number. But we find the signs of two periodsof elevation in a long range of inland cliff on the east side of theVal di Not, both to the north of Syracuse, beyond Melilli, andto the south beyond the town of Not. The great limestoneformation before mentioned, terminates suddenly towards thesea in a lofty precipice, a, b, which varies in height from fiveNo. 23.hundred to seven hundred feet, and may remind the Englishgeologist of some of the most perpendicular escarpmentsof our chalk and oolite. Between the base of the precipicea, 6, and the sea, is a-n inferior platform, c, b, consisting ofsimilar white limestone. All the strata dip towards the sea,112 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. IX.but are usually inclined at a very slight angle; they are seento extend uninterruptedly from the base of the escarpment intothe platform, showing distinctly that the lofty cliff was notproduced by a fault or vertical shift of the beds, but by theremoval of a considerable mass of rock. Hence we must concludethat the sea, which is now undermining the cliffs of theSicilian coast, reached at some former period the base of theprecipice a, 6, at which time the surface of the terrace c, b, musthave constituted the bottom of the Mediterranean. Here, then,we have proofs of at least two elevations, but there may havebeen fifty others, for the encroachment of the sea tends to obliterateall signs of a succession of cliffs.Suppose, for example, that a series of escarpments, e,/, y, h 9once existed, and that during a long interval, free from subterraneanmovements, the sea had time to advance along the linec, b, all those ancient cliffs must then have been swept away oneafter the other, and reduced to the single precipice a, b. Theremay have been an antecedent period when the sea advancedalong the line h, /, substituting the single cliff e, I, for the series*>/.We may also imagine that the present cliffs may be theresult of the union of several lines of smaller cliffs and terraces,which may once have been produced by a succession of elevatormovements. For example, the waves may have carriedaway the cliffs k, ?', in advancing to c, d. In the same mannerthey may ultimately remove the mass c, b, m, d, and then theplatform c, 6, will disappear, and the precipice a, m, will besubstituted for a, b.We have stated, in the first volume, that the waves washedthe base of the inland cliff near Puzzuoli, in the Bay of Baiae,within the historical era, and that the retiring of the sea wascaused, in the sixteenth century, by an upheaving of the landto an elevation of twenty feet above its original level. At thatperiod, a terrace twenty feet high in some parts, was laid drybetween the sea and the cliff, but the Mediterranean is hasteningto resume its former position, when the terrace will beCh. Ix] PROOFS OF SUCCESSIVE ELEVATION. 113destroyed, and every trace of the successive rise of the land willbe obliterated.We have been led into these observations, in order to showthat the principal features in the physical geography of Sicilyare by no means inconsistent with the hypothesis of the successiveelevation of the country by the intermittent action ofordinary earthquakes *. On the other hand, we consider themagnitude of the valleys, and their correspondence in form withthose of other parts of the globe, to lend countenance to thetheory of the slow and gradual rise of subaqueous strata.We have remarked in the first volume f, that the excavationof valleys must always proceed with the greatest rapidity whenthe levels of a country are undergoing alteration from time totime by earthquakes, and that it is principally when a countryis rising or sinking by successive movements, that the power ofaqueous causes, such as tides, currents, rivers, and land-floods,is exerted with the fullest energy.In order to explain the present appearance of the surface,we must first go back to the time when the Sicilian formationswere mere shoals at the bottom of the sea, in which thecurrents may have scooped out channels here and there. Wemust next suppose these shoals to have become small islands ofwhich the cliffs were thrown down from time to time, as werethose of Giant Greco, in Calabria, during the earthquake of1783. The waves and currents would then continue theirdenuding action during the emergence of these islands, untilat length, when the intervening channels were laid dry, andrivers began to flow, the deepening and widening of the val-sincewriting the above I have read the excellent memoir of M. Boblaye, onthe alterations produced by the sea on calcareous rocks on the shores of Greece.By examining the line of littoral caverns worn by the waves in cliffs composed ofthe harder limestones, together with the modes of decomposition of the rock, actedupon by the spray and sea air, as well as lithodomous perforations, and othermarkings, he has proved that there are four or five distinct ranges of ancient seacliffs, one above the other, at various elevations in the Morea, which attest asmany successive elevations of the country. Journal de Geologic, No. 10. Feb.1831.t Clan. xxiv.VOL. III. I114 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. IX.less by rivers and land-floods would proceed in the same manneras in modern times in Calabria, according to our formerdescription *.Before a tract could be upraised to the height of severalthousand feet above the level of the sea, the joint operation ofrunning water and subterranean movements must greatly modifythe physical geography ; but when the action of the volcanicforces has been suspended, when a period of tranquillitysucceeds, and the levels of the land remain fixed and stationary,the erosive power of water must soon be reduced to a state ofcomparative equilibrium. For this reason, a country that hasbeen raised at a very remote period to a considerable heightabove the level of the sea, may present nearly the same externalconfiguration as one that has been more recently uplifted tothe same height. . :In other words, the time required for the raising of a massof land to the height of several hundred yards must usually beso enormous (assuming as we do that the operation is effected byordinary volcanic forces), that the aqueous and igneous agentswill have time before the elevation is completed to modify thesurface, and imprint thereon the ordinary forms of hill andvalley, by which our continents are diversified. But after thecessation of earthquakes these causes of change will remaindormant, or nearly so. The greater part, therefore, of theearth's surface will at each period be at rest, simply retainingthe features already imparted to it, while smaller tracts willassume, as they rise successively from the deep, a configurationperfectly analogous to that by which the more ancient landswere previously distinguished.Migration of animals and plants. The changes which,according to the views already explained, have been broughtabout in the earth's crust by the agency of volcanic heat, cannotfail to strike the imagination, when we consider how recentin the calendar of nature is the epoch to which we refer them.But if we turn our thoughts to the organic world, we shall feel,Chap, xxii,Ch. IX.] SPECIES OLDER THAN THEIR STATIONS. 115perhaps, no less surprise at the great vicissitude which it hasundergone during the same period.We have seen that a large portion of Sicily has been convertedfrom sea to land since the Mediterranean was peopledwith the living species of testacea and zoophytes. The newlyemerged surface, therefore, must, during this modern zoologicalepoch, have been inhabited for the first time with the terrestrialplants and animals which now abound in Sicily. It is fair toinfer, that the existing terrestrial species are, for the most part,of as high antiquity as the marine, and if this be the case, alarge proportion of the plants and animals, now found in thetertiary districts in Sicily, must have inhabited the earth beforethe newer Pliocene strata were raised above the waters. Theplants of the Flora of Sicily are common, almost without exception,to Italy or Africa, or some of the countries surroundingthe Mediterranean *, so that we may suppose the greater partof them to have migrated from pre-existing lands, just as theplants and animals of the Phlegraean fields have colonizedMonte Nuovo, since that mountain was thrown up in the sixteenthcentury.We are brought, therefore, to admit the curious result, thatthe flora and fauna of the Val di Not, and some other mountainousregions of Sicily, are of higher antiquity than the countryitself, having not only flourished before the lands wereraised from the deep, but even before they were deposited beneaththe waters. Such conclusions throw a new light on theadaptation of the attributes and migratory habits of animals andplants, to the changes which are unceasingly in progress in theinanimate world. It is clear that the duration of species is sogreat, that they are destined to outlive many important revolutionsin the physical geography of the earth, and hence thoseinnumerable contrivances for enabling the subjects of the animaland vegetable creation to extend their range, the inhabitantsProfessor Vivianii of Genoa informed me, that, considering the great extent ofSicily, it was remarkable that its flora produced scarcely any, if any peculiar indigenousspecies, whereas there are several in Corsica, and some other Mediterraneanislands,IINEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. IX.of the land being often carried across the ocean, and the aquatictribes over great continental spaces*. It is obviously expedientthat the terrestrial and fluviatile species should not only befittedfor the rivers, valleys, plains, and mountains which exist at theera of their creation, but for others that are destined to be formedbefore the species shall become extinct; and, in like manner, themarine species are not only made for the deep or shallowregions of the ocean at the time when they are called into being,but for tracts that may be submerged or variously altered indepth during the time that is allotted for their continuance onthe globe.Recapitulation. We may now briefly recapitulate some ofthe most striking results which we have deduced from our investigationof a single district where the newer Pliocene strataare largely developed.In the first place, we have seen that a stratified mass of solidlimestone attaining sometimes a thickness of eight hundred feetand upwards., has been gradually deposited at the bottom of thesea, the imbedded fossil shells and corallines being almost all ofrecent species. Yet these fossils are frequently in the state ofmere casts, so that in appearance they correspond very closelyto organic remains found in limestones of very ancient date.2d ly. In some localities the limestone above-mentionedalternates with volcanic rocks such as have been formed bysubmarine eruptions, recurring again and again at distant intervalsof time.3dly. Argillaceous and sandy deposits have also been producedduring the same period, and their accumulation lias alsobeen accompanied by submarine eruptions. Masses of mixedsedimentary and igneous origin, at least two thousand feet inthickness, can thus be shown to have accumulated since thesea was peopled with the greater number of the aquatic speciesnow living".(T>4thly. These masses of submarine origin have, since theirformation, been raised to the height of two thousand or three(: .Sou vjl. ii. ; cliiiplurs v., vi., and vii.Ch. IX.] RECAPITULATION. 117thousand feet above the level of the sea, and this elevation impliesan extraordinary modification in the state of the earth'scrust at some unknown depth beneath the tract so upheaved.5thly. The most probable hypothesis in regard to the natureof this change, is the successive generation and forcible intrusioninto the inferior parts of the earth's crust of lava which,after cooling down, may have assumed the form of crystallineunstratified rock, such as is frequently exhibited in thosemountainous parts of the globe where the greatest alterationsof level have taken place.Gthly. Great inequalities must have been caused on thesurface of the new-raised lands during the emergence of thenewer Pliocene strata, by the action of tides, currents, andrivers, combined with the disturbing and dislocating force ofthe elevatory movements.7thly. There are no features in the forms of the valleys andsea-cliffs thus recently produced, which indicate the suddenrise of the strata to the whole or the greater part of their presentaltitude, while there are some proofs of distinct elevationsat successive periods.Sthly. We may infer that the species of terrestrial andfluviatile animals and plants which now inhabit extensivedistricts, formed during the newer Pliocene era, were in existencenot only before the new strata were raised, but beforetheir materials were brought together at the bottom of the sea.CHAPTER X.Tertiary formations of Campania Comparison of the recorded changes in thisregion with those commemorated hy geological monuments Differences in thecomposition of Somma and Vesuvius Dikes of Sonima, their origin Causeof the parallelism of their opposite sides 'Why coarser grained in the centreMinor cones of the Phlegrsean Fields Age of the volcanic and associatedrocks of Campania Organic remains External configuration of the country,how produced No signs of diluvial waves Marine Newer Pliocene stratavisible only in countries of earthquakes Illustrations from Chili PeruParallel roads of Coquimbo West-indian archipelago Honduras East-indianarchipelago Red Sea.TERTIARY FORMATIONS OF CAMPANIA.Comparison of recorded changes with those commemoratedbij geological monuments. IN the first volume we traced thevarious changes which the volcanic region of Naples is knownto have undergone during the last 2000 years, and, imperfectas are our historical records, the aggregate effect of igneousand aqueous agency, during that period, was shown to be farfrom insignificant. The rise of the modern cone of Vesuvius,since the year 79, was the most memorable event during thosetwenty centuries ; but in addition to this remarkable phenomenon,we enumerated the production of several new minorcones in Ischia, and of the Monte Nuovo, in the year 1538.We described the flowing of lava-currents upon the land andalong the bottom of the sea, the showering down of volcanicsand, pumice, and scoriae, in such abundance that whole citieswere buried, the filling up or shoaling of certain tracts of thesea, and the transportation of tufaceous sediment by rivers andland-floods. We also explained the evidence in proof of apermanent alteration of the relative levels of the land and seain several localities, and of the same tract having, near Puz-zuoli, been alternately upheaved, and depressed, to the amountof more than 20 feet. In connexion with these convulsions,Ch, X.] TERTIARY FORMATIONS OF CAMPANIA. 119we pointed out that, on the shores of the Bay of Baiae, thereare recent tufaceous strata filled with fabricated articles, mingledwith marine shells. It was also shown that the sea hasbeen making gradual advances upon the coast, not only sweepingaway the soft tuffs of the Bay of Baise, but excavatingprecipitous cliffs, where the hard Ischia and Vesuvian lavashave flowed down into the deep.These events, we shall be told, although interesting, are theresults of operations on a very inferior scale to those indicatedby geological monuments. When we examine this same region,it will be said, we find that the ancient cone of Vesuvius,called Somma, is larger than the modern cone, and is intersectedby a greater number of dikes, the hills of unknownantiquity, such as Astroni, the Solfatara, and Monte Barbara,formed by separate eruptions, in different parts of the Phle-grsean fields, far outnumber those of similar origin, which arerecorded to have been thrown up within the historical era.In place of modern tuffs of slight thickness, and single flowsof lava, we find, amongst the older formations, hills from 500to more than 2000 feet in height, composed of an immenseseries of tufaceous strata, alternating with distinct lava-currents.We have evidence that in the lapse of past ages,districts, not merely a few miles square, were upraised to theheight of 20 or 30 feet above their former level, but extensiveand mountainous countries were uplifted to an elevation of morethan 1000 feet, and at some points more than 2000 feet abovethe level of the sea.These and similar objections are made by those who comparethe modern effects of igneous and aqueous causes, not witha part but with the whole results of the same agency in antecedentages. Thus viewed in the aggregate, the leadinggeological features of each district must always appear to beon a colossal scale, just as a large edifice of striking architecturalbeauty seems an effort of superhuman power, until wereflect on the innumerable minute parts of which it is composed.A mountain mass, so long as the imagination is occur*120 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. X,pied in contemplating the gigantic whole, must appear thework of extraordinary causes, but when the separate portionsof which it is made up are carefully studied, they are seen tohave been formed successively, and the dimensions of each part,considered singly, are soon recognized to be comparatively insignificant,and it appears no longer extravagant to liken them,to the recorded effects of ordinary causes.Difference in the composition of Somma and Vesuvius.As no traditional accounts have been handed down to us ofthe eruptions of the ancient Vesuvius, from the times of theearliest Greek colonists, the volcano must have been dormantfor many centuries, perhaps for thousands of years, previous tothe great eruption in the reign of Titus. But we shall afterwardsshow that there are sufficient grounds for presuming thismountain, and the other igneous products of Campania, to havebeen produced during the Newer Pliocene period.We stated in the first volume *, that the ancient and moderncones of Vesuvius were each a counterpart of the other instructure ; we may now remark that the principal point ofdifference consists in the greater abundance in the older coneof fragments of stratified rocks ejected during eruptions. Wemay easily conceive that the first explosions would act with thegreatest violence, rending and shattering whatever solid massesobstructed the escape of lava and the accompanying gases, sothat great heaps of ejected pieces of sedimentary rock wouldnaturally occur in the tufaceous breccias formed by the earliesteruptions. But when a passage had once been opened and anhabitual vent established, the materials thrown out would consistof liquid lava, which would take the form of sand andscoriae, or of angular fragments of such solid lavas as may havechoked up the vent.Among the angular fragments of solid rock which aboundin the tufaceous breccias of Somma, none are more commonthan a saccharoid dolomite, supposed to have been derivedChap. xx.Ch. X.] DIKES OF SOMMA. 121from an ordinary limestone altered by heat and volcanic vapours.Carbonate of lime enters into the composition of so many ofthe simple minerals found in Somma, that M. Mitscherlich,with much probability, ascribes their great variety to the actionof the volcanic heat on subjacent masses of limestone.Dikes of Somma, The dikes seen in the great escarpmentwhich Somma presents towards the modern cone of Vesuviusare very numerous. They are for the most part vertical, andtraverse at right angles the beds of lava, scoriae, volcanicbreccia, and sand, of which the ancient cone is composed. Theyproject in relief several inches, or sometimes feet, from the faceof the cliff, like the dikes of Etna already described (see woodcutNo. 19), being, like them, extremely compact, and lessdestructible than the intersected tuffs and porous lavas. Inheight they vary from a few yards to 500 feet, and in breadthfrom one to twelve feet. Many of them cut all the inclined bedsin the escarpment of Somma from top to bottom, others stopshort before they ascend above half way, and a few terminateat both ends, either in a point or abruptly. In mineral compositionthey scarcely differ from the lavas of Somma, the rockconsisting of a base of leucite and augite, through which largecrystals of augite and some of leucite are scattered *. Examplesare not rare of one dike cutting through another, and inone instance a shift or fault is seen at the point of intersection.We observed before f, when speaking of the dikes of themodern cone of Vesuvius, that they must have been producedby the filling up of open fissures by liquid lava. In some examples,however, the rents seem to have been filled laterally.Consult the valuable memoir of M. L. A. Necker, Mem. de la Soc. (le Phys.et d'Hist. Nat. de Geneva, tome ii. part i. } Nov. 1822.f Vol. i. chap. xx.NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.Dikes or veins at the Punto del Nasone on Somma.The reader will remember our description of the manner inwhich the plain of Jerocarne, in Calabria, was fissured by theearthquake of 1783 *, so that the Academicians compared it tothe cracks in a broken pane of glass. If we suppose the sidewalls of the ancient crater of Vesuvius to have been cracked inlike manner, and the lava to have entered the rents and becomeconsolidated, we can explain the singular form of the veinsfigured in the accompanying wood-cut parallelismof their opposite sides. Nothing is more remarkablethan the parallelism of the opposite sides of the dikes,which usually correspond with as much regularity as the twoopposite faces of a wal of masonry. This character appears atfirst the more inexplicable, when we consider how jagged anduneven are the rents caused by earthquakes in masses of heterogeneouscomposition like those composing the cone ofSomma ; but M. Necker has offered an ingenious and, wethink, satisfactory explanation of the phenomenon. He refersus to Sir W. Hamilton's account of an eruption of Vesuvius inthe year 1779, who records the following facts. f The lavas,when they either boiled over the crater, or broke out from theconical parts of the volcano, constantly formed channels asregular as if they had been cut by art, down the steep part ofSee vol. i. chap, xxiv., wood-cut No. 22.f From a drawing of M, Necker, ibid.Ch. X.]PARALLEL SIDES OF DIKES. 123the mountain, and, whilst in a state of perfect fusion, continuedtheir course in those channels, which were sometimes full tothe brim, and at other times more or less so according to thequantity of matter in motion.6 These channels, upon examination after an eruption, Ihave found to be in general from two to five or six feet wide,and seven or eight feet deep. They were often hid from thesight by a quantity of scoriae that had formed a crust overthem, and the lava, having been conveyed in a covered way forsome yards, came out fresh again into an open channel. Afteran eruption I have walked in some of those subterraneous orcovered galleries, which were exceedingly curious, the sides,top, and bottom, being worn perfectly smooth and even in mostparts, by the violence of the currents of the red-hot lavas,which they had conveyed for many weeks successively.'In another place, in the same memoir, he describes the liquidand red-hot matter as being received ( into a regular channel,raised upon a sort of wall of scoriae and cinders, almost perpendicularly,of about the height of eight or ten feet, resemblingmuch an ancient aqueduct *.'Now, if the lava in these instances had not run out from thecovered channel, in consequence of the declivity whereon it wasplaced if, instead of the space being left empty, the lava hadbeen retained within until it cooled and consolidated, it wouldthen have constituted a small dike with parallel sides. But thewalls of a vertical fissure through which lava has ascended inits way to a volcanic vent, must have been exposed to the sameerosion as the four sides of the channels before adverted to.The prolonged and uniform friction of the heavy fluid as it flowsupwards cannot fail to wear and smooth down the surfaces onwhich it rubs, and the intense heat must melt all such massesas project and obstruct the passage of the incandescent fluid.We do not mean to assert that the sides of fissures causedby earthquakes are never smooth and parallel, but they areusually uneven, and are often seen to have been so where volcanicPhil, Trans,, vol. Ixx. 1780.124 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. X.or trap dikes are as regular in shape as those of Somma. Thesolution, therefore, of this problem, in reference to the moderndikes, is most interesting, as being of very general applicationin geology.Varieties in their texture. Having explained the origin ofthe parallelism of the sides of a dike, we have next to considerthe difference of its texture at the edges and in the middle.Towards the centre, observes M, Necker, the rock is coarsergrained, the component elements being in a far more crystallinestate, while at the edge the lava is sometimes vitreous andalways finer grained. A thin parting band, approaching in itscharacter to pitch stone, occasionally intervenes on the contactof the vertical dike and intersected beds. M. Necker mentionsone of these at the place called Primo Monte, in the Atrio delCavallo ; I saw three or four others in different parts of thegreat escarpment. These phenomena are in perfect harmonywith the results of the experiments of Sir James Hall andMr. Gregory Watt, which have shown that a glassy texture isthe effect of sudden cooling, and that, on the contrary, a crystallinegrain is produced where fused minerals are allowed toconsolidate slowly and tranquilly under high pressure,It is evident that the central portion of the lava in a fissurewould , during consolidation, part with its heat more slowlythan the sides, although the contrast of circumstances wouldnot be so great as when we compare the lava at the bottom andat the surface of a current flowing in the open air. In thiscase the uppermost part, where it has been in contact with theatmosphere, and where refrigeration has been most rapid, isalways found to consist of scoriform, vitreous, and porous lava,while at a greater depth the mass assumes a more lithoidalstructure, and then becomes more and more stony as we descend,until at length we are able to recognize with a magnifyingglass the simple minerals of which the rock is composed. Onpenetrating still deeper, we can detect the constituent parts bythe naked eye, and in the Vesuvian currents distinct crystals ofaugite and leucite become apparent.Ch. X.] MINOR CONES OF CAMPANIA. 125The same phenomenon, observes M. Necker, may readily beexhibited on a smaller scale, if we detach a piece of liquid lavafrom a moving current. The fragment cools instantly, and wefind the surface covered with a vitreous coat, while the interior,although extremely fine grained, has a more stony appearance.It must, however, be observed, that although the lateral portionsof the dikes are finer grained than the central, yet thevitreous parting layer before alluded to is extremely rare. Thismay, perhaps, be accounted for, as the above-mentioned authorsuggests, by the great heat which the walls of a fissure mayacquire before the fluid mass begins to consolidate, in whichcase the lava, even at the sides, would cool very slowly. Somefissures, also, may be filled from above ; and in this case therefrigeration at the sides would be more rapid than when themelted matter flowed upwards from the volcanic foci, in anintensely-heated state.The rock composing the dikes of Somma is far more compactthan that of ordinary lava, for the column of melted matterin a fissure greatly exceeds an ordinary stream of lava in weight,and the great pressure checks the expansion of those gaseswhich give rise to vesicles in lava.There is a tendency in almost all the Vesuvian dikes todivide into horizontal prisms, which are at right angles to thecooling surfaces *, a phenomenon in accordance with the formationof vertical columns in horizontal beds of lava.Minor cones of the Phlecjrcean Fields. In the volcanic districtof Naples there are a great number of conical hills withcraters on their summits, which have evidently been producedby one or more explosions, like that which threw up the MonteNuovo in 1538. They are composed of trachytic tuff, whichis loose and incoherent, both in the hills and, to a certain depth,in the plains around their base, but which is indurated below.It is suggested by Mr. Scrope, that this difference may beowing to the circumstance of the volcanic vents having burstout in a shallow sea, as was the case with Monte Nuovo, wherethere is a similar foundation of hard tuff, under a covering ofSee wood-cut No. 25.126 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. X.loose lapilli. The subaqueous part may have become solid byan aggregate process like that which takes place in the settingof mortar, while the rest of the ejections, having accumulatedon dry land when the cone was raised above the water, mayhave remained in a loose state *.Age of the volcanic and associated rocks of Campania.If we enquire into the evidence derivable from organic remains,respecting the age of the volcanic rocks of Campania, we findreason to conclude that such parts as do not belong to therecent, are referable to the newer Pliocene period.In the solid tuff quarried out of the hills immediately behindNaples, are found recent shells of the genera Ostrea, Car-drum,Buccinum, and Patella, all referable to species nowliving in the Mediterranean f. In Ischia I collected marineshells in beds of clay and tuff, not far from the summit ofEpomeo, or San Nicholas, about 2000 feet above the level ofthe sea, as also at another locality, about 100 feet below, on thesouthern declivity of the mountain, and others not far abovethe town of Moropano. At Casamicciol, and several placesnear the sea-shore, shells have long been observed in stratifiedtuff and clay. From these various points I obtained, o 1 during ashort excursion in Ischia, 28 species of shells, all of which,with one exception, were identified by M. Deshayes with recentspecies J.As the highest parts of Epomeo are composed of regularly-stratifiedgreenish tuff, and some beds near the summit containthe fossils above-mentioned, it is clear that that mountainwas not only raised to its present height above the level of thesea, but was also formed since the Mediterranean was inhabitedby the existing species of testaceousthe Ischia tuffs we find pumice, lapilli, angular fragmentsof trachytic lava, and other products of igneous ejections,intcrstratified with some deposits of clay, free from any intermixtureof volcanic matter. These clays might have re-Geol Trans., vol, ii. part iji. p. 351. Second Series,t Scrope, ibid, J See the list of these (shells, Appendix IJ,Ch, X.] OUTLINE OF COUNTRY HOW CAUSED. 127suited from the decomposition of felspathic lava which aboundsin Ischia, the materials having been transported by rivers andmarine currents, and spread over the bottom of the sea wheretestacea were living. We may observe generally of these submarinetuffs, lavas, and clays, of Campania, that they strictlyresemble those around the base of Etna, and in parts of the Valdi Not before described.External configuration of the country how caused. Whenonce we have satisfied ourselves by inspection of the marineshells imbedded in tuffs at high elevations, that a mass of landlike the island of Ischia has been raised from beneath the watersof the sea to its present height, we are prepared to find signsof the denuding action of the waves impressed upon the outwardform of the island, especially if we conceive the upheaving forceto have acted by successive movements. Let us suppose thelow contiguous island of Provide to be raised by degrees untilit attains the height of Ischia, we should in that case expectthe steep cliffs which now face Museum to be carried upwardsand to become precipices near the summit of the central mountain.Such, perhaps, may have been the origin of those precipiceswhich appear on the north and south sides of the ridgewhich forms the summit of Epomeo in Ischia. The northernescarpment is about 1000 feet in height, rising from the hollowcalled the Cavo delle Neve above the village of Panella. Theabrupt manner in which the horizontal tuffs are there cut off,in the face of the cliff, is such as the action of the sea, workingon soft materials, might easily have produced, underminingand removing a great portion of the mass. A heap of shinglewhich lies at the base of a steep declivity on the flanks ofEpomeo, between the Cavo delle Neve and Panella, may once,perhaps, have been a sea-beach, for it certainly could not havebeen brought to the spot by any existing torrents.There is no difficulty in conceiving that if a large tract of thebed of the sea near Ischia should now be gradually upheavedduring the continuance of volcanic agency, this newly-raised landmight present a counterpart to the Phlegraean fields before NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. X.scribed. Masses of alternating lava and tuff, the products ofsubmarine eruptions, might on their emergence become hillsand islands; the level intervening plains might afterwards appear,covered partly by the ashes drifted and deposited bywater, and partly by those which would fall after the layingdry of the tract. The last features imparted to the physicalgeography would be derived from such eruptions in the openair as those of Monte Nuovo and the minor cones of Ischia.No signs of diluvial waves. Such a conversion of a largetract of sea into land might possibly take place while the surfaceof the contiguous country underwent but slight modification.No great wave was caused by the permanent rise of thecoast near Puzzuoli in the year 1538, because the upheavingoperation appears to have been effected by a long succession ofminor shocks *. A series of such movements, therefore, mightproduce an island like Ischia without throwing a diluvial rushof waters upon low parts of the neighbouring continent. Theadvocates of paroxysmal elevations may, perhaps, contend thatthe rise of Ischia must have been anterior to the birth of allthe cones of loose scoriae scattered over the Phlegrasan Fields,for, according to them, the sudden rise of marine strata causesinundations which devastate adjoining continents. But theabsence of any signs of such floods in the volcanic region ofCampania does not appear to us to warrant the conclusion,either that Ischia was raised previously to the production ofthe volcanic cones, or that it may not have been rising duringthe whole period of their formation.We learn from the study of the mutations now in progress,that one part of the earth's surface may, for an indefiniteperiod, be the scene of continued change, while another, in theimmediate vicinity, remains stationary. We need go no fartherthan our own country to illustrate this principle ; for,reasoning from what has taken place in the last ten centuries,we must anticipate that in the course of the next 4000 or 5000years, a long strip of land, skirting the line of our easternSee vol. i. p. 457, first edition j p. 527, second edition.Ch. X.] MARINE Newer PLIOCENE STRATA. 129coast, will be devoured by the ocean, while part of the interior,immediately adjacent, will remain at rest and entirely undisturbed.The analogy holds true in regions where the volcanicfires are at work, for part of the Philosopher's Tower on Etnahas stood for the last 2000 years, at the height of more than9000 feet above the sea, between the foot of the highestcone and the edge of the precipice which overhangs the Val delBove, whilst large tracts of the surrounding district have beenthe scenes of tremendous convulsions. The great cone abovehas more than once been blown into the air, and again renewed; the earth has sunk down in the neighbouring Cisterna*; the cones of 1811 and 1819 have started up, on theledge of rock below, pouring out of their craters two mightystreams of lava ; the watery deluge of 1755 has rushed downfrom the steep desert region, into the Val del Bove, rollingalong vast heaps of rocky fragments towards the sea ; fissures,several miles in length, have opened on the flanks of Etna ;cities and villages have been shattered by partial earthquakes,or buried under lava and ashes ; yet the tower has stood as ifplaced on the most perilous point in Europe, to commemoratethe stability of one part of the earth's surface, while others inimmediate proximity have been subject to most wonderful andterrific vicissitudes.Marine Newer Pliocene strata only visible in countries ofearthquakes. In concluding what we have to say of the marineand volcanic formations of the newer Pliocene period, we maynotice the highly interesting fact, that the marine strata ofthis era have hitherto been found at great elevations in thosecountries only where violent earthquakes have occurred duringthe historical ages. We do not deny that some partial depositscontaining recent marine shells have been discovered at aconsiderable height in several maritime countries in Europe andelsewhere, far from the existing theatres of volcanic action ; butstratified deposits of great extent and thickness, and replete withrecent species, have only been observed to enter largely into theSec above, p. 96.VOL. III. K130 New-tt PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. X.structure of the interior, as in Sicily, Calabria, and the Morea,where subterranean movements are now violent. On the otherhand, it is a still more striking fact, that there is no exampleof any extensive maritime district, now habitually agitated bygreat earthquakes, which has not, when carefully investigated,yielded traces of marine strata, either of the recent or newerPliocene eras, at considerable elevations.Chills Conception Ktnj.* In illustration of the above remarkswe may mention, that on the western coast of SouthAmerica marine deposits occur, containing precisely the sameshells as are now living in the Pacific. In Chili, for example,as we before stated :;: , micaceous sand, containing the fossil remainsof such species as now inhabit the Bay of Conception,arc found at the height of from 1000 to 1500 feet above thelevel of the ocean, It is impossible to say how much of thisrise may have taken place during the Recent period. We haveendeavoured to show that one earthquake raised this part ofthe Civilian coast, in 1750, to the height of at least 25 feetabove its former level. If we could suppose a continued seriesof such shocks, one in every century, only Good years wouldbe required to uplift the coast 1500 feet. But we have nodata for inferring that so great a quantity of elevation has takenplace in that space of time, and although we cannot assume thatthe micaceous sand may not belong to the recent period, wethink it more probable that it was deposited during the newerPliocene period.Peru. We are informed by j\Ir. A. Cruckshanks, that inthe valley of Lima, or llimao, where the subterranean movementshave been so violent in recent times, there are indicationsnot only of a considerable rise of the land, but of that risehaving resulted from successive movements. Distinct lines ofancient sea-tills have been observed at various heights, at thebase of which the hard rocks of greenstone are hollowed outinto precisely those forms which they now assume between highand low water mark on the .shores of the Pacific. Immediatelybelow thui'j water-worn lines are ancient beaches strewed withVul. i. cilia, xxv,Ch. X.] PARALLEL ROADS OF Colombo. 131rounded blocks. One of these cliffs appears in the hill behindBathos del Pujio, about 700 feet above the level of the sea, and200 above the contiguous valley. Another occurs at Aman-cases,at the height of perhaps 200 feet above the sea, and othersat intermediate elevations.Parallel roads of Coquimbo. We can hardly doubt that theparallel roads of Coquimbo, in Chili, described by CaptainHall, owe their origin to similar causes. These roads, or shelves,occur in a valley six or seven miles wide, which descends fromthe Andes to the Pacific. Their general width is from 20 to50 yards, but they are, at some places, half a mile broad.They are so disposed as to present exact counterparts of oneanother, at the same level, on opposite sides of the valley.There are three distinctly characterized sets, and a lower onewhich is indistinct when approached, but when viewed from adistance is evidently of the same character with the others.Each resembles a shingle beach, being formed entirely of loosematerials, principally water-worn, rounded stones, from thesize of a nut to that of a man's head. The stones are principallygranite and gneiss, with masses of schists, whetstone,and quartz mixed indiscriminately, and all bearing marks ofhaving been worn by attrition under water *.The theory proposed by Captain Hall to explain these appearancesis the same as that which had been adopted toaccount for the analogous parallel roads of Glen Roy in Scotlandf. The valley is supposed to have been a lake, the watersof which stood, originally, at the level of the highest road, untila flat beach was produced. A portion of the barrier was thenbroken down, which allowed the lake to discharge part of itswaters into the sea, and, consequently, to fall to the secondlevel ; and so on successively till the whole embankment waswashed away, and the valley left as we now see it.As I did not feel satisfied with this explanation, I applied toCaptain Hail's South America, vol. ii. p. 9.f See Sir T. D. Lander, Ed. Roy. Soc. Trans., vol. ix., and Dr. Macculloeh,Gaol. Trans., 1st Series, vol. iv. p. 314,K 2132 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. X.my friend Captain Hall for additional details, and he immediatelysent me his original manuscript notes, requesting me tomake free use of them. In them I find the following interestingpassages, omitted in his printed account. ' The valley is completelyopen towards the sea ; if the roads, therefore, are the ;beaches of an ancient lake, it is difficult to imagine a catastrophesufficiently violent to carry away the barrier whichshould not at the same time obliterate all traces of the beaches.I find it difficult also to account for the water worn characterof all the stones, for they have the appearance ofhaving travelled over a great distance, being well rounded anddressed. They are in immense quantity too, and much morethan one could expect to find on the beach of any lake, and.seem more properly to belong to the ocean. 9We entertained a strong suspicion, before reading thesenotes, that the beaches were formed by the waves of the Pacific,and not by the waters of a lake ; in other words, that they,bear testimony to the successive rise of the land, not tothe repeated fall of the waters of a lake. We have beforecited the proofs adduced by M. Boblaye, that in the Moreathere are four or five ranges of ancient sea-cliffs, one above theother, at various elevations, where limestone precipices exhibitlithodomous perforations and lines of ancient littoral caverns *.If we discover lines of parallel upraised cliffs, we ought to findparallel lines of elevated beaches on those coasts where the rocksare of a nature to retain, for a length of time, the marks imprintedon their surface. We may expect such indications tobe peculiarly manifest in countries where the subterraneanforce has been in activity within comparatively modern times,and it is there that the hypothesis of paroxysmal elevations, andthe instantaneous rise of mountain-chains, should first have beenput to the test, before it was hastily embraced by a certainschool of geologists.West Indian Archipelago. According to the sketch givenby Maclure of the geology of the Leeward Islands f, theSee above, ,p. 113. f Quart. Jour. of Sci., vol. v. p. 31 1..Ch. X.] EAST INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO. 133western range consists in great part of formations of the mostmodern period. It will be remembered, that many parts ofthis region have been subject to violent earthquakes ; that inSt. Vincent's and Guadaloupe there are active volcanos, andin some of the other islands boiling springs and sol fat aras. InSt. Eustatia, there is a marine deposit, estimated at 1500 feetin thickness, consisting of coral limestone alternating with bedsof shells, of which the species are, according to Maclure, thesame as those now found in the sea. These strata dip to thesouth-west at an angle of about 45, and both rest upon, and arecovered by, cinders, pumice, and volcanic substances. Part ofthe madrepore rock has .been converted into silex and chalcedony,and is, in some parts, associated with crystalline gypsum.Alternations of coralline formations with prismatic lava and differentvolcanic substances also occur in Dominica and St.Christopher's, and the American naturalist remarks, that asevery lava-current which runs into the sea in this archipelagois liable to be covered with corals and shells, and these againwith lava, we may suppose an indefinite repetition of suchalternations to constitute the foundation of each isle.We do not question the accuracy of the opinion, that thefossil shells and corals of these formations are of recent species,for there are specimens of limestone in the Museum of theJardin du Hoi at Paris, from the Antilles, in which the imbeddedshells are all or nearly all identical with those nowliving. Part of this limestone is soft, but some of thespecimens are very compact and crystalline, and contain onlythe casts of shells. Of 30 species examined by M. Deshayesfrom this rock 28 were decidedly recent.Honduras. Shells sent from some of the recent strata ofJamaica, and many from the nearest adjoining continent ofthe Honduras, may be seen in the British Museum, and areidentified with species now living in the West Indian seas.East Indian Archipdacjo. We have seen that the Indianocean is one of the principal theatres of volcanic disturbance.We expect, therefore, that future researches in this quarter of134 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. X.the globe will bring to light some of the most striking examplesof marine strata upraised to great heights during comparativelymodern periods.From the observations of Dr. Jack, it appears that in theisland of Pulo Nias, off the west coast of Sumatra masses ofcorals of recent species can be traced from the level of the seafar into the interior, where they form considerable hills.Large shells of the Chamaa gigs (Tridacna, Lamk.) are scatteredover the face of the country, just as they occur on thepresent reefs. These fossils are in such a state of preservationas to be collected by the inhabitants for the purpose of beingcut into rings for the arms and wrists *.Madeira. The island of Madeira is placed between theAzores and Canaries, in both of which groups there are activevolcanos, and Madeira itself was violently shaken by earthquakesduring the last century. It consists in great part ofvolcanic tuffs and porous lava, intersected in some places, asat the Brazen Head, by vertical dikes of compact lava-f. Someof the marine fossil shells, procured by Mr. Bodice from thisisland, are referable to recent species.These examples may suffice for the present, and lead us toanticipate with confidence, that in almost all countries wherechanges of level have taken place in our own times, the geologistwill find monuments of a prolonged series of convulsionsduring the lleccnt and newer Pliocene periods. Exceptionsmay no doubt occur where a particular line of coast is sinkingdown, yet even here we may presume, from what we knowof the irregular action of the subterranean forces, that some casesof partial elevation will have been caused by occasional oscillationsof level, so that modern subaqueous formations will, hereand there, have been brought up to view.We shall conclude by enumerating a few exceptions to therule above illustrated instances of elevation where no greatearthquakes have been recently experienced.Gctl. Trans., Si-fond Scries, vol. i. j:art ii. \i. C97.f Mo. of Captain 1J. Hull.X.]BORDERS OF THE RED SEA. 135Grosceil, near Nice. At a spot called Grosoeil, near Nice,east of the Bay of Villefranche, in the peninsula of St. Hospice,a remarkable bed of fine sand occurs at an elevation of about50 feet above the sea *. This sand rests on inclined secondaryrocks, and is filled with the remains of marine species all identicalwith those now inhabiting the neighbouring sea. Noless than 200 species of shells, and several Crustacea and echini,have been obtained by M. Risso, in a high state of preservation,although mingled with broken shells. The winds haveblown up large heaps of similar sand to considerable heights,upon ledges of the steep coast farther westward, but the positionof the deposit at Grosceil cannot be referred to such agency,for among the shells may be seen the large Murex Triton,Linn., and a species of Cassis, weighing a pound and a half.Uddevalla. The ancient beaches of the Norwegian andSwedish coasts, described in the first volume y, in which theshells are of living species, present more marked exceptions asbeing farther removed from any line of recent convulsion.They afford evidence of a rise of 200 feet or more of partsof those coasts during the newer Pliocene, if not the Recentepoch.West of England's The proofs lately brought to light of analogouselevations on our western shores, in Caernarvonshire andLancashire, during some modern tertiary period, were beforepointed out J ; but the data are as yet exceedingly incomplete.Western Borders of the Red Sea. Another exception maybealluded to, for which we are indebted to the researches ofMr. James Burton. On the western shores of the Arabiangulf, about half way between Suez and Kosire, in the 28thdegree of North latitude, a formation of white limestone andcalcareous sand is seen, reaching the height of 200 feet abovethe sea. It is replete with fossil shells, all of recent species,which are in a beautiful state of preservation, many of themretaining their colour. I have been favoured with a list ofI examined this locality in company with Mr. Murchison m 1828.f Chap. xiii. j See description of the map, vol. ii.13G NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. X.these shells, which will be found in Appendix II.* The volcanoof Mabel Tor, situate at the entrance of the Arabiangulf, is the nearest volcanic region known to us at present.We should guard the reader against inferring, from the factsabove detailed, that marine strata of the newer Pliocene periodhave been produced exclusively in countries of earthquakes.If we have drawn our illustrations exclusively from modernvolcanic regions, it is simply for this reason, that these formationshave been made visible to us in those districts only wherethe conversion of sea into land has taken place in times comparativelymodern. Other continents have, during the newerPliocene period, suffered degradation,, and rivers and currentshave deposited sediment in other seas, but the new strata remainconcealed wherever no subsequent alterations of levelhave taken place.We believe, however, that to a certain limited extent thegrowth of new subaqueous deposits has been greatest whereigneous and aqueous causes have co-operated. It is there, aswe have explained in former chapters, that the degradation ofland is most rapid, and it is there only that materials ejectedfrom below, by volcanic explosions, are added to the sedimenttransported by running water f.These fossils are now in the museum of Mr. Greenough, in London, and duplicates,presented by him, in the cabinets of the Geological Society.t See vol. i. chap. xxiv. ; and vol. ii. chap, xviii.CHAPTER XI.Newer Pliocene fresh-water formations Valley of the Elsa Traversing of RomeOsseous breccias Sicily Caves near Palermo Extinct animals in newerPliocene breccias Fossil bones of Marsupial animals in Australian cavesFormation of osseous breccias in the Morea Newer Pliocene alluviums-Difference between alluviums and regular subaqueous strata The former ofvarious ages Marine alluvium Grooved surface of rocks Erratic blocks ofthe Alps Theory of deluges caused by paroxysmal elevations untenableHow ice may have contributed to transport large blocks from the Alps Europeanalluviums chiefly tertiary Newer Pliocene in Sicily Loss of the Valleyof the Rhine Its origin Contains recent shells.FRESH-WATER FORMATIONS.IN this chapter we shall treat of the fresh-water formations,and of the cave breccias and alluviums of the newer Plioceneperiod.In regard to the first of these, they must have been formed,in greater or less quantity, in nearly all the existing lakes ofthe world, in those, at least, of which the basins were formedbefore the earth was tenanted by man. If the great lakes ofNorth America originated before that era, the sedimentarystrata deposited therein, in the ages immediately antecedent,would, according to the terms of our definition, belong to thenewer Pliocene period.Valley of the Elsa. As an example of the strata of this age,which have been exposed to view in consequence of the drainageof a lake, we may mention those of the valley of the Elsa,in Tuscany, between Florence and Sienna, where we meet withfresh-water marls and travertins full of shells, belonging tospecies which now live in the lakes and rivers of Italy. Valleysseveral hundred feet deep have been excavated through thelacustrine beds, and the ancient town of Colle stands on a hillcomposed of them. The subjacent formation consists of marineSubapennine beds, in which more than half the shells are138 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XI.of recent species. The fresh-water shells which I collectednear Colle are in a very perfect state, and the colours of theNeritinae are peculiarly brilliant. The following six species,all of which now inhabit Italy, were identified by M. Deshayes:Paludina impure, Neritina fluviatilis, Succinea amphibia, Linesauricular, L. prefer. and Planorbis carinatus.travertins of Rome. Many of the travertins and calcareoustufts which cap the hills of Rome may also belong tothe same period. The terrestrial shells inclosed in these massesare of the same species as those now abounding in the gardensof Rome, and the accompanying aquatic shells are such as arefound in the streams and lakes of the Campagna. On MountAventine, the Vatican, and the Capitol, we find abundance ofvegetable matter, principally reeds encrusted with calcareoustufa, and intermixed with volcanic sand and pumice. Thetusk of a mammoth has been procured from this formation,filled in the interior with solid travertin, wherein sparklingcrystals of augite are interspersed, so that the bone has all theappearance of having been extracted from a hard crystallinerock *.These Roman tufts and travertins repose partly on marinetertiary strata, belonging, perhaps, to the older Pliocene era,and partly on volcanic tuff of a still later date. They musthave been formed in small lakes and marshes, which existedbefore the excavation of the valleys which divide the seven hillsof Rome, and they must originally have occupied the lowesthollows of the country, whereas now we find them placed uponthe summit of hills about 200 feet above the alluvial plain ofthe Tiber. We know that this river has flowed nearly in itspresent channel ever since the building of Rome, and scarcelyany changes in the geographical features of the country havetaken place since that era.When the marine tertiary strata of this district were formed,those of Monte Mario for example, the Mediterranean wasalready inhabited by a large proportion of the existing speciesThis fossil wag shown me by Signer Riccioli at Rome.Ch.XL]BRECCIAS IN SICILIAN CAVES. 139of testacea. At a subsequent period, volcanic eruptions occurred,and tuffs were superimposed. The marine formationthen emerged from the deep, and supported lakes wherein thefresh-water groups above described slowly accumulated, at atime when the mammoth abounded in the country. Thevalley of the Tiber was afterwards excavated, and the adjoininghills assumed their present shape, and then a long intervalmay, perhaps, have elapsed before the first human settlersarrived. Thus we have evidence of a chain of events all regardedas extremely recent by the geologist, but which, nevertheless,may have preceded, for an immense series of ages, avery remote era in the history of nations.OSSEOUS BRECCIAS.Sicily. The breccias recently found in several caves inSicily belong evidently to the period under consideration. Wehave shown, in the sixth chapter,, that the cavernous limestoneof the Val di Not is of very modern date, as it contains agreat abundance of fossil shells of recent species. But if anybreccias are found in the caverns of this rock they must be ofstill later origin.We are informed by M. Hoffmannn, that the bones of themammoth, and of an extinct species of hippopotamus, havebeen discovered in the stalactite of caves near Sortino, of whichthe situation is represented in the annexed diagram at b. TheNo. 26.1} fr, Debits in caves, } contain f '<* quadrupeds.C, Limestone containing remains of recent shells.same author also describes a breccia, containing the bones of140 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XI.an extinct rhinoceros and hippopotamus, in a cave in the neighbourhoodof Syracuse, where the country is composed entirelyof the Val di Not limestone. .Some of the fragments in thebreccia are perforated by lithodomi, and the whole mass iscovered by a deposit of marine clay filled with recent shells *.These phenomena may, we think, be explained by supposingsuch oscillations of level as are known to occur on maritimecoasts where earthquakes prevail, such, in fact, as have beenwitnessed on the shores of the Bay of Baiae within the lastthree centuries f. For it is evident that the temporary submergenceof a cave filled with osseous breccia might affordtime for the perforation of the rock by boring testacea, and forthe deposition upon it of mud, sand, and shells.The association in these and other localities of shells of livingspecies with the remains of extinct mammalia is very distinct,and corroborates the inference adverted to in a former chapter,that the longevity of species in the mammalia is, upon thewhole, inferior to that of the testacea. This circumstance weareby no means inclined to refer to the intervention of man,and his power of extirpating the larger quadrupeds, for thesuccession of mammiferous species appears to have been in likemanner comparatively rapid throughout the older tertiaryperiods. Their more limited duration depends, in all probability,on physiological laws which render warm-blooded quadrupedsless capable, in general, of accommodating themselvesto a great variety of circumstances, and, consequently, ofsurviving the vicissitudes to which the earth's surface is exposedin a great lapse of ages J.Caves near Palermo. The caves near Palermo exhibit appearancesvery analogous to those above described, and muchcurious information has been lately published respecting them.According to Hoffmannn, the grotto of Mardolce is distantabout two miles from Palermo, and is 20 feet high and 10Hoffmannn, Archie. fUr Mineralogy, p. 393. Berlin, 1831. Dr. Christie,Proceedings of Geol. Soc., No. xxiii. p. 333.j- Vol. i. chap. xxv. J See above, p. 48, and vol. i. chap. vi.Ch. XI.]BRECCIAS IN SICILIAN CAVES.wide. It occurs in a secondary limestone, in the MonteGrifone, at the base of a rocky precipice about 180 feet abovethe sea. From the foot of this precipice an inclined plane,consisting of horizontal tertiary strata, of the newer Plioceneperiod, extends to the sea, a distance of about a mile.No. 27.a, Monte Grifone.6, Cave of San Giro.c, Plain of Palermo.d, Bay of Palermo *.The limestone escarpment was evidently once a sea-cliff, andthe ancient beach still remains formed of pebbles of variousrocks, many of which must have been brought from places farremote. Broken pieces of coral and shell, especially of oystersand pectens, are seen intermingled with the pebbles. Immediatelyabove the level of this beach serpulae are still foundadhering to the face of the rock, and the limestone is perforatedby lithodomi. Within the grotto also, at the same level, similarperforations occur, and so numerous are the holes, that therock is compared by Hoffmannn to a target pierced by musketballs. But in order to expose to view these marks of boring-shellsin the interior of the cave, it was necessary first to removea mass of breccia, which consisted of numerous fragments ofrock and an immense quantity of bones imbedded in a darkbrown calcareous marl. Many of the bones were rolled as ifpartially subjected to the action of the waves. Below thisbreccia, which is about 20 feet thick, was found a bed of sandfilled with sea shells of recent species, and underneath theThis section is given by Dr. Christie, as of the Cave of San Giro. Ed. NewPhil. Journ., No. xxiii. Its geographical position and other characters agree soprecisely with that of Mardolce, described by M. Hoffmannn, that it may be anothername for the same cave, or one immediately adjoining.142 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch XI.sand again is the secondary limestone of Monte Grifone. Thestate of the surface of the limestone in the cave above the levelof the marine sand is very different from that below it. A hove,the rock is jagged and uneven, as is usual in the roofs and sidesof limestone caverns ; below, the surface is smooth and polished,as if by the attrition of the waves.So enormous was the quantity of bones, that many ship-loadswere exported in the years 1829 and 1830, in the hopeof their retaining enough gelatine to serve for refining sugar,for which, however, they proved useless. The bones belongchiefly to the mammoth (". primi genius), and with them arethose of an hippopotamus, smaller than the species usuallyfound fossil, and distinct from the recent. Several species ofdeer were also found with the above*. The remains of a bear,also, are said to have been discovered.It is easy to explain in what manner the cavern of Mardolcewas in part filled with sea-sand, and how the surface of thelimestone became perforated by lithodomi; but in whatmanner, when the elevation of the rocks and the ancient beachhad taken place, was the superimposed osseous breccia formed ?The extraordinary number of the imbedded animal remainsprecludes, we think, at once the supposition of the whole havingbeen heaped up together by a single catastrophe. Let us supposethat, when the caves were at a moderate elevation abovethe level of the sea, they were exposed, during a succession ofearthquakes, to be inundated again and again by waves rollingin upon the land till they reached the base of an inland cliff,not far from the shore. Reiterated catastrophes may thus haveoccurred, like that of 1783 in Calabria, when a wave broke inupon the coast, and after sweeping away 1400 of the inhabitantsand many cattle, threw in upon the land, on its return,the bodies of men and the carcasses of animals, mingled withsand and pebbles. Caves so flooded might be inhabited bysome animals, and others might retreat into them during aperiod of alarm. We attach no importance, however, to theseCuvier, Disc. Prelim., p. 345. 6th Kd.Ch.XL] BRECCIAS IN AUSTRALIAN CAVES. 143speculations, but merely throw them out as hints for those whomay re-examine these caves and be desirous of collecting additionalfacts.Two other caverns are described by Dr. Christie as occurringin Mount Beliemi, about four miles west of Palermo, at ahigher elevation than that of Mardolce, being more than 300feet above the level of the sea. In one of these localities thebones are only found in a talus at the outside of the cavern ; inthe other, they occur both within the cave and in the taluswhich slopes from it to the plain below. These caves appear to besituated much above the highest point attained by the tertiary depositsin this neighbourhood, nor is there the slightest appearancein the caves themselves of the sea having been there *.The breccias in these caves may have originated in the mannerbefore suggested, vol. ii. chap. xiii.Australian Breccias. In several parts of Australia, fossiliferousbreccias have lately been discovered in limestone caverns, andthe remains of the fossil mammalia are found to be referable tospecies now living in that country, mingled with some relics ofextinct animals. Many of these have been examined by MajorMitchell in the Wellington Valley, about 210 miles west fromSidney, on the river Bell, one of the principal sources of theMacquarrie, and on the Macquarrie itself.The caverns appear to correspond closely with those whichcontain similar osseous breccias in Europe ; they often branchoft* in different directions through the rock, widening and contractingtheir dimensions, the roofs and floors being coveredwith stalactite. The bones are often broken, but do not appearwater worn. In some caves and fissures they lie imbeddedin loose earth, but usually they are included in a breccia, havinga red ochreous cement as hard as limestone, and like thatof the Mediterranean caves.The remains found most abundantly are those of the kangaroo.Amongst others, those of the Wombat, Dasyurus,Dr. T. Christie, on certain Newer Deposits in Sicily, &c, Jameson, Ed,Phil, Spurn,, No, xxiii. p, 1,144 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XI.Kaola, and Phalanges, have been recognized. The greaterpart of them belong to existing, but several to extinct, species.One of the bones is of much greater size than the rest, and issupposed, by Mr. Clift, to belong to an hippopotamus *.In a collection of these bones sent to Paris, Mr. Pentlandthought he could recognize a species of Ilahnaturus of largersize than the largest living kangaroo j.These facts are full of interest, for they prove that thepeculiar type of organization which now characterizes themarsupial tribes has prevailed from a remote period in Australia,and that in that continent, as in Europe, North and SouthAmerica, and India, many species of mammalia have becomeextinct. It also appears, although the evidence is less completethan we could have wished, that land quadrupeds, farexceeding in magnitude the wild species now inhabiting NewHolland, have, at some former period, existed in that country.Breccias now forming in the Morea. Respecting the variousways in which fissures and caverns may become gradually filledup with osseous breccias, we may refer the reader to what wehave said in a former volume J. It appears, however, from arecent communication of M. Boblaye, that the Morea is, of allthe countries hitherto investigated, that which throws the greatestlight on the mode in which the Mediterranean breccias mayhave originated.In that peninsula a great many of the rivers and torrentsterminate in land-locked hollows, where they arc engulphed inchasms which traverse limestone. They sometimes reappearat great distances, but generally they discharge their watersbelow the level of the sea. ' Numerous bone caverns,' saysM. Boblaye, ' may thus be filling up in our own times, andthe gulphs (katavothrons) of the plain of Tripolitza haveswallowed up of late years thousands of human bones, mingledMr. Clift, Kd. New Phil. Jimrn., No. xx. p. 394. Major Mitchell, ProceedingsofGi-ol. Sue., 1831, p. 321.| Journ. de Geologic, tome iii. p. 291. The bone of an e/cji/uint mentioned byMr. Penthmd was the same large bone alluded to by Mr. Cliff.I Vol. ii. chap. xiii.Ch. XI.] NEWER PLIOCENE ALLUVIUMS. 145with the same ochreous clay which envelops the osseous remainsof higher antiquity *.'NEWER PLIOCENE ALLUVIUMS.Some writers have attempted to introduce into their classificationof geological periods an alluvial epoch, as if thetransportation of loose matter from one part of the surface ofthe land to another had been the work of one particular period.In our opinion, they might have endeavoured, with equalpropriety, to institute a volcanic period, or a period of marineor fresh-water deposits. We believe, on the contrary, thatalluvial formations have originated in every age, but moreparticularly during those periods when land has been raisedabove its former level, or depressed below it. We definedalluvium to be such transported matter as has been throwndown, either by rivers, floods, or other causes, upon land liableto inundations, or which is not permanently submerged beneaththe waters of lakes or seas. As examples of the other causesadverted to in the above definition, we might instance a waveof the sea raised by an earthquake, or a water spout, or aglacier.We have said permanently submerged in order to distinguishbetween alluviums and regular subaqueous deposits.The latter are accumulated in lakes or great submarine receptacles,the former in the channels of rivers and currents,where the materials may be regarded as being still in transitu,or on their way to a place of rest. There may be cases whereit is impossible to draw a line of demarcation between thesetwo classes of formations, but these exceptions are rare, andthe division is, upon the whole, convenient and natural, thecircumstances being very different under which each grouporiginates.Marine alluvium. The term ( marine alluvium ' is, perhaps,admissible if confined to banks of shingle thrown up like theJourn. de Geologic, tome iii. No. x. p. 165.f Vol. ii. chap. xiv.VOL. III. L14G NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XI.Chesil bank, or to materials cast up by a wave of the sea uponthe land, or those which a submarine current has left in itstrack. The kind last mentioned must necessarily, when thebed of the ocean has been laid dry, resemble terrestrial allusions,with this difference, that if any fragments of organicbodies have escaped destruction they will belong to marinespecies.During the gradual rise of a large area, first from beneaththe waters, and then to a great height above them, severalkinds of superficial gravel must be formed and transportedfrom one place to another. When the first islets begin toappear, and the breakers arc foaming upon the new-raisedreefs, many rocky fragments are torn off and rolled along thebottom of the sea.Let the reader recall to mind the action of the tides andcurrents off the coast of Shetland, described in the first volume*,where blocks of granite, gneiss, porphyry, and serpentine, ofenormous dimensions, are continually detached from wastingcliffs during storms, and carried in a few hours to a distanceof many hundred yards from the parent rocks. Suppose thefloor of the ocean not far from the coast to be composed ofthose secondary strata of which several islands of this groupconsist. Such a tract, after being strewed over with detachedblocks and pebbles of ancient rocks, might be converted intoland, and the geologist might then, perhaps, search in vainfor the islands whence the fragments were originally derived.For the islands may have wholly disappeared, having beengradually consumed by the waves of the ocean, or submergedby subterranean movements.Let us farther suppose this new land to be uplifted duringsuccessive convulsions to the height of 1000 feet. The marinealluvium before alluded to would be carried upwards on thesummits of the hills and on the surface of elevated platforms.It might still constitute the general covering of the country,being wanting only in such valleys and ravines as may haveChapter xv.Ch. XI.] BRITISH ALLUVIUMS. 147been caused by earthquakes or excavated by the power ofrunning water during the rise of the land. The alluvium inthose more modern valleys would consist partly of pebbleswashed out of the older gravel before mentioned, but chiefly offragments derived from the wreck of those rocks which wereremoved during the erosion of the valleys.Many of the most widely distributed of the British allusionsmay we think be referred to the action of the seaprevious to the elevation of the land ; and for this reason wenever expect to be able to trace all the pebbles to their parentrocks. If it be objected that the high antiquity thus ascribedto many of our superficial deposits seems inconsistent with theiractual state of preservation, we may observe, that they areoften composed of indestructible materials, such as flint andquartz, and in many cases they have been protected for agesfrom the corroding action of the atmosphere by an envelope ofloam or clay, from which they have been partially and slowlywashed out by rain.It must not; however, be understood that we refer thegreater part of the alluviums scattered over our continents tothe waves and currents of the sea, but merely some of thosewhich have been justly regarded as most singular and anomalous,both in position and in the discordance of their contentswith any known rocks in the adjacent countries.Grooved surface of rocks. We sometimes find the surfaceof large tracts hollowed out extensively in parallel grooves,such as have been described by Sir James Hall on the summitsof the Corstorphine Hills, where I have myself examined them,in company with Dr. Buckland. These grooves may havebeen caused by the friction of blocks rolled along the floor ofthe ocean before the country emerged from the deep. Thesame appearances may be seen on a smaller scale, in the bedsof many mountain streams in Scotland, and I observed themstrikingly displayed on Etna, in the defile called the Patelladi Calanna, where a hard blue lava of modern date has beenfurrowed in this manner by the rolling of blocks down a steepdeclivity. I< 2148 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XI.We have endeavoured, in a former volume, to point out thegreat power exerted by running water on the land in excavatingvalleys, at those periods when violent earthquakes derange,from time to time, the regular drainage of a country *. Wealso explained the manner in which temporary lakes are formed,and how the accumulated waters may suddenly escape, whenthe barriers are rent open by subsequent convulsions.Erratic blocks. Blocks of extraordinary magnitude havebeen observed at the foot of the Alps, and at a considerableheight in some of the valleys of the Jura, exactly opposite theprincipal openings by which great rivers descend from theAlps. These fragments have been called ' erratic,' and manyimaginary causes have been invented to account for their transportation.Some have talked of chasms opening in the groundimmediately below, and of huge fragments having been cast outof them from the bowels of the earth. Others have referredto the deluge, a convenient agent in which they find a simplesolution of every difficult problem exhibited by alluvial phenomena.More recently, the instantaneous rise of mountain-chainshas been introduced as a cause which may have givenrise to diluvial waves, capable of devastating whole continents,and drifting huge blocks from one part of the earth's surfaceto another.M. Else de Beaumont has indulged in the speculation, thatthe sudden ' appearance of the Cordillera of the Andes ' mayhave caused c the historical deluge f ! ' Now, if we were sufficientlyacquainted with the Andes to have grounds for assumingthat they were not upheaved, like the Alps, at several successiveperiods ; if we could assume that they have started upat once, so as to attain their actual height in an instant oftime ; if, in short, we could embrace the theory of { paroxysmalelevations,' still we should consider the hypothesis of aconnexion between the rise of the Andes and the historicalVol. i. chap. xxiv.f L'Age relates des Montagues, sec. x. Revue Frai^aise, No. xv., Mai, 1830,p. 55.Ch. XL] ERRATIC BLOCKS. 149deluge, as most extravagant. It cannot be disputed that, ifpart of the unfathomable ocean were suddenly converted intoa shoal, a great body of water would be displaced, and a diluvialwave might then inundate some previously-existing continent.A line of shoals, therefore, or reefs, consisting ofshattered and dislocated rocks, and surrounded on all sides bya great depth of sea, ought first to have been pointed out bythe paroxysmalist as one of the protruded masses which mayhave caused a recent deluge. The subsequent throw ofthese same reefs to an additional height of ten, fifteen, ortwenty thousand feet, converting them suddenly into a mountainridge like the Andes, would displace a great volume ofatmospheric air, not of water, and if the velocity of the movementwere sufficiently great, might occasion a tremendoushurricane.If it be said that a convulsion sufficiently violent to raise theAndes would probably extend far beyond the immediate range ofthe mountain chain, we reply that, according to that theory, itwas not the Andes, but some other unknown tract, part perhapsof the present bed of the Pacific, which occasioned the flood.And if we indulge in conjectures as to what may have happenedin contiguous regions at the time when the Cordillera arose, weask whether those regions may not have sunk down, so as to causea subsidence instead of an uplifting of the oceanic waters ?But leaving the farther discussion of these speculative views,let us return to the origin of the larger erratic blocks of Alpineorigin. It has been often suggested, that ice may have contributedits aid towards the transfer of these enormous blocks,and, as the transporting power of ice is now so conspicuouslydisplayed in the Alps, the idea is entitled to the fullest consideration.Those naturalists who have seen the glaciers of Savoy, andwho have beheld the prodigious magnitude of some fragmentsconveyed by them from the higher regions of Mont Blanc tothe valleys below, to a distance of many leagues, will be preparedto appreciate the effects which a series of earthquakes150 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XI.might produce in this region, if the peaks or < needles,' as theyare called, of Mont Blanc were shaken as rudely as many partsof the Andes have been in our own times. The glaciers 01Chamouni would immediately be covered under a prodigiousload of rocky masses thrown down upon them. Let us, then,imagine one of the deep narrow gorges in the course of theAre, between Chamouni and Cluse, to be stopped up by thesliding down of a hill-side (as the Rossberg fell in 1806 *),and a lake would fill the valley of Chamouni, and the lowerparts of the glaciers would all be laid under water. Thestreams which flow out of arches, at the termination of eachglacier, prove that at the bottom of those icy masses there arevaulted cavities through which the waters flow. Into thesehollows the water of the lake would enter, and might thusfloat up the ice in detached icebergs, for the glaciers are muchfissured, and the rents would be greatly increased during aperiod of earthquakes. Icebergs thus formed might, we conceive,resemble those seen by Captain Scores far from landin the Polar seas, which supported fragments of rock and soil,conjectured to be above fifty thousand tons in weight f. Leta subsequent convulsion, then, break suddenly the barrier ofthe lake, and the flood would instantly carry down the icebergs,together with their burden, to the low country at the base ofthe Alps.We have stated in the first volume that blocks conveyed onfloating icebergs must be deposited in different parts of thebottom of the ocean, in whatever latitudes those icebergs aredissolved J .European alluviums in great part tertiary. If those writerswho speak of an ' alluvial epoch ' intend merely to say that agreat part of the European alluviums are tertiary ', we fully coincidein that opinion, for the map of Europe, given in oursecond volume, will show that almost every part of the existingcontinent of Europe has emerged from beneath the watersSee above, vol. ii. 1st Ed., p. 229 ; 2d Ed. p. 235.t See above, vol. i. p. 299, 1st Ed.j p. 342, 2d Ed. J Vol. i. ibid.Ch. XL] LOESS OF THE VALLEY OF THE RHINE. 151during some one or other of the tertiary periods ; and it isprobable, that even those districts which were land before thecommencement of the tertiary epoch, may have shared inthe subterranean convulsions by which the levels of adjoiningcountries have since been altered. During such subterraneanmovements new alluviums would be formed in great abundance,and those of more ancient date so modified as to retainscarcely any of their original distinguishing characters.LOCALITIES OF NEWER PLIOCENE ALLUVIUMS.Sicily. Assuming, then, that almost all the European allusionsare tertiary, we have next to inquire which of thembelong to the newer Pliocene period. It is clear that when adistrict, like the Val di Not 5 is composed of rocks of this age,all the alluvium upon the surface must necessarily belongeither to the newer Pliocene or to the Recent epoch. If, therefore,the elevation of the mountains of the Val di Not waschiefly accomplished antecedently to the recent epoch, we mustat once pronounce alluviums, in the position indicated at a,diagram No. 26 (p. 139), to belong to the newer Plioceneera. I am informed, that gravel so situated occurs at Gram-michelein Sicily, containing the bones of the mammoth.Loess of the Valley of the Rhine. There is a remarkablealluvium filled with land-shells of recent species, which overspreadsa great part of the valley of the Rhine, between Basleand Cologne, which, as it contains no remains of man or hisworks, we may refer to the newer Pliocene era. This depositis provincial termed ' Loess,' or, in Alsace, f Lehm/ and hasbeen described by many geologists, whose observations wehave lately had opportunities of verifying *.According to M. Leonhard the loess consists chiefly of argillaceousmatter combined with a sixth part of carbonate of limeand a sixth of quartzose and micaceous sand. It may be describedas a pulverulent loam, of a dirty yellowish-grey colour,Among these we may mention MM. Leonhard, Broun, Boue, Volts, Stringer,Marian, Rozet, and Hubert.152 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XI.often containing calcareous sandy concretions or nodules, rarelyexceeding the size of a man's head. Its entire thickness, incertainlocalities, amounts to several hundred feet ; yet no signsof stratification appear in the mass, except here and there atthe bottom, where there is a slight intermixture of materialsderived from subjacent rocks. No marine remains are anywhereimbedded in it, but land-shells of existing species areextremely common, and the remains of the mammoth, horse,and some other quadrupeds, are said to have been found in it.The general absence of fresh water shells is very remarkable.I collected a few specimens in the section near the Manheimgate of Heidelberg, and they are mentioned as having beenfound at a few other spots, by several of the writers abovecited.The loess sometimes rises to the height of 300 feet above thealluvial plain of the Rhine, and to the height of 600 feet abovethe sea ; but it is confined to the valley of the Rhine and itstributary valleys, preserving everywhere the same mineral characters,except where the lowest portion is mixed up, as before-mentioned,with matter derived from the underlying rocks.The loess reposes on every rock, from the granite to the gravelof the plains of the Rhine, and must have been thrown downfrom some vast body of water, densely charged with sediment,after the country had assumed its present configuration. Iam informed by M. Studer, that it does not extend intoSwitzerland, so that we may suppose the flood to have descendedfrom near the borders of that country, perhaps fromthe neighbourhood of Basle, into the valley of the Rhine, whereone of the first great obstacles to its passage would be theKaiserstuhl, a small group of volcanic hills which stand almostin the middle of the plains of the Rhine, south of Strasbourg,between the chains of the Black Forest and the Vosges. Thesehills are covered nearly to their summits with loess. But thenarrow gorge of Bingen and Andernach would cause thegreatest obstruction, even if we suppose that defile to have beenopen when the flood descended, which was probably the case,Ch. XL]LOESS OF THE VALLEY OF THE RHINE. 153since we find the loess lower down the valley, on the flanks ofthe Siebengebirge.We have stated that stratification is almost entirely wanting,but the movement of the muddy waters appears in some placesto have torn up the subjacent soil, and then to have throwndown again the foreign matter, thus mingled with the loess, inlayers and strata. An alternation of gravel and loess hasresulted from this cause in the lower part of the section beforealluded to at Heidelberg.I observed a similar blending of the loess, and the variegatedsandstone and red marl underlying it at Zeuten and Odenau,in a valley on the right bank of the Rhine, at a short distancefrom the Bergstrasse, between Wiesloch and Brachial, a localitypointed out to me by Professor Bronn. Near Andernachthere is a similar intermixture and alternation of the lower bedsof loess, with volcanic ejections such as are strewed over thatcountry, a phenomenon from which some observers have toohastily inferred that the volcanic eruptions and the depositionof the loess were contemporaneous.The Rhine throughout a great part of its course betweenthe lake of Constance to the falls of Chaff hausen traverses atertiary deposit, called in Switzerland molasse, which consists insome places of stratified yellow loam. At Stein, near (Meninges,this loam is 150 feet thick, and resembles exceedingly theloss before described, except in being regularly stratified. Ifwe could suppose the waters of a great lake like that ofConstance to have been suddenly let free by an earthquake,and in their descent into the valley of the Rhine to haveintersected such strata, we might imagine the waters to havebecome densely charged with loam, with which they may haveparted as soon as their velocity was diminished by spreadingover a wider space.The catastrophe which brought down the loess must, for atime, have desolated the country, but, in the end, it hasenriched the soil, constituting the most fertile parts of Alsace154 NEWER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch, XI.and Lorraine, which were previously composed of barren sandand gravel.The perfect state of preservation of the land-shells in theloess may have arisen from their having been floated in theturbid water in which there were no hard particles to injurethem by friction. The occurrence of fresh-water shells is sorare as by no means to warrant the theory adopted by some,that the loss was formed in a lake instead of having beenthrown down from a transient flood of muddy water. A fewindividual shells of aquatic species, the inhabitants, perhaps,of rivers or small ponds, may easily have been washed awayand intermingled with the rest during the inundation. Thenames of fifteen species of recent shells, which I collected fromthe loss, are given in Appendix II.*M. Bronn of Heidelberg possesses a more extensive collection.CHAPTER XII.Geological monuments of the older Pliocene period Subapennine formationsOpinions of Brocchi Different groups termed by him Subapennine are notall of the same age Mineral composition of the Subapennine formationsMarls Yellow sand and gravel Subapennine beds how formed Illustrationderived from the Upper Val d'Arno Organic remains of Subapenninehills Older Pliocene strata at the base of the Maritime Alps Genoa SavonaAlbenga Nice Conglomerate of Valley of Magnan Its origin Tertiarystrata at the eastern extremity of the Pyrenees.OLDER PLIOCENE FORMATIONS.WE must now carry back our retrospect one step farther,and treat of the monuments of the era immediately antecedentto that last considered. We defined in the fifth chapter *, thezoological characters by which the strata of the older Plioceneperiod may be distinguished, and we shall now proceed at onceto describe some of the principal groups which answer to thosecharacters.Subapennine strata. The Apennines, it is well known, arecomposed chiefly of secondary rocks, forming a chain whichbranches off from the Silurian Alps and passes down themiddle of the Italian peninsula. At the foot of these mountains,on the side both of the Adriatic and the Mediterranean,are found a series of tertiary strata, which form, for the mostpart, a line of low hills occupying the^space between the olderchain and the sea. Brocchi, the first Italian geologist whodescribed this newer group in detail, gave it the name of theSubapennines, and he classed all the tertiary strata of Italy,from Piedmont to Calabria, as parts of the same system.Certain mineral characters, he observed, were common to thewhole, for the strata consist generally of nightgown or blue marl,covered by yellow calcareous sand and gravel. There are also,Above, p. 54.156 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XII.he added, some species of fossil shells which are found in thesedeposits throughout the whole of Italy.In a catalogue, published by Lamarck, of 500 species offossil-shells of the Paris basin, a small number only were enumeratedas identical with those of Italy, and only 20 as agreeingwith living species. This result, said Brocchi, is wonderful,and very different from that derived from a comparison of thefossil-shells of Italy, more than half of which agree with speciesnow living in the Mediterranean, or in other seas, chiefly ofhotter climates *.He also stated, that it appeared from the observations ofParkinson, that the clay of London, like that of the Subapen-nine hills, was covered by sand (alluding to the Crag), and thatin that upper formation of sand in England the species of shellscorresponded much more closely with those now living in theocean than did the species of the subjacent clay. Hence heinferred that an interval of time had separated the origin of thetwo groups. But in Italy, he goes on to say, the shells foundin the marl and superincumbent sand belong entirely to thesame group, and must have been deposited under the samecircumstances t-Notwithstanding the correctness of these views, Brocchi conceivedthat the Italian tertiary strata, as a whole, might agreewith those of the basins of Paris and London, and he endeavouredto explain the discordance of their fossil contents byremarking, that the testacea of the Mediterranean differ nowfrom those living in the ocean J. In attempting thus toassimilate the age of these distinct groups, he was evidentlyinfluenced by his adherence to the anciently-received theory ofthe gradual fall of the level of the ocean, to which, and not tothe successive rise of the land, he attributed the emergence ofthe tertiary strata, all of which he consequently imagined tohave remained under water down to a comparatively recentperiod.Brocchi was perfectly justified in affirming that there wereConch. Foss. Subap., torn. i. p. 148. f Ibid., p. 147. J Ibid., p. 166.Ch.XIL] SUBAPENNINE STRATA. 157some species of shells common to all the strata called byhim Subapennine ; but we have shown that this fact is notinconsistent with the conclusion, that the several deposits mayhave originated at different periods, for there are speciesof shells common to all the tertiary eras. He seems to havebeen aware, however, of the insufficiency of his data, for ingiving a list of species universally distributed throughout Italy,he candidly admits his inability to determine whether the shellsof Piedmont were all identical with those of Tuscany, andwhether those of the northern and southern extremities of Italycorresponded *.We have already satisfactory evidence that the Subapenninebeds of Brocchi belonged, at least, to three periods. To theMiocene we can refer a portion of the strata of Piedmont,those of the hill of the Superga, for example ; to the olderPliocene belong the greater part of the strata of northernItaly and of Tuscany, and perhaps those of Rome ; to thenewer Pliocene, the tufaceous formations of Naples, thecalcareous strata of Otranto, and probably the greater part ofthe tertiary beds of Calabria.That there is a considerable correspondence in the arrangementand mineral composition of these different Italian groupsis undeniable; but not that close resemblance which shouldlead us to assume an exact identity of age, even had the fossilremains been less dissimilar.Very erroneous notions have been entertained respectingthe contrast between the lithological characters of the Italianstrata and certain groups of .higher antiquity. Dr. Maccullochhas treated of the Italian tertiary beds under the general titleof c elevated submarine alluvia,' and the overlying yellow sandand gravel may, according to him, be wholly, or in part, a terrestrialalluvium f . Had he visited Italy, we are persuadedthat he would never have considered the tertiary strata ofLondon and Paris as belonging to formations of a differentorder from the Subapennine groups, or as being more regu-Conch, Foss, Subap., torn. i. p. 143. f Syst. of Geol., vol. i. chap. xv.158 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XII.early stratified. He seems to have been misled by Brocchi'sdescription, who contrasts the more crystalline and solid textureof the older secondary rocks of the Apennines with the looseand incoherent nature of the Subapennine beds, which resemble,he says, the mud and sand now deposited by the sea.We have endeavoured, in the last chapter, to restrict withindefinite limits the meaning of the term alluvium ; but if theSubapennine beds are to be designated marine alluvia thesame name might, with equal propriety, be applied not only tothe argillaceous and sandy groups of the London and Hampshirebasins, but to a very great portion of our secondary serieswhere the marls, clays, and sands are as imperfectly consolidatedas the tertiary strata of Italy in general.They who have been inclined to associate the idea of the morestony texture of stratified deposits with a comparatively higherantiquity, should consider how dissimilar, in this respect, arethe tertiary groups of London and Paris, although admittedto be of contemporaneous date, or they should visitSicily and behold a soft brown marl, identical in mineral characterwith that of the Subapennine beds, underlying a mass ofsolid and regularly stratified limestone, rivalling the chalk ofEngland in thickness. This Sicilian marl is older than thesuperincumbent limestone, but newer than the' k Subapennine marlof the north of Italy ; for in the latter the extinct shells ratherpredominate over the recent, in the former the recent predominatealmost to the exclusion of the extinct.We shall now consider more particularly the characters ofthose Subapennine beds which we refer to the older Plioceneperiod.Subapennine marls. The most important member of theSubapennine formation is a marl which varies in colour fromgreyish brown to blue. It is very aluminous, and usuallycontains much calcareous matter and scales of mica. Itoften exhibits no lines of division throughout a considerablethickness, but in other places it is thinly laminated. NearParma, for example, I have counted thirty distinct laminae inCh. XII.]SUBAPENNINE MARLS. 159the thickness of an inch. In some of the hills near that citythe marl attains, according to Signor Guidotti, a thickness ofnearly 2000 feet, and is charged throughout with shells, manyof which are such as inhabit a deep sea. They often occur inlayers in such a manner as to indicate their slow and gradualaccumulation. They are not flattened but are filled with marl.Beds of lignite are sometimes inter stratified, as at Medesano,four leagues from Parma ; subordinate beds of gypsum alsooccur in many places, as at Vigilant and Baron, in the territoryof Parma, where they are inter stratified with shelly marland sand. At Lezignano, in the Monte Cerio, the sulphateof lime is found in lenticular crystals, in which unaltered shellsare sometimes included. Signor Guidotti, who showed mespecimens of this gypsum, remarked, that the sulphuric acidmust have been fully saturated with lime when the shells wereenveloped, so that it could not act upon tlje shell. Accordingto Brocchi, the marl sometimes passes from a soft and pulverulentsubstance into a compact limestone *, but it is rarely foundin this solid form. It is also occasionally inter stratified withsandstone.The marl constitutes very frequently the surface of thecountry, having no covering of sand. It is sometimes seenreposing immediately on the Apennine limestone ; more rarelygravel intervenes, as in the hills of San Quirico f . Volcanicrocks are here and there superimposed, as at Radicofani,in Tuscany, where a hill composed of marl, with some fewshells interspersed, is capped by basalt. Several of the volcanictuffs in the same place are so inter stratified with the marlsas to show that the eruptions took place in the sea during theolder Pliocene period. At Acquapendente, Viterbo, and otherplaces, hills of the same formation are capped with trachyticlava, and with tuffs which appear evidently to have been subaqueous.Yellow Sand. The other member of the Subapenninegroup, the yellow sand and conglomerate, constitutes, in mostConch. FOBS, Subap., torn, i, p. 82. f Ibid., p. 78.160 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch.XII.of the places where I have seen it, a border formation near thejunction of the tertiary and secondary rocks. In some cases,as near the town of Sienna, we see sand and calcareous gravelresting immediately on the Apennine limestone, without theintervention of any blue marl. Alternations are there seen ofbeds containing fluviatile shells, with others filled exclusivelywith marine species ; and I observed oysters attached to manyof the pebbles of limestone. This locality appears to havebeen a point where a river, flowing from the Apennines, enteredthe sea in which the tertiary strata were formed.Between Florence and Poggibonsi, in Tuscany, there is agreat range of conglomerate of the Subapennine beds, which isseen for eleven miles continuously from Caspian to the south ofBartering. The pebbles are chiefly of whitish limestone withsome sandstone. On receding from the older Apennine rocks,the conglomerate passes into yellow sand and sandstone, withshells, the whole overlying blue marl. In such cases we maysuppose the deltas of rivers and torrents to have gained upon thebed of a sea where blue marl had previously been deposited.The upper arenaceous group above described sometimespasses into a calcareous sandstone, as at San Mignonne. Itcontains lapidified shells more frequently than the marl, owingprobably to the more free percolation of mineral waters, whichoften dissolve and carry away the original component elementsof fossil bodies and substitute others in their place. In somecases the shells imbedded in this group are silicified, as at SanVitale, near Parma, from whence I saw two species, one freshwaterand the other marine (Limnea palustris, and Cytherea concentric,Lamk.), both recent, and perfectly converted into flint.On the other hand, the shells of Monte Mario, near Rome,which are probably referable to the same formation, arcchanged into calcareous spar, the form being preserved notwithstandingthe crystallization of the carbonate of lime.Mode of formation of the Subapennine beds. The tertiarystrata above described have resulted from the waste of thesecondary rocks which now form the Apennines, and whichCh. XII.] SUBAPENNINE STRATA, HOW FORMED. 161lead become dry land before the older Pliocene beds weredeposited. In the territory of Placentia we have an opportunityof observing the kind of sediment which the rivers arenow bringing down from the Apennines. The tertiary marlof that district being too calcareous to be used for bricks orpottery, a substitute is obtained, by conveying into tanks theturbid waters of the rivers Braganza, Parma, Taro and Senza.In the course of a year a deposit of brown clay, much resemblingsome of the Subapennine marl, is procured, severalfeet in thickness, divided into thin laminae of different shadesof colour.In regard to the sand and gravel, we see yellow sandthrown down by the Tiber near Rome, and by the Arno,at Florence. The northern part of the Apennines consistsof a grey micaceous sandstone with an argillaceous base,alternating with shale, from the degradation of which brownclay and sand would result. If a river flow through suchstrata, and some one of its tributaries drains the ordinarylimestone of the Apennines, the clay will become marly by theintermixture of calcareous matter. The sand is frequentlyyellow from being stained by oxide of iron, but this colour isby no means constant.The similarity in composition of the tertiary strata in thebasins of the Po, Arno, and Tiber, is merely such as might beexpected to arise from their having been all derived from thedisintegration of the same continuous chain of secondary rocks.But it does not follow that the latter rocks were all upheavedand exposed to degradation at the same time. The correspondenceof the tertiary groups consists in their being all alikecomposed of marl, clay, and sand ; but we might say the sameof the London and Hampshire basins, although the Englishand Italian groups, thus compared, belong nearly to the twoopposite extremes of the tertiary series.The similarity in mineral character of the lacustrine depositof the Upper Val d'Arno, and the marine Subapenninehills of northern Italy, ought, we think, to serve as a cautionVOL. III. M1G2 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XII.to the geologist, not to infer too hastily a contemporaneousorigin from identity of mineral composition. The deposit ofthe Upper Val d'Arno occurs nearly at the bottom of a deepnarrow valley, which is surrounded by precipitous rocks ofsecondary sandstone and shale (the malign of the Italians andgreywacke of the Germans). Hills of yellow sand, of considerablethickness, appear around the margin of the smallbasin, while, towards the central parts, where there has beenconsiderable denudation, and where the Arno flows, blue clayis seen underlying the yellow sand. The shells are of freshwaterorigin, but we shall speak more particularly of themwhen we discuss the probable age of this formation in thesixteenth chapter. We desire, at present, to call the reader'sattention to the fact, that we have here, in an isolated basin,such a formation as would result from the waste of the contiguoussecondary rocks of the Apennines, fragments of whichrocks are found in the sand and conglomerate. We should expectthat if the freshwater beds were removed, and the barrierof the lake-basin closed up again, similar sediment would beagain deposited, for the aqueous agents would operate in thesame manner, at whatever period they might be in activity.Now, the only difference, in mineral composition, between thelacustrine deposit above alluded to, and the ordinary marinestrata of the Subapennine beds, consists in the absence of calcareousmatter from the clay, the torrents flowing into the lakehaving passed over no limestone rocks.The lithological character of the Subapennine beds varies indifferentparts of the peninsula both in colour and degree of solidity.The presence, also, or absence of lignite and gypsum, andthe association or non-association of volcanic rocks, are causesof great local discrepancy. The superposition of the sand andconglomerate to the marl, on the other hand, is a general pointof agreement, although there are exceptions to the rule, as atSan Quirico before mentioned. The cause of this arrangementmay be, as we before hinted, that the arenaceous groups werefirst formed on the coast where rivers entered, and whenCh. XII.] ORGANIC REMAINS OF SUBAPENNINES. 163these pushed their deltas farther out, they threw down thesand upon part of the bed of the sea already occupied by finerand more transportable mud.Organic Remains. I have been informed, by experiencedcollectors of the Subapennine fossils, that they invariably procurethe greatest number in those winters when the rains aremost abundant, an annual crop, as it were, being washed out ofthe soil to replace those which the action of moisture, frost,and the rays of the sun, soon reduce to dust upon the surface.The shells in general are soft when first taken from the marl,but they become hard when dried. The superficial enamelis often well preserved, and many shells retain their pearlylustre, and even part of their external colour, and the ligamentwhich unites the valves. No shells are more usually perfectthan the microscopic, which abound near Sienna, where morethan a thousand full-grown individuals are sometimes pouredout of the interior of a single univalve of moderate dimensions.In some large tracts of yellow sand it is impossible to detect asingle fossil, while in other places they occur in profusion.The Subapennine testacea are referable to species and familiesof which the habits are extremely diversified, some livingin deep, others in shallow water, some in rivers or at theirmouths. I have seen a specimen of a fresh-water univalve(Limnea palustris), taken from the blue marl near Parma, fullof small marine shells. It may have been floated down by thesame causes which carried wood and leaves into the ancient sea.Blocks of Apennine limestone are found in this formationdrilled by lithodomous shells. The remains not only of and corals, but of fishes and crabs, are met with, as alsothose of cetacea, and even of terrestrial quadrupeds.A considerable list of mammiferous species has been givenby Brocchi and some other writers ; and, although severalmistakes have been made, and the bones of cetacea have sometimesbeen confounded with those of land animals, it is stillindubitable that the latter were carried down into the sea whenthe Subapennine sand and marl were accumulated. The sameM 2164 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XII.causes which drifted skeletons into lakes, such as that of theupper Val d'Arno, may have carried down others into firths orbays of the sea. The femur of an elephant has been disinterredwith oysters attached to it, showing that it remained for sometimeexposed after it was drifted into the sea.Strata at the base of the Maritime Alps. If we pass fromthe Italian peninsula, and, following the borders of the Mediterranean,examine the tertiary strata at the foot of theMaritime Alps, we find formations agreeing in zoologicalcharacters with the Subapennine beds, and presenting manypoints of analogy in their mineral composition. The Alps, it iswell known, terminate abruptly in the sea, between Genoa andNice, and the steep declivities of that bold coast are continuousbelow the waters, so that a depth of many hundred fathoms isoften found within stone's-throw of the beach. exceptionsoccur only where streams and torrents enter the sea, and atthese points there is always a low level tract, interveningbetween the mouth of the stream and the precipitous escarpmentof the mountains.In travelling from France to Genoa, by the new coast-road,we are principally conveyed along a ledge excavated out of theside of a steep slope or precipice, in the same manner as onthe roads which traverse the great interior passes of the Alps,such as the Simplon and Mont Cenis, the difference beingthat, in this case, the traveller has always the sea below him,instead of a river. But we are obliged occasionally to descendby a zig-zag course into those low plains before alluded to,which, when viewed from above, have the appearance of baysdeserted by the sea. They are surrounded on three sides byrocky eminences, and the fourth is open to the sea.These leading features in the physical geography of thecountry are intimately connected with its geological structure.The rocks composing the Alpine declivities consist partly ofprimary formations, but more generally of secondary, whichhave undergone immense disturbance ; but when we examinethe low tracts before-mentioned, we find the surface coveredCh. XII.J STRATA AT THE BASE OF THE MARITIME ALPS. 165with great beds of gravel and sand, such as are now annuallybrought down by torrents and streams in the winter, and whichare spread in such quantity over the wide and shifting river-channelsas to render the roads for a season impassable. Thefirst idea which naturally suggests itself, on viewing these plains,is to imagine them to be deltas or spaces converted into land bythe accumulated sand and gravel brought down from the Alpsby rivers. But, on closer inspection, we find that the apparentlowness of the plains, which at first glance might be supposedto be only just raised above the level of the sea, is a deceptionproduced by contrast. The Alps rise suddenly to the heightof several thousand feet with a bold and precipitous outline,while the country below is composed of horizontal strata, whichhave either a flat or gently-undulating surface. These strataconsist of gravel, sand, and marl, filled with marine shells.They are considerably elevated, attaining sometimes the heightof 200 feet, or even more, above the level of the sea; theremust, therefore, have been a rise of the coast since they weredeposited, and they are not mere deltas or spaces reclaimedfrom the sea by rivers. Why, then, are the strata found onlyat the points where rivers enter ?We must imagine that, after the coast had nearly acquiredits present configuration, the streams which flowed down intothe Mediterranean produced shoals opposite their mouths bythe continual drifting in of gravel, sand, and mud. The Alpswere afterwards raised to a sufficient height to cause these shoalsto become land, while no perceptible alteration was producedon intervening parts of the coast, where the sea was of greatdepth near the shore.The disturbing force appears to have acted very irregularly,and to have produced the least elevation towards the easternextremity of the Maritime Alps, and a greater amount as weproceed westward. Thus we find the marine tertiary strataattaining the height of about 100 feet at Genoa, 200 and 300feet farther westward, at Albenga, and 800 or 900 feet in theneighbourhood of Nice,16G OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD, [Ch. XII.Genoa. At Genoa the tertiary strata consist of blue marlslike those of the northern Subapennines, and contain thesame shells. On the immediate site of the town they riseto the height of only 20 feet above the sea, but they reachabout SO feet in some parts of the suburbs. At the baseof a mountain not far from the suburbs there is an ancientMonte d'Origina. No. 28.Position of Tertiary strata at Genoa.a, Ancient sea-beach. b, Blue marl with shells.Cj Inclined secondary strata of sandstone, shale, &c,beach, strewed with rounded blocks of Alpine rocks,, some ofwhich are drilled by the Modiola lithopliatja, Lamk., thewhole cemented into a conglomerate", which marks the ancientsea-beach at the height of 100 feet above the present sea.Savona. At Savona, proceeding westwards, we find depositsof blue marl like those of Genoa, and occupying a correspondinggeological position at the base of the mountains near the sea.The shells, collected from these marls by Mr. Murchison andmyself, in 1S28, were examined by Signer Bonelli, of Turin,and found to agree with Subapennine fossils.Albenga. At Albania these formations occupy a more extensivetract, forming the plains around that town and the lowbills of the neighbourhood, which reach in some spots anelevation of 300 feet. The encircling mountains recalled tomy mind those which bound the plain and bay of Palermo, andI have to acknowledge the assistance of Professor Vivianii and Dr. Tassowho called my attention to these phenomena when I visited Genoa in Jan. 1829.Ch. XII.] TERTIARY STRATA AT NICE. 167other bays of the Mediterranean, which are surrounded bybold rocky coasts.The general resemblance of the Albenga strata to theSubapennine beds is very striking, the lowest division consistingof blue marl, which is covered by sand and yellow clay, andthe highest by a mass of stratified shingle, sometimes consolidatedinto a conglomerate. Dr. Tasso has collected about 200species of shells from these beds, and it appears, by hiscatalogue, that they agree, for the most part, with the northernSubapennine fossils, more than half of them belonging to recentspecies *.Nice. At Nice the tertiary strata are upraised to a muchgreater height, but they may still be said to lie at the base ofthe Alps which tower above them. Here, also, they consistprincipally of blue marl and yellow sand, which appear tohave been deposited in submarine valleys previously existing inthe inclined secondary strata. In one district, a few miles tothe west of Nice, the tertiary beds are almost exclusively composedof conglomerate, from the point of their j unction withthe secondary strata to the sea.The river Magnan flows in a deep valley which terminatesat its upper extremity in a narrow ravine. Nearly verticalMonte Calvo. No. 29.Section from Monte Calvo to the sea by the valley of Magnan, near Nice.A, Dolomite and sandstone. (Green-sand formation ?)a, b, d, Beds of gravel and sand.c, Fine marl and sand of St. Madeleine.Giornale Ligustico, Genoa, 1827.168 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XII.precipices are laid open on each side, varying from 200 to 600feet in height, and composed of inclined beds of shingle, sometimesseparated by layers of sand, and more rarely by bluemicaceous marl. The pebbles in these stratified shingles agreein composition with those now brought down from the Alps bythe Var and other rivers on this coast.The dip of the strata is remarkably uniform,, being alwayssouthwards, or towards the Mediterranean, at an angle ofabout 25. In summer, when the bed of the river is dried up,the geologist has a good opportunity of examining a section ofthe strata, as the channel crosses for many miles the line ofbearing of the beds, which may be traced to the base of MonteCalvo, a distance of about nine miles in a straight line fromthe Mediterranean *. It is usually impossible to determinethe exact age of such accumulations of sand and gravel, in consequenceof the total absence of organic remains. Their nonexistencemay depend chiefly on the disturbed state of thewaters, where great beds of shingle are formed, which areknown to prevent testacea and fishes from living in Alpine torrents,partly on the destruction of shells by the same frictionwhich rounded the pebbles, and partly on the permeability ofthe matrix to water, which may carry away the elements of thedecomposing fossil body, and substitute no others in their placewhich might retain a cast of their form.But it fortunately happens, in this instance, that in somefew seams of loamy marl, intervening between the pebble-beds,and near the middle of the section, shells have been preserved inavery perfect state of preservation, and these may furnish azoological date to the whole mass. The principal of theseinter stratified masses of loam occurs near the church of St.Madeleine (at c, diagram No. 29), where the active researchesof M. Risso have brought to light a great number of shellswhich agree perfectly with the species found in much greaterabundance at a spot called La Trinity, and some other localexamined tjiis section in company with Mr. Murchison in 1828.Ch. XII.]TERTIARY STRATA AT NICE. 169ties nearer to Nice. From these fossils it clearly appears thatthe formation belongs to the older Pliocene era.Such alternations of gravel and the usual thin layers of finesediment may easily be explained, if we reflect that the riversnow flowing from the Maritime Alps are nearly dried up insummer, and have only strength to drift along fine mud to thesea ; whereas, in winter, or on the melting of the snow, theyroll along large quantities of pebbles. The thicker masses ofloam, such as that of St. Madeleine, may have been producedduring a longer interval, when the river shifted for a time thedirection of its principal channel of discharge, so that nothingbut fine mud was for a series of years conveyed to that point inthe bed of the sea opposite the delta.Uniform and continuous as the strata appear, on a generalview, in the ravine of the Magnan, we discover, if we attemptto trace any one of them for some distance, that they thin outand are wedge-shaped. We believe that they were throwndown originally upon a steep slanting bank or talus, whichadvanced gradually from the base of Monte Calvo to the sea.The distance between these points is, as we have before mentioned,about nine miles, so that the accumulation of superimposedstrata would be a great many miles in thickness, if theywere placed horizontally upon one another. The strata nearestto Monte Calvo, which may be expressed by a, are certainlyolder than those at b, and the group b was formed before c.The aggregate thickness, in any one place, cannot be provedto amount to 1000 feet, although it may, perhaps, be muchgreater. But it may never exceed three or four thousandfeet ; whereas, if we did not suppose that the beds were originallydeposited in an inclined position, we should be forced toimagine that a sea, many miles in depth, had been filled up byhorizontal strata of pebbles thrown down one upon another.At no great distance on this coast the Var is annually seento sweep down into the sea a large quantity of gravel, whichmay be spread out by the waves and currents over a considerablespace. The sea at the mouth of this river is now shallow,170 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XII.but it may originally have been 3')0() feet deep, as it is nowclose to the shore at Nice. Here, therefore, a formation resemblingthat of the Magnan above described may be in progress.The time required for the accumulation of such a mass ofconglomerate as we have just considered must be immense: onwhat ground such formations have been frequently referred todiluvial waves and to periods of great disturbance, we couldnever understand, for the causes now in diurnal action at thefoot of the Maritime Alps and other analogous situations seemto us quite sufficient to explain their origin.Tertiary strata at the eastern extremity of the Pyrenees.We shall conclude this chapter with one more example derivedfrom a region not far distant. On the borders of the Mediterraneanat the eastern extremity of the Pyrenees, in the Southof France, a considerable thickness of tertiary strata are seenin the valleys of the rivers Tech, Et, and Ugly. They bearmuch resemblance to those already described, consisting partlyof a great thickness of conglomerate, and partly of clay andsand, with subordinate beds of lignite. They abut against theprimary formation of the Pyrenees, which here consists ofmica schist. Between Cerett and Boulon these tertiary strataare seen inclined at an angle of between 20 and 30. Theshells which I procured from several localities were recognizedby M. Deshayes as agreeing with Subapennine fossils.Spain Morca, It appeal's from the recent observationsof Colonel Silvertop, that marine strata of the older Plioceneperiod occur in patches at Malaga, and in Granada, in Spain.They have also been discovered by MM. Boblaye and Violetin the Morea, and the names of many of the shells broughtfrom thence are given in the Appendix No. I.CHAPTER XIII.Crag of Norfolk and Suffolk Shown by its fossil contents to belong to the olderPliocene period Heterogeneous in its composition Superincumbent lacustrinedeposits Relative position of the crag Forms of stratification Strata composedof groups of oblique layers Cause of this arrangement Dislocations inthe crag produced by subterranean movements Protruded masses of chalkPassage of marine crag into alluvium Recent shells in a deposit at Sheppey,Ramsgate, and Brighton.CRAG OF NORFOLK AND SUFFOLK.THE older Pliocene strata, described in the last chapter, are allsituated in countries bordering the Mediterranean but weshall now consider a group in our own island, which belongs tothe same era. We have already alluded to this deposit underthe provincial name of crag *, and pointed out its superpositionto the London clay, a tertiary formation of much higher antiquityf. The crag is chiefly developed in the eastern parts ofNorfolk and Suffolk, from whence it extends into Essex.Its relative age. A collection of the shells of the ' crag'beds, which I formed in 1829, together with a much largernumber sent me by my friend, Mr. Mantelll of Lewes., werecarefully examined by M. Deshayes, and compared to thetertiary species in his cabinet. This comparison gave thefollowing result : out of 111 species, 66 were extinct or unknown,and 45 recent, the last, with one exception ( ValutaLambert, Sow), being now inhabitants of the German ocean.Such being the proportion of recent and extinct species,, we mayconclude, according to the rules before laid down J, that thecrag belongs to the older Pliocene period.Mineral composition. So heterogeneous is this deposit inmineral character, that we can scarcely convey any correct notionsof its appearance, without describing the beds separatelyin the different localities where they occur. In general, theyChap. ii. p. 19. f See above, Diagram No. 4, p. 21. J Page 54.172 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch.XlII.consist of sand, gravel, and blue or brown marl the shellsimbedded in the sand and marl being, for the most part, brokenand sometimes finely comminuted. In a few spots we find thedeposit in the form of a soft stratified rock, composed almostentirely of corals, sponges, and echini*, an assemblage ofspecies which probably lived in a tranquil sea of some depth.In other parts of our coast it consists of alternations of sandand shingle, destitute of organic remains, and more than 200feet in thickness, as in the Suffolk cliffs, between Dunwich andYarmouth. In others, we meet with an enormous mass, morethan 300 feet in thickness, of sand, loam, and clay, containingbones of terrestrial quadrupeds and drift wood, sometimes stratifiedregularly, at others consisting of a confused heap ofrubbish, in which fragments of the chalk and its flints are imbeddedin a chalky marl.In this aggregate are also found many fragments of olderrocks, the septaria of the London clay, together with ammonites,vertebrae of ichthyosauri, and other fossils from parts ofthe oolitic series. It has been questioned whether all theabove-mentioned beds can be considered as belonging to thesame era. The subject may admit of doubt, but after examining,in 1829, the whole line of coast of Essex, Suffolk, andNorfolk, I found it impossible to draw any line of separationbetween the different groups. Each seemed in its turn to passinto another, and those masses which approach in character toalluvium, and contain the remains of terrestrial quadrupeds,are occasionally intermixed with the strata of the crag.There are, however, lacustrine deposits overlying the crag,which probably belong to a distinct zoological period. Theseare found in small cavities, which must have existed on thesurface of the crag after its elevation, and which formed smalllakes or ponds wherein recent fresh-water testacea were includedin loamy strata. (See wood-cut, No. 30, c.)Relative position. The crag is seen to rest on the chalk andon the London clay, but usually on the former. The strataR, Taylor, Geol,of East Norfolk.Ch. XIII.] CRAG OF ENGLAND.are in great part horizontal, or slightly undulating ; but atsome points they are much disturbed, especially where severalmasses of chalk appear to have been protruded from below.The annexed section may give a general idea of the mannerin which the crag may be supposed to rest on the chalk as wepass from the Norfolk cliffs, at Trimminghani, into the interior,where the country rises gradually.No. 30.a, Chalk. b } Crag. c, Lacustrine deposit.D, Trimmingham beacon. E, Interior and higher parts of Norfolk *.The outline of the surface of the subjacent chalk, in thissection, is imaginary, but is such as might explain the relationsof those protruded masses, three of which appear in the cliffsnear Trimmingham, and which some geologists have too hastilyassumed to be unconnected with the great mass of chalk below.We shall treat of these presently, when we describe the disturbanceswhich the crag appears to have suffered since itsoriginal deposition.In the interior, at E, there is a thick covering of sand andgravel upon the chalk, having the characters of an alluvium,partly, perhaps, marine, and partly terrestrial, and which seemsto pass gradually in this district into the regular marine strataof the crag.Forms of stratification. In almost every formation the individualstrata are rarely persistent for a great distance, thesuperior and inferior planes being seldom precisely parallel toeach other ; and if the materials are very coarse, the beds oftenthin out if we trace them for a few hundred yards. There arealso many cases where all the layers are oblique to the generalThis section is compiled principally from one by Mr. Murchison, the others inthis chapter are from drawings by the Author.Its OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch.XIII.direction of the strata, and the crag affords most interestingillustrations of this phenomenon.In the sea-cliff near Walton, in Suffolk, opposite the MartelloTower, called R, the section represented in the annexeddiagram is seen. The vertical height is about 20 feet, andNo. 31.Section of shelly crag near Walton, Suffolk.the beds consist alternately of sets of inclined and horizontallayers of sand and comminuted shells. The sand is siliceousand of a ferruginous colour, but the layers are sometimes madeup of small plates of bivalve shells, arranged with their flatsides parallel to the plane of each layer, like mica in micaceoussandstones.The number of laminae in the thickness of an inch, both inthe siliceous and shelly sand, varies from seven to ten in number,so that it is impossible to express them all in the diagram.The height of the uppermost stratum is, in this instance, remarkable,as it extends to twelve feet. The inclination of thelamina? is about 30 ; but in the cliffs of Bawdesey, to theeastward, they are sometimes inclined at an angle of 45, andeven more.No. 32.Xectlm nl (lie U^lithitnse near Ilappislorougli. Height sixteen feet.a, Pebbles of chalk Hint, and of rolled pieces of while clmlk.b, Loam overlying <i. c, c, Blue and brown clay.Ch. XIII.]CRAG OF ENGLAND.This diagonal arrangement of the layers, sometimes callede false stratification,' is not confined to deposits of fine sand andcomminuted shells, for we find beds of shingle disposed in thesame manner as is seen in the annexed section (No. 32).The direction of the dip of the inclined layers, throughoutthe Suffolk coast, is so uniformly to the south, that I only saw-twoor three instances of a contrary nature, where the inclinationwas northerly. ' One of the best examples of this variationis exhibited in a cliff between Miser and Dunwich, wood-cutNo. 33. In this case, there are about six layers in the thicknessof an inch, and the part of the cliff represented is aboutsix feet high.<========r===^==r ==z ^ No. 33.Section of part of Little Cat cliff, composed ofquartzose sand, showing the inclinationof the layers in opposite directions.Another example may be seen near Walton, where the layers,which are of extreme tenuity, consist of ferruginous sand,brown loam, and comminuted shells. It is not uncommon tofind in this manner sets of perfectly horizontal strata restingupon and covered by groups of wavy and transverse layers.No. 34.Lamination of shelly sand and loam, near the Signal-house, Walton.Vertical height four feet.The appearances exhibited in the diagrams are not peculiarto the crag, and I have seen sand and pebble-beds of all ages,including the old red sandstone, greywacke, and clay-slate,exhibit the same arrangement.170 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. XIII.When we inquire into the causes of such a disposition of the- 3 ' J - materials of each bed or group of layers,we may, in the first place, remark,that however numerous may be the successivelayers a, b, c, the layer a musthave been deposited before b, b before c, and so of the rest.We must suppose that each thin seam was thrown down ona slope, and that it conformed itself to the side of the steepbank, just as we see the materials of a talus arrange themselvesat the foot of a cliff' when they have been cast down successivelyfrom above. If the transverse layers are cut off by a nearlyhorizontal line, as in many of the above sections, it may arisefrom the denuding action of a wave which has carried away theupper portion of a submarine bank and truncated the layers ofwhich it was composed. But I do not conceive this hypothesisto be necessary; for if a bank have a steep side, it may grow bythe successive apposition of thin strata thrown down upon itsslanting side, and the removal of matter from the top may proceedsimultaneously with its lateral extension. The same currentmay borrow from the top what it gives to the sides, a mode offormation which I had lately an opportunity of observing on therippled surface of the hills of blown sand near Calais. The undulatingridges and intervening furrows on the dunes of blownsand resembled exactly in form those caused by the waves ona sea-beach, and were always at right angles to the directionof the wind which had produced them. Each ridge had oneNo. 3G.side slightly inclined and the other steep, the lee side beingalways steep, as b c, d <?, the windward side a gentle slope, asab, c. d. When a gust of wind blew with sufficient force todrive along a cloud of sand, all the ridges were seen to be inmotion at once, each encroaching on the furrow before it, and,in the course of a few minutes, filling the place which the lurch.XIII.] DERANGEMENT IN THE CRAG STRATA. 177rows had occupied. Many grains of sand were drifted alongthe slopes a b, and c d t which, when they fell over the scarpsb c, and d c, were under shelter from the wind, so that theyremained stationary, resting, according to their shape andmomentum, on different parts of the descent. In this mannereach ridge was distinctly seen to move slowly on as often asthe force of the wind augmented. We think that we shallnot strain analogy too far if we suppose the same laws togovern the subaqueous and subaerial phenomena ; and if so,we may imagine a submarine bank to be nothing more thanone of the ridges of ripple on a larger scale, which may increasein the manner before suggested, by successive additions to thesteep scarps.The set of tides and currents, in opposite directions, mayaccount for sudden variations in the direction of the dip of thelayers, as represented in the wood-cut, No. 33, while thegeneral prevalence of a southerly inclination in the Crag ofSuffolk may indicate that the matter was brought by a currentfrom the north.We may refer to a drawing given in the first volume*, toshow the analogy of the arrangement of the submarine strata,just considered, to that exhibited by deposits formed in thechannels of rivers where a considerable transportation of sedimentis in progress.Derangement in the Crag strata.' In the above exampleswe have explained the want of parallelism or horizontality inthe subordinate layers of different strata, by reference to themode of their original deposition ; but there are signs of disturbancewhich can only be accounted for by subsequent movements.The same blue and brown clay, or loam, which is oftenperfectly horizontal, and as regularly bedded as any of ourolder formations, is, in other places, curved and even foldedback upon itself, in the manner represented in the annexeddiagrams.Chap, xiv., Drag. No. 6.VOL, III. NOLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.No. 37.[Ch. XIII.No. 38.Bent strata of loam in the cliffs betweenCromer and Runton.Folding of the strata between East andWest Runton.In the last of these cuts a central nucleus of sand is surroundedby argillaceous and sandy layers. This phenomenonis very frequent, and there are instances where the materialsthus enveloped consist of broken flints mingled with pieces ofchalk, forming a white mass encircled by dark laminated clay.The diameter of these included masses, as seen in sections laidopen in the sea-cliffs, varies from five to fifteen feet.East of Sherringham, a heap of partially-rounded flints,about five feet in diameter, is nearly enveloped by finely laminatedstrata of sand and loam, and some of the loam is entangledin the midst of the flints.No. 39.Section in the Cliffs east of Sherringham.a, Sand and loam in thin layers.In this and similar instances, we may imagine the yieldingstrata, a, to have subsided into a cavity, and the flints belongingto a superincumbent bed to have pressed down with theirweight, so as to cause the strata to fold round them.That some masses of stratified sand and loam have actuallysunk down into cavities, or have fallen like landslips into ravines,seems indicated by other appearances. Thus, near Sher-gingham,the argillaceous beds, a, represented in the annexeddiagram (No. 40), are cut off abruptly, and succeeded by thevertical and contorted series, b, c. The face of the cliff hereCh. XIII.]CRAG OF NORFOLK.represented, is 24 feet in height. Some of the layers in 6, 6,are composed of pebbles, and these alternate with thin bedsNo. 40.Section east ofSherringham, Norfolk,a, Sand, loam, and blue clay. b } b, Sand and gravel, c, Twisted beds of loam.of loose sand. The whole set must once have been horizontal,and must have moved in a mass, or the relative position ofthe several parts would not have been preserved. Similarappearances may, perhaps, be produced when chasms openduring earthquakes and portions of yielding strata fall in fromabove and are engulphed.Protruded masses of chalk. But whatever opinion we mayentertain on this point, we cannot doubt that subterraneanNo. 41 .SeaSide view of a promontory of chalk and crag, Trimmingham, Norfolk.a, Gravel and ferruginous sand, rounded and angular pieces of chalk flint, withsome quartz pebbles, 3 feet.b, Laminated blue clay, 8 feet. c, Yellow sand, 1 foot C inches.(I, Dark blue clay with fragments of marine shells, 6 feet.e, Yellow loam and flint gravel, 3 feet. /, Light blue clay. 1 foot.ff, Sand and loam, 12 feet.h t Yellow and white sand, loam, and gravel, about 100 feet.N 2ISOOLDER PLIOCENE PEUIOIJ. [Ch. XIII.movements have given rise to some of the local derangementsin this formation, particularly where masses of solid chalkpierce, as it were, the crag. Thus, between Mundesley andTrimmingham we see the appearances exhibited in the accompanyingview (No. 41). The chalk, of which the strata arehighly inclined, or vertical, projects in a promontory, becauseit offers more resistance to the action of the waves than thetertiary beds which, on both sides, constitute the whole of thecliff. The height of the soft crag strata immediately abovethe chalk is, in this place, about 130 feet. Those which arein contact (see the wood-cut) are inclined at an angle of 45,and appear more disturbed than in other parts of the cliffs,as if they had been displaced by the movement by which thechalk was protruded.Very similar appearances are exhibited by the northernmostof the three protuberances of chalk, of which a front view isgiven in the annexed diagram. It occupies a space of about 100yards along the shore, and projects about GO yards in advanceof the general line of cliff. One of its edges, at c, rests uponNo. 42.Northern protuberance ofchalh, Trimmingham.a. Chalk with flints. c. Laminated blue clay.b. Gravel, of broken and half-rounded flints, d. Sand and yellow loam.the blue clay beds of the crag, in such a manner as to implythat the mass had been undermined when the crag wasdeposited, unless we suppose, as some have done, that thischalk is a great detached mass enveloped by crag. For,Ch. xiii.;CRAG. 181as one of the ' Needles ', or insulated rocks of chalk, whichprojected 120 feet above high water-mark, at the westernextremity of the Isle of Wight, fell into the sea in 1772 *,so a pinnacle of chalk may have been precipitated into thetertiary sea, at a point where some strata of the crag hadpreviously accumulated. The beds of flint and chalk in theabove diagram appear nearly horizontal, but they are in facthighly inclined inwards towards the cliff. The rapid waste ofthe Norfolk coast might soon enable us to understand the trueposition of this mass, if observations and drawings are madefrom time to time of the appearances which present themselves.Perhaps it may be necessary to suppose, that subterraneanmovements were in progress during the deposition of the crag,and the extraordinary dislocations of the beds, in some places,which in others are perfectly regular and horizontal, may bemost easily accounted for by introducing an alternate rise anddepression of the bed of the sea, such as we know to be usuallyattendant on a series of subterranean convulsions. Several ofthe contortions may also have been produced by lateral movements.Passage of marine crag into alluvium. By supposing theadjoining lands to have participated in this movement, we mayexplain the origin of those masses of an alluvial characterwhich contain the detritus of many rocks, the bones of landanimals and of drift timber, which were evidently swept downinto the sea. The land-floods which accompany earthquakesare, as we have seen, capable of transporting such materials togreat distances f , and, as part of these alluviums must be leftsomewhere upon the land, we may expect to find, on exploringthe interior, a gradual passage from the terrestrial alluviumto that which was carried down into the sea, and which alternateswith marine beds.The fossil quadrupeds imbedded in the crag appear to bethesame as those of a great part of the alluviums of the interiorDudley's Annual Register, vol. xv. p. 140. f Vol. i. chap. 25.182 Older Pliocene PERIOD. [Ch. XIII.of England, which may, therefore, have been formed whenthe testacea of the older Pliocene period were in existence.Upon the whole, we may imagine the crag strata to bear agreat resemblance to the formations which may now be in progressin the sea between the British and Dutch coasts, a seafor the most part shallow, yet having here and there a depth of50 or 60 fathoms, and where strong tides and currents prevail ;where shells, also, and zoophytes abound, and where matterdrifted from wasting cliffs must be thrown down in certainreceptacles in the form of sand, shingle, and mud.In conclusion we may observe that the history of the cragrequires further elucidation, and the author is by no meanssatisfied with the sketch above given ; but as the country is soaccessible and the formation so interesting both in its structureand zoological characters, it is hoped that these remarks mayexcite curiosity and lead to fuller investigation.Sheppey. Ramsgate. Brighton. Deposits have latelybeen observed by Mr. Crow * resting on the London clay,in the Isle of Sheppey, at the height of 140 feet above the sea,and by Captain Eater at Powell Bay, near Ramsgate, at theheight of a few yards, and by Mr. Mantelll, in the cliffs nearBrighton, all containing recent marine shells. But as there areonly five or six species yet discovered in these localities, wecannot decide, till we obtain further information, whether thesestrata belong to the crag or to a more recent formation.Of Christ Church College, Cambridge.CHAPTER XIV.Volcanic rocks of the older Pliocene period Italy Volcanic region of Olot inCatalonia Its extent and geological structure Map Number of conesScoriae Lava currents Ravines in the latter cut by water Ancient alluviumunderlying lava Jets of air called ' Butadors ' Age of the Cataloniann volcanosuncertain Earthquake which destroyed Olot in 1421 Sardinian volcanosDistrict of the Eifel and Lower Rhine Map Geological structureof the country Peculiar characteristics of the Eifel volcanos Lake cratersTrass Crater of the Roderberg Age of the Eifel volcanic rocks uncertainBrown coal formation.VOLCANIC ROCKS OF THE OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.Italy . IT is part of our proposed plan to consider the igneousas well as the aqueous formations of each period, but we arefar from being able as yet to assign to each of the numerousgroups of volcanic origin scattered over Europe a precise placein the chronological series. We have already stated that the volcanicrocks of Tuscany belong, in great part at least, to the olderPliocene period, those for example of Radicofani, Viterbo,and Aquapendente, which have been chiefly erupted beneaththe sea. The same observation would probably hold true inregard to the igneous rocks of the Campagna di Roma.But several other districts, of which the dates are stilluncertain, may be mentioned in this chapter as being possiblyreferable to the period now under consideration. It will at leastbe useful to explain to the student the points which requireelucidation before the exact age of the groups about to bedescribed can be accurately determined.Volcanos of Olot, in Catalonia. I shall first direct thereader's attention to a district of extinct volcanos in the northof Spain, which is little known, and which I visited in thesummer of 1830.The whole extent of country occupied by volcanic productsin Catalonia is not more than fifteen geographical miles fromOLDER PLIOCENE Period[Ch. XIV.north to south, and about six from east to west. The vents oferuption range entirely within a narrow band running northand south, and the branches which we have represented asextending eastward in the map are formed simply of two lava-streams,those of Castell Follit and Cellent.No. 43.Volcanic district of Catalonia.Dr. Maclure, the American geologist, was the first who madeknown the existence of these volcanos * ; and, according to hisdescription, the volcanic region extended over twenty squareleagues, from Amer to Massage. I searched in vain in the environsof Massage, in the Pyrenees, for traces of a lava-current ;and I can say with confidence that the adjoined map gives acorrect view of the true area of the volcanic action.Macluve.Jouru.de Phys., vol. Lxvi. p. 219, 1808j cited by' Daubeny. Descriptionof Volcanos, p. 24.Ch. XIV.] VOLCANOS OF CATALONIA. 185Geological structure of the district. The eruptions haveburst entirely through secondary rocks, composed in greatpart of grey and greenish sandstone and conglomerate, withsome thick beds of nummulitic limestone. The conglomeratecontains pebbles of quartz, limestone, and Lydian stone. Thelimestone is not only replete with nummulit.es, but occasionallyincludes oysters, pectens, and other shells. This system ofrocks is very extensively spread throughout Catalonia, one ofits members being a red sandstone, to which the celebratedsalt-rock of Cardona is subordinate. It is conjectured thatthe whole belongs to the age of our green-sand and chalk.Near Araer, in the Valley of the Ter, on the southern bordersof the region delineated in the map, primary rocks areseen consisting of gneiss, mica-schist, and clay-slate. Theyrun in a line nearly parallel to the Pyrenees, and throw off thesecondary strata from their flanks, causing them to dip to thenorth and north-west. This dip, which is towards thePyrenees, is connected with a distinct axis of elevation, andprevails through the whole area described in the map, theinclination of the beds being sometimes at an angle of between40 and 50 degrees.It is evident that the physical geography of the country hasundergone no material change since the commencement of theera of the volcanic eruptions, except such as has resulted fromthe introduction of new hills of scoriae and currents of lavaupon the surface. If the lavas could be remelted and pouredout again from their respective craters, they would descend thesame valleys in which they are now seen, and reoccupy thespaces which they at present fill. The only difference in theexternal configuration of the fresh lavas would consist in this,that they would nowhere be intersected by ravines, or exhibitmarks of erosion by running water.Volcanic cones and lavas. There are about fourteen distinctcones with craters in this part of Spain, besides several pointswhence lavas may have issued ; all of them arranged along anarrow line running north and south, as will be seen in theO;.DI;R PLIOCKM: Period. [Ch. XIV.map. The greatest number of perfect cones are in the immediateneighbourhood of Olot, some of which are represented inthe frontispiece, and the level plain on which that townstands has clear] v been produced by the flowing down of manylava-streams from those hills into the bottom of a valley,probably once of considerable depth like those of the surroundingcountry.In the frontispiece an attempt is made to represent by coloursthe different geological formations of which the country iscomposed. The blue line of mountains in the distance are thePyrenees, which are to the north of the spectator, and consistof primary and ancient secondary rocks. In front of these arethe secondary formations described in this chapter,, colouredgrey. 'Different shades of this colour are introduced, to expressvarious distances. The flank of the hill, in the foreground,called Costa de Pujou, is composed partly of secondary rocksand partly of volcanic, the red colour expressing lava andscoriae.The Fluvia, which passes near the town of Olot, has onlycut to the depth of forty feet through the lavas of the plainbefore mentioned. The bed of the river is hard basalt, and atthe bridge of Santa Magdalena, are seen two distinct lava-currents,one n'-ove the oilier, separated by a horizontal bedof scoriae eight feet thick.In one place, to the south of Olot, the even surface of theplain is broken by a mound of lava, called the ' Mosque dcTosca/ the upper part of which is scoriaceous, and coveredwith enormous heaps of fragments of basalt more or less porous.Between the numerous hummocks thus formed, are deep cavities,having the appearance of small craters. The whole preciselyresembles some of the modern currents of Etna, or that ofCome, near Clermont, the last of which, like the Mosque deTosca, supports only a scanty vegetation.Most of the Cataloniann volcanos are as entire as those in theneighbourhood of Naples, or on the flanks of Etna. One ofthese, figured in the frontispiece,, called JMontsacopa, is of aCh. XIV. JVOLCANOS OF CATALONIA.very regular form, and has a circular depression or crater atthe summit. It is chiefly made up of red scoriae, undistinguishablefrom that of the minor cones of Etna. The neighbouringhills of Olivet and Garrinada, also figured in the frontispiece,are of similar composition and shape. The largest crater ofthe whole district occurs farther to the east of Olot, and is calledSanta Margarita. It is 455 feet deep, and about a mile incircumference. Like Astroni, near Naples, it is richly coveredwith wood, wherein game of various kinds abound.Although the volcanos of Catalonia have broken out throughsandstone, shale, and limestone, as have those of the Eifel, inGermany, to be described in the sequel, there is a remarkabledifference in the nature of the ejections composing the cones inthese two regions. In the Eifel, the quantity of pieces of sandstoneand shale thrown out from the vents, is often so immenseas far to exceed in volume the scoriae, pumice, and lava ; but Isought in vain in the cones near Olot for a single fragment ofany extraneous rock, and Don Francisco Bolos informs methat he has never been able to detect any. Volcanic sand andashes are not confined to the cones, but have been sometimesscattered by the wind over the country, and drifted into narrowvalleys, as is seen between Olot and Cellent, where the annexedsection is exposed. The light cindery volcanic matter rests inthin regular layers, just as it alighted on the slope formed bythe solid conglomerate. No flood could have passed throughi No. 44.a, Secondary conglomerate. b, Thin seams of volcanic sand and scoriae.the valley since the scoriae fell, or these would have been forthe most part removed.The currents of lava in Catalonia, like those of Auvergne,the Vivarais, Iceland, and all mountainous countries, are ofconsiderable depth in narrow denies, but spread out into com-OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch.XIVpositively thin sheets in places where the valleys widen. If ariver has flowed on nearly level ground, as in the great plainnear Olot, the water has only excavated a channel of slightdepth ; but where the declivity is great, the stream has cut adeep section, sometimes by penetrating directly through thecentral part of a lava-current, but more frequently by passingbetween the lava and the secondary rock which bounds thevalley. Thus, in the accompanying section, at the bridge ofCellent, six miles east of Olot, we see the lava on one side ofNo. 45.Section above the bridge of Cellent.a, Scoriaceous lava.b, Schistose basalt.Cy Columnar basalt.//, Scoriae, vegetable soil, and alluvium.e } Nummulitic limestone.f, Micaceous grey sandstone.the small stream, while the inclined stratified rocks constitutethe channel and opposite bank. The upper part of the lava atthat place is scoriaceous ; farther down it becomes less porous,and assumes a spheroidal structure ; still lower it divides inhorizontal plates, each about two inches in thickness, and ismore compact. Lastly, at the bottom is a mass of prismaticbasalt about five feet thick. The vertical columns often restimmediately on the subjacent secondary rocks; but there issometimes an intervention of such sand and scoriae as covera country during volcanic eruptions, and which when unprotected,as here, by superincumbent lava, is washed away fromthe surface of the land. Sometimes the bed d contains a fewCh. XIV.] Ravines IN LAVA EXCAVATED BY RIVER?. 189pebbles and angular fragments of rock ; in other places fineearth, which may have constituted an ancient vegetable soil.In several localities, beds of sand and ashes are interposedbetween the lava and subjacent stratified rock, as may be seenif we follow the course of the lava-current which descends fromLas Planas towards Amer, and stops two miles short of thattown. The river there has often cut through the lava, andthrough eighteen feet of underlying limestone. Occasionallyan alluvium, several feet thick, is interposed between the igneousand marine formation ; and it is interesting to remark, thatin this, as in other beds of pebbles occupying a similar position,there are no rounded fragments of lava, whereas, in the moderngravel beds of rivers in this country, volcanic pebbles areabundant.The deepest excavation made by a river through lava, whichI observed in this part of Spain, is that seen in the bottom ofa valley near San Felix de Pallets, opposite the Castell deStones. The lava there has filled up the bottom of a valley,and a narrow ravine has been cut through it to the depth of100 feet. In the lower part the lava has a columnar structure.A great number of ages were probably required for the erosionof so deep a ravine ; but we have no reason to infer that thiscurrent is of higher antiquity than those of the plain near Olot.The fall of the ground, and consequent velocity of the stream,being in this case greater, a more considerable volume of rockmay have been removed in an equal quantity of time.We shall describe one more section to elucidate the phenomenaof this district. A lava-stream, flowing from a ridgeof hills to the east of Olot, descends a considerable slopeuntil it reaches the valley of the river Flu via. Here, for thefirst time, it comes in contact with running water, which hasremoved a portion,, and laid open its internal structure in aprecipice about 130 feet in height, at the edge of which standsthe town of Castell Jollitythe junction of the rivers Fluvia and Teronel the massof lava has been cut away on two sides ; and the insular massOLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. XIV.B (No. 46) has been left, which was probably never so highas the cliff A, as it may have constituted the lower part of thesloping side of the original current,No. 46.ASection at Castell Follit.A, Church and town of Castell Follit, overlooking precipices of basalt.B, Small island, on each side of which branches of the river Teronel flow tomeet the Effluvia.c, Precipice of basaltic lava, chiefly columnar.d, Ancient alluvium underlying the lava-currentse, Inclined strata of secondary sandstone.From an examination of the vertical cliffs, it appears thatthe upper part of the lava ori which the town is built isscoriaceous, passing downwards into a spheroidal basalt ; someof the huge spheroids being no less than six feet in diameter.Below this is a more compact basalt with crystals of olivine.There are in all about four distinct ranges of prismatic basalt,separated by thinner beds not columnar, and some of whichare schistose. The whole mass rests on alluvium, ten ortwelve feet in thickness, composed of pebbles of limestone andquartz, but without any intermixture of igneous rocks ; inwhich circumstance alone it appears to differ from the moderngravel of the Effluvia.Bufadors. The volcanic rocks near Olot have often acavernous structure like some of the lavas of Etna ; and inmany parts of the hill of Bate, in the environs of the town, thesound returned by the earth, when struck, is like that of anarchway. At the base of the same hill are the mouths ofCh.XIV.] AGE OF Catalonia VOLCANOS.several subterranean caverns, about twelve in number, whichare called in the country ' bufadors/ from which a current ofcold air issues during summer ; but which in winter is said tobe scarcely perceptible. I visited one of these bufadors in thebeginning of August, 1830, when the heat of the season wasunusually intense, and found a cold wind blowing from it,which may easily be explained, for as the external air whenrarefied by heat ascends, the cold air from the interior of themountain rushes in to supply its place.Age of the Cataloniann volcanos uncertain. It now onlyremains to offer some remarks on the probable age of theseSpanish volcanos. Attempts have been made to prove, that inthis country, as well as in Auvergne and the Eifel, the earliestinhabitants were eye-witnesses to the volcanic action. In theyear 1421 it is said, when Clot was destroyed by an earthquake,an eruption broke out near Amer, and consumed thetown. The researches of Don Francisco Bolos have, I think,shown, in the most satisfactory manner, that there is no goodhistorical foundation for the latter part of this story ; and anygeologist who has visited Amer must be convinced that therenever was any eruption on that spot. It is true that, in theyear above-mentioned, the whole of Olot, with the exception ofa single house, was cast down by an earthquake ; one of thoseshocks which at distant intervals, during the last five centuries,have shaken the Pyrenees, and particularly the countrybetween Perpignan and Olot, where the movements, at theperiod alluded to, were most violent.Some houses are said to have sunk into the earth ; and thisaccount has been corroborated by the fact that, within thememory of persons now living, the buried arches of a Benedictinemonastery were found at a depth of six feet beneath thesurface; and still later, some houses were dug out in the streetcalled Aigua. Don Bolos informed me, that he was presentwhen the latter excavation was made, and when the roof of aburied house, nearly entire, was found six feet beneath the surface,the interior being in a great part empty, so that it wasOLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. XIV.necessary to fill it up with earth and stones, in order to form asure foundation for the new edifice.The annihilation of the ancient Olot may, perhaps, be ascribed,not to the extraordinary violence of the movement onthat spot, but to the cavernous nature of the subjacent rocks ;for Catalonia is beyond the line of those modern Europeanearthquakes which destroy towns throughout extensive areas.As we have no historical records, then, to guide us in regardto the extinct volcanos, we must appeal to geological monuments.We have little doubt that some fossil land-shells, andbones of quadrupeds, will hereafter reward the industry of collectors.If such remains are found imbedded in volcanic ejections,the period of the eruptions may be inferred ; but atpresent we have no evidence beyond that afforded by superposition,in regard to which the annexed diagram will presentto the reader, in a synoptical form, the results obtained fromnumerous sections.No. 47.Superposition frocks in the volcanic district of Catalonia.a, Sandstone and nummulitic limestone.6, Older alluvium with volcanic pebbles.c, Cones of scoriae and lava.d, Newer alluvium.The more modern alluvium d is partial, and has been formedby the action of rivers and floods upon the lava ; whereas theolder gravel, b, was strewed over the country before the volcaniceruptions. In neither have any organic remains beendiscovered, so that we can merely affirm, as yet, that the volcanosbroke out after the elevation of some of the newest rocksof the secondary series, and before the formation of an alluvium,d t of unknown date. The integrity of the cones merelyshows that the country has not been agitated by violent earth.XIV.] VOLCANOS OF THE KIFKL. 193quakes, nor subjected to the action of any great transient floodsince their origin.East of Olot, on the Cataloniann coast, marine tertiary strataoccur, which, near Barcelona, attain the height of about 500feet. It appears probable, from a small number of shells whichI collected, that these strata may correspond with the Sub-apenninebeds, so that if the volcanic district had extendedthus far, we might be able to determine the age of the igneousproducts, by observing their relation to these older Plioceneformations *.Sardinian volcanos. The line of extinct volcanos in Sardinia,described by Captain Smith f , is also of uncertain date,as, notwithstanding the freshness of some of the cones and lavas,they may be of high antiquity. They rest, however, on a tertiaryformation, supposed by some to correspond to the Sub-apenninestrata, but of which the fossil remains have not beenfully described.VOLCANIC ROCKS OF THE EIFEL.The volcanos of the Lower Rhine and the Eifel are of no lessuncertain date than those of Catalonia ; but we are desirous ofpointing out some of their peculiar characters, and shall,therefore, treat of them in this chapter, trusting that futureinvestigations will determine their chronological relations moreaccurately.For the geographical details of this volcanic region, we referthe reader to the annexed map, for which I am indebted toMr. Leonard Horner, whose residence in the country hasenabled him to verify the maps of MM. Noeggerath and VonOyenhausen, from which that now given has been principallycompiled.For some account of the Olot volcanos see ' Notitia de Los EsiinguidosVolcanoes de la Villa de Olot,' by Francisco Bolos. Barcelona. No date, but theobservations, I am told, preceded those of Dr. Maclure.f Present state of Sardinia, &c., pp. 69, 70.VOL. III. OOLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch, XIV.ENGLISH MILES.No. 48.r ; -. .1 Volcanic) A, Upper Eifel. f ^ I Points of eruption, with craterst-i-' '-'' '! District / B, Lower Eii'el. . ' and scoria?.|<"t,j Basalt.3 Trachyte. g] Brown coal.N.B. The country in that part of the map which is left blank is almostentirely composed of graywacke.There has been a long succession of eruptions in thiscountry, and some of them must have occurred when itsphysical geography was in a very different state, while othershave happened when the whole district had nearly assumedits present configuration.The fundamental rock of the Eifel is an ancient secondarysandstone and shale, to which the obscure and vague appellationof 'graywacke' has been given. The formation hasprecisely the characters of a great part of those grey and redsandstones and shales which are called ' old red sandstone ' inCh. XIV.]LAKE-CRATERS OF THE EIFEL.England and Scotland, where they constitute the inferiormember of the carboniferous series. In the Eifel they occupythe same geological position, and in some parts alternate with alimestone, containing trilobites and other fossils of our mountainand transition limestones. The strata are inclined at allangles from the horizontal to the vertical, and must haveundergone reiterated convulsions before the country wasmoulded into its present form.Lake-Craters. The volcanos have broken out sometimes atthe bottom of deep valleys, sometimes on the summit of hills,and frequently on intervening platforms. The traveller oftenfalls upon them unexpectedly in a district otherwise extremelybarren of geological interest. Thus, for example, he mightarrive at the village of Gemunden, immediately south of Dan,without suspecting that he was in the immediate vicinity ofsome of the most remarkable vents of eruption. Leaving astream which flows at the bottom of a deep valley in a sandstonecountry, he climbs the steep acclivity of a hill where heobserves the edges of strata of sandstone and shale dippinginwards towards the mountain. When he has ascended to aconsiderable height he sees fragments of scoriae sparingly scatteredover the surface, till at length on reaching the summithe finds himself suddenly on the edge of a tarn, or deepcircular lake-basin.No. 49.The Gemunden Maar,This, which is called the Gemunden Maar, is the first of threelakes which are in immediate contact, the same ridge forming thebarrier of two neighbouring cavities (see diag. No. 50). On196 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIV.viewing die first of these we recognize the ordinary form of acrater, for which \ve have been prepared by the occurrence ofNo. 50.a, Village of Gemunden. c, Weinfelder Maar.b, Gemunden Maar. - d } Schalkenmehren Maar.scoriae scattered over the surface of the soil. But on examiningthe walls of the crater, we find precipices of sandstone andshale which exhibit no signs of the action of heat, and we lookinvain for those beds of lava and scoriae, dipping in oppositedirections on every side, which we have been accustomed to consideras characteristic of volcanic craters. As we proceed, however,to the opposite side of the lake, and afterwards visit thecraters c and d, we find a considerable quantity of scoriae andsome lava, and see the whole surface of the soil sparkling withvolcanic sand and ejected fragments of half-fused shale, whichpreserves its laminated texture in the interior, while it has avitrified or scoriform coating.We cannot, therefore, doubt that these great hollows havebeen formed by gaseous explosions ; in other words, that partsof the summits of hills composed of sandstone and shale wereblown up during a copious discharge of gas or steam, accompaniedby the escape of a small quantity of lava. It is apeculiar feature of the Eifel volcanos that aeriform dischargeshave been violent, and the quantity of melted matter pouredout from the vents proportionably insignificant. In this respectthey differ, as a group, from any assemblage of extinctvolcanos which I have seen in France, Italy, or Spain.In some of the Eifel lavas, as in Auvergne and the Vivarais,fragments of granite, gneiss, and clay-slate are found inclosed ;pieces of these rocks having probably been torn off by themelted matter and gases as they rose from below.A few miles to the south of the lakes above-mentionedCh. XIV.]TRASS OF RHINE VOLCANOS. 197occurs the Pulvermaar of Gillenfeld, an oval lake of veryregular form, and surrounded by an unbroken ridge of fragmentarymaterials, consisting of ejected shale and sandstone,and preserving an uniform height of about one hundred andfifty feet above the water. The side slope in the interior isat an angle of about 45; on the exterior, of 35. Volcanicsubstances are intermixed very sparingly with the ejectionswhich in this place entirely conceal from view the stratifiedrocks of the country *.The Meerfelder Maar is a cavity of far greater size anddepth, hollowed out of similar strata ; the sides presenting someabrupt sections of inclined secondary rocks, which in otherplaces are buried under vast heaps of pulverised shale. Icould discover no scoriae amongst the ejected materials, butballs of olivine, and other volcanic substances are mentioned ashaving been found f- This cavity, which we must suppose tohave discharged an immense volume of gas, is nearly a mile indiameter, and is said to be more than one hundred fathomsdeep. In the neighbourhood is a mountain called the Moseswhich consists of red sandstone and shale in its lowerparts, but supports on its summit a triple volcanic cone, whilea distinct current of lava is seen descending the flanks of themountain. The edge of the crater of the largest cone remindedme much of the form and characters of that of Vesuvius.If we pass from the Upper to the Lower Eifel we find thecelebrated lake-crater of Leach, which has a greater resemblancethan any of those before-mentioned to the Lago diBologna, and others in Italy being surrounded by a ridge ofgently sloping hills, composed of loose tuffs, scoriae, and blocksof a variety of lavas.Trass and its origin. It appears that in the Lower Eifeleruptions of trachytic lava preceded the emission of currentsof basalt, and that immense quantities of pumice were thrownout wherever trachyte issued. In this district, also, we findScrope, Edin. Jours. of Sci., June 1826, p. 145.f Hibbertj Extinct Volcanos of the Rhine, p. 24.198 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIV.the tufaceous alluvium of the Rhine volcanos called trass,which has covered large areas, and choked up some valleysnow partially re-excavated. This trass is, like the loess, unstratified.The base is composed almost entirely of pumice,in which are included fragments of basalt and other lavas,pieces of burnt shale, slate, and sandstone, and numeroustrunks and branches of trees.If an eruption, attended by a copious evolution of gases,should now happen in one of the lake basins, we might supposethe water to remain for weeks in a state of violent ebullition,until it became of the consistency of mud, just as the sea becamecharged with red mud round the new island of Sciacca,in the Mediterranean, in the year 1831. If a breach shouldthen be made in the side of the cone, the flood would sweepaway great heaps of ejected fragments of shale and sandstone,which would be borne down into the adjoining valleys.Forests would be torn up by such a flood, which would explainthe occurrence of the numerous trunks of trees dispersedirregularly through the trass.Crater of the Roderberg. One of the most interesting volcanoson the left bank of the Rhine is called the Roderberg.It forms a circular crater nearly a quarter of a mile in diameter,and one hundred feet deep, now covered with fields of corn.The highly inclined gray wacke strata rise even to the rim of oneside of the crater, but they are overspread by quartzose gravel,and this again is covered by volcanic scoriae and tufaceoussand. The opposite wall of the crater is a scoriaceous rock,like that at the summit of Vesuvius. It is quite evident thatthe eruption in this case burst through the graywacke andalluvium which immediately overlies it ; and I observed someof the quartz pebbles mixed with scoriae on the flanks of themountain, so placed as if they had been cast up into the air,and had fallen again with the volcanic ashes.On the opposite, or right bank of the Rhine, are the Sieben-george,a group of mountains wherein analogous phenomenaare exhibited. There also trachytic lavas have flowed out andCh. XIV.] AGE OF EIFEL VOLCANOS. 199covered the graywacke ; and basaltic currents of a somewhatlater date have followed.There is, however, such a connexion between these rocksthat a suite might be procured from the Siebengebirge,showing an insensible gradation from highly crystalline trachyteinto compact basalt, with the accompanying passage ofthe hornblende in the former, into augite in the latter.Age of the volcanic rocks of the Eifel uncertain. Besidesthe ancient inclined graywacke, we have in the immediatevicinity of the valley of the Rhine, a nearly horizontal tertiaryformation, called brown coal, from the association with it ofbeds of lignite worked for coal. The great mass of the igneousrocks are seen to be newer than this formation ; and thus weobtain a relative date of much local importance for the volcanosof the whole region. This brown coal consists of beds of sandand sandstone, with nodules of clay-ironstone, and siliceousconglomerate. Beds of lignite of various thickness are inter-stratifiedwith the clays and sands, and often irregularly diffusedthrough them. This deposit was classed with the plasticclay at a time when every group of tertiary strata was referredto the age of some one of the subdivisions of the Paris basin,but as no shells, either marine, fresh-water, or land haveyet been found imbedded, it is not easy to decide the ageof the formation. Near Marienforst, in the vicinity of Bonn,large blocks are found on the surface of a white opaquequartz rock, containing numerous casts of fresh-water shellswhich appear to belong to Planorbis rotundity and Limnealongiscatus, two well-known Eocene species * ; but this rock isnot in situ, and may possibly have been a local deposit in somesmall lake, fed by a spring holding silica in solution. Yet, asthere are beds of the brown coal at Marienforst, and this formationcontains in other places subordinate beds of silex, itseems to me most probable that the quartzose blocks alludedto were derived from some member of that tertiary group.M. Deshayes, to whom I showed the specimens, said he felt as confident ofthe above identifications as mere casts would warrant.200 OLDER PLIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIV.The other organic remains of die brown coal arc principallyfishes ; they are found in a bituminous shale, called paper-coal,from being divisible into extremely thin leaves. The individualsare extremely numerous, but they appear to belongedabout five species, which M. Agassiz informs me are allextinct, and hitherto peculiar to the brown coal. Theybelong to the fresh-water genera Leuciscus, Aspius, and Percy.The remains of frogs also, of an extinct species, have been discoveredin the paper coal and a perfect series may be seen inthe museum at Bonn, from the most imperfect state of thetadpole to that of the full-grown animal. With these a salamander,scarcely distinguishable from the recent species, hasbeen found.All the distinguishable remains of plants in the lignite andassociated beds are said to belong to dicotyledonous trees andshrubs, bearing a close resemblance to those now existing inthe country. The same is declared to be the case with theremains found in the trachytic tuffs and in the trass ; but theabsolute identification of species on which some geologists haveinsisted must be received with great caution.As trachytic tuff has been observed at several places inter-stratifiedwith the clay beds of the brown coal formation, andcontaining the same impressions of plants, there can be nodoubt that the oldest eruptions began when k the fresh-waterdeposits were still in progress, and when the geographicalfeatures of the country must have been extremely differentfrom those which it has now assumed.We have stated that the volcanic ejections of the Roderbergrepose upon a bed of gravel. This gravel forms part of anancient alluvium which is quite distinct in character from thatnow found in the plains of the valley of the Rhine. It consistschiefly of quart pebbles, and is found at considerable elevationsboth on the graywacke and brown coal beds. It formsindeed a general capping to the latter, varying from ten tothirty-five feet in thickness, and was probably an alluviumformed at that period when the ancient lake, in which theCh. XIV.]AGE OF EIFEL VOLCANOS. 201brown coal strata were deposited, was drained ; for the disappearanceof that great body of fresh water may naturally besupposed to have taken place when the country was undergoinggreat changes in its physical geography.Beds and large veins of quartz are found in the Hundsruck,Faunus, and Eifel, the nearest mountain-chains which borderthis part of the Rhine, and their degradation may have suppliedthe quartz found in this gravel called Kiescl gerolle bythe Germans.It has been supposed by some writers that the latest volcaniceruptions of the Eifel and Rhine coincided in epoch with thedeposition of the Loess before described (chap. xi). Such anassociation, if established, would give a comparatively recentdate to the most modern igneous eruptions ; but I looked invain for any clear indications of such a connexion, and all thesections which I saw appeared to indicate the posteriority ofthe Loess. The integrity of the volcanic cones is, for reasonsbefore explained, a character to which we attach no value.We have, therefore, in this region, graywacke covered bybrown coal, and some volcanic formations so blended with thelatter as to prove the igneous eruptions to have been contemporaneous.Yet when we endeavour to assign a chronologicalposition to any one part of the series by reference to organicremains, we discover that the evidence is vague and inconclusive.I have as yet been unable to obtain satisfactory proofthat any one species of fossil animal or plant has been foundin the brown coal, or superimposed formations which was commonto a tertiary group of known date in any other part ofEurope ; whereas the reader will bear in mind that the relativeage of different tertiary formations, of which we have beforespoken, was usually determined by reference to a comparison ofseveral hundred, often more than a thousand, species of testacea*.A memoir has lately been communicated to the Geological Society of London,hy Mr. Homer, on the geology of this district. For fuller details consultNoeggerath's Rheinland Westphalia, and the works of Von Dechen, Oyen-hausen, Von Buch, Stringer, Van der Wick, Scrape, Daubeny, Leonhard,and Hubert.CHAPTER XV.Miocene period Marine formations Faluns of Touraine Comparison of theFaluns of the Loire and the English Crag Basin of the Gironde and LandesFresh-water limestone of Saucats Position of the limestone of BlayeEocene strata in the Bordeaux basin Inland cliff near Dax Strata of PiedmontSuperga Valley of the Bormida Molasse of Switzerland Basin ofVienna Styria Hungary Volhynia and Podolia Montpellier.MIOCENE FORMATIONS MARINE.HAVING treated in the preceding chapters of the older andnewer Pliocene formations, we shall next consider those membersof the tertiary series which we have termed Miocene. Thedistinguishing characters of this group, as derived from itsimbedded fossil testacea, have been explained in the fifth chapter(p. 54). In regard to the relative position of the strata,they underlie the older Pliocene, and overlie the Eocene formations,when any of these happen to be present.The area covered by the marine, fresh-water, and volcanicrocks of the Miocene period, in different parts of Europe, canalready be proved to be very considerable, for they occur inTouraine, in the basin of the Loire, and still more extensivelyin the south of France, between the Pyrenees and the Gironde.They have also been observed in Piedmont, near Turin, andin the neighbouring valley of the Bormida, where the Apenninesbranch off from the Alps. They are largely developedin the neighbourhood of Vienna and in Styria ; they aboundin parts of Hungary ; and they overspread extensive tracts inVolhynia and Podolia.Shells characteristic of the Miocene strata are found in allthese countries, figures of some of which are given in Plate 2in this volume. They characterize the period, because theyare either wanting or extremely rare in the Eocene or Plioceneformations.We shall now proceed to notice briefly some of the countriesCh, XV.] Fauns OF TOURAINE. 203before enumerated as containing monuments of the era underconsideration.Touraine. We have already alluded to the proofs of superpositionadduced by M. Desnoyers, to show that the shellystrata provincially called the Faluns of the Loire ' were posteriorto the most recent fresh-water formation of the basin ofthe Seine. Their position, therefore, shows that they are ofnewer origin than the Eocene strata, more recent, at least,than the uppermost beds of the Paris basin. But an examinationof their fossil contents proves also that they are refer-bibleto that type which distinguishes the Miocene period.When three hundred of the Touraine shells were comparedwith more than eleven hundred of the Parisian species, therewere scarcely more than twenty which could be identified ;and, on the other hand, the fossil shells of the Touraine bedsagree far less with the testacea now inhabiting our seas thandoes the group occurring in the older Pliocene strata ofnorthern Italy.The Miocene strata of the Loire have been observed torepose on a great variety of older rocks between Cologne andthe sea, in which line they are seen to rest successively upongneiss, clay slate, coal-measures, Jura limestone, greenstone,chalk, and lastly upon the upper fresh water deposits of thebasin of the Seine. They consist principally of quartzosegravel, sand, and broken shells. The beds are generally incoherent,but sometimes agglutinated together by a calcareous orearthy cement, so as to serve as a building-stone. Like theshelly portion of the crag of Norfolk and Suffolk, the faunsand associated strata are of slight thickness, not exceedingseventy feet. They often bear a close resemblance to thecrag in appearance, the shells being stained of the same ferruginouscolour, and being in the same state of decay ; servingin Touraine, just as in Norfolk and Suffolk, to fertilize thearable land. Like the crag, also, they contain mammiferousremains, which are not only intermixed with marine shells, butsometimes encrusted with repulse, frustra 5 and balani. These204 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XV.terrestrial quadrupeds belong to the genera Mastodon, Rhinoceros,Hippopotamus, &c., the assemblage, considered as awhole, being very distinct from those of the Paris gypsum.I examined several detached patches of the Touraine beds,where they rest on primary strata in the environs of Nantes,particularly one locality at Les Cleon, about eight miles southeastof that town, and was struck with the evidence afforded bythem of the emergence of large intervening tracts of graniticschist since the Miocene era, which we might otherwise havesupposed to have been raised at a very remote epoch. It isprobable that these patches of tertiary deposits were originallylocal., having been thrown down wherever the set of the tidesand currents permitted an accumulation to take place.The faluns and contemporary strata of the basin of the Loiremay be considered generally as having been formed in a shallowsea, into which a river, flowing perhaps from some of the landsnow drained by the Loire, introduced from time to time fluviatileshells, wood, and the bones of quadrupeds, which mayhave been washed down during floods. Some of these boneshave precisely the same black colour as those found in thepeaty shell-marl of Scotland ; and we might imagine them tohave been dyed black in Miocene peat which was swept downinto the sea during the waste of cliffs, did we not find theremains of cetacea in the same strata, bones, for example, ofthe lamartine, morse, sea-calf, and dolphin, having preciselythe same colour.Comparison of the Faluns of the Loire and the EnglishCrag. The resemblance which M. Desnoyers has pointed outas existing between the English crag and the French falunsis one which ought by no means to induce us to ascribe a contemporaneousorigin to these two groups, but merely a similarityof geographical circumstances at the respective periodswhen each was deposited. In every age, where there is landand sea, there must be shores, shallow estuaries, and rivers ;and near the sea-coasts banks of marine shells and corals mayaccumulate. It must also be expected that rivers will drift inCh. XV.]CRAG AND Fauns COMPARED. 205fresh-water shells, together with sand and pebbles, and occasionally,perhaps, sweep down the carcasses of land quadrupedsinto the sea. If the sand and shells, both of the 'crag 5 andthe ' faluns ' have each acquired the same ferruginous colour,such a coincidence would merely lead us to infer that, at eachperiod, there happened to be springs charged with iron, whichflowed into some part of the sea or basin of the river, by whichthe sediment was carried down into the sea.Even had the French and English strata which we arecomparing shared a greater number of mineral characters incommon, that identity could not have justified us in inferringthe synchronous date of the two groups, where the discordanceof fossil remains is so marked. The argument which infers acontemporaneous origin from correspondence of mineral contents,proceeds on the supposition that the materials wereeither washed down from a common source, or from differentsources into a common receptacle. If, according to the latterhypothesis, the crag and the faluns were thrown down in onecontinuous sea, the testacea could not have been so distinct intwo very contiguous regions, unless we assume that the lawswhich regulated the geographical distribution of species werethen distinct from those now prevailing. But if it be saidthat the two basins may have been separated from each other,as are those of the Mediterranean and Red Sea, by an isthmus,and that distinct assemblages of species may have flourishedin each, as in the example above-mentioned is actually thecase *, we may reply that such narrow lines of demarcationare extremely rare now, and must have been infinitely more soinremoter tertiary epochs, because there can be no doubtthat the proportion of land to sea has been greatly on theincrease in European latitudes during the more modern geologicaleras.In the faluns, and in certain groups of the same age, whichoccur not far to the west of Orleans, M. Desnoyers has discoveredthe following mammiferous quadrupeds. Palceothe-See above, chap. x.206 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XV.rum magnum, Mastodon augustines, Hippopotamus major,and PI. minutes, Rhinoceros leptorhinus, and R. minutus, Tapir(jiyas, Anthracotherium (small species), Sus, Eques (smallspecies), Corvus, and an undetermined species of the Rodentia.The first species on this list is common to the Paris gypsum,and is therefore an example of a land quadruped common tothe Miocene and Eocene formations, an exception perfectly inharmony with the results obtained from the study of fossilshells *.Basin of the Gironde and district of the Landes. A greatextent of country between the Pyrenees and the Gironde isoverspread by tertiary deposits which have been more particularlystudied in the environs of Bordeaux and Dax, fromwhence about 600 species of shells have been obtained. Theseshells belong to the same type as those of Touraine. See AppendixI.fMost of the beds near Dax, whence these shells are procured,,consist of incoherent quartzose sand, mixed for the mostpart with calcareous matter, which has often bound togetherthe sand into concretionary nodules. A great abundanceof fluviatile shells occur in many places intermixed with themarine ; and in some localities microscopic shells are in greatprofusion.The tertiary deposits in this part of France are often veryinconstant in their mineralogical character, yet admit generallyof being arranged in four groups, which are enumerated in theexplanation of diagram No. 51.In some places the united thickness of these groups is considerable,but in the country between the Pyrenees and thevalley of the Adour around Dax, the disturbed secondary rocksFor further details respecting the basin of the Loire, see M. Desnoyers, Ann,des Sci. Nat., tome xvi. pp. 1/1 and 402, where full references to other authorsare given.f M. de Bastcrot has given a description of more than 300 shells of Bordeauxand Dax, and figures of the greater number of them. Mem. de la Soc. d'Hist.Nat. de Paris, tome ii.Ch.XV.]STRATA NEAR Dan. 207are often covered by a thin pellicle only of tertiary strata,which rests horizontally on the chalk and does not alwaysconceal it.Adour R. Luy R. Puy Arzet. No. 51.Tertiary strata overlying chalk in the environs of Dax,a, Siliceous sand without shells. c, Sand and marl with shells.6, Gravel. d, Blue marl with shells.E, Chalk and volcanic tuff.In the valleys of the Adour and Luy, sections of all themembers of the tertiary series are laid open, but the lowest bluemarl, which is sometimes 200 feet thick, is not often penetrated.On the banks of the Luy, however, to the south ofDax, the subjacent white chalk is exposed in inclined andvertical strata. In the hill called Puy Arzet the chalk, characterizedby its peculiar fossils, is accompanied by beds of volcanictuff, which are conformable to it, and which may be consideredas the product of submarine eruptions which took place inthe sea wherein the chalk was formed.About a mile west of Orgies, in the Bas Pyrenees, the bluemarl is seen to extend to the borders of the tertiary formation,and rises to the height probably of six or seven hundred feet.In that locality many of the marine Miocene shells preservetheir original colours. This marl is covered by a considerablethickness of ferruginous gravel, which seems to increase involume near the borders of the tertiary basin on the side of thePyrenees.In an opposite direction, to the north of Dax, the shellysands often pass into calcareous sandstone, in which there aremerely the casts of shells as at Carcases, and into a shelly brecciaresembling some rocks of recent origin which I have receivedfrom the coral reefs of the Bermudas.Fresh-water limestone at Saucats. Associated with the Miocenestrata near Bordeaux, at a place called Saucats, is a208 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XV.compact fresh-water limestone, of slight thickness, which is perforatedon the upper surface by marine shells, for the mostpart of extinct species. It is evident that the space must havebeen alternately occupied by salt and fresh water. First, alagoon may have been formed, in which the water may havebecome fresh ; then a barrier of sand, by which the sea wasexcluded for a time, may have been breached, whereby thesalt water again obtained access.Eocene strata in the Bordeaux basin. The relations of someof the members of the tertiary series, in the basin of the Gironde,have of late afforded matter of controversy. A limestone, resemblingthe calcaire grossier of Paris, and from 100 to 200feet in thickness, occurs at Pauliac and Blaye, and extends onthe right bank of the Gironde, between Blaye and La Roche.It contains many species of fossils identical with those of theParis basin. This fact was pointed out to me by M. Deshayesbefore I visited Blaye in 1830 ; but although I recognized themineral characters of the rock to be very different from thoseof the Miocene formations in the immediate neighbourhoodof Bordeaux, I had not time to verify its relative position. Iinferred, however, the inferiority of the Blaye limestone to theMiocene strata, from the order in which each series presenteditself as I receded from the chalk and passed to the centralparts of the Bordeaux basin.Upon leaving the white chalk with flints, in travelling fromCharente by Blaye to Bordeaux, I first found myself uponoverlying red clay and sand (as at Mirabeau) ; I then cameupon the tertiary limestone above alluded to, at Blaye; andlastly, on departing still farther from the chalk, reached thestrata which at Bordeaux and Dax contain exclusively theMiocene shells.The occurrence both of Eocene and Miocene fossils in thesame basin of the Gironde, had been cited by M. Boue as afact which detracted from the value of zoological characters asameans of determining the chronological relations of tertiaryCh. XV.] INLAND CLIFF NEAR Dan. 209groups. But on farther inquiry, the fact, on the contrary, hasfurnished additional grounds of confidence in these characters.M. Ch. Desmoulins replied, in answer to M. Bout's objections,that the assemblage of Eocene shells are never intermixedwith those found in the ' melton,' as he calls the sandy calcareousrock of the environs of Bordeaux and Dax; and M.Dufrenoy farther stated, that the hills of limestone which borderthe right bank of the Gironde, from Marianne as far asBlaye, present several sections wherein the Parisian (or Eocene)limestone is seen to be separated from the shelly strata calledfauns or ' melton,' by a fresh-water formation of considerablethickness. It appears, therefore, that as the marine falunsof Touraine rest on a fresh-water formation, which overlies themarine calcaire grossier of Paris, so the marine Miocene strataof Bordeaux are separated from those of Blaye by a freshwaterdeposit *.The following diagram, therefore, will express the order ofposition of the groups above alluded to.No. 52.Aa, Red clay and sand,b, Limestone like calcaire grossier, sometimes alternating with green marland containing Eocene shells.c, Fresh-water formation, same as that of the department of Lot and Garonne.rf, Tertiary strata of the Landes, with Miocene fossils.Inland cliff near Dax, A few miles west from Dax, and atthe distance of about twelve miles from the sea, a steep bankis seen running in a direction nearly north-east and south-west,or parallel to the contiguous coast. This steep declivity, orbrae, which is about 50 feet in height, conducts us from thehigher platform of the Landes to a lower plain which extendsto the sea. The outline of the ground might suggest to everygeologist the opinion, that the bank in question was onceBulletin de la Soc. Gaol, de France, tome ii. p. 440,VOL. III. P210 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XV.a sea-cliff, when the whole country stood at a lower levelNo. 53.d<tSection of Inland cliff at Abesse, near Dax.a, Sand of the Landes. b, Limestone. c, Clay.relatively to the sea. But this can no longer be regardedas matter of conjecture. In making excavations recently forthe foundation of a building at Abesse, a quantity of loosesand, which formed the slope d, e, was removed, and a perpendicularcliff exposed about 50 feet in height. The bottom ofthis cliff consists of limestone, 6, which contains shells andcorals of Miocene species, and is probably a calcareous form ofthe division c (diagram No. 51, p. 207). Immediately belowthis limestone is the clay c (probably d, diagram No. 51, p. 207),and above it the usual tertiary sand a of the departmentof the Landes. At the-base of the precipice are seen large,partially-rounded, masses of rock, evidently detached fromthe stratum b. The face of the limestone is hollowed outand weathered into such forms as are seen in the calcareouscliffs of the adjoining coast, especially at Biaritz, near Bayonne*.It is evident that, when the country was at a somewhat lowerlevel, the sea advanced along the surface of the argillaceousstratum c, which, by its yielding nature, favoured the wasteand undermining of the more solid superincumbent limestoneb. Afterwards, when the country had been elevated, part ofthe sand a fell down, or was drifted by the winds, so as toform the talus d, e, which masked the inland cliff until it wasartificially laid open to view.The situation of this cliff is interesting, as marking one ofthe pauses which intervened between the successive movementsof elevation whereby the marine tertiary strata of this countryThis spot was pointed out to me by the proprietor of the lands of Abesse in1830.Ch.XV.] MONT Ferret AND THE Super. 211were upheaved to their present height, a pause which allowedtime for the sea to advance and strip off the upper beds a, 6,from the denuded clay c.Hills of Mont Ferrat and the Superga. The late SignerBonelli of Turin was the first who remarked that the tertiaryshells found in the green sand and marl of the Superga nearTurin differed, as a group, from those generally characteristicof the Subapennine beds. The same naturalist had also observed,that many of the species peculiar to the Superga wereidentical with those occurring near Bordeaux and Dax. Thestrata of which the hill of the Superga is composed, are inclinedat an angle of more than 70 degrees. They consist partly of finesand and marl, and partly of a conglomerate composed of primaryboulders, which forms a lower part of the series, and not, asrepresented by M. Brongniart by mistake *, an unconformableand overlying mass f. This same series of beds is more largelydeveloped in the chain of Mont Ferrat, especially in the basinof the Bormida. The high road which leads from Savona toAlessandria intersects them in its northern descent, and theformation may be well studied along this line at Carcare, Cairo,and Pinto, at all which localities fossil shells occur in a brightgreen sand. At Diana, a conglomerate, inter stratified with thisgreen sand, contains rounded blocks of serpentine and chloriteschist, larger than those near the summit of the Superga, someof the blocks being not less than nine feet in diameter.When we descend to Qui, we find the green sand givingplace to bluish marls, which also skirt the plains of the Tanaroat lower levels. These newer marls are associated with sand,and are nearly horizontal, and appear to belong to the olderPliocene Subapennine strata J. The shells which characterizethe latter, abound in various parts of the country near Turin ;but that region has not yet been examined with sufficient careto enable us to give exact sections to illustrate the superiordu Licentia, p. 26.f I examined the Superga in company with Mr. Murchison in 1828.J See section, wood-cut No. 4 ; p. 21.P 2212 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch, XV,siphon of the Miocene and older Pliocene beds. It is, however,ascertained, that the highly-inclined green sand, which comesimmediately in contact with the primary rocks, is the oldestpart of the series *.Molasse of Switzerland. If we cross the Alps, and pass fromPiedmont to Savoy, we find there, at the northern base of thegreat chain and throughout the lower country of Switzerland, asoft green sandstone, much resembling some of the beds of thebasin of the Bormida, above described, and associated in a similarmanner with marls and conglomerate. This formation is called,in Switzerland, 'molasse,' said to be derived from 'mol,' 'soft,because the stone is easily cut in the quarry. It is of vastthickness, but shells have so rarely been found in it that theydo not supply sufficient data for correctly determining its age.M. Studer, in his treatise on the ' molasse,' enumerates somefossil shells found near Lucerne, agreeing, apparently, with thetestacea of the Subapennine hills. The correspondence inmineral character between the green sand of Piedmont andthat of Switzerland can in nowise authorise us to infer identityof age, but merely to conclude that both have been derivedfrom the degradation of similar ancient rocks.Until the place of the f molasse ' in the chronological seriesof tertiary formations has been more rigorously determined, theapplication of this provincial name to the tertiary groups ofother countries must prove a source of ambiguity, and we regretthat the term has been so vaguely employed by M. Boue.Styria, Vienna, Hungary, fyc. Of the various groups whichhave hitherto been referred to the Miocene era, none are soimportant in thickness and geographical extent as those whichare found at the eastern extremity of the Alps, in what havebeen termed the basins of Vienna and Styria, and which spreadthence into the plains of Hungary. The collection of shellsformed by M. Constant Prevost, in the neighbourhood ofWe trust that MM. Pareto, Passing, Sismondi, and La Marmot, will devotetheir attention to the relative position of the several groups of tertiary strata inPiedmont, by instituting a comparison between their respective organic remains,Ch. XV.] STYRTA VIENNA HUNGARY. 213Vienna, and described by him in 1820 *, were alone sufficientto identify a great part of the formations of that country withthe Miocene beds of the Loire, Gironde, and Piedmont. Thefossil remains subsequently procured by that indefatigableobserver M. Boue have served to show the still greater rangeof the same beds through Hungary and Transylvania.It appears from the recently published memoirs of ProfessorSedgwick and Mr. Hutchison , that the formations in Styriamay be divided into groups corresponding to those adopted byM. Parts for the Vienna beds ; the basin of Vienna exhibitingnearly the same phenomena as that of Styria. These regionshave evidently formed, during the Miocene period, two deepbays of the same sea, separated from each other by a greatpromontory connected with the central ridge of the easternAlps.The English geologists, above mentioned, describe a longsuccession of marine strata intervening between the Alps andthe plains of Hungary, which are divisible into three naturalgroups, each of vast thickness, and affording a great variety ofrocks. All these groups are of marine origin, and lie in nearlyhorizontal strata, but have a slight prevailing easterly dip, sothat, in traversing them from west to east, we commence withthe oldest and end with the youngest beds. At their westernextremity they fill an irregular trough-shaped depression,through which the waters of the Mur, the Rab, and theDrave, make their way to the lower Danube J. They hereconsist of conglomerate, sandstone, and marls, some of themarls containing marine shells. Beds also of lignite occur,showing that wood was drifted down in large quantitiesinto the sea. In parts of the series there are masses of roundedsiliceous pebbles resembling the shingle banks which are formingon some of our coasts.The second principal group is characterized by corallineJournal de Physique, Novembre, 1820.t Geol. Trans., Second Series, vol. iii. p, 301. J Ibid., p. 382.214 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XV.and concretionary limestone of a yellowish white colour : it isfinely exposed in the escarpments of Wildon, and in the hillsof Ehrenhausen, on the right bank of the Mur *. This corallinelimestone is not less than 400 feet thick at Wildon, andexceeds, therefore, some of the most considerable of oursecondary groups in England, as, for example, the CoralRags.'Beds of sandstone, sand, and shale, and calcareous marls, areassociated with the above-mentioned limestone.The third group, which occurs at a still greater distancefrom the mountains, is composed of sandstone and marl, and ofbeds of limestone, exhibiting here and there a perfectly ooliticstructure. In this system fossil shells are numerous.It is by no means clear that the coralline limestones of thesecond group, are posterior in origin to all the beds of the firstdivision ; they may possibly have been formed at some distancefrom land, while the head of the gulf was becoming filled upwith enormous deposits of gravel, sand, and mud, which may,in that quarter, have rendered the waters too turbid for thefullest development of testaceous and coralline animals.In regard to the age of the formations above described, wemay observe that the middle group, both in the basins of Styriaand Vienna, belongs indisputably to the Miocene period, forthe species of shells are the same as those of the Loire, Gironde,and other contemporary basins before noticed. Whether thelowest and uppermost systems are referable to the same, or todistinct tertiary epochs, is the only question. We cannot doubtthat the accumulation of so vast a succession of beds requiredan immense lapse of ages, and we are prepared to find somedifference in the species characterizing the different membersof the series ; nevertheless, all may belong to different subdivisionsof the Miocene period. Professor Sedgwick and Mr.Murchison have suggested that the inferior, or first group,which comprises the strata between the Alps and the corallineGeol. Trans., Second Series, vol. iii. p. 335. f Ibid., p. 390.Ch.XV.] VOLHYNIA PODOLIA MONTPELLIER. 215limestone of Wildon, may correspond in age to the Paris basin ;but the list of fossils which they have given, seems rather tofavour the supposition, that the deposit is of the Miocene era.They enumerate four characteristic Miocene fossils, MytilusRadii, Cerithium dictum, C. pupasforme, and C. plicatum,and if there are some few of the associated shells common tothe Paris basin, such a coincidence is no more than holds truein regard to all the European Miocene formations.On the other hand, the third or newest system, which overliesthe coralline limestone, contains fossils which do not appearto depart so widely from the Miocene type as to authorize usto separate them. They appear to agree with the tertiarystrata of a great part of Hungary and Transylvania, whichwill be seen, by the tables of shells in Appendix I., to be re-terrible to the Miocene period.Volhynia and Podolia. We may expect to find many otherdistricts in Europe composed of Miocene strata, and there appearsalready to be sufficient evidence that the marine depositsof the platform of Volhynia and Podolia were of this era.The fossils of that region, which is bounded by Alicia on thewest, and the Ukraine on the east, and comprises parts of thebasins of the Bog and the Dniester, has been investigated byVon Buch, Eichwald, and Du Bois, and the latter has givenexcellent plates of more than one hundred fossil shells of thecountry, which M. Deshayes finds to agree decidedly with thefossils of the Miocene period *.The formation consists of different rocks, sand and sandstone,clay, coarse limestone, and a white oolite, the last ofwhich is of great extent.Montpellier. The tertiary strata of Montpellier containmany of the Dax and Bordeaux species of shells, so that theyare probably referable to the Miocene epoch ; but in the cataloguegiven by M. Marcel de Serres, many Pliocene species,similar to those of the Subapennine beds, are enumerated.Conch. Foss. du Plateau Wolhyni-Podo, par F. du Bois. Berlin, 1831.2 Hi MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XV.This subject requires fuller investigation, and it would behighly interesting if the Montpellier beds should be found toindicate a passage from the fossils of the Miocene type to thoseof the older Pliocene. We are fully prepared for the discoveryof such intermediate links, and \ve have endeavoured toprovide a place for them in the classification proposed in thefifth chapter *.Paw 57.CHAPTER XVI.Miocene alluviums Auvergne Mont Perrier Extinct quadrupeds VelayOrleanais Alluviums contemporaneous with Faluns of Touraine Miocenefresh-water formations Upper Val d' Arno Extinct mammalia Coal of Cadi-bonaMiocene volcanic rocks Hungary Transylvania Styria AuvergneVelay.IN the present chapter we shall offer some observations on thealluviums and freshwater formations of the Miocene era, andshall afterwards point out the countries in Europe where thevolcanic rocks of the same period may be studied.MIOCENE ALLUVIUMS.Auvergne. The annexed drawing will explain to the readerthe position of two ancient beds of alluvium, c and e, in Auro.54.Position of the Miocene alluviums of Mont Perrier (or Boulder).a, Newer alluvium. e, First Miocene alluvium with bones.b, Second trachytic breccia. /, Compact basalt.c, Second Miocene alluvium with bones, g, Eocene lacustrine strata.d, First trachytic breccia.vergne, in which the remains of several quadrupeds characteristicof the Miocene period have been obtained. In order toaccount for the situation of these beds of rounded pebbles andsand, we must suppose that after the tertiary strata g, coveredby the basaltic lava /, had been disturbed and exposed toaqueous denudation, a valley was excavated, wherein the alluviume accumulated, and in which the remains of quadrupeds218 MIOCENE PERIOD.[Ch.XVLthen inhabiting the country were buried. The trachyticbreccia d was then superimposed ; this breccia is an aggregateof shapeless and angular fragments of trachyte, cemented byvolcanic tuff and pumice, resembling some of the brecciaswhich enter into the composition of the neighbouring extinctvolcano of Mont Dor in Auvergne, or those which are foundin Etna. Upon this rests another alluvium c, which also containsthe bones of Miocene species, and this is covered byanother enormous mass of tufaceous breccia. We suppose thebreccias to have resulted from the sudden rush of large bodiesof water down the sides of an elevated volcano at its momentsof eruption, when snow perhaps was melted by lava. Suchfloods occur in Iceland, sweeping away loose blocks of lavaand ejections surrounding the crater, and then strewing theplains with fragments of igneous rocks, enveloped in mud ormora.' The abrupt escarpment presented by the above-describedbeds, b, c, d 9 e, towards the valley of the Couze, musthave been caused by subsequent erosion, whereby a large portionof those masses has been carried away *.In the alluviums c and e, MM. Croizet, Jobert, Chariot, andBullet have discovered the remains of about forty speciesof extinct mammalia, the greater part of which are peculiaras yet to this locality ; but some of them characteristic of theMiocene period, being common to the faluns of Touraine, andassociated in other localities with marine Miocene strata.Among these species may be enumerated Mastodon minorand M. arvernensis, Hippopotamus major, Rhinoceros lep-terminus and Tapir arvernensis. The Elephas primi genius, aspecies common to so many tertiary periods, is also stated toaccompany the rest. In some cases the remains are not sufficientlycharacteristic to indicate the exact species, but thefollowing genera can be determined: the boar, horse, ox,hyaena (two species), felix (three or four species), bear (threeFor an account of the position "and age of the volcanic breccias of MontPerrier and Blade, see Lyell and Murchison on the beds of Mont Perrier, "Ed.New Phil, Journ., July, 1829, p. 15.Ch. XVI.] ALLUVIUMS Fresh WATER STRATA. 219species), deer, a great variety, canis, otter, beaver, hare, andwater-rat *.Velay. In Velay a somewhat similar group of mammiferousremains were found by Dr. Hubert f , in a bed of volcanicscoria? and tuff, inclosed between two beds of basaltic lava, atSaint-private deadlier. Some of the bones were found adheringto the slaggy lava. Among the animals were Rhinocerosleptorhinus, Hyaena spelled, and another species alliedto the spotted hyaena of the Cape, together with four undeterminedspecies of deer J.At Cussac and Solilhac, one league from Puy en Velay,M. Robert discovered, in an ancient alluvium covered withlava, the remains of Elephas primi genius, Rhinoceros lepto-linus, Tapir arvernensis, horse (two species), deer (seven species),ox (two species), and an antelope.Orleanais. In the Orleanais, at Avaray, Civilly, les Aides,and les Barres, fossil land quadrupeds have been found associatedwith fluviatile shells and reptiles, identical with thosefound in the marine faluns of Touraine . These are supposed,with great probability, by M. Desnoyers, to mark thepassage of streams which flowed towards the sea in which thefaluns were deposited. They bear the same relation to theMiocene strata of Touraine, as part of the ancient gravel andsilt of England, containing the bones of elephants and otherextinct animals, probably bear to the crag.MIOCENE FRESH-WATER FORMATIONS.Upper Val d'Arno. There are a great number of isolatedtertiary formations, of fresh-water origin, resting on primaryand secondary rocks in different parts of Europe, in the sameRecherches sur les Oss. Foss. du Dept. du Puy de Dome, to., 1828. EssaiGeol. et Mineral, sur les Environs d'Issoire, Dept. du Puy de Dome, folio, 1827.f Edin. Journ. of Sci., No. 4, New Series, p. 276.J Figures of some of these remains are given by M. Bertrand de Doue, Ann. dela Soc. d'Agricult. de Puy, 1828.MM. Desnoyers and Lockhart, Bulletin de la Soc. Geol., torn, ii, p. 336.220 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVI.manner as we now find small lakes scattered over our continentsand islands wherein deposits are forming, quite detachedfrom all contemporary marine strata. To determinethe age of such groups with reference to the great chronologicalseries established for the marine strata, must often be amatter of difficulty, since we cannot always enjoy an opportunityof studying a locality where the fresh water species areintermixed with marine shells, or where they occur in bedsalternating with marine strata.The deposit of the Upper Val d'Arno before alluded top.161) was evidently formed in an ancient lake ; but althoughthe fossil testaceous and mammiferous remains preservedtherein are very numerous, it is scarcely possible, at present,to decide with certainty the precise era to which they belong.I collected six species of lacustrine shells, in an excellentstate of preservation, from this basin belonging to the generaAnton, Paludina and Neritina; but M. Deshayes was unableto identify them with any recent or fossil species knownto him. If the beds belonged to the older Pliocene formationswe might expect that several of the fossils would agreespecifically with living testacea ; and we are therefore disposedto believe that they belong to an older epoch. If we considerthe terrestrial mammalia of the same beds, we immediatelyperceive that they cannot be assimilated to the Eocene type,as exhibited in the Paris basin, or in Auvergne and Velay :but some of them agree with Miocene species. Mr. Pentlandhas obligingly sent me the following list of the fossil mammifersof the Upper Val d'Arno which arc in the museums ofParis. Fera. Urus outriders, Vivere Yaldarnensis, Canislupus, and another of the size of the common fox. Hyaenaradiata, II. fossils. Felix (a new species of the size of thepanther). Potentia. Historic, nearly allied to dorsalis, Castor.Pacfiijdannatn. Elephas Italics, Mastodon augustines, M.Taperoides, Tapir , Eques , Sus scrofa, rhinocerosleptorhinus, Hippopotamus major, fossils. Ruminant.Ch. XVI.] UPPER VAL D'ARNO CADIBONA. 221Corvus megaceros, (?) C. Valdarnensis, C. , new species,Bos, bubalo affinis, B. urus and B. taurus.Cuvier also mentions the remains of a species of lophiodonas occurring among the bones in the Upper Val d'Arno *.The elephant of this locality has been called by Nestif meridional,and is considered by him as distinct from the Siberianfossil species E. primige?iius, with which, however, some eminentcomparative anatomists regard it as identical. The skeletonsof the hippopotamus are exceedingly abundant ; no less thanforty had been procured when I visited Florence in 1828.Remains of the elephant, stag, ox, and horse, are also extremelynumerous. In winter the superficial degradation ofthe soil is so rapid, that bones which the year before wereburied are seen to project from the surface of the soil, andare described by the peasants as growing. In this manner thetips of the horns of stags, or of the tusks of hippopotamusesoften appear on the surface, and thus lead to the discovery ofan entire head or skeleton.Cadibona. Another example of an isolated lacustrine deposit,belonging possibly to the Miocene period, is that whichoccurs at Cadibona, between Savona and Carcare. Its positionis described in the annexed section, which does not howeverNo. 55.Carcare,cSection of the fresh-water formation of Cadibona.a. Blue marl and yellow sand (older Pliocene).b. Sand, shale and coal of Cadibona (Miocene).c. Green sand, &c. of the Bormida (Miocene).d. Chloritic and micaceous schist, serpentine, &c.pretend to accuracy in regard to the relative heights of thedifferent rocks, or the distances of the places from each other.Oss. Foss., vol. v. p. 504.f Letter supra aucune Ossa Fossil del Val d'Arno, &c. Pisa, 1825.222 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVI.The lacustrine strata are composed of gravel, grit, and micaceoussandstone, of such materials as were derivable from thesurrounding primary rocks ; and so great is the thickness ofthis mass, that some valleys intersect it to the depth of sevenor eight hundred feet without penetrating to the subjacent formations.In one part of the series, carbonaceous shales occur,and several seams of coal from two to six feet in thickness, butno impressions of plants of which the species could be determined,and no shells have been discovered. Many entire jawsand other bones of an extinct mammifer, called by Cuvier ,have been found in the coal-beds, the bonebeing itself changed into a kind of coal ; but as this speciesdoes not occur elsewhere in association with organic remainsof known date, it affords us no aid in our attempt to assign aplace to the lignites of Cadibona *.MIOCENE VOLCANIC ROCKS.Hungary. M. Beudant, in his elaborate work on Hungary,describes five distinct groups of volcanic rocks > which, althoughrarely of great extent, form striking features in the physicalgeography of that country, rising as they do abruptly fromextensive plains composed of tertiary strata. They may haveconstituted islands in the ancient sea, as Santorin and Milonow do in the Grecian archipelago; and M. Beudant has remarkedthat the mineral products of the last-mentioned islandsresemble remarkably those of the Hungarian extinct volcanos,where many of the same minerals, as opal, chalcedony, resinoussilex (silex definite), pearlite, obsidian, and pitchstone abound.The Hungarian lavas are chiefly felspathic, consisting ofdifferent varieties of trachyte ; many are cellular and used asmillstones ; some so porous and even scoriform as to resemblethose which have issued in the open air. Pumice occursin great quantity, and there are conglomerates, or ratherThe author visited Cadibona in August, 1828, in company with Mr.Murchison.Ch .XVI.] HUNGARY TRANSYLVANIA STYRIA.breccias, wherein fragments of trachyte are bound together bypumiceous tuff or sometimes by silex.It is probable that these rocks were permeated by the watersof hot springs, impregnated, like the Geysers, with silica ; or, insome instances perhaps, by aqueous vapours, which, like thoseof Lancelot, may have precipitated hydrate of silica *.By the influence of such springs or vapours the trunks andbranches of trees washed down during floods, and buried intuffs on the flanks of the mountains, may have become silicified.It is scarcely possible, says M. Beudant, to dig into any ofthe pumiceous deposits of these mountains without meetingwith realized wood, and sometimes entire silicified trunks oftrees of great size and weight.It appears from the species of shells collected principally byM. Boue, and examined by M. Deshayes, that the fossil remainsimbedded in the volcanic tuffs, and in strata alternatingwith them in Hungary, are of the Miocene type, and noidentical, as was formerly supposed, with the fossils of theParis basin.Transylvania. The igneous rocks of the eastern part ofTransylvania described by M. Boue, are probably of thesame age. They cover a considerable area, and bear a closeresemblance to the Hungarian lavas, being chiefly trachytic.Several large craters, containing shallow lakes like the Marsof the Eifel, are met with in some regions ; and a rent in thetrachytic mountains of Budoshagy exhales hot sulphureousvapours, which convert the trachyte into alum-stone, a changewhich that rock has undergone at remote periods in severalparts of Hungary.Styria. Many of the volcanic groups of this country beara similar relation to the Syrian tertiary deposits, as do theHungarian rocks to the marine strata of that country. Theshells are found imbedded in the volcanic tuffs in such amanner as to show that they lived in the sea when the volcaniceruptions were in progress, as many of the Val di Not lavasSee above, vol. i, chap, xxii.224 MIOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVI.in Sicily, before described, were shown to be contemporaneouswith newer Pliocene strata *.Auvergne Velay. We believe that part of the volcaniceruptions of Auvergne took place during the Miocene period ;those, for example, which cover, or are inter stratified with thealluviums mentioned in this chapter, and some of the ancientbasaltic tapping of hills in Auvergne, which repose on gravelcharacterized by similar organic remains. A part also of theigneous rocks of Velay belong to this epoch, but to these weshall again refer when we treat more fully of the volcanic rocksof Central France ; the older part of which are referable to theEocene period.Sedgwick and Murchison, Geol. Trans. Second Series, vol. iii. p. 400.Daubeny, Extinct Volcanos, p. 92.CHAPTER XVII.Eocene period Fresh-water formations Central France Map Imageauvergne Sandstone and conglomerate Tertiary Red marl and sandstonelike the secondary ' new red sandstone' Green and white foliated marlsIndusial limestone Gypseous marls General arrangement and origin of theTravertin Fresh-water formation of the Limagne Puy en Velay Analogy ofthe strata to those of Auvergne Cantal Resemblance of Aurillac limestoneand its flints to our upper chalk Proofs of the gradual deposition of marlConcluding Remarks.EOCENE FRESH-WATER FORMATIONS.WE have now traced back the history of the European formationsto that period when the seas and lakes were inhabitedby a few only of the existing species of testacea, a periodwhich we have designated Eocene, as indicating the dawn of thepresent state of the animate creation. But although a smallnumber only of the living species of animals were then in being,there are ample grounds for inferring that all the great classesof the animal kingdom, such as they now exist, were then fullyrepresented. In regard to the testacea, indeed, it is no longera matter of inference, for 1400 species of this class have beenobtained from that small number of detached Eocene depositswhich have hitherto been examined in Europe.The celebrated Paris basin, the position of which waspointed out in the former part of this volume, (see wood-cut,p. 16) first presents itself, and seems to claim our chiefattention when we treat of the phenomena of this era. Butinorder more easily to explain to the student the peculiarnature and origin of that group, it will be desirable, first, togive a brief sketch of certain deposits of Central France, whichafford many interesting points of analogy, both in organicremains and mineral composition, and where the original circumstancesunder which the strata were accumulated maymore easily be discerned.VOL, III. QEOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. XVII.Auvergne. We allude to the lacustrine basins of Auvergne,Cantal, and Velay, the site of which may be seen in theNo. 56.Ch. XVII.] LACUSTRINE STRATA AUVERGNE. 227annexed Map *. They appear to be the monuments of ancientlakes which may have resembled in geographical distributionsome of those now existing in Switzerland, and may like themhave occupied the depressions in a mountainous country,, andhave been each fed by one or more rivers and torrents. Thecountry where they occur is almost entirely composed ofgranite, and different varieties of granitic schist, with hereand there a few patches of secondary strata much dislocated,and which have probably suffered great denudation. Thereare also some vast piles of volcanic rock, (see the Map,) thegreater part of which are newer than the fresh-water strata,often resting upon them, whilst a small part were evidently ofcontemporaneous origin. Of these igneous rocks we shall treatmore particularly in the nineteenth chapter, and shall first turnour attention exclusively to the lacustrine beds.The most northern of the freshwater groups is situated inthe valley-plain of the Allier, which lies within the departmentof the Puy de Dome, being the tract which went formerly bythe name of the Limagne auvergne. It is inclosed by twoparallel primitive ranges, that of the Forez, which divides thewaters of the Loire and Allier, on the east, and that of the MontsDomes, which separates the latter river from the Sioule, on thewest . The average breadth of this tract is about ^20 miles,and it is for the most part composed of nearly horizontal strataof sand, sandstone, calcareous marl, clay, limestone, and somesubordinate groups, none of which observe a fixed and invariableorder of superposition. The ancient borders of the lake,wherein the fresh-water strata were accumulated, may generallybe traced with precision, the granite and other ancient rocksrising up boldly from the level country. The precise junction,however, of the lacustrine and granitic beds is rarely seen,as a small valley usually intervenes between them. The fresh-thefollowing account of the fresh-water formations of Central France is theresult of observations made in the summer of 1828, in company with Mr. Mur-chiron.f Scrope, Geology of Central France, p. 15.Q2228 Eocene PERIOD. [ch. evil.water strata may sometimes be seen to retain their horizontallywithin a very slight distance of the border-rocks, while in someplaces they are inclined, and in a few instances vertical. Theprincipal divisions into which the lacustrine series may be separatedare the following : 1st, Sandstone, grit, and conglomerate.2ndly, green and white foliated marls. 3dly, limestone or travertin,oolite,, &c. 4thly, gypseous marls.1. Sandstone and conglomerate. Strata of sand and gravel,sometimes bound together into a solid rock, are found in greatabundance around the confines of the lacustrine basin, containing,in different places,, pebbles of all the ancient rocks of theadjoining elevated country, namely, granite, gneiss, mica-schist,clay-slate, porphyry, and others. But the arenaceous stratado not form one continuous band around the margin of thebasin, being rather disposed like the independent deltas whichgrow at the mouths of torrents along the borders of existinglakes *.At Cavaliers, near Clermont, we have an example of oneof these littoral groups of local extent where the pebbly bedsslope away from the granite as if they had formed a talus beneaththe waters of the lake near the steep shore. A section,of about 50 feet in vertical height, has been laid open bya torrent, and the pebbles are seen to consist throughout ofrounded and angular fragments of granite, quartz, primaryslate, and red sandstone, but without any intermixture of thosevolcanic rocks which now abound in the neighbourhood. Partiallayers of lignite and pieces of wood are found in these beds,but no shells, a fact which probably indicates that testaceacould not live where the turbid waters of a stream were frequentlyhurrying down uprooted trees, together with sand andpebbles, or, that if they existed, they were triturated by thetransported rocks.There are other localities on the margin of the basin wherequartzose grits are found, composed of white sand boundtogether by a siliceous cement.See vol. i. chap. \\v. p. 2 19 ; and 2nd. Kd. p. 2,%.Ch. XVII.]LACUSTRINE STRATA AUVERGNE. 229Occasionally, when the grits rest on granite, as at Cavaliersbefore mentioned, and many other places, the separatecrystals of quartz, mica, and felspar, of the disintegratedgranite, are bound together again by the silex, so that thegranite seems regenerated in a new and even more solid form,and thus so gradual a passage may sometimes be traced betweena crystalline rock and one of mechanical origin, that wecan scarcely distinguish where one ends and the other begins.In the Puy de Jussat, and the neighbouring hill of LaRoche, are white quartzose grits, cemented into a sandstoneby calcareous matter, which is sometimes so abundant as toform imbedded nodules. These sometimes constitute spheroidalconcretions six feet in diameter, and pass into beds ofsolid limestone resembling the Italian travertins, or the depositsof mineral springs.In the hills above mentioned, we have the advantage of seeinga section continuously exposed for about 700 feet in thickness.At the bottom are foliated marls, white and green,about 400 feet thick, and above, resting on the marls, are thequartzose grits before mentioned with the associated travertins.This section is observed close to the confines of the basin, sothat the lake must here have been filled up near the shore withfine mud, before the coarse superincumbent sand was introduced.There are other cases where sand is seen below themarl.2. Red marl and sandstone. But the most remarkable of thearenaceous groups is a red sandstone and red marl, identical inall their characters with the secondary new red sandstone andmarl of England. In the latter, the red ground is sometimesvariegated with light greenish spots, and the same may be seenin its tertiary counterpart of fresh water origin at Coudes, onthe Allier. The marls are sometimes of a purplish-red colour,as at Champlain, and are accompanied by a reddish limestone,like the well-known ( cornerstone,' which is associated with theold red sandstone of English geologists. The red sandstoneand marl of Auvergne have evidently been derived from the230 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVII.degradation of gneiss and mica-schist, which are seen in situ onthe adjoining hills, decomposing into a soil very similar to thetertiary red sand and marl. We also find pebbles of gneiss,mica-schist, and quartz, in the coarser sandstones of thisgroup, clearly pointing to the parent rocks from which thesand and marl were derived. The red beds, although destituteof organic remains, pass upwards into strata containing Eocenefossils, and are certainly an integral part of the lacustrine formation.3. Green and white foliated marls. A great portion of whatwe term clay in ordinary language, consists of the same materialsas sandstone, but the component parts are in a finerstate of subdivision. The same primary rocks, therefore, ofAuvergne, which, by the partial degradation of their harderparts, gave rise to the quartzose grits and conglomerates beforementioned, would, by the reduction of the same into powder,and by the decomposition of their felspar, mica, and hornblende,produce aluminous clay, and, if a sufficient quantity ofcarbonate of lime was present, calcareous marl. This finesediment would naturally be carried out to a greater distancefrom the shore, as are the various finer marls now deposited inLake Superior *. And, as in the American lake, shingle andsand are annually amassed near the northern shores, so inAuvergne the grits and conglomerates before mentioned wereevidently formed near the borders.The entire thickness of these marls is unknown, but it certainlyexceeds, in some places, 700 feet. They are for themost part either light green or white, and usually calcareous.They are thinly foliated, a character which frequently arisesfrom the innumerable thin plates or scales of that small animalcalled cypress a genus which comprises several species, of whichsome are recent, and may be seen swimming rapidly throughthe waters of our stagnant pools and ditches. This animalresides within two small valves like those of a bivalve shell,and it mounts its integuments annually, which the vociferousSee vol. i. chap. xiii.Ch. XVII.} LACUSTRINE STRATA AUVERGNE. 231molluscs do not. This circumstance may partly explain thecountless myriads of the shells of cyprus which were shed inthe Eocene lakes, so as to give rise to divisions in the marlas thin as paper, and that too in stratified masses several hundredfeet thick. A more convincing proof of the tranquillityand clearness of the waters, and of the slow and gradual processby which the lake was filled up with fine mud, cannot bedesired. We may easily suppose that, while in the deep andcentral parts of the basin, this fine sediment was thrown down,gravel, sand, and rocky fragments were hurried into the lakenear the shore, and formed the group first described.Not far from Clermorit the green marls, containing the cyprusin abundance, approach to within a few yards of the granitewhich forms the borders of the basin. The annexed sectionoccurs at Champradelle, in a small ravine north of La petiteBarque, and above the bridge.No. 57.Vertical strata of marl near Clermont.A, Granite. C, Green marl, vertical and inclined.B, Space of 60 feet in which no section is seen. D. White marl.The occurrence of these marls so near the ancient marginmay be explained by considering that, at the bottom of theancient lake in spaces intermediate between the points whererivers and torrents entered, no coarse ingredients were deposited,but finer mud only was drifted by currents. Thevertically of some of the beds in the above section bears testimonyto considerable local disturbance subsequent to thedeposition of the marls, but such inclined and vertical strataare very rare.4. Limestone, travertin, fyc. Both the preceding members ofthe lacustrine deposit, the marls and grits, pass occasionally232 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVII.into limestone. Sometimes only concretionary nodules aboundin them ; but these, by an additional quantity of calcareousmatter, unite, as already noticed (p. 229), into regular beds.On each side of the basin of the Limagne, both on the eastat Gannat, and on the west at Vichy, a white oolitic limestoneis quarried. At Vichy, the oolite resembles our Bath stone inappearance and beauty, and, like it, is soft when first takenfrom the quarry, but soon hardens on exposure to the air. AtGannat, the stone contains land-shells and bones of quadrupeds,resembling those of the Paris gypsum. In several places inthe neighbourhood of Gannat, at Marplot among others, thisstone is divided by layers of clay.At Chart, in the hill of La Serre, the limestone is politic,and in this and other respects resembles the travertin of Tivoli.It presents the same combination, of a radiated and concentricstructure, and the coats of the different segments of spheroidshave the same undulating surface. (See wood-cut No. 5, chap,xii. vol. i.)Indusial limestone. There is another remarkable form offresh water limestone in Auvergne, called ( industrial,' from thecases, or injustice, of the larva? of Phryganea, great heaps ofwhich have been encrusted, as they lay, by hard travertin, andformed into a rock. We may often see, in our ponds, someof the living species of these insects, covered with smallfresh-water shells, which they have the power of fixing to theoutside of their tubular cases, in order, probably, to give themweight and strength. It appears that, in the same manner, alarge species which swarmed in the Eocene lakes of Auvergne,was accustomed to attach to its dwelling the shells of asmall spiral univalve of the genus Paludina. A hundred ofthese minute shells are sometimes seen arranged around onetube, part of the central cavity of which is still occasionallyempty, the rest being filled up with thin concentric layers oftravertin. When we consider that ten or twelve tubes arepacked within the compass of a cubic inch, and that somesingle strata of this limestone are six feet thick, and may beCh. Evil]LACUSTRINE Strata AUVERGNE. 233traced over a considerable area, we may form some idea of thecountless number of insects and mollusca which contributedtheir integuments and shells to compose this singularly constructedrock. It is unnecessary to suppose that the Phry-ganeae lived on the spots where their cases are now found ;they may have multiplied in the shallows near the margin ofthe lake,, and their buoyant cases may have been drifted by acurrent far into the deep water.The calcareous strata of the Limagne, like the other membersof the lacustrine formation, are for the most part horizontal,or inclined at a very slight angle, but instances of localdislocation are sometimes seen. At the town of Vichy, for example,the strata dip at an angle of between 30 and 40 degrees ;in an ancient quarry behind the convent of Celestina, and nearthe hot spring at the same place, the beds of limestone are seenfirst inclined at an angle of 80, and then vertical.5. Gypseous marls. More than 50 feet of thinly-laminatedgypseous marls, exactly resembling those in the hill of Montmartre,at Paris, are worked for gypsum at St. Remain, on theright bank of the Allier. They rest on a series of greenodoriferous marls which alternate with grits, the united thicknessof this inferior group being seen, in a vertical section onthe banks of the river, to exceed 250 feet.General arrangement and origin of the fresh-water formationsof Auvergne. The relations of the different groupsabove described cannot be learnt by the study of any one section,and he who sets out with the expectation of finding afixed order of succession may perhaps complain that the differentparts of the basin give contradictory results. Thearenaceous division, the marls and the limestone, may all beseen in some localities to alternate with each other, yet it canby no means be affirmed that there is no order of arrangement.The sands, sandstone, and conglomerate, constitute in generala littoral group ; the foliated white and green marls a contemporaneouscentral deposit, and the limestone is for the mostpart subordinate to the newer portions of the above groups.234 EOCENE PERIOD. [Gh. XVII.We never meet with calcareous rocks covered by a considerablethickness of quartzose sand or green marl, and the uppermostmarls and sands are more calcareous than the lower.From the resemblance of the Eocene limestones of Auvergneto the Italian travertins, we may conclude that they were derivedfrom the waters of mineral springs, such springs as nowexist in Auvergne, and which rising up through the graniteprecipitate travertin. They are sometimes thermal, but thischaracter is by no means constant.We suppose that, when the ancient lake of the Limagne firstbegan to be filled with sediment, no volcanic action had producedlava and scoriae on any part of the surface of Auvergne.No pebbles, therefore, of lava were transported into the lake,no fragments of volcanic rocks imbedded in the conglomerate.But at a later period, when a considerable thickness of sandstoneand marl had accumulated, eruptions broke out, and lavaand tuff were alternately deposited, at some spots, with the lacustrinestrata. Of this we shall give proofs in the 19th chapter.It is not improbable that cold and thermal springs, holdingdifferent mineral ingredients in solution, increased in numberduring the successive convulsions attending this developmentof volcanic agency, and thus carbonate and sulphate of lime,silex, and other minerals, were produced. Hence these mineralspredominate in the uppermost strata. The subterraneanmovements may then have continued until they altered therelative levels of the country and caused the waters of the lakesto be drained off, and the farther accumulation of regularfresh-water strata to cease. The occurrence of these convulsionsanterior to the Miocene epoch, and prolonged duringa succession of after-ages, may explain why no fresh-water formationsmore recent than the Eocene are now found in thiscountry.We may easily conceive a similar series of events to give riseto analogous results in any modern basin, such as that of LakeSuperior, for example, where numerous rivers and torrents arecarrying down the detritus of a chain of mountains into theCh. XVII.] LACUSTRINE STRATA PUY EN Delay. 235lake. The transported materials must be arranged accordingto their size and weight, the coarser near the shore, the finerat a greater distance from land; but in the gravelly andsandy beds of Lake Superior no pebbles of modern volcanicrocks can be included, since there are none of these at presentin the district. If the igneous action should break out in thatcountry and produce lava, scoriae, and thermal springs, thedeposition of gravel, sand, and marl, might still continue asbefore ; but in addition, there would then be an intermixtureof volcanic gravel and tuff, and rocks precipitated from thewaters of mineral springs.Although the fresh-water strata of the Limagne approachgenerally to a horizontal position, the proofs of local disturbanceare sufficiently numerous and violent to allow us to supposegreat changes of level since the Eocene period. We areunable to assign a northern barrier to the ancient lake, althoughwe can still trace its limits to the east, west, and south, wherethey were formed of bold granitic eminences. But we neednot be surprised at our inability to restore the physical geographyof the country after so great a series of volcanic eruptions.It is by no means improbable that one part of thedistrict may have been moved upwards bodily, while the othersremained at rest, or even suffered a movement of depression.Puy en Velay. In the department of the Haute Loire, afresh-water formation, very analogous to that of Auvergne, issituated in the basin of the Loire, and is exposed in the valleyin which stands the town of Le Puy. Since the deposition ofthe lacustrine strata, there have been so many volcanic eruptionsin this country, and such immense quantities of lava andscoriae poured out upon the surface, that the aqueous rocks arealmost buried and concealed. We are indebted, however, tothe researches of M. Bertrand de Doue for having distinctlyascertained the succession of strata, and we have had opportunitiesof verifying his observations during a visit to Le Puy.In this basin we find, as in Auvergne, two great divisions,consisting of grits and marls ; the former composed of quartzose236 EOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. XVII.grit, sometimes gratntifortii, reddish and mottled sands andconglomerates, all evidently derived from the degradationof granitic rocks, and resembling exceedingly the arenaceousgroup of the Limagne before described. This formation isalmost confined to the borders of the basin, and was evidentlya littoral deposit. The other member of the formation, themarls, are more or less calcareous, and are associated with limestoneand gypsum, which last is worked for agricultural uses,and exactly resembles that of Paris.The analogy in the mineral character of the Velay and Parisbasins is rendered more complete by the presence in both ofsilex in regular beds. In the limestone I found gyrogonites,or seeds of the Clara, of the same species as those most commonin the Paris basin; and M. Bertrand de Doue has discoveredthe bones of several mammiferous animals of the samegenera as those which characterize the basins of Auvergne andParis *. The shells also of this formation correspond specificallywith those of Eocene formations in other parts of France.The sand and conglomerate of the fresh-water basin ofVelay is entirely free from volcanic pebbles, agreeing in thisrespect with the analogous group of the Limagne ; but thefact is the more striking in Velay, because the masses of trachyte,limestone, and other igneous rock now abounding inthat country, have an aspect of extremely high antiquity, andconstitute a most prominent feature in the geological structureof the district. Yet the non-intermixture of volcanic productswith the lacustrine sediment, is just what we shouldexpect when we have ascertained that the imbedded organicremains of those strata are Eocene ; whereas the lavas belongin part, if not entirely, to the Miocene period f.CantaL Near Aurillac, in Cantal, another series of freshwaterstrata occurs, which resembles, in mineral character andorganic remains, those of Auvergne and Velay already described.The leading feature of this group, as distinguishedDescribe. Geognos. des Env.du Puy en Velay, 1823.t See above, p. 219, and below, Chap, six,Ch. XVII.]LACUSTRINE STRATA CANTAL. 237from the two former, is the immense abundance of silex associatedwith the calcareous marls and limestone, which last, likethe limestone of Auvergne, constitutes an upper member of thefresh-water series.The formation of the Cantal may be divided into twogroups, the lowest composed of gravel, sand, and clay, such asmight have been derived from the wearing down and decompositionof the granitic schists of the surrounding country ; theupper system consisting of siliceous and calcareous marls,contains subordinately gypsum, silex, and limestone depositssuch as the waters of springs charged with carbonate andsulphate of lime, and with silica, may have produced.Fresh-water limestone and flints resembling chalk. To theEnglish geologist, the most interesting feature in the Cantalis the resemblance of the fresh-water limestone, and its accompanyingflint, to our upper chalk, a resemblance which,like that of the red sandstone of Auvergne to our secondarynew red, 7 is the more important, as being calculated toput the student upon his guard against too implicit a relianceon lithological characters as tests of the relative ages ofrocks. When we approach Aurillac from the west, we passovergreat heathy plains, where the sterile mica-schist is barelycovered with vegetation. Near Ytrac, and between La Capelleand Scamp, we begin to see the surface strewed over withloose broken flints, some of them black in the interior, but witha white external coating, others stained with tints of yellow andred, and looking precisely like the flint gravel of our chalk districts.When heaps of this gravel have thus announced ourapproach to a new formation, we arrive at length at the escarpmentof the lacustrine beds. At the bottom of the hill we seestrata of clay and sand resting on mica-schist ; and above, inthe quarries of Belbet, Lesbos, and Cruel, a white limestone,in horizontal strata, the surface of which has been hollowedout into irregular furrows, since filled up with broken flint,marl, and vegetable mould. We recognize in these cavities,filled with dark mould and flint gravel, an exact counterpart to238 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVII.the appearances so frequently presented on the furrowed surfaceof our white chalk. Proceeding onwards from thesequarries, along a road made of the white limestone, which reflectsas glaring a light in the sun, as do our roads composed ofchalk, we reach, at length-in the neighbourhood of Aurillac,hills of limestone and calcareous marl, in horizontal strata,separated in some places by regular layers of flint in nodules,the coating of each nodule being of an opaque white colour,like the exterior of the flinty nodules of our chalk. In theselast the hard white substance has been ascertained to consist, insome instances, wholly of siliceous matter, and sometimes tocontain a small admixture of carbonate of lime *, and the analysisof those of the Cantal would probably give the sameresults. The Aurillac flints have precisely the appearance ofhaving separated from their matrix after the siliceous and calcareousmatter had been blended together. The calcareousmarl sometimes occupies small sinuous cavities in the flint,and the siliceous nodule, when detached, is often as irregularin form as those found in our chalk.By what means, then, can the geologist at once decidethat the limestone and silex of Aurillac are referable to anepoch entirely distinct from that of the English chalk ? It isnot by reference to position, for we can merely say of thelacustrine beds, as we should have been able to declare of thetrue chalk had it been present, that they overlie the graniticrocks of this part of France. It is by reference to the organicremains that we are able to pronounce the formation to belongto the Eocene tertiary period. Instead of the marine Alcyoniaof our cretaceous system, the silicified seed-vessels of the Clara,a plant which grows at the bottom of lakes, abound in theflints of Aurillac, both in those which are in situ and thoseforming the gravel. Instead of the Echinus and marine of the chalk, we find in the marls and limestones theshells of the Planorbis, and other lacustrine testacea, all ofPhillips, Geol Trans. First Series, vol. v. p. 22. Outlines of Geology,p. 95.Ch. XVII.] LACUSTRINE STRATA CANTAL. 239them, like the gyrogonites, agreeing specifically with species ofthe Eocene type.Proofs of the gradual deposition of marl. Some sections ofthe foliated marls in the valley of the Cer, near Aurillac, attest,in the most unequivocal manner, the extreme slowness withwhich the materials of the lacustrine series were amassed. Inthe hill of Barrat, for example, we find an assemblage of calcareousand siliceous marls, in which, for a depth of at least 60feet, the layers are so thin that thirty are sometimes containedin the thickness of an inch ; and when they are separated we seepreserved in each the flattened stems of Charge, or other plants,or sometimes myriads of small palatine and other freshwatershells. These minute foliations of the marl resembleprecisely some of the recent laminated beds of the Scotch marllakes, and when divided may be compared to the pages of abook, each containing a history of a certain period of thepast. The different layers may be grouped together inbeds from a foot to a foot and a half in thickness, which aredistinguished by differences of composition and colour, thelatter being white, green, and brown. Occasionally there is aparting layer of pure flint, or of black carbonaceous vegetablematter, one inch thick, or of white pulverulent marl. We findseveral hills in the neighbourhood of Aurillac composed of suchmaterials for the height of more than 200 feet from their base,the whole sometimes covered by rocky currents of trachytic orbasaltic lava *.Concluding remarks. So wonderfully minute are the separateparts of which some of the most massive geological monumentsare made up ! When we desire to classify, it is necessaryto contemplate entire groups of strata in the aggregate;but if we wish to understand the mode of their formation, and,to explain their origin, we must think only of the minutesubdivisions of which each mass is composed. We must bearin mind how many thin, leaf-like seams of matter, each con-lyelland Murchison, sur les Depots Lacus. Tertiary du Cantal, &c. Ann*des Sci, Nat., Oct. 1829.240 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVII,training the remains of myriads of testacea and plants, frequentlyenter into the composition of a single stratum, andhow great a succession of these strata unite to form a singlegroup ! We must remember, also, that volcanos like thePlomb da Cantal, which rises in the immediate neighbourhoodof Aurillac, are equally the result of successive accumulation,consisting of reiterated flows of lava and showers ofscoriae ; and we have shown, when we treated of the high antiquityof Etna, how many distinct lava-currents and heaps ofejected substances are required to make up one of the numerousconical envelopes whereof a volcano is composed. Lastly,we must not forget that continents and mountain chains,colossal as are their dimensions, are nothing more than anassemblage of many such igneous and aqueous groups, formedalso in succession during an indefinite lapse of ages, andsuperimposed upon each other.CHAPTER XVIII.Marine formations of the Eocene period Strata of the Paris basin how faranalogous to the lacustrine deposits of Central France Geographical connexionof the Limagne d' Auvergne and the Paris basin Chain of lakes in the Eoceneperiod Classification of groups in the Paris basin Observations of M. C.Prevost Sketch of the different subdivisions of the Paris basin Contemporaneousmarine and fresh-water strata Abundance of Cerithia in theCalcaire grossier Upper marine formation indicates a subsidence Part ofthe Calcaire grossier destroyed when the upper marine strata originated'All the Parisian groups belong to one great epoch Microscopic shellsBones of quadrupeds in gypsum In what manner entombed Number ofspecies All extinct Strata with and without organic remains alternatingOur knowledge of the physical geography, fauna, and flora of the Eocene periodconsiderable Concluding remarks.EOCENE FORMATIONS-PARIS BASIN.THE geologist who has studied the lacustrine formations describedin the last chapter cannot enter the tract usually termedthe Paris Basin ' without immediately recognizing a greatvariety of rocks with which his eye has already become familiar.The green and white marls of Auvergne,, Cantal, andVelay, again present themselves, together with limestones andquartzose grits, siliceous and gypseous marls, nodules andlayers of flint, and saccharoid gypsum ; lastly, in addition to allthis identity of mineral character, we find an assemblage of thesame species of fossil animals and plants.When we consider the geographical proximity of the twodistricts, we are the more prepared to ascribe this correspondencein the mineral composition of these groups to a combinationof similar circumstances in the same era. From the map(No. 56, p. 226) in the last chapter, it will be seen that theunited waters of the Allier and Loire, after descending fromthe valleys occupied by the fresh-water formations of CentralFrance, flow on till they reach the southern extremity of whatis called the Paris basin. M. Melius d'Halloy long agoVOL. III. RE O C i: N E PERIOD. [Ch. XVII I ,suggested the very natural idea that there existed formerly achain of lakes, reaching from the highest part of the centralmountain-group of France, and terminating in the basin ofParis, which he supposes was at that time an arm of the sea.Notwithstanding the great changes which the physical geographyof that part of France must since have undergone, wemay easily conceive that many of the principal features in theconfiguration of the country may have remained unchanged,or but slightly modified. Hills of volcanic matter have indeedbeen formed since the Eocene formations were accumulated,and the levels of large tracts have been altered in relation tothe sea ; lakes have been drained, and a gulf of the sea turnedinto dry land, but many of the reciprocal relations of thedifferent parts of the surface may still remain the same. Thewaters which flowed from the granitic heights into the Eocenelakes may now descend in the same manner into valleys oncethe basins of those lakes. Let us, for example, suppose thegreat Canadian lakes,, and the gulf into which their watersare discharged, to be elevated and laid dry by subterraneanmovements. The whole hydrographical basin of the St. Lawrencemight be upraised during these convulsions, yet thatriver might continue, after so extraordinary a revolution, todrain the same elevated regions, and might continue to conveyits waters in the same direction from the interior of the continentto the Atlantic. Instead of traversing the lakes, it wouldhold its course through deposits of lacustrine sand and shellymarl, such as we know to be now forming in Lakes Superiorand Erie; and these fresh-water strata would occupy the siteand bear testimony to the pristine existence of the lakes. Marinestrata might also be brought into view in the space where aninlet of the sea, like the estuary of the St. Lawrence, had oncereceived the continental waters ; and in such formations wemight, discover shells of lacustrine and iluviatile species intermingledwith marine' tcstncca and zoophytes.Subdivisions of sfrafu In the J'nnH btisin. The area whichhas been called the Paris basin is about one hundred andCh. XVIII.]PARIS BASIN,eighty miles in its greatest length from north-east to southwest,and about ninety miles from east to west. This spacemay be described as a depression in the chalk (see diagramNo. 2, p. 16), which has been filled up by alternating groupsof marine and fresh-water strata. MM. Cuvier and Bringsattempted in 1811 to distinguish five different formations,and to arrange them in the following order, beginning with thelowest :plastic clay.Lignite.First sandstone.2. First marine formation Calcaire grossier.siliceous limestone.Gypsum, with bones of animals.Fresh-water marls.f Gypseous marine marls.4. Second marine formation. . . . .< Upper marine sands and sandstones.I Upper marine marls and limestones.r Siliceous millstone, without shells.5. Third fresh-water formation. < Siliceous millstone, with shells.'Upper fresh-water marls.These formations were supposed to have been deposited insuccession upon the chalk ; and it was imagined that the watersof the ocean had been by turns admitted into and excludedfrom the same region. But the subsequent investigations ofNo. 58. No. 59.M. Alex.Bronguiart M. Constant Prevost.2i4 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch, XVIII.several geologists, especially of M. Constant Provost *, haveled to great modifications in the theoretical views entertainedrespecting the order in which the several groups were formed ;and it now appears that the formations Nos. I, 2, and 3, ofthe table of MM. Cuvier and Brongniart, instead of havingoriginated one after the other, are divisible into four nearlycontemporaneous groups.Superposition of different formations in the Paris basin.A comparison of the two accompanying diagrams will enablethe reader to comprehend at a glance the different relationswhich the several sets of strata bear to each other, accordingto the original, as well as the more modern classification.We shall now proceed to lay before the reader a brief sketchof the several sets of strata referred to in the above systems.Immediately upon the chalk a layer of broken chalk flints,often cemented into a breccia by siliceous sand, is very commonlyfound. These flints probably indicate the action of thesea upon reefs of chalk when a portion of that rock had emergedand before the regular tertiary beds were superimposed. Tothis partial layer no reference is made in the annexed sections.Plastic clay and sand. Upon this flinty stratum, or, if itbe wanting, upon the chalk itself, rests frequently a deposit ofclay and lignite (No. 1 of the above tables). It is composedof fresh-water shells and drift-wood, and was, at first., regardedas a proof that the Paris basin had originally been filled withfresh water. I3ut it has since been shown that this group isnot only of very partial extent, but is by no means restrictedto a fixed place in the series ; for it alternates with the marinecalcairc grosser (No. 2 of the tables), and is repeated in thevery middle of that limestone at Veaugirard, Pagneux, andother places, where the same Planorbes, Paluclinae, and Limneroccur-j-. M. Desnoyers pointed out to me a section in thesuburbs of Paris, laid open in 1S2D, where a similar intercalationwas seen in a still higher part of the calcairc grosser.Build in cli-s Sci. di hi Sue. Philip May, 1S'25, p. 74.| Provost, Sur k-s Submersions Iterative*; &c. Mom. do la Sue. duellist. Nut.do Paris, thine iv. p. 71.Ch. Xvii]PARIS BASIN. 245These observations relieve us from the difficulty of seeking acause why vegetable matter, and certain species of fresh-watershells and a particular kind of clay, was first introduced intothe basin, and why the same space was subsequently usurpedby the sea. A minute examination of the phenomena leads ussimply to infer, that a river charged with argillaceous sedimententered a bay of the sea and drifted down, from time to time,fresh water shells and wood.Calcaire grosser. The calcaire grossier above alluded to, iscomposed of a coarse limestone, often passing into sand, such asmay perhaps have been derived from the aqueous degradationof a chalk country. It contains by far the greater number ofthe fossil shells which characterize the Paris basin. No lessthan 400 distinct species have been derived from a single localitynear Grignon. They are imbedded in a calcareous sand,chiefly formed of comminuted shells, in which, nevertheless,individuals in a perfect state of preservation, both of marine,terrestrial, and fresh water species, are mingled together*and were evidently transported from a distance. Some of themarine shells may have lived on the spot, but the Cyclostomaand Limnea must have been brought there by rivers andcurrents, and the quantity of triturated shells implies considerablemovement in the waters.Nothing is more remarkable in this assemblage of fossiltestacea than the astonishing proportion of species referable tothe genus Cerithium *. There occur no less than 137 speciesof this genus in the Paris basin, and almost all of them in thecalcaire grossier. Now the living testacea of this genus inhabitthe sea near the mouths of rivers, where the waters are brackish,so that their abundance in the marine strata of the Paris basin isin perfect harmony with the hypothesis before advanced, that ariver flowed into the gulf, and gave rise to the beds of clay andlignite before mentioned. But there are ample data for inferringthat the gulf was supplied with fresh water by more thanone river, for while the calcaire grossier occupies the northernSee the tables of M. Desliayes, Appendix I., p. 26.246 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVIII.part of the Paris basin, another contemporaneous deposit, offresh-water origin, appears at the southern extremity.Calcaire siliceux. This group (No. 3 of the foregoingtables) is a compact siliceous limestone,, which resembles aprecipitate from the waters of mineral springs. It is, for themost part, devoid of organic remains, but in some places it containsfresh-water and land species, and never any marine fossils.The siliceous limestone and the calcaire grossier occupy distinctparts of the basin, the one attaining its fullest development inthose places where the other is of slight thickness. They alsoalternate with each other towards the centre of the basin , as atSerge and Ony, and there are even points where the two rocksare so blended together, that portions of each may be seen inhand specimens. Thus in the same bed, at Triel, we havethe compact fresh-water limestone, characterized by its Limner,mingled with the coarse marine limestone through which thesmall multilocular shell, called millionaire, is dispersed in countlessnumbers. These microscopic testacea are also accompaniedby Cerithia and other shells of the calcaire grossier. Itis very extraordinary that, although in this instance both kindsof sediment must have been thrown down together on the samespot, each still contains its own peculiar organic remains *.These facts lead irresistibly to the conclusion, that while tothe north, where the bay was probably open to the sea, a marinelimestone was formed, another deposit of fresh-waterorigin was introduced to the southward, or at the head of thebay. For it appears that during the Eocene period, as now,the ocean was to the north, and the continent, where the greatlakes existed, to the south. From the latter region we maysuppose a body of fresh water to have descended charged withcarbonate of lime and silica, the water being perhaps in sufficientvolume to convert the upper end of the bay into freshwater,like some of the gulfs of the Baltic.Gypsum and marls. The next group to be considered isM. Prevost has pointed out this limestone to me, both in situ at Triel, and inhand specimens in his cabinet.Ch. XVIII.] PARIS BASIN. 247the gypsum, and the white and green marls, subdivisionsof No. 3 of the table of Cuvier and Brongniart. Thesewere once supposed to be entirely subsequent in origin to thetwo groups already considered ; but M. Prevost has pointedout that in some localities they alternate repeatedly with thecalcaire siliceux, and in others with some of the upper membersof the calcaire grossier. The gypsum, with its associatedmarls and limestone, is in greatest force towards the centreof the basin, where the two groups before mentioned are lessfully developed ; and M. Prevost infers, that while those twoprincipal deposits were gradually in progress, the one towardsthe north, and the other towards the south, a river descendingfrom the east may have brought down the gypseous and marlysediment.It must be admitted, as highly probable, that a bay ornarrow sea, 180 miles in length, would receive, at more pointsthan one, the waters of the adjoining continent ; at the sametime we must observe, that if the gypsum and associated greenand white marls of Montmartre were derived from an hydrographicalbasin distinct from that of the southern chain of lakesbefore adverted to, this basin must nevertheless have beenplaced under circumstances extremely similar ; for the identityof the rocks of Velay and Auvergne with the fresh-water groupof Montmartre, is such as can scarcely be appreciated by geologistswho have not carefully examined the structure of boththese countries.Some of our readers may think that the view above given ofthe arrangement of four different sets of strata in the Parisbasin is far more obscure and complicated than that first presentedto them in the system of MM. Cuvier and Brongniart.We admit that the relations of the several sets of strata are lesssimple than the first observers supposed, being much more analogousto those exhibited by the lacustrine groups of CentralFrance before described.The simultaneous deposition of two or more groups of stratain one basin, some of them fresh-water and others marine, must248 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVIII.always produce very complex results ; but in proportion as it ismore difficult in these cases to discover any fixed order ofsuperposition in the associated mineral masses, so also is it moreeasy to explain the manner of their origin and to reconcile theirrelations to the agency of known causes. Instead of the successiveirruptions and retreats of the sea, and changes in thechemical nature of the fluid and other speculations of theearlier geologists, we are now simply called upon to imagine agulf, into one extremity of which the sea entered, and at theother a large river, while other streams may have flowed in atdifferent points, whereby an indefinite number of alternationsof marine and fresh-water beds were occasioned.Second or Upper marine group. The next group, calledthe second or Upper marine formation (No. 4 of the tables),consists in its lower division of green marls which alternatewith the freshwater beds of gypsum and marl last described.Above this division the products of the sea exclusively predominate,the beds being chiefly formed of micaceous sand,80 feet or more in thickness, surmounted by beds of sandstonewith scarcely any limestone. The summits of a great manyplatforms and hills in the Paris basin consist of this uppermarine series, but the group is much more limited in extentthan the calcaire grossier. Although we fully agree withM. C. Prevost that the alternation of the various marine andfresh-water formations before described admit of a satisfactoryexplanation without supposing different retreats and subsequentreturns of the sea, yet we think a subsidence of the soil maybest account for the position of the upper marine sands.Oscillations of level may have occurred whereby for a time thesea and a river prevailed each in their turn, until at length amore considerable sinking down of part of the basin took place,whereby a tract previously occupied by fresh water was convertedinto a sea of moderate depth.In one part of the Paris basin there are decisive proofs thatduring the Eocene period, and before the upper marine sandwas formed, parts j>f the calcaire grossier were exposed to theCh. XVIII.] PARIS BASIN. 249action of denuding causes. At Valmondois, for example, adeposit of the upper marine sandstone is found *, in whichrolled blocks of the calcaire grossier with its peculiar fossils, andfragments of a limestone resembling the calcaire siliceux, occur.These calcareous blocks are rolled and pierced by perforatingshells belonging to no less than fifteen distinct species, and theyare imbedded, as well as worn shells washed out from the calcairegrossier, with the ordinary fossils of the upper marinesand.We have seen that the same earthquake in Cutch could raiseone part of the delta of the Indus and depress another, andcause the river to cut a passage through the upraised strata andcarry down the materials removed from the new channel intothe sea. All these changes, therefore, might happen within ashort interval of time between the deposition of two sets ofstrata in the same delta f-It is not improbable, then, that the same convulsions whichcaused one part of the Paris basin to sink down so as to let inthe sea upon the area previously covered by gypsum and freshwatermarl, may have lifted up the calcaire grossier and thesiliceous limestone, so that they might be acted upon by thewaves, and fragments of them swept down into the contiguoussea, there to be drilled by boring testamentis observed that the older marine formation at Lion isnow raised 300 metres above the sea, whereas the upper marinesands never attain half that elevation. Such may possiblyhave been the relative altitude of the two groups when thenewest of them was deposited.Third fresh-water formation. We have still to consideranother formation, the third fresh-water group (No. 5 of thepreceding tables). It consists of marls inter stratified with bedsof flint and layers of flinty nodules. One set of siliceous layersis destitute of organic remains, the other replete with them.M. Deshayes, Memoires de la Soc. d'Hist. Nat. de Paris, torn. i. p. 243.The sandstone is called, by mistake, goes marin inferior, instead of superior, towhich last the author has since ascertained it to belong.t Vol. i. 2d Edit. chap, xxiii, - 3 vol. il 1st Edit. chap. xvi.250 EOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. XVIII,Gyrogonites, or fossil seed-vessels of charge, are found abundantlyin these strata, and all the animal and vegetable remainsagree well with the hypothesis, that after the gulf or estuaryhad been silted up with the sand of the upper marine formation,a great number of marshes and shallow lakes existed, likethose which frequently overspread the newest parts of a delta.These lakes were fed by rivers or springs which contained, inchemical solution or mechanical suspension, such kinds of sedimentas we have already seen to have been deposited in thelakes of Central France during the Eocene period.The Parisian groups all Eocene. Having now given a rapidsketch of the different groups of the Paris basin, we mayobserve generally that they all belong to the Eocene epoch,although the entire series must doubtless have required animmense lapse of ages for its accumulation. The shells of thedifferent fresh-water groups, constituting at once some of thelowest and uppermost members of the series, are nearly allreferable to the same species, and the discordance between themarine testacea of the calcaire grossier and the upper marinesands is very inconsiderable.A curious observation has been made by M. Deshayes, inreference to the changes which one species, the Cardium porushas undergone during the long period of its existence inthe Paris basin. Different varieties of this artium are characteristicof different strata. In the oldest sand of the Sois-sonnets(a marine formation underlying the regular beds of thecalcaire grossier), this shell acquires but a small volume, andhas many peculiarities which disappear in the lowest bedsof the calcaire grossier. In these the shell attains its full size,and many peculiarities of form, which are again modified in theuppermost beds of the calcaire grossier, and these last charactersare preserved throughout the whole of the * uppermarine ' series *.Microscopic shells. In some parts of the calcaire grossiermicroscopic shells are very abundant, and of distinct speciesCoc[uilles characterise. des Terrains, 1831.Ch, Xvii] MAMMIFEROUS REMAINS IN GYPSUM. 251from those before mentioned of the older Pliocene beds of Italy.We may remind those readers who are not familiar with theseminute fossil bodies, that they belong to the order Cephalopoda,the animals of which are most free in their movements, and mostadvanced in their organization, of all the mollusca. The multilocularcephalopods have been separated, by d'Orbigny, intotwo subdivisions : first, those having a syphon or internal tubeconnecting the different chambers, such as the nautilus andammonite; and, secondly, those without a syphon, to whichthe microscopic species now under consideration belong. Theyare often in an excellent state of preservation, and their formsare singularly different from those of the larger testacea. Wehave given a plate of some of these, from unpublished drawingsby M. Deshayes, who has carefully selected the mostremarkable types of form.The natural size of each species figured in plate 4, is indicatedby minute points, to which we call the reader's attention,as they might be easily overlooked.Bones of quadrupeds in gypsum.-~We have already consideredthe position of the gypsum which occurs in the formof a saccharoid rock in the hill of Montmartre at Paris, andother central parts of the basin. At the base of that hill itis seen distinctly to alternate with soft marly beds of the calcairegrossier, in which carinthia and other marine shells occur.But the great mass of gypsum may be considered as a purelyfresh water deposit, containing land and fluviatile shells, togetherwith fragments of palm-wood, and great numbers ofskeletons of quadrupeds and birds, an assemblage of organicremains which has given great celebrity to the Paris basin. Thebones of fresh water fish, also, and of crocodiles, and many landand fluviatile reptiles occur in this rock. The skeletons of mammaliaare usually isolated, often entire, the most delicate extremitiesbeing preserved as if the carcasses clothed with their fleshand skin had been floated down soon after death, and while theywere still swoln by the gases generated by their first decomposition.The few accompanying shells are of those light kinds252 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVIII.which frequently float on the surface of rivers together withwood.M. Prevost has, therefore, suggested that a river may haveswept away the bodies of animals, and the plants which livedon its borders, or in the lakes which it traversed, and may havecarried them down into the centre of the gulf into which flowedthe waters impregnated with sulphate of lime. We know thatthe Fiume Also in Sicily enters the sea so charged with varioussalts that the thirsty cattle refuse to drink of it. A stream ofsulphureous water, as white as milk, descends into the sea fromthe volcanic mountain of Guienne, on the east of Java ; and agreat body of hot water, charged with sulphuric acid, rusheddown from the same on one occasion, and inundated a largetract of country, destroying, by its noxious properties, all thevegetation*. In like manner the Pusanibio, or ' Vinegarriver ' of Colombia, which rises at the foot of Purace, an extinctvolcano 7500 feet above the level of the sea, is stronglyimpregnated with sulphuric and muriatic acid, and with oxideof iron. We may easily suppose the waters of such streams tohave properties noxious to marine animals, and in this mannerwe may explain the entire absence of marine remains in thefossiliferous gypsum -f-.There are no pebbles or coarse sand in the gypsum, a circumstancewhich agrees well with the hypothesis that thesebeds were precipitated from water holding sulphate of lime insolution, and floating the remains of different animals. Thebones of land quadrupeds however are not confined entirely tothe fresh-water formation to which the gypsum belongs, forthe remains of a Palseotherium, together with some fresh-watershells have been found in a marine stratum belonging to thecalcaire grossier at Beauchamp.In the gypsum the remains of about fifty species of quadrupedshave been found all extinct and nearly four-fifthsLeyden Magaz. poor Wetensch Const en Lett., partie v. cahier i.p, 71. Citedby Rozet, Journ. de Geologic, torn. i. p. 43.f M. C. Prevost, Submersions Operatives, &c. Note 23.Ch. XVIII.] PARIS BASIN GYPSUM. 253of them belonging to a division of the order Pachydermata,which is now only represented by four living species, namelyby three tapirs and the daman of the Cape. A few carnivorousanimals are associated, among which are a species offox and bennet. Of the Rodentia, a dormouse and a squirrel ;of the Insectivora, a bat ; and of the Marsupialia, (an ordernow confined to America, Australia, and some contiguousislands,) an opossum, have been discovered.Of birds about ten species have been ascertained, the skeletonsof some of which are entire. None of them are referableto existing species *. The same remark applies to the fish,according to MM. Cuvier and Agassiz, as also to the reptiles.Among the last are crocodiles and tortoises of the generaEms and Trionix.The tribe of land quadrupeds most abundant in this formationis such as now inhabits alluvial plains and marshes andthe banks of rivers and lakes, a class most exposed to suffer byriver inundations. Whether the disproportion of carnivorousanimals can be ascribed to this cause, or whether they werecomparatively small in number and dimensions, as in the indigenousfauna of Australia, when first known to Europeans, isa point on which it would be rash perhaps to offer an opinionin the present state of our knowledge.We have no reason to be surprised that all the species of vertebratedanimals hitherto observed are extinct, when we recollectthat out of 1122 species of fossil testacea obtained from the Parisbasin, 38 only can be identified with species now living. Wehave more than once adverted to the fact that extinct mammaliaare often found associated with assemblages of recentshells, a fact from which we have inferred the inferior durationof species in mammalia as compared to the testacea ; and it isnot improbable that the higher order of animals in general maymore readily become extinct than the marine molluscs. Someof the thirty-eight species of testacea above alluded to, as havingsurvived from the Eocene period to our own times, have now aCuvier, Oss. Foss. torn. iii. p. 255.254 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch, XVIII.vide geographical range, as, for example, Lucina divaricata,and are therefore fitted to exist under a great variety of circumstances.On the other hand, the great proportion of theEocene marine testacea which have become extinct sufficientlydemonstrates that the loss of species has been due to generallaws, and that a sudden catastrophe, such as the invasion of awhole continent by the sea a cause which could only annihilatethe terrestrial and fresh water tribes, is an hypothesiswholly inadequate to account for the phenomenon.Strata with and without organic remains alternating. Betweenthe gypsum of the Paris basin and the upper marinesands a thin bed of oysters is found, which is spread over aremarkably wide area. From the manner in which they lie, itis inferred that they did not grow on the spot, but that somecurrent swept them away from a bed of oysters formed in someother part of the bay. The strata of sand which immediatelyrepose on the\>yster-bed are quite destitute of organic remains ;and nothing is more common in the Paris basin and inother formations, than alternations of shelly beds with othersentirely devoid of them. The temporary extinction andrenewal of animal life at successive periods have been inferredfrom such phenomena, which may nevertheless be explained,as M. Prevost justly remarks, without appealing to any suchextraordinary revolutions in the state of the animate creation.A current one day scoops out a channel in a bed of shelly sandand mud, and the next day, by a slight alteration of its course,ceases to prey upon tie same bank. It may then becomecharged with sand unmixed with shells, derived from some dune,or brought down by a river. In the course of ages an indefinitenumber of transitions from shelly strata to those withoutshells may thus be caused.Concluding remarks. It will be seen by our observationson Auvergne and other parts of Central France, and on thedistrict round Paris, that geologists have already gained a considerableinsight into the state of the physical geography ofpart of Europe during the Eocene period. We can point toCh, XVIII.]PARIS BASIN. 255some districts where lakes and rivers then existed, and to thesite of some of the lands encircling those lakes, and to theposition of a great bay of the sea, into which their surpluswaters were discharged. We can also show, as we shall endeavourto explain in the next chapter, the points where somevolcanic eruptions took place. We have acquired much informationrespecting the quadrupeds which inhabited the landat that period, and concerning the reptiles, fishes, and testaceawhich swarmed in the waters of lakes and rivers ; and we havea collection of the marine Eocene shells more complete than hasyet been obtained from any existing sea of equal extent inEurope. Nor are the contemporary fossil plants altogetherunknown to us, which, like the animals, are of extinct species,and indicate a warmer climate than that now prevailing in thesame latitudes.When we reflect on the tranquil state of the earth impliedby some of the lacustrine and marine deposits of this age, andconsider the fullness of all the different classes of the animalkingdom, as deduced from the study of the fossil remains, wearenaturally led to conclude, that the earth was at that periodin a perfectly settled state, and already fitted for the habitationof man.The heat of European latitudes during the Eocene perioddoes not seem to have been superior if equal to that now experiencedbetween the tropics; some living species of molluscousanimals both of the land, the lake, and the sea, existedwhen the strata of the Paris basin were formed, and the contrastin the organization of the various tribes of Eoceneanimals when compared to those now co-existing with man,although striking, is not, perhaps, so great as between theliving Australian and European types. At the same time wearefully aware that we cannot reason with any confidence onthe capability of our own or any other contemporary species toexist under circumstances so different as those which mightbe caused by an entirely new distribution of land and sea ;and we know that in the earlier tertiary periods the physicalEOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XVIII.geography of the northern hemisphere was very distinct. Ourinability to account for the atmospheric and other latentcauses, which often give rise to the most destructive epidemics,proves the extent of our ignorance of the entire assemblage ofconditions requisite for the existence of any one species onthe globe.CHAPTER XIX.Volcanic rocks of the Eocene period Auvergne Igneous formations associatedwith lacustrine strata Hill of Gergovia Eruptions in Central France at successiveperiods Mont Dor an extinct volcano Velay Plomb du CantalTrain of minor volcanos stretching from Auvergne to the Vivarais MontsDomes Puy de Come Puy Rouge Ravines excavated through lava Currentsof lava at different heights Subjacent alluviums of distinct ages Themore modern lavas of Central France may belong to the Miocene period Theintegrity of the cones not inconsistent with this opinion No eruptions duringthe historical era Division of volcanos into ante-diluvian and post-diluvian inadmissibleTheories respecting the effects of the Flood considered Hypothesisof a partial flood Of a universal deluge Theory of Dr. Buckland ascontroverted by Dr. Fleming Recapitulation.EOCENE VOLCANIC ROCKS.WHEN we treated in the seventeenth chapter of the lacustrinedeposits of Central France, we purposely omitted to give adetailed account of the associated volcanic rocks, to which wenow recall the attention of the reader. (See the Map, p. 226.)We stated that, in the arenaceous and pebbly group of thelacustrine basins of Auvergne, Cantal, and Velay, no volcanicpebbles had ever been detected, although massive piles ofigneous rocks are now found in the immediate vicinity. Asthis observation has been confirmed by minute research, we arewarranted in inferring, as we before explained, that the volcaniceruptions had not commenced when the older subdivisions ofthe fresh-water groups originated.In Cantal and Velay we believe no decisive proofs have yetbeen brought to light that any of the igneous out-bursts happenedduring the deposition of the fresh-water strata ; but therecan be no doubt that in Auvergne some volcanic explosionstook place before the drainage of the lakes, and at a time whenthe Eocene species of animals and plants still flourished. Weshall first advert to these proofs as relating to the historyVOL. III. SECCEXK PERIOD. [Ch. XIX.of the period under consideration, and shall then proceed toshow that there arc in the same country volcanic rocks ofmuch newer date, sonic of which appear to be referable to theMiocene era.Volcanic rocks associated with Lacustrine auvergne. Thefirst locality to which we shall call the reader's attention is Pontclu Chateau near term on tj where a section is seen in a precipiceon the right bank of the river Allier *. Beds of volcanic tuffalternate with a fresh-water limestone, which is in some placespure, but in others spotted with fragments of volcanic matter,as if it were deposited while showers of sand and scoria-wereprojected from a neighbouring vent-J-. This limestone containsthe Ili'lix Raymond and other shells of Eocene species. It isimmaterial to our present argument whether the volcanic sandwas showered down from above, or drifted to the spot by ariver, for the latter opinion must presuppose the country tohave been covered with volcanic ejections during the Eoceneperiod.Another example occurs in the Puy che Marmot, nearV eyes, where a fresh-water marl alternates with volcanic tuffcontaining Eocene shells. The tuff or breccia in this localityis precisely such as is known to result from volcanic ashesfalling into water, and subsiding together with ejected fragmentsof marl and other stratified rocks. These tuffs andmarls are highly inclined, and traversed by a thick vein ofbasalt which, as it rises in the hill, divides into two branches.Geryoma. The hill of Gergovia near Claremont affords athird example. We agree with MM. Dufrenoy and Jobertthat there is no alternation here of lava and fresh-water strata,in the manner supposed by some other observers J; but theposition and contents of some of the mil's prove them to havebeen derived from volcanic eruptions which occurred duringthe deposition of the Eocene formations.Tins place, and all the others in Auvcr^nt 1 . mentioned in this chapter, wereexamined by the author, in company with Mr. Murcliison, in 182S.} See Scrope's Central France, p. -1. J Scrope ; ibid. p. 7,Ch.XlX.]VOLCANIC ROCKS AUVERGNE.The bottom of the hill consists of slightly inclined beds ofwhite and greenish marls, more than three hundred feet inthickness, which are intersected by a dike of basalt, which maybestudied in the ravine above the village of Merdogne. Thedike here cuts through the marly strata at a considerable angle,No. 60.Basaltic capping.White and yellow marl.Hill of Gergovia.producing, in general, great alteration and confusion in them forsome distance from the point of contact. Above the white andgreen marls, a series of beds of limestone and marl, containingfresh water shells, are seen to alternate with volcanic tuff. Inthe lowest part of this division, beds of pure marl alternatewith compact fissile tuff resembling some of the subaqueoustuffs of Italy and Sicily called peperinos. Occasionally fragmentsof scoriae are visible in this rock. Still higher is seenanother group of some thickness, consisting exclusively of tuff,upon which lie other marly strata intermixed with volcanicmatter.There are many points in Auvergne where igneous rockshave been forced by subsequent injection through clays andmarly limestones, in such a manner that the whole has becomeblended in one confused and brecciated mass, between whichand the basalt there is sometimes no very distinct line of demarcation.In the cavities of such mixed rocks we often findchalcedony and crystals of mesotype, stilbite and arragonite. ToS 3260 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIX.formations of this class may belong some of the breccias immediatelyadjoining the dike in the hill of Gergovia ; but itcannot be contended that the volcanic sand and scoriae inter-stratifiedwith the marls and limestones in the upper part ofthat hill were introduced, like the dike, subsequently by intrusionfrom below. They must have been thrown down likesediment from water, andean only have resulted from igneousaction which was going on contemporaneously with the depositionof the lacustrine strata.The reader will bear in mind that this conclusion agrees wellwith the proofs, adverted to in the seventeenth chapter, of theabundance of silex, travertin and gypsum precipitated whenthe upper lacustrine strata were formed : for these rocks, aswe have pointed out, are such as the waters of mineral andthermal springs might generate.The igneous products above mentioned, as associated withthe lacustrine strata, form the lowest members of the greatseries of volcanic rocks of Auvergne, Cantal, and Velay, whichrepose for the most part on the granitic mountains (see Map,above, p. 226). There was evidently a long succession oferuptions, beginning with those of the Eocene period, andending, so far as we can yet infer from the evidence derivedfrom fossil remains, with those of the Miocene epoch. Theoldest part of the two principal volcanic masses of Mont Dorand the Plomb du Cantal may perhaps belong to the Eoceneperiod, the newer portion of the same mountains to the Miocene; just as Etna commenced its operations during the newerPliocene era, and has continued them down to the Recentepoch, and still retains its energy undiminished. There aresome parts of the Mont Mezen, in Velay, which are perhapsof the same antiquity as the oldest parts of Mont Dor. Besidesthese ancient rocks, of which the lavas are in a greatmeasure trachytic, there are many minor cones in CentralFrance, for the most part of posterior origin, which extend fromAuvergne, in a direction north-west and south-east, throughVelay, into the Vivarais, where they are seen in the basin ofCh. XIX.]AUVERGNE MONT DOR. 261the Ardeche. This volcanic line does not pass by the Plombdu Cantal; it was formed, as nearly as we can conjecture inthe present imperfect state of our knowledge, during the Mioceneperiod; but there may probably be found, among thesecones and their accompanying lavas, rocks of every intermediateage between the oldest and newest volcanic formationsof Central France.We shall first give a brief description of the Mont Dor andthe Plomb du Cantal, and then pass on to the train of newercones, examining the evidence at present obtained respectingtheir relative ages, and the light which they throw on thesuccessive formation of alluviums and on the excavation ofvalleys.Mont Dor. Mont Dor, the most conspicuous of the volcanicmasses of Auvergne, rests immediately on the graniticrocks standing apart from the fresh water strata *. Thisvolcano rises suddenly to the height of several thousand feetabove the surrounding platform, and retains the shape of aflattened and somewhat irregular cone, all the sides slopingmore or less rapidly, until their inclination is gradually lost inthe high plain around. It is composed of layers of scoriae,pumice-stones, and their fine detritus, inter stratified with bedsof trachyte and basalt, which descend often in uninterruptedcurrents, till they reach and spread themselves around thebase of the mountain f . Conglomerates also, composed ofangular and rounded fragments of igneous rocks, are observedto alternate with the above ; and the various masses are seento dip off from the central axis, and to lie parallel to thesloping flanks of the great cone, in the same manner as wehave described when treating of Etna.The summit of the mountain terminates in seven or eightrocky peaks, where no regular crater can be traced, but wherewe may easily imagine one to have existed which may havebeen shattered by earthquakes, and have suffered degradationby aqueous causes. Originally, perhaps, like the highestSee the Map, p. 226. t Scrope's Central France, p. 98.262 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch.XlX.crater of Etna, it may have formed an insignificant feature inthe great pile, and may frequently have been destroyed andrenovated.We cannot at present determine the age of the great massof Mont Dor, because no organic remains have yet been foundin the tuffs, except impressions of the leaves of trees of speciesnot determined. Some of the lowest parts of the greatmass are formed of white pumiceous tuffs, in which animalremains may perhaps be one day found. In the mean time,we conclude that Mont Dor had no existence when the gritsand conglomerates of the Limagne, which contain no volcanicmaterials, were formed ; but some of the earliest eruptionsmay perhaps have been contemporary with those described inthe commencement of this chapter. To the latest of theseeruptions, on the other hand, we refer those trachytic brecciasof Mont Perrier which were shown in the sixteenth chapter, p.217, to alternate with Miocene alluviums.Velay. The observations of M. Bertrand de Done have notyet established that any of the most ancient volcanos of Velaywere in action during the Eocene period, although it is veryprobable that some of them may have been contemporaneouswith the oldest of the Auvergne lavas. There are beds ofgravel in Velay, as in Auvergne, covered by lava at differentheights above the channels of the existing rivers. In thehighest and most ancient of these alluviums the pebbles areexclusively of granitic rocks; but in the newer, which arefound at lower levels, they contain an intermixture of volcanicsubstances. We have already shown, in the sixteenth chapter,that, in the volcanic ejections and alluviums covered by thelavas of Velay, the bones of animals of Miocene species havebeen found, in which respect the phenomena accord perfectlywith those of Auvergne.Plomb du Cantal. In regard to the age of the igneousrocks of the Cantal we are still less informed, and at presentcan merely affirm that they overlie the Eocene lacustrine strataof that country. The Plomb du Cantal (see Map, wood-cutCh. XIX.] MINOR VOLCANOS OF AUVERGNE. 263No. 56) is a conical mass, which has evidently been formed,like the cone of Etna, by a long series of eruptions. It iscomposed of trachytic and basaltic lavas, tuffs, and conglomerates,or breccias, forming a mountain several thousand feetin height. This volcano evidently broke out precisely on thesite of the lacustrine deposit before described (Chapter xvii),which had accumulated in a depression of a tract composed ofmicaceous schist. In the breccias, even to the very summitof the mountain, we find ejected masses of the fresh-waterbeds, and sometimes fragments of flint, containing Eoceneshells. Deep valleys radiate in all directions from the centralheights of the mountain, especially those of the Cer and Jour-anne,which are more than twenty miles in length, and lay openthe geological structure of the mountain. No alternationof lavas with undisturbed Eocene strata have been observed,nor any tuffs containing fresh-water shells ; on the northernside of the Plomb du Cantal, at La Vissiere, near Murat, wehave pointed out on the Map (wood-cut, p. 226) a spot wherefresh-water limestone and marl are seen covered by a thicknessof about 800 feet of volcanic rock. Shifts are here seen in thestrata of limestone and marl *.Although it appears that the lavas of the Cantal are morerecent than the fresh-water formation of that country, it doesnot follow that they may not belong to the Eocene period.The lake may possibly have been drained by the earthquakeswhich preceded or accompanied the first eruptions, but theEocene animals and plants may have continued to exist for along series of ages, while the cone went on increasing indimensions.Train of minor Volcanos. We shall next consider thoseminor volcanos before alluded to, which stretch in a long rangefrom Auvergne to the Vivarais, and which appear for themost part to be of newer origin than the mountains abovedescribed. They have been thrown up in a great number ofisolated points, and much resemble those scattered over theSee Lyell and Murchison, Ann, des Sci. Nat., Oct. 1829.2G4EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIX.Phlegraean fields and the flanks of Etna. They have givenrise chiefly to currents of basaltic lava, whereas those of MontDor and the Cantal are in great part trachytic. There areperhaps about three hundred of these minor cones in CentralFrance ; but a part of them only occur in Auvergne, wheresome few are found at the bottom of valleys excavated throughthe more ancient lavas of Mont Dor, as the Puy do Margaret,for example, whence issues a current of lava which, flowinginto the bed of the river Couze, gave rise to the lake of chamber.Here the more ancient columnar basalts of Auvergne areseen forming the upper portion of the precipices which boundthe valley.But the greater part of the minor cones of Auvergne areplaced upon the granitic platform, where they form an irregularridge about eighteen miles in length and two in breadth.They arc usually truncated at the summit, where the crateris often preserved entire, the lava having issued from the baseof the hill. But frequently the crater is broken down on oneside, where the lava has flowed out. The hills are composedof loose scoriae, blocks of lava, lapilli, and puzzuolana, withfragments of trachyte and granite.The lavas may be often traced from the crater to the nearestvalley, where they usurp the channel of the river, which hasoften excavated a deep ravine through the basalt. We havethus an opportunity of contrasting the enormous degradationwhich the solid and massive rock has suffered by aqueouserosion and the integrity of the cone of sand and ashes whichhas, in the mean time, remained uninjured on the neighbouringplatform, where it was placed beyond the reach of the power ofrunning water.Puis dc Come. We may mention the Puy de Come andits lava current, near Clermont, as one of the numerous illustrationsof the phenomenon here alluded to. This conicalhill rises from the granitic platform at an angle of about 40degrees to the height of more than S(K) feet. Its summit presentstwo distinct craters, one of them with a vertical depth ofCh. XIX.] RAVINES EXCAVATED THROUGH LAVA.250 feet. A stream of lava takes its rise at the western baseof the hill, instead of issuing from either crater, and descendsthe granitic slope towards the present site of the town of PontGibaud. Thence it pours in a broad sheet down a steepdeclivity into the valley of the Sioule, filling the ancient river-channelfor the distance of more than a mile. The Sioule,thus dispossessed of its bed, has worked out a fresh one betweenthe lava and the granite of its western bank ; and the excavationhas disclosed, in one spot, a wall of columnar basalt aboutfifty feet high *.The excavation of the ravine is still in progress, every wintersome columns of basalt being undermined and carried downthe channel of the river, and in the course of a few miles rolledto sand and pebbles. Meanwhile the cone of Come remainsstationary, its loose materials being protected by a dense vegetation,and the hill standing on a ridge not commanded byany higher ground whence floods of rain-water may descend.Puy Rouge. At another point, farther down the course ofthe Sioule, we find a second illustration of the same phenomenonin the Puy Rouge, a conical hill to the north ofthe village of Pranal. The cone is composed entirely ofred and black scoriae, tuff, and volcanic bombs. On its westernside there is a worn-down crater whence a powerful streamof lava has issued and flowed into the valley of the Sioule.The river has since excavated a ravine through the lava andsubjacent gneiss, to the depth of 400 feet.On the upper part of the precipice forming the left side ofthis ravine, we see a great mass of black and red scoriaceouslava ; below this a thin bed of gravel, evidently an ancientriver-bed, now at an elevation of 50 feet above the channel ofthe Sioule. The gravel again rests upon gneiss, which hasbeen eroded to the depth of 50 feet f. It is quite evident inthis case that, while the basalt was gradually undermined andScrope's Central France, p. 60, and plate.f See Lyell and Murchisou on the Excavation of Valleys, Edin. New PhilJourn., July 1829.206 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIX.carried away by the force of running water, the cone whencethe lava issued escaped destruction, because it stood upon aplatform of gneiss several hundred feet above the level of thevalley in which the force of running water was exerted.It is needless to multiply examples or the Vivarais wouldsupply many others equally striking. Among many we mayinstance the cone of Jaujac, and its lava current *, which is acounterpart of that near Pranal last mentioned.Lavas and Alluviums of different Ages, We have seen thaton the flanks of Etna, since the commencement of the presentcentury, several currents of lava have flowed at the bottom ofthe Val del Bove, at the foot of precipices formed of moreancient lavas and tuff's. So we find in Auvergne that somestreams of melted matter have flowed in valleys, the sides ofwhich consist partly of older lavas. These are often seencapping the hills in broad sheets, resting sometimes on granite,sometimes on fresh-water strata.Many^of the earlier lavas of Auvergne have flowed out uponthe platform of granite before all the existing valleys had beenexcavated ; others again spread themselves in broad sheets overthe horizontal lacustrine deposit, when these had been coveredwith gravel, probably soon after the drainage of the lakes.Great vicissitudes in the physical geography of the countrymust have taken place since the flowing of these ancient lavas ;and it is evident that the changes were gradual and successive,caused probably by the united agency of runningwater and subterranean movements. We frequently observeone mass of lava capping a hill, and a second at a lower elevation,forming a terrace on the side of a valley ; or sometimesoccupying the bed of a river.It is a most interesting fact that we almost invariably findin these cases beds of gravel underlying the successive currentsof lava, as in Catalonia before described (pp. 18 ( ,), 190). Occasionally,when the highest platform of lava is 70i) or 800 feetabove the lowest, we cannot fail to be struck with the won'tSee Scrape's Central Trance, plate 14.Ch. XIX.]ALLUVIUMS OF DIFFERENT AGES.tearful alterations effected in the drainage of the country sincethe first current flowed ; for the most elevated alluviums mustNo. 61.Lavas of Auvergne resting on alluviums of different ages.originally have been accumulated in the lowest levels of thethen existing surface. As some geologists have referredalmost all the superficial gravels to one era, and have supposedthem to be the result of one sudden catastrophe, the phenomenaof Auvergne above alluded to are very important.The flows of volcanic matter have preserved portions of thesurface in the state in which they existed at successive periods,so that it is impossible to confound together the alluviums ofdifferent ages. The reader will see at once by reference tothe wood-cut (No. 61) that a considerable interval of timeoccurred between the formation of the uppermost bed of graveland that next below it ; during which interval the uppermostlava was poured out and a valley excavated, at the bottom ofwhich the second bed of gravel accumulated. In like mannerthe pouring out of a second current of lava, and a fartherdeepening of the valley, took place between the date of thesecond-gravel and that of the modern alluvium which now fillsthe channel of the river *.For localities in Central France where lavas or sheets of basalt repose onalluviums at different elevations above the present valleys, consult the works ofMM. Le Grand aussi, Montrose, Raymond, Scrope, Bertrand de Done, Croizet,Jobert; Bullet, and others.2(38 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIX."When rivers arc dispossessed of their channels hy lava, theyusually flow between the mass of lava and one side of theoriginal valley. They then eat out a passage, partly throughthe volcanic and partly through the older formation ; but asthe soft tertiary marls in Auvergne give way more readilythan the basalt, it is usually at the expense of the former thatthe enlarging and deepening of the new valley is effected, andall the remaining lava is then left on one side, in the mannerrepresented in the above wood-cut.A(jc of the more modern lavas. The only organic remainsfound as yet in the ancient alluviums appear to belong tothe Miocene period ; but we have heard of none discoveredin the gravel underlying the newest lavas, those whichcither occupy the channels of the existing rivers or arc veryslightly elevated above them. We think it not improbablethat even these may be of Miocene date, although the conjecturewill appear extremely rash to some who arc awarethat the cones and craters whence the lavas issue, are oftenas fresh in their aspect as the majority of the cones of the forestzone of Etna.The brim of the crater of the Puy de Pariou, near Clermont,is so sharp, and has been so little blunted by time, that it scarcelyaffords room to stand upon. This and other cones in anequally remarkable state of integrity have stood, we conceive,uninjured, not in spifc of their loose porous nature, as somegeologists might think, but in consequence of it. No rills cancollect where all the rain is instantly absorbed by the sandand scoria: 1 , as we have shown to be the case on Etna (secabove, p. 102), and nothing but a waterspout breaking directlyupon the Puy de Pariou could carry away a portion of thehill, so long as it is not rent by earthquakes or engulphed.Atlrmjrf to divide Vulwnios into ante-diluvian and post-silurian.The opinions above expressed arc entirely at variancewith the doctrine's of those writers who have endeavoured toarrange all the volcanic cones of Europe under two divisions.Ch. XIX.] AGE OF Auvergne VOLCANOS. 2G9those of ante-diluvian and those of post-diluvian origin. Tothe former they attribute such hills of sand and scoriae asexhibit on their surface evident signs of aqueous denudation ;to the fetter, such as betray no marks of having been exposedto such aqueous action. According to this classification almostall the minor cones of Central France must be called postdiluvian5 although, if we receive this term in its ordinaryacceptation as denoting posteriority of date to the Noachiandeluge., we are forced to suppose that all the volcanic eruptionsoccurred within a period of little more than twenty centuries,or between the era of the flood, which happened about 4000years ago, and the earliest historical records handed downto us respecting the former state of Central France. Dr.Daubeny has justly observed, that had any of these Frenchvolcanos been in a state of activity in the age of Julius Caesar,that general, who encamped upon the plains of Auvergne, andlaid siege to its principal city, (Gergovia, near Clermont,)could hardly have failed to notice them. Had there beeneven any record of their existence in the time of Pliny orSidonius Apollinaris,, the one would scarcely have omittedto make mention of it in his Natural History, nor the other tointroduce some allusion to it among the descriptions of thishis native province. This poet's residence was on the bordersof the Lake Aidan, which owed its very existence to the dammingup of a river by one of the most modern lava currents*.The ruins of several Roman bridges and of the Romanbaths at Royal confirm the conclusion that no sensiblealteration has taken place in the physical geography of thedistrict, not even in the chasms excavated through the newestlavas since ages historically remote. We have no data atpresent for presuming that any one of the Auvergne cones hasbeen produced within the last 4000 or 5000 years; and theDaubeny on Volcanos ; p. 14.270 Eocene PERIOD. [Ch. XIX.same may be said of those of Velay. Until the bones of menor articles of human workmanship are found buried undersome of their lavas, instead of the remains of extinct animals,which alone have hitherto been met with, we shall consider itprobable, as we before hinted, that the latest of the volcaniceruptions may have occurred during the Miocene period.Supposed effects of the Flood.They who have used the terms ante-diluvian and postdiluvianin the manner above adverted to, proceed on theassumption that there arc clear and unequivocal marks of thepassage of a general flood over all parts of the surface of theglobe. It had long been a question among the learned, evenbefore the commencement of geological researches, whether thedeluge of the Scriptures was universal in reference to the wholesurface of the globe, or only so with respect to that portion ofit which was then inhabited by man. If the latter interpretationbe admissible, the reader will have seen, in former parts ofthis work, that there are two classes of phenomena in the configurationof the earth's surface, which might enable us toaccount for such an event. First, extensive lakes elevated abovethe level of the ocean ; secondly, large tracts of dry land depressedbelow that level. When there is an immense lake, havingits surface, like Lake Superior, raised GOO feet above the levelof the sea, the waters may be suddenly let loose by the rendingor sinking down of the barrier during earthquakes, andhercbv a region as extensive as the valley of the Mississippi,inhabited by a population of several millions, might be deluged*. On the other hand, there may be a country placedbeneath the mean level of the ocean, as we have shown to be thecase with part of Asia, and such a region must be entirely laidunder water should the tract which separates it from the oceanSee vol. i. p. {;!. and Second Edition, p. 101.f \ ul. ii. p. 1G;J ; and Sccund Edition, p. IG'J.Ch. XIX.] DILUVIAL THEORIES. 271be fissured or depressed to a certain depth. The great cavityof western Asia is 18,000 square leagues in area, and is occupiedby a considerable population. The lowest parts, surroundingthe Caspian Sea, are 300 feet below the level of theEuxine, here, therefore, the diluvial waters might overflowthe summits of hills rising 300 feet above the level of the plain ;and if depressions still more profound existed at any formertime in Asia, the tops of still loftier mountains may have beencovered by a flood.But it is undeniable, that the great majority of the oldercommentators have held the deluge, according to the briefaccount of the event given by Moses, to have consisted of arise of waters over the whole earth, by which the summits ofthe loftiest mountains on the globe were submerged. Manyhave indulged in speculations concerning the instruments employedto bring about the grand cataclysm ; and there has beena great division of opinion as to the effects which it might beexpected to have produced on the surface of the earth. Accordingto one school, of which De Luc in former times, andmore recently Dr. Buckland, have been zealous and eloquentsupporters, the passage of the flood worked a considerablealteration in the external configuration of our continents. Bythe last-mentioned writer the deluge is represented as a violentand transient rush of waters which tore up the soil to a greatdepth, excavated valleys, gave rise to immense beds of shingle,carried fragments of rock and gravel from one point to another,and, during its advance and retreat, strewed the valleys, andeven the tops of many hills, with alluvium *.But we agree with Dr. Fleming f, that in the narrative ofMoses there are no terms employed that indicate the impetuousrushing of the waters, either as they rose or when they re-Buckland, Reliquiae Diluvianse.f See a Memoir by the Rev. John Fleming, D. D , on the Geological Deluge,Edin. Phil. Journ., vol. xiv. p. 205, whose opinions were reviewed by the author inOct. 1827, in an article in the Quarterly Review, No, Lxxii. p. 481.2/2 EOCENE PERIOD, [Ch. XIX.treated, upon the restraining of the rain and the passing of awind over the earth. On the contrary, the olive-branch,brought back by the dove, seems as clear an indication to usthat the vegetation was not destroyed,, as it was then to Noahthat the dry land was about to appear.We have been led with great reluctance into this digression,in the hope of relieving the minds of some of our readers fromgroundless apprehension respecting the bearing of many of theviews advocated in this work. They have been in the habit ofregarding the diluvial theory above controverted as alonecapable of affording an explanation of geological phenomena inaccordance with Scripture,, and they may have felt disapprobationat our attempt to prove, in a former chapter *, that theminor volcanos on the flanks of Etna may, some of them, bemore than 10,000 years old. IIow^ they would immediatelyask, could they have escaped the denuding force of a diluvialrush of waters? The same objection may have presenteditself when we quoted, with so much respect, the opinion of adistinguished botanist, that some living specimens of the Baobabtree of Africa, or the Taxodium of Mexico, may be fivethousand years old f . Our readers may also have beenastonished at the high antiquity assigned by us to the greaterpart of the European alluviums, and the many differentages to which we refer them J, as they may have been taughtto consider the whole as the result of one recent and simultaneousinundation. Lastly, they may have felt some disappointmentat observing, that we attach no value whateverto the hypothesis of M. Else dc Beaumont, adopted by ProfessorSedgwick, that the sudden elevation of mountain-chainshas been followed again and again by mighty waves desolatingwhole regions of the earth ,' a phenomenon which,according to the last-mentioned of these writers, has ' takenChap. viii. p. 100. f Sec above, p. ( J9.I 1 J . H7. P. 101.Ch. XIX.] RECAPITULATION. 273away all anterior incredibility from the fact of a recentdeluge.'For our own part, we have always considered the flood, ifwe are required to admit its universality in the strictest senseof the term, as a preternatural event far beyond the reach ofphilosophical inquiry, whether as to the secondary causes employedto produce it, or the effects most likely to result fromit. At the same time, it is evident that they who are desirousof pointing out the coincidence of geological phenomena withthe occurrence of such a general catastrophe, must neglect noone of the circumstances enumerated in the Mosaic history,least of all so remarkable a fact as that the olive remainedstanding while the waters were abating.Recapitulation. We shall now briefly recapitulate some ofthe principal conclusions to which we have been led by an examinationof the volcanic districts of Central France.1st. Some of the volcanic eruptions of Auvergne took placeduring the Eocene period, others at an era long subsequent,probably during the Miocene period.2ndly. There are no proofs as yet discovered that the mostrecent of the volcanos of Auvergne and Velay are subsequent tothe Miocene period, the integrity of many cones and craters notopposing any sound objection to the opinion that they may beof indefinite antiquity.sadly. There are alluviums in Auvergne of very differentages, some of them belonging to the Miocene period. Manyof these have been covered by lava-currents which have beenpoured out in succession while the excavation of valleys was inprogress.4thly. There are a multitude of cones in Auvergne, Velay,and the Vivarais, which have never been subjected to the actionof a violent rush of waters capable of modifying considerablythe surface of the earth.5thly. If, therefore, the Mosaic deluge be represented asuniversal, and as having exercised a violent denuding force, allAnniv, Address to the Geol. Soc., Feb. 18th, 1831.VOL. III. T274 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XIX.these cones, several hundred in number, must be post-silurian.Gthly. But since the beffinninsf of the historical era, or the/ o oinvasion of Gaul by Julius Caesar, the volcanic action in Auvergnehas been dormant, and there is nothing to countenancethe idea that, between the date usually assigned to the Mosaicdeluge and the earliest traditional and historical records of CentralFrance (a period of little more than twenty centuries), allor any one of the more entire cones of loose sconce were thrownup,Lastly, it is the opinion of some writers, that the earth'ssurface underwent no great modification at the era of the Mosaicdeluge, and that the strictest interpretation of the scripturalnarrative docs not warrant us in expecting to find any geologicalmonuments of the catastrophe,, an opinion which is consistentwith the preservation of the volcanic cones,, however high theirantiquity.CHAPTER XX.Eocene formations, continued Basin of the Cotentin, or Valognes RennesBasin of Belgium, or the Netherlands Aix in Provence Fossil insectsTertiary strata of England Basins of London and Hampshire Differentgroups Plastic clay and sand London clay Bagshot sand Fresh-waterstrata of the Isle of Wight Palseotherium and other fossil mammalia of BinsteadEnglish Eocene strata conformable to chalk Outliers on the elevatedparts of the chalk Inferences drawn from their occurrence Sketch of atheory of the origin of the English tertiary strata.HAVING in the last three chapters treated of the Eoceneformations of different parts of France, we now propose toexamine those which are found in the south-eastern division ofEngland; but before we pass from the continent to our ownisland, we may briefly advert to several other spots whereEocene deposits have been observed. Their geographical positionwill be found delineated on the annexed map *.MAP OF THE PRINCIPAL TERTIARY BASINS OF THE EOCENEPERIOD.No. 62.Eocene formations.li&'-xl Primary rocks and HIstrata older than the carboniferous series.N.B. The space left blank is occupied by secondary formations, from the old redsandstone to the chalk inclusive.This map is copied from one given by M. Desnoyers, Mem. de la Soc.d'Hist,Nat. de Paris, 1825, pi. 9 j compiled partly from that author's observations, andpartly from Mr, Webster's map, Geol, Trans., 1st series, vol. ii. plate 10.T 2276 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XX.Basin of the Cotcntin, or Valocjnes. The strata in theenvirons of ValogneSj in the department of La Blanche, consistchiefly of a coarse limestone resembling the calcaire grossier ofParis; of which M. Discovers has given an elaborate description.It is occasionally covered with a compact fresh-waterlimestone alternating with fresh-water marls. In these Eocenestrata more than 300 species of fossil shells have been discovered,almost all identical with species of the Paris basin. (SeeTables, Appendix I.) Superimposed upon the Eocene strataof this basin is a newer marine deposit, extending over alimited area, the fossils of which agree with those of the Falunsof the Loire*. Here, therefore, the geologist has an opportunityof observing the superposition of the Miocene depositsupon those of the rage of the Paris basin.Rennet. Several small patches, also, of marine strata, havebeen found by M. Desnoyers, in the neighbourhood of Rennes,which are characterised by Eocene fossils and repose on ancientrocks, as will be seen in the map.'Baal n of Belgium, or the Netherlands. The greater part ofthe tertiary formations of the Low Countries consist of clayand sand, much resembling those of the basin of London, afterwardsto be described. The fossil shells, also, arc of the samespecies, 4-0 of which will be found referred to by M. Deshayes,in the tables, Appendix I.Air, in Prince. The tertiary strata of Aix and Euveauin Provence are of great thickness and extent, the lower membersbeing remarkable for containing coal grit and beds ofcompact limestone, such as we only find in England inancient secondary groups. Yet these strata are for the mostpart of fresh-water origin, and contain several species of Eoceneshells, together with many which are peculiar to this basin. Itwould require a fuller comparison than has yet been made ofthe fossil remains of Aix and Euveau, before we can determinewith accuracy the relative age of that formation. Some of theplants seem to agree with those of the Paris basin, while manyDesnoycrSj Mem. che lu Sue. d'llibt. Nut. du Paris, 1825.Ch. XX.] ENGLISH EOCENE FORMATIONS. 277of the insects have been supposed identical with species nowliving*. These insects have been almost exclusively procuredfrom a thin bed of grey calcareous mar], which passes into anargillaceous limestone found in the quarries of gypsum nearAix. The rock in which they are imbedded is so thinly laminatedthat there are sometimes more than 70 layers in thethickness of an inch. The insects are for the most part inan extraordinary state of preservation, and an impression oftheir form is seen both on the upper and under laminae, as in thecase of the Monte Bolca fishes. M. Marcel de Serres enumerates62 genera belonging chiefly to the orders Litera,Hemiptera and Cleopatra. On reviewing a collection broughtfrom Aix, Mr. Curtis observes that they are all of Europeanforms and most of them referable to existing genera f. Withthe single exception of an Hydrobius, none of the species areaquatic. The antennae, tarsi, and trophy are generally veryobscure, or distorted, yet in a few the claws are visible, and thesculpture, and even some degree of local colouring, are preserved.The nerves of the wings, in almost all the Litera,are perfectly distinct, and even the pubescence on the head ofone of them. Several of the beetles have the wings extendedbeyond the elytra, as if they had made an effort to escape byflying, or had fallen into the water while on the wings.BASINS OF LONDON AND HAMPSHIRE.The reader will see in the small map above given (No. 62,,p. 275,) the position of the two districts usually called thebasins of London and Hampshire, to which the Eocene formationsof England are confined. These tracts are boundedby rising grounds composed of chalk, except where the seaintervenes. That the chalk passes beneath the tertiary strata,we can not only infer from geological data, but can prove bynumerous artificial sections at points where wells have beensunk, or brings made through the overlying beds. TheM. Marcel de Serres, Geog. des Ter. Tertiary du Midi de la France,t Murchison and Lyell. Ed. New Phil. Journ., Oct. 1829.J Curtis, ibid., where figures of some of the insects are given.278 EOCENE PERIOD, [Ch. XX.Eocene deposits are chiefly marine, and have generally beendivided into three groups: 1st, the Plastic clay and sand,which is the lowest group;' 2dly, the London clay; and,Sadly, the Bagshot sand. Of all these the mineral compositionis very simple, for they consist almost entirely of clay,sand, and shingle, the great mass of clay being in the middle,and the upper and lower members of the series being morearenaceous.Plastic clay and sand. The lowest formation, which sometimesattains a thickness of from 400 to 500 feet, consists principallyof an indefinite number of beds of sand, shingle, clay,and loam, irregularly alternating, some of the clay being usedin potteries, in reference to which the name of Plastic clay hasbeen given to the whole formation. The beds of shingle arecomposed of perfectly rolled chalk flints with here and theresmall pebbles of quartz. Heaps of these materials appearsometimes to have remained for a long time covered by a tranquilsea. Dr. Buckland mentions that he observed a largepebble in part of this formation at Bromley, to which five fullgrownoyster-shells were affixed, in such a manner as to showthat they had commenced their first growth upon h } and remainedattached through life *.In some of the associated clays and sand, perfect marine shellsare met with, which are of the same species as those of theLondon clay. The line of separation, indeed, between thesuperincumbent blue clay last alluded to, and the Plastic clayand sand, is quite arbitrary, as any geologist may be convincedwho examines the celebrated section in Alum Bay, in the Isleof Wight f , where a distinct alternation of the two groups isobservable, each marked with their most characteristic peculiarities.In the midst of the sands of the lower series a massof clay occurs 200 feet thick, containing septaria, and repletewith the usual fossils of the neighbourhood of London J.Geol. Trans., First Series, vol. iv. p. 300.J- See Mr. Webster's Memoir, Geol. Trans,, vol. ii., First Series, and his Lettersin Sir H. Englefield's Isle of Wight.I See Mr, Webster's sections, plate 11. Geol. Trans., vol. ii., First Series.Ch. XX.]LONDON CLAY. 279The arenaceous beds are chiefly laid open on the confines ofthe basins of London and Hampshire, in following which wediscover at many places great beds of perfectly rounded flints.Of this description, on the southern borders of the basin ofLondon, are the hills of Comb Hurst and the Addington hills,which form a ridge stretching from Blockhead to Croydon.Here they have much the appearance of banks of sand andshingle formed near the shores of the tertiary sea ; but whetherthey were really of littoral origin cannot be determined forwant of a sufficient number of sections which might enable usto compare the tertiary strata at the edges with those in thecentral parts of each basin.We have ample opportunities in the basin of Paris of examiningsteep cliffs of hard rock which bound many of the valleys,and innumerable excavations have been made for building-stone,limestone, and gypsum; but when we attempt to obtain aconnected view of any considerable part of the tertiary seriesin the basin of London, we are almost entirely limited to asingle line of coast-section ; for in the interior the regular bedsare much concealed by an alluvial covering of flint gravelspread alike over the summits and gentle slopes of the hills,and over the bottoms of the valleys.Organic remains are extremely scarce in the Plastic claybut when any shells occur they are of Eocene species. Vegetableimpressions and fossil wood sometimes occur, and evenbeds of lignite, but none of the species of plants have, we believe,as yet been ascertained.London clay. This formation consists of a bluish or blackishclay, sometimes passing into a calcareous marl, rarely into asolid rock. Its thickness is very great, sometimes exceeding500 feet *. It contains many layers of ovate or flattish massesof argillaceous limestone, which, in their interior, are generallytraversed in various directions by cracks, partially or whollyfilled by calcareous spar. These masses, called septaria, aresometimes continued through a thickness of 200 feet f.Con, and Phil. Outlines of Geol., p. 33. t Outlines of Geol., p. 27.280 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XX.A great number of the marine shells of this clay have beenidentified with those of the Paris basin, and are mentioned bynamein Appendix I. It is quite evident, therefore, that thesetwo formations belong to the same epoch.No remains of terrestrial mammalia have as yet been foundin this clay, but the occurrence of bones and skeletons of crocodilesand turtles prove, as Mr. Conybeare justly remarks,the existence of neighbouring dry land. The shores, at least,of some islands were accessible, whither these creatures mayhave resorted to lay their eggs. In like manner, we may inferthe contiguity of land from the immense number of ligneousseed-vessels of plants, some of them resembling the cocoa-nut,and other spices of tropical regions, which have been foundfossil in great profusion in the Isle of Sheppey. Such is theabundance of these fruits, that they have been supposed tobelong to several hundred distinct species of plants,Bag shot sand. The third and uppermost group, usuallytermed the Bagshot sand, rests conformably upon the Londonclay, and consists of siliceous sand and sandstone devoid oforganic remains, with some thin deposits of marl associated.From these marls a few marine shells have been obtained whichare in an imperfect state, but appear to belong to Eocenespecies common to the Paris basin *.Fresh-water strata of the Hampshire basin. In the northernpart of the Isle of Wight, and part of the opposite coast ofHampshire, fresh-water strata occur resting on the Londonclay. They are composed chiefly of calcareous and argillaceousmarls, inter stratified with some thick beds of siliceoussand, and a few layers of limestone sometimes slightly siliceous.The marls are often green, and bear a considerable resemblanceto the green marls of Auvergne and the Paris basin. Theshells and gyrogonites also agree specifically with some of thosemost common in the French deposits. Mr. Webster, who firstdescribed the fresh-water formation of Hampshire, divided it intoan upper and lower series separated by intervening beds of marineWarburton, Geol. Trans., vol. i. Second Series.Ch. XX.] MAMMIFEROXJS REMAINS ISLE OF WIGHT. 281origin. There are undoubtedly certain intercalated strata, bothin the Isle of Wight and coast of Hampshire, marked by aslight intermixture of marine and fresh-water shells, sufficientto imply a temporary return of the sea, before and after whichthe waters of a lake, or rather, perhaps, some large river, prevailed*. The united thickness of the fresh-water and intercalatedupper marine beds, exposed in a vertical precipice inHeaden Hill, in the Isle of Wight, is about 400 feet, themarine series appearing about half way up in the cliff.Eocene mammiferom remains. Very perfect remains of tortoisesand the teeth of crocodiles have been procured from thefresh water strata, but a still more interesting discovery hasrecently been made. The bones of mammalia correspondingto those of the celebrated gypsum of Paris, have been disinterredat Binstead, near Hyde, in the Isle of Wight. In theancient quarries near this town a limestone, belonging to thelower fresh water formation, is worked for building. Solidbeds alternate with marls, wherein a tooth of an Anoplotherium,and two teeth of the genus Palaeotherium, were found. Theseremains were accompanied not only by several other fragmentsof the bones of Pachydermata (chiefly in a rolled and injuredstate), but also by the jaw of a new species of Ruminant,apparently closely allied to the genus Roscius f. Mr. T. Allanof Edinburgh had several years before found the tooth of anAnoplotherium at the same spot, and when we alluded to thisin our first volume J, we threw out some doubts as to theauthenticity of his specimen, stating at the same time, that inthe Binstead beds, if anywhere in our island, we should expectsuch remains to be found. Although we carried our scepticismtoo far, it has been attended with good results, for it inducedMr. Pratt to visit Binstead, where he verified and extended thediscovery of Mr. Allan.See Memoirs of Mr. Webster, Geol. Trans., vol. ii., First Series, vol. i. part i.,Second Series, and Englefield's Isle of Wight. Professor Sedgwick, Anil, ofPhil., 1822, and Lyell, Geol. Trans., vol. ii. Second Series.t Pratt, Proceedings of Geol. Soc., No. 18, p. 239.{ First Edition, p. 153.232 EOCENE PERIOD, [Ch. XX,These newer strata of the Isle of Wight bear a certain degreeof resemblance to some of the green marls and limestonesin the Paris basin, yet, as a whole, no formations can be moredissimilar in mineral character than the Eocene deposits ofEngland and Paris. In our own island the tertiary strata aremore exclusively marine, and it might be said that the Parisianseries differs chiefly from that of London in the very points inwhich it agrees with the formations of Auvergne, Cantal, andVelay. The tertiary formations of England are, in fact, almostexclusively of mechanical origin, and their composition bespeaksthe absence of those mineral and thermal waters towhich we have attributed the origin of the compact and siliceouslimestones, the gypsum, and beds of pure flint, commonto the Paris basin and Central France.English tertiary strata conformable to the chalk. TheBritishEocene strata are nearly conformable to the chalk on whichthey rest, being horizontal where the strata of the chalk arehorizontal, and vertical where they are vertical. On the otherhand, there are evident signs that the surface of the chalk had,in many places, been furrowed by the action of the waves andcurrents, before the Plastic clay and its sands were superimposed.In the quarries near Rochester and Gravesend, forinstance, fine examples are seen of deep indentations on thesurface of the chalk, into which sand, together with rolled andangular pieces of chalk-flint, have been swept *. But theseappearances may be referred to the action of water when thechalk began to emerge during the Eocene period, and they byno means warrant the conclusion, that the chalk had undergoneany considerable change of position before the tertiary stratawere superimposed.In this respect there is a marked difference between thereciprocal relations of our secondary and tertiary rocks andthose which exist between the same groups throughout thegreater part of the continent, especially in the neighbourhoodof mountain-chains. Near the base, for example, of the Alps,Con, and Phil., Outlines of Geol., p. 62.Ch, XX.] TERTIARY OUTLIERS ON CHALK. 283Apennines, and Pyrenees, we find the newer formations reposingunconformably upon the truncated edges of the older beds, andit is clear that, in many cases, the latter had been subjected toa complicated series of movements before the more modernstrata were formed. The latter rise only to a certain heighton the flanks of the mountains which usually tower abovethem, and are recognized at once by the geologist as havingbeen upraised into land when the tertiary formations were stillforming in the sea. The ancient borders also of that sea canoften be defined with certainty, and the outline of some of itsbays and sea-cliffs traced.In England, although undoubtedly the greater portion of thetertiary strata is confined to certain spaces, we find outlyingpatches here and there at great distances beyond the generallimits, and at great heights upon the chalk which separates thebasins of London and Hampshire*. I have seen masses ofclay extending in this manner to near the edge of the westernescarpment of the chalk in Wiltshire, and Mr. Mantelll haspointed out the same to me in the South Downs. Near theescarpment at Lewes, for example, there is a fissure in thechalk filled with sand, and with a ferruginous breccia, suchas usually marks the lower members of the Plastic clay formation.From the fact of these tertiary outliers Dr. Bucklandinferred, ' that the basins of London and Hants were originallyunited together in one continuous deposit across the nowintervening chalk of Salisbury Plain in Wilts, and the plainsof Andover and Basingstoke in Hants, and that the greaterintegrity in which the tertiary strata are preserved within thebasins has resulted from the protection which their comparativelylow position has afforded them from the ravages of diluvialdenudation f.'We agree so far with this conclusion as to believe that thebasins of London and Hampshire were not separated until partof the tertiary strata were deposited, but we do not think itprobable that the tertiary beds ever extended continuously overDr. Buckland, Geol. Trans., Second Series, vol. ii. p. 125. t Ibid., p. 126.284 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XX.those spaces where the outliers above mentioned occur, northat the comparative thinness of those deposits in the higherchalk countries should be attributed chiefly to the greaterdegree of denudation which they have there suffered.Origin of the English tertiary strata. In explanation ofthe phenomena above described, we shall endeavour, in the twonext chapters, to lay before the reader a view of the series ofevents which may have produced the leading geological andgeographical features of the south-east of England.A preliminary outline of these views may be useful in thisplace. We conceive that the chalk, together with many subjacentrocks, may have remained undisturbed and in horizontalstratification until after the commencement of the Eocene period.When at length the chalk was upheaved and exposed to theaction of the waves and currents, it was rent and shattered, sothat the subjacent secondary strata were exposed at the sametime to denudation. The waste of these rocks, composed chieflyof sandstone and clay, supplied materials for the tertiary sandsand clays, while the chalk was the source of flinty shingle, andof the calcareous matter which we find intermixed with theEocene clays. The tracts now separating the basins of Londonand Hampshire were those first elevated, and which contributedby their gradual decay to the production of the newerstrata. These last were accumulated in deep submarinehollows, formed probably by the subsidence of certain parts ofthe chalk, which sank while the adjoining tracts were rising.CHAPTER XXI.Denudation of secondary strata during the deposition of the English Eoceneformations Valley of the Weald between the North and South Downs MapSecondary rocks of the Weald divisible into five groups North and SouthDowns Section across the valley of the Weald Anticlinal axis True scaleof heights Rise and denudation of the strata gradual Chalk escarpmentsonce sea-cliffs Lower terrace of ' firestone,' how caused Parallel ridges andvalleys formed by harder and softer beds No ruins of the chalk on the centraldistrict of the Weald Explanation of this phenomenon Double system ofvalleys, the longitudinal and the transverse Transverse how formed Gorgesintersecting the chalk Lewes Coomb Transverse valley of the Adur.Denudation of the Valley of the Weald. IN order to understandthe theory of which we sketched an outline at the closeof the last chapter, it will be necessary that the reader shouldbe acquainted with the phenomena of denudation exhibited bythe chalk and some of the older secondary rocks in parts ofEngland most nearly contiguous to the basins of London andHampshire. It will be sufficient to consider one of the denudeddistricts, as the appearances observable in others arestrictly analogous; we shall, therefore, direct our attention towhat we may call the Valley of the Weald, or the region interveningbetween the North and South Downs.Map. In the coloured map given in Plate V. *, the districtalluded to is delineated, and it will be there seen that thesouthern portion of the basin of London, and the north-easternlimits of that of Hampshire, are separated by a tract ofsecondary rocks, between 40 and 50 miles in breadth, comprisingwithin it the whole of Sussex and parts of the countiesof Kent, Surrey, and Hampshire.There can be no doubt that the tertiary deposits of theHampshire basin formerly extended much farther along oursouthern coast towards Beachy Head, for patches are stillThis map has been chiefly taken from Mr, Greenough's Map of England,286 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXI.found near Newhaven, and at other points, as will be seen bythe map. These are now wasting away, and will in timedisappear, as the sea is constantly encroaching and underminingthe subjacent chalk.The secondary rocks, depicted on the map, may be dividedinto five groups :1. Chalk and Upper green-sand. This group is the uppermostof the series ; it includes the white chalk with andwithout flints, and an inferior deposit called, provincially,' Firestone,' and by English geologists the < Uppergreen-sand.' It sometimes consists of loose siliceoussand, containing grains of silicate of iron, but often offirm beds of sandstone and chert.2. Blue clay or calcareous marl, called provincially Gaul3. Lower green-sand, a very complex group consisting ofgrey, yellowish, and greenish sands, ferruginous sandand sandstone, clay, chert, and siliceous limestone.4. Weald clay, composed for the most part of clay withoutintermixture of calcareous matter, but sometimes includingthin beds of sand and shelly limestone.5. Hastings sands, composed chiefly of sand, sandstone, clay,and calcareous grit, passing into limestone *.The first three formations above enumerated are of marineorigin, the last two, Nos. 4 and 5, contain almost exclusivelythe remains of fresh-water and amphibious animals. But it isnot our intention at present to enlarge upon the organic remainsof these formations, as we have merely adverted to the rocks inorder that we may describe the changes of position which theyhave undergone, and the denudation to which they have beenexposed since the commencement of the Eocene period, mutationswhich, if our theory be well founded, belong strictly tothe history of tertiary phenomena.By a glance at the map, the reader may trace at once theFor an account of these strata in the south-east of England, sec Mantelll'sGeology of Sussex, and Dr. Fi:ton's Geology of Hastings, where the memoirs ofall the writers on this part of England are i\ averred to.Ch. XXL] SECTION OF WEALD VALLEY. 287superficial area occupied by each of the five formations abovementioned.On the west will be seen a large expanse of chalk,from which two branches are sent off; one through the hills ofSurrey and Kent to Dover, forming the ridge called the NorthDowns, the other through Sussex to the sea at Beachy Head,constituting the South Downs. The space comprised betweenthe North and South Downs, or e the Valley of the Weald,'consists of the formations Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, of the above table.It will be observed that the chalk terminates abruptly, andwith a well-defined line towards the country occupied by thoseolder strata. Within that line is a narrow band coloured blue,formed by the gault, and within this again is the Lower greensand,next the Weald clay, and then, in the centre of the district,a ridge formed by the Hastings sands.Section of the Valley of the Weald. It has been ascertainedby careful investigation, that if a line be drawn from any partof the North to the South Downs, which shall pass throughthe central group, No. 5, the beds will be found arranged inthe order described in the annexed section (No. 63, p. 288).We refer the reader at present to the dark lines of thesection, as the fainter lines represent portions of rock supposedto have been carried away by denudation.At each end of the diagram the tertiary strata a are exhibitedreposing on the chalk. In the centre are seen the Hastingssands (No. 5), forming an anticlinal axis, on each side of whichthe other formations are arranged with an opposite dip. It hasbeen necessary however, in order to give a clear view of thedifferent formations, to exaggerate the proportional height ofeach in comparison to its horizontal extent, and we have subjoineda true scale in another diagram (No. 61) in order tocorrect the erroneous impression which might otherwise bemade on the reader's mind. In this section the distancebetween the North and South Downs is represented to exceed40 miles; for we suppose the valley of the Weald to be hereintersected in its longest diameter, in the direction of a linebetween Lewes and Maidstone.EOCENE Period.[Ch. XXI.o >I hfl !-'y .4J ^^ Ji :=TS "o Kv,GI Ic* ^ ^< > IT-Il|lCJ 1 * yJ .US-si-H-Ch. XXL] CHALK Escarpment ONCE SEA-CLIFFS. 289In attempting to account for the manner in which the fivesecondary groups above mentioned may have been brought intotheir present position, the following hypothesis has been verygenerally adopted. Suppose the five formations to lie inhorizontal stratification at the bottom of the sea ; then let amovement from below press them upwards into the form of aflattened dome, and let the crown of this dome be afterwardscut off, so that the incision should penetrate to the lowest ofthe five groups. The different beds would then be exposed onthe surface in the manner exhibited in the map, plate 5 *.It will appear from former parts of this work, that the amountof elevation here supposed to have taken place is not greaterthan we can prove to have occurred in other regions withingeological periods of no great duration. On the other hand,the quantity of denudation or removal by water of vast masseswhich are assumed to have once reached continuously from theNorth to the South Downs is so enormous, that the reader mayat first be startled by the boldness of the hypothesis. But hewill find the difficulty to vanish when once sufficient time isallowed for the gradual and successive rise of the strata, duringwhich the waves and currents of the ocean might slowly accomplishan operation, which no sudden diluvial rush of waterscould possibly have effected.Escarpments of the chalk once sea-cliffs. In order to makethe reader acquainted with the physical structure of the Valleyof the Weald, we shall suppose him first to travel southwardsfrom the London basin. On leaving the tertiary strata he willfirst ascend a gently-inclined plane, composed of the upperflinty portion of the chalk, and then find himself on the summitof a declivity consisting, for the most part, of different membersof the chalk formation, below which the upper green-sand, andsometimes also the gault crop out. This steep declivity is calledby geologists ( the escarpment of the chalk,' which overhangs aSee illustrations of this theory by Dr. Fitton, Geol. Sketch of Hastings.f We use this term, borrowed from our miners, to express the coming up to thesurface of one stratum from beneath another*VOL, III. UEOCENE PERIOD,[Ch, XXI.lilflilililCh. XXI.] CHALK ESCARPMENTS ONCE SEA-CLIFFS. 291valley excavated chiefly out of the argillaceous or marly bed,termed Gault (No. 2). The escarpment is continuous along thesouthern termination of the North Downs, and the reader maytrace it from the sea at Folkestone, westward to Guildford andthe neighbourhood of Petrified, and from thence to the terminationof the South Downs at Beachy Head. In this precipiceor steep slope the strata are cut off abruptly, and it isevident that they must originally have extended farther. Inthe accompanying wood-cut (No. 65), part of the escarpmentof the South Downs is faithfully represented, where the denudationat the base of the declivity has been somewhat moreextensive than usual, in consequence of the upper and lowergreen-sand being formed of very incoherent materials, theformer, indeed, being extremely thin and almost wanting.The geologist cannot fail to recognize in this view the exactlikeness of a sea-cliff, and if he turns and looks in an oppositedirection, or eastward, towards Beachy Head, he will see thesame line of height prolonged. Even those who are notaccustomed to speculate on the former changes which the surfacehas undergone, may fancy the broad and level plain toresemble the flat sands which were laid dry by the recedingtide, and the different projecting masses of chalk to be theheadlands of a coast which separated the different bays fromeach other.No. 66.Chalk escarpment as seen from the hill above Steyning, Sussex. The castle and village ofBr amber in the fore-ground.Lower terrace offircstone. We have said that the upperU2292 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXI.green-sand (' firestone or ' malm rock,' as it is sometimes called)is almost absent, in the tract here alluded to. It is, in fact,seen at Beachy Head to thin out to an inconsiderable stratumof loose green-sand ; but farther to the westward it is of greatthickness, and contains hard beds of blue chert and limestone.Here, accordingly, we find that it produces a correspondinginfluence on the scenery of the country, for it runs out like astep beyond the foot of the chalk-hills, and constitutes a lowerNo. Ga,Chalk with flints. I, Chalk without flints.c t Upper green sand, or firestone. </, Gault.terrace varying in breadth from a quarter of a mile to threemiles, and following the sinuosities of the chalk escarpment' 14 .It is impossible to desire a more satisfactory proof that theescarpment is due to the excavating power of water during thegradual rise of the strata. For we have shown, in our accountof the coast of Sicily ]', in what manner the encroachments ofthe sea tend to efface that succession of terraces which mustotherwise result from the successive rises of a coast preyedupon by the waves. During the interval between two elevatormovements, the lower terrace will usually be destroyed,wherever it is composed of incoherent materials; whereas thesea will not have time entirely to sweep away another part of thesame terrace, or lower platform, which happens to be composedof rocks of a harder texture and capable of offering a firmerresistance to the erosive action of water.Valleys where softer strata, ridycs icicle harder crop out.It is evident that the Gault No. 2 (sec the map) couldnot have opposed any effectual resistance to the denuding forceMr. Murchison, Gcol. Sketch of Sussex, c.,Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, vol. ii. p. 98.f See p. Ill, and wood-cut No. 21,Ch. ExtenuationOF WEALD VALLEY,of the waves; its outcrop, therefore, is marked by a valley, thebreadth of which is often increased by the loose incoherentnature of the uppermost beds of the lower green-sand, whichlie next to it, and which have often been removed with equalfacility.The formation last mentioned has been sometimes entirelysmoothed off like the gault ; but in those districts where chert,limestone, and other solid materials enter largely into its composition,it forms a range of hills parallel to the chalk, whichsometimes rival the escarpment of the chalk itself in height, oreven surpass it, as in Leith Hill. This ridge often presents asteep escarpment towards the Weald clay which crops out fromunder it. (See the strong lines in diagram No. 63, p. 288.)The clay last mentioned forms, for the most part, a broadvalley, separating the lower green-sand from the Hastingssands, or Forest ridge ; but where subordinate beds of sandstoneof a firmer texture occur, the uniformity of the plain isbroken by waving irregularities and hillocks *.In the central region, or Forest ridge, the strata have beenconsiderably disturbed and are greatly fractured and shifted.One fault is known where the vertical shift of a bed ofcalcareous grit is no less than 60 fathoms [. It must not besupposed that the anticlinal axis, which we have described asrunning through the centre of the weald, is by any meansso simple as is usually represented in geological sections.There are, on the contrary, a series of anticlinal and synclinal JMartin, Geol. of Western Sussex. Fitton, Geol, of Hastings, p. 31.f- Fitton, ibid., p. 55.I We adopt this term, first used, we believe, by Professor Sedgwick ; its significationwill best be understood by reference to the accompanying diagram.No, 68.a, Anticlinal Hues.Synclinal lines.294 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXI.lines, which form ridges and troughs running nearly parallel toeach other.Much of the picturesque character of the scenery of this districtarises from the depth of the narrow valleys and ridges towhich the sharp bends and fractures of the strata have givenrise ; but it is also in part to be attributed to the excavatingpower exerted by water, especially on the inter stratified argillaceousbeds.From the above description it will appear that, in the tractintervening between the North and South Downs, there are aseries of parallel valleys and ridges ; the valleys appearing evidentlyto have been formed principally by the removal of softermaterials, while the ridges are due to the resistance offered byfirmer beds to the destroying action of water.Rise and denudation of the strata gradual. Let us thenconsider how far these phenomena agree with the changeswhich we should naturally expect to occur during the gradualrise of the secondary strata. Suppose the line of the mostviolent movements to have coincided with what is now the centralridge of the Weald Valley; in that case, the first landwhich emerged must have been situated where the Forest ridgeis now placed. Here a number of reefs may have existed, andislands of chalk, which may have been gradually devoured bythe ocean in the same manner as Heligoland and other Europeanisles have disappeared in modern times, as related in ourfirst volume *.Suppose the ridge or dome first elevated to have been so rentand shattered on its summit as to give more easy access to thewaves, until at length the masses represented by the fainter linesin the annexed diagram were removed. Two strips of land mightNo. 69.Seathen remain on each side of a channel, in the same manner asPage 289, and Second Edition, page 330.Ch. XXI.] ALLUVIUM OF WEALD VALLEY. 295the opposite coasts of France and England, composed of chalk,present ranges of white cliffs facing each other. A powerfulcurrent might then rush, like that which now ebbs and flowsthrough the straits of Dover, and might scoop out a channel inthegault. We must bear in mind that the intermittent action ofearthquakes would accompany this denuding process, assuringrocks, throwing down cliffs, and bringing up, from time to time,new stratified masses, and thus greatly accelerating the rate ofwaste. If the lower bed of chalk on one side of the channelshould be harder than on the other, it would cause an underterrace, as represented in the above diagram, resembling thatpresented by the upper green sand in parts of Sussex andHampshire. When at length the gault was entirely sweptaway from the central parts of the channel, the lower green-sand(3, diagram No. 70,) would be laid bare, and portions of it wouldNo. 70.The dotted line represents the sea-level.become land during the continuance of the upheaving earthquakes.Meanwhile the chalk cliffs would recede farther fromone another, whereby four parallel strips of land, or perhapsrows of islands, would be caused.The edges of the argillaceous strata. No. 2, are still exposedto erosion by the waves, and a portion of the clay, No. 4, isalready removed. This clay, as it gradually rises, will be sweptoff from part of the subjacent group, No. 5, which will thenbe laid bare, and may afterwards become land by subsequentelevation.Why no ruins of chalk on central district. By this theoryof the successive emergence and denudation of the groups, 1, 2,3, 4, 5, we may account for an alluvial phenomenon whichseems inexplicable on any other hypothesis. The summits ofthe chalk downs are covered everywhere with flint gravel, which296 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXI.is often entirely wanting on the surface of the clay at the footof the chalk escarpment, and no traces of chalk flint have everbeen found in the alluvium of the central c v 'net, or Forestridge. It is rare, indeed, to see any wreck 01 the chalk, evenat the distance of two or three miles from the escarpments ofthe North and South Downs. To this general rule, however,an exception occurs near Barcombe, about three miles to thenorth of Lewes., where we obtain the accompanying section *.No. /I.Section from the North escarpment of the South Downs to Barcombe,1, Gravel composed of partially-rounded chalk flints.2, Chalk with and without flints.3, Lowest chalk or chalk marl (upper green-sand wanting).4 ; Gault. 5, Lower green-sand. (j, "Weald clay.It will be seen that the valley at the foot of the escarpmentextends, in this case, not only over the gault, but over the4 lower green-sand'' to the Weald clay. On this clay a thickbed of flints, evidently derived from the waste of chalk, remainsin the position above described.We say that there is no detritus of the chalk and its flints onthe central ridge of the Weald. I have sought in vain for avestige of such fragments, and Mr. Mantelll, who has hadgreater opportunities of minute investigation, assures me thathe has never been able to detect any. Now whether we embraceor reject the theory of the former continuity of the chalk andother groups over the whole space intervening between theNorth and South Downs, we cannot certainly imagine thatany transient and tumultuous rush of waters could have sweptover this country, which should not have left some fragmentsThe author visited this locality with Mr. Mantelll, to whom he is indebted forthis section.Ch. XXI.J ALLUVIUM OF WEALD VALLEY. 297of the chalk and its flints in the deep valleys of the Forestridge. Indeed, if we adopted the diluvial hypothesis of Dr.Buckland, we ' uld expect to find vast heaps of broken flintsdrifted more frequently into the valleys of the Garland Wealdclay, instead of being so frequently confined to the summitof the chalk downs. On the other hand, it is quite conceivablethat the slow agency of oceanic currents may have clearedaway, in the course of ages, the matter which fell into the seafrom wasting cliffs. The reader will recollect our account ofthe manner in which the sea has advanced, within the last century,upon the Norfolk coast at Sherringham *.No. 72.Section of cliffs west of Sherringham,a, Crag. b } Ferruginous flint breccia on the surface of the chalk,c, Chalk with flints.The beach, at the foot of the cliff, is composed of bare chalkwith flints, as is the bed of the sea near the shore. No onewould suspect, from the appearance of the beach at low water,that a few years ago beds of solid chalk, together with sandand loam of the superincumbent crag, formed land on the veryspot where the waves are now rolling ; still less that these sameformations extended, within the last 50 years, to a considerabledistance from the present shore, over a space where the sea hasnow excavated a channel 20 feet deep.As in this recent instance the ocean has cleared away part ofthe chalk, and its capping of crag, so the tertiary sea may haveswept away not only the chalk, but the layer of broken flintson its surface, which was probably a marine alluvium of theVol. i, p. 268, and Second Edition, p. 307.298 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXI.Eocene period. Hence these flints might naturally occur onthe downs, and be wanting in the valleys below.If the reader will refer to the preceding diagrams (Nos. 69and 70), and reflect not only on the 'successive states of thecountry there delineated, but on all the intermediate conditionswhich the district must have passed through during theprocess of elevation and denudation before supposed, he willunderstand why no wreck of the chalk (No. 1) should occurat great distances from the chalk escarpments. For it is evidentthat when the ruins of the uppermost bed (No. 1, diagram69) had been thrown down upon the surface of thebed immediately below, those ruins would subsequently becarried away when this inferior stratum itself was destroyed.And in proportion to the number and thickness of the groups,thus removed in succession, is the probability lessened of ourfinding any remnants of the highest group strewed over thebared surface of the lowest.Transverse valleys. There is another peculiarity in thegeographical features of the south-east of England which mustnot be overlooked when we are considering the action of thedenuding causes. By reference to the map (Plate 5), thereader will perceive that the drainage of the country is noteffected by water-courses following the great valleys excavatedout of the argillaceous strata (Nos. 2 and 4), but by valleyswhich run in a transverse direction, passing through thechalk to the basin of the Thames on the one side, and to theEnglish channel on the other.In this manner the chain of the North Downs is broken bythe rivers Wey, Mole, Darent, Medway, and Stour; the SouthDowns by the Arun, Adur, Ouse, and Cuckmere *.If these transverse hollows could be filled up, all the rivers,observes Mr. Conybeare, would be forced to take an easterlycourse, and to empty themselves into the sea by RomneyMarsh and Pevensey levels f.Conybeare, Outlines of Geol., p. 81. t Ibid., p. 145.Ch.XXL]TRANSVERSE VALLEYS.Mr. Martin has suggested that the great cross fractures of thechalk which have become riverchannels have a remarkablecorrespondence on each sideof the valley of the Weald ;in several instances the gorgesin the North and SouthDowns appearing to be directlyopposed to each other.Thus, for example, the defilesof the Wey, in the NorthDowns, and of the Arun inthe South, seem to coincidein direction ; and, in likemanner, the Ouse is opposedto the Darent, and the Cuck-mere to the Medway *. Butwe think it very possible thatthese coincidences may beaccidental. It is, however,by no means improbable, ashinted by the author abovementioned,that the greatamount of elevation towardsthe centre of the Weald districtgave rise to transversefissures. And as the longitudinalvalleys were connectedwith that linear movementwhich caused the anticlinallines running east and west,so the cross fissures mighthave been occasioned by theintensity of the upheavingforce towards the centre ofGeol. of Western Sussex, p, 61.300 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXI.the line, whereby the effect of a double axis of elevation wasin some measure produced.In order to give a clearer idea of the manner in which thechalk-hills are intersected by these transverse valleys, we subjoina sketch (No. 73) of the gorge of the river Adur, taken from thesummit of the chalk-downs, at a point in the bridle-way leadingfrom the towns of Chamber and Steyning to Shoreham. If thereader will refer again to the view given in a former wood-cut(No. 65, p. 290), he will there see the exact point where thegorge, of which we are now speaking, interrupts the chalkescarpment. A projecting hill, at the point a, hides the townof Steyning, near which the valley commences where the Adurpasses directly to the sea at Old Shoreham. The river flowsthrough a nearly level plain, as do most of the others whichintersect the hills of Surrey, Kent, and Sussex ; and it is evidentthat these openings, so far at least as they are due toaqueous erosion, have not been produced by the rivers, manyof which, like the Ouse near Lewes, have filled up arms of thesea, instead of deepening the hollows which they traverse.In regard to the origin of the transverse ravines, there canbe no doubt that they are connected with lines of fracture, andperhaps, in some places, there may be an anticlinal dip on bothsides of the valley, as suggested by a local observer *. Butthis notion requires confirmation.No. 74.Supposed section of Transverse Valley.The ravine, called the Coomb, near Lewes, affords a beautifulexample of the manner in which narrow openings in the chalkmay have been connected with shifts and dislocations in thestrata. This coomb is seen on the eastern side of the valleyof the Ouse, in the suburbs of the town of Lewes. The steepMartin, Geol. of Western Sussex, p. 64, plate III. fig. 3.Ch. XXL]THE Coom, NEAR LEWES.declivities on each side are covered with green turf, as is thebottom, which is perfectly dry. No outward signs of disturbanceare visible, and the connexion of the hollow withsubterranean movements would not have been suspected by thegeologist, had not the evidence of great convulsions been clearlyexposed in the escarpment of the valley of the Ouse, and inthe numerous chalk pits worked at the termination of theNo. 75.The Coomb, near Lewes,Coomb. By aid of these we discover that the ravine coincidesprecisely with a line of fault, on one side of which the chalkwith flints a, appears at the summit of a hill, while it is throwndown to the bottom on the other.No. 76.Fault in the cli/-hilh near Lewes.a, Chalk with flints. b, Lower chalk *.The fracture here alluded to is one of those which run eastI examined this spot in company with Mr. Mantelll, to whom I am indebtedfor the above section.302 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. Inlandwest, and of which there are many in the Weald district,parallel to the central axis of the Forest ridge.In whatever manner the transverse gorges originated, theymust evidently have formed ready channels of communicationbetween the submarine longitudinal valleys and those deepparts of the sea wherein we imagine the tertiary strata to havebeen accumulated. If the strips of land which first rose hadbeen unbroken, and there had been no free passage throughthe cross fractures, the currents would not so easily have driftedaway the materials detached from the wasting cliffs, and itwould have been more difficult to understand how the wreckof the denuded strata could have been so entirely swept awayfrom the base of the escarpments.In the next chapter we shall resume the consideration ofthese subjects,, especially the proofs of the former continuity ofthe chalk of the North and South Downs, and the probableconnexion of the denudation of the Weald valley with theorigin of the Eocene strata.CHAPTER XXII.Denudation of the Valley of the Weald, continued The alternative of the propositionthat the chalk of the North and South Downs were once continuous,considered Dr. Buckland on the Valley of Kingsclere Rise and denudationof secondary rocks gradual Concomitant deposition of tertiary strata gradualComposition of the latter such as would result from the wreck of the secondaryrocks Valleys and furrows on the chalk how caused Auvergne, theParis basin, and south-east of England one region of earthquakes during theEocene period Why the central parts of the London and Hampshire basinsrise nearly as high as the denudation of the Weald Effects of protrudingforce counteracted by the levelling operations of water Thickness of massesremoved from the contra! ridge of the Weald Great escarpment of the chalkhaving a direction north-east and south-west Curved and vertical strata in theIsle of Wight These were convulsed after the deposition of the fresh-waterbeds of Headen Hill Elevations of land posterior to the crag Why no Eocenealluviums recognizable Concluding remarks on the intermittent operations ofearthquakes in the south-east of England, and the gradual formation of valleysRecapitulation.Extent of denudation in the Valley of the Weald. ' IT wouldbe highly rash observes Mr. Conybeare, speaking of the denudationof the Weald, ' to assume that the chalk at any periodactually covered the whole space in which the inferior strataare now exposed, although the truncated form of its escarpmentevidently shows it to have once extended much farther than atpresent *.'We believe that few geologists who have considered theextent of country supposed to have been denuded, and whohave explored the hills and valleys of the central, or Forestridge, without being able to discover the slightest vestige of chalkin the alluvium f, will fail to participate, at first, in the doubtshere expressed as to the original continuity of the upper secondaryformations over the anticlinal axis of the Weald. For ourown part, we never traversed the wide space which separates theNorth and South Downs, without desiring to escape from theconclusions advocated in the last chapter; and yet we haveOutlines, p. 144, f See above, p. 295,304 EOCENE PERIOD.[Ch. XXII.been invariably brought back again to the opinion, that thechalk was originally continuous, on a more deliberate review ofthe whole phenomena.It may be useful to consider the only other alternative of thehypothesis before explained. If the marine groups, Nos. 1,2, 3, were not originally continuous, it is necessary to imagineNo. 77.1, Chalk and Upper grcen-sand.| 4j Wealth c] .^2, Gault. > Marine. afresh-water.3, Lower green-sand. J 5 ; Hastings sands.that they each terminated at some point between their presentoutgoings and the secondary strata of the Forest ridge. Thuswe might suppose them to have thinned out one after the other,as in the above diagram, and never to have covered the entirearea occupied by the fresh-water strata, Nos. 4 and 5.We grant that had such been the original disposition of thedifferent groups, they might, as they gradually emerged fromthe sea, have become denuded in the manner explained in thelast chapter, so that the country might equally have assumed itspresent configuration. But, although we know of no invincibleobjection to such an hypothesis, there are certainly no appearanceswhich favour it. If the strata Nos. 4 and 5 had beenunconformable to the Lower green-sand No. 3, then, indeed, wemight have imagined that the older groups had been disturbedby a series of movements antecedently to the deposition ofNo. 3, and, in that case, some parts of them might be supposedto have emerged or formed shoals in the ancient sea, interruptingthe continuity of the newer marine deposits. But the groupNo. 4 is conformable to No. 3, and the only change which hasbeen observed to take place at the junction, is an occasional intermixtureof the Weald clay with the superior marine sand,such as might have been caused by a slight superficial movementin the waters when the sea first overflowed the freshwaterstrata.Ch. XXII.]VALLEY OF 1 Kingsley.On the other hand, the green-sand and chalk, as they approachthe central axis of the Weald, are not found to containlittoral shells, or any wreck of the fresh-water strata, such asmight indicate the existence of an island with its shores orwasting cliffs. Had any such signs been discovered, we mighthave been inclined to suppose the geography of the region tohave once borne some resemblance to that exhibited in the diagramNo. 77.Dr. Bucldand on Valleys of Elevation. We are indebtedto Dr. Buckland for an able memoir in illustration of severaldistricts of similar form and structure to the Weald, whichoccur at no great distance in the south of England. His paperis intitled, ' On the formation of the Valley of Kingsclere andother valleys by the elevation of the strata which enclosethem *.'The valley of Kingsclere, situate a few miles south of New-valleyof Kingsclere.a, b, Anticlinal line marking the opposite dip of the strata on each side of it.No. 79.Section across the Valley of Kingsclere from north to south.1, Chalk with flints. 2, Lower chalk without flints.3, Upper green-sand, or firestone, containing beds of chert.Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, vol. ii. p. 119.VOL. III.EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch.XXII.bury, in Berkshire, is about five miles long and two in breadth.The upper and lower chalk, as will be seen in the accompanyingsection *, and the upper green-sand dip in opposite directionsfrom an anticlinal axis which passes through the middleof the valley along the line o, b, of the ground-plan (No. 78).We subjoin an additional wood-cut, as conveying a scale ofN. No. SO. S.Valley of Kingsclere.heights more nearly approaching to that of nature, althoughthe altitudes, in proportion to the horizontal extent, are evenin this, perhaps, somewhat in excess. On each side of the valleywe find escarpments of chalk, the strata of which dip in oppositedirections, in the northern escarpment to the north, andin the southern to the south. At the eastern and western extremitiesof the valley, the two escarpments become confluent,precisely in the same manner as do those of the North andSouth Downs, at the eastern end of the Weald district, nearPctersfieltl. And as, a few miles east of the town last mentioned(see Map, plate V.), the firestone, or upper green-sand,is laid open in the sharp angle between the escarpment of theAlton Hills and the western termination of the South Downs f ;so in the valley of Kingsley the same formation is seen tocrop out from beneath the chalk.The reader might imagine, on regarding Dr. Auckland'ssection (No. 7!)), where, for the sake of elucidating the geologicalphenomena, the heights are greatly exaggerated in proportionto the horizontal extent, that the solution of continuityof the strata bounding the valley of Kingsclere had beensimply due to elevation and fracture, unassisted by aqueouscauses; but by reference to the true scale (No. 80), it willCopied by permission from Dr. Buckram's plate XVII., Gcol. Trans., 2ndSeries, vol. ii.j- See Mr. Murchison's map, plate XIV., ibid.Ch. XXII.] PROOFS OF DENUDATION. 307in mediately appear, that a considerable mass of chalk musthave been removed by denudation.If the anticlinal dip had been confined to the valley ofKingsclere, we might have supposed that the upheaving forcehad acted on a mere point, forcing upwards the superincumbentstrata into a small dome-shaped eminence, the crown of whichhad been subsequently cut off. But Dr. Buckland traced theline of opposite dip far beyond the confluence of the chalkescarpments, and found that it was prolonged in a more northwestdirection far beyond the point a, diagram No. 78. Infollowing the line thus extended, the strata are seen in numerouschalk-pits to have an opposite dip on either side of a centralaxis, from which we may clearly infer the linear direction of themovement. Perhaps the intensity of the disturbing force wasgreatest where the denudation of the valley of Kingsclere tookplace ; but this cannot be confidently inferred, for the quantityof matter removed by aqueous agency must depend on the setof the tides and currents at the period of emergence, andnot solely on the amount of elevation and derangement ofthe strata.Many of the valleys enumerated by Dr. Buckland as havinga similar conformation to that of Kingsclere, run east and west,like the anticlinal ridge of the Weald valley. Several of theseoccur in Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, and they are all circumscribedby an escarpment whose component strata dip outwardsfrom an anticlinal line running along the central axis of thevalley. One of these, distant about seven miles to the north-eastof Weymouth, is nearly elliptical in shape, and in size does notmuch exceed that of the Coliseum at Rome. Their drainageis generally effected by an aperture in one of their lateral escarpments,and not at either extremity of their longer axis, aswould have happened had they been simply excavated by thesweeping force of rapid water*.'It will be seen,' continues Dr. Buckland, 'if we follow onMr. Greenough's map the south-western escarpment of theDr. Buckled, Geol. Trans,, 2nd Series, vol. ii. p 122.X 2308 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXII.chalk in the counties of Wilts and Dorset, that, at no greatdistance from these small elliptical valleys of elevation, thereoccur several longer and larger valleys, forming deep notches,as it were, in the lofty edge of the chalk. These are of similarstructure to the smaller valleys we have been considering, andconsist of green-sand, inclosed by chalk at one extremity, andflanked by two escarpments of the same, facing each other withan opposite dip; but they differ in the circumstance of theirother and broader extremity being without any such inclosure,and gradually widening till it is lost in the expanse of theadjacent country.The cases I now allude to are the Vale of Pewsey, to theeast of Devises, that of the Wily, to the east of Axminster,and the valley of the Nadder, extending from Shaftsbury toAfford, near Salisbury ; in which last not only the strata ofgreen-sand are brought to the surface, but also the still lowerformations of Purbeck and Portland beds, and of Simmeringclay.It might at first sight appear that these valleys are nothingmore than simple valleys of denudation; but the fact of thestrata composing their escarpments having an opposite and outwarddip from the axis of the valley, and this often at a highangle, as near Fonthill and Afford, in the Vale of the Nadder,and at Are, near the base of Martinet Hill, in the Vale ofPewsey, obliges us to refer their inclination to some antecedentviolence, analogous to that to which I have attributed the positionof the strata in the inclosed valleys near Kingsclere, Ham,and Burbage. Nor is it probable that, without some preexistingfracture or opening in the lofty line of the great chalkescarpment, which is here presented to the north-west, thepower of water alone would have forced open three such deepvalleys as those in question, without causing them to maintaina more equable breadth, instead of narrowing till they end in apoint in the body of the chalk *.Rise and denudation of the secondary rocks gradual. ToDr. Buckland, Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, vol. ii. p. 123.Ch. XXII.] ORIGIN OF TERTIARY STRATA. 309return to the valley of the Weald, the strata of the NorthDowns are inclined to the north, at an angle of from 10 to 15,and in the narrow ridge of the Hog's back, west of Guildford,in Surrey, about 45; those in the South Downs dip to thesouth at a slight angle. It is superfluous to dwell on theanalogy which in this respect the two escarpments bear tothose which flank the valleys above alluded to ; and in regardto the greater distance which separates the hills of Surrey fromthose of Sussex, the difficulty may be reduced simply to aquestion of time. If the rise of the land and its degradationby aqueous causes was accomplished by an indefinite number ofminor convulsions, during an immense lapse of ages, we beholdin the ocean a power fully adequate to perform the work ofdemolition. If, on the other hand, we embrace the hypothesisof paroxysmal elevation, or, in other words, suppose a submarinetract to have been converted instantaneously intohigh land, we may seek in vain for any known cause capable ofsweeping away even those portions of chalk and other rockswhich, all are agreed, must once have formed the prolongationof the existing escarpments. It is common in such cases tocall in one arbitrary hypothesis to support another, and as theupheaving force operated with sudden violence, so a vast diluvialwave is introduced to carry away, with almost equalcelerity, the mountain mass of strata assumed to have beenstripped off.Materials of the tertiary strata whence derived. If, then, weconclude that the wreck of the denuded district was removedgradually, it follows that it was deposited by degrees elsewhere.If any part of the sea immediately adjacent to the districtwhich was then emerging, was of considerable depth, the driftmatter would be consigned to that submarine region, since everycurrent charged with sediment must purge itself in the firstdeep cavity which it traverses, as does a turbid river in a lake.Suppose that while the wave sand currents were excavating thelongitudinal valleys, D and C (No. 81, p. 310), the depositsa were thrown down to the bottom of the contiguous deep310 EOCENE PERIOD. [Qi, XXII.No. 81.water E, the sediment being drifted through transverse fissures,as before explained. In this case, the rise of the formationsNos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, may have been going on contemporaneouslywith the excavation of the valleys C and D, and with the accumulationof the strata a. There must be innumerable pointson our own coast where the sea is of great depth near to islandsand cliffs now exposed to rapid waste, and in all these thedenuding and reproductive processes must be going on in theimmediate proximity of each other. Such may have been thecase during the rise of the Valley of the Weald and thedeposition of the beds of the London and Hampshire basins.The theory above proposed requires that the deposits ashould be composed, for the most part, of a mixture of suchmineral ingredients as would result from the degradation ofthe secondary groups, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now the tertiarystrata answer extremely well to these conditions. They consist,as we have before seen, of alternations of variously-colouredsands and clays, as do the secondary strata from the groupNo. 5 to No. 2 inclusive, the principal difference being, thatthe latter are more consolidated.If it be asked, where do we find the ruins of the white chalkamong our Eocene strata ? We reply, that the flint pebbleswhich are associated in such immense abundance with the sandsof the plastic clay, are derived evidently from the destructionof chalk ; and as to the soft white calcareous matrix, we maysuppose it to have been reduced easily to fine sediment, and tohave contributed, when in a state of perfect solution, to formthe shells of Eocene testacea; or when mixed with the waste ofthe argillaceous groups, Nos. 2 and 4, which have been peculiarlyexposed to denudation, it may have entered into thecomposition of the London clay, which contains no slightCh. XXII.] FURROWS ON THE CHALK HOW CAUSED. 311proportion of calcareous matter. In the crag of Norfolk,undoubtedly, we find great heaps of broken pieces of whitechalk, with slightly-worn and angular flints; but in this casewe may infer that the attrition was not continued for a longtime; whereas the large accumulations of perfectly-rolledshingle, which are inter stratified with our Eocene formations,proves that they were acted upon for a protracted period bythe waves. We have many opportunities of witnessing theentire demolition of the chalk on our southern coast, as at Sea-ford,for example, in Sussex, where large masses are, year afteryear, detached from the cliffs, and soon disappear, leavingnothing behind but a great bank of flint shingle *.Valleys and furrows in the chalk hoi caused. The furrowswhich occur on the surface of the chalk, filled with sand andpebbles of the plastic clay, may be easily explained if we supposethe English Eocene strata to have been formed during aperiod of local convulsion. For if portions of the secondaryrocks emerged from the sea in the south-east of our islandduring that period, it is probable that the chalk underwentmany oscillations of level, and that certain tracts became landand then sea, and then land again, so that parts of the surface,first excavated by currents or rivers, were occasionally submerged,and, after being covered by tertiary deposits, upraisedagain. We must also remember, that almost every part of thechalk must have been exposed for some time to the action ofthe waves, if we assume the elevation to have been slow and bysuccessive movements. The valleys seen everywhere on thesurface, and the layers of partially-rolled and broken flintswhich very generally overspread it, may be referred to the seabreaking upon the reefs and shoals when the rocks were aboutto emerge. We apprehend, indeed, that no formidable difficultywill be encountered in explaining the position of thetertiary sand which sometimes fills rents and furrows in thechalk, or the occurrence of banks of shingle at the junction ofthe tertiary strata and the chalk, if we once admit that theVol. i. p. 279, and Second Edition, p. 319.312 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXII.Eocene deposits originated while the chalk and other secondaryrocks were rising from the deep and wasting away.Earthquakes during the Eocene period. We have pointedout, in a former chapter, our reasons for concluding that theParis basin was a theatre of subterranean convulsions duringthe Eocene period, the older beds of the calcaire grossierhaving been raised and exposed to the action of the wavesbefore, or at least during, the deposition of the upper or secondmarine group *. These convulsions w r ere doubtless connectedwith that depression which let in the sea upon the second freshwaterformation, and gave rise to the superposition of theupper marine beds. We have also demonstrated, in a precedingchapter, that some of the earlier volcanic eruptions inAuvergne happened before the Eocene species of animals wereextinct, and we suggested that the great lakes of Central Francemay have been drained by alterations of level which accompaniedthe outbreak of those earlier Eocene volcanos of Auvergne.We ought not, therefore, to be surprised if we discover proofsthat the south-east of England participated in the earthquakeswhich seem to have extended at that time over a considerablepart of the neighbouring continent ; and we may refer thealternation of marine and fresh-water beds in the Isle of WightOand coast of Hampshire, to changes of level analogous to thosewhich gave rise to the intercalation of the upper marine formationin the Paris basin.Why the English Eocene strata rise nearly as h'ujh as thedenuded secondary districts. Those geologists who havehitherto regarded the rise and denudation of the lands inthe south-east of England as events posterior in date to thedeposition of the London clay, will object to the foregoingreasoning, that not only certain outlying patches of tertiarystrata, but even the central parts of the London and Hampshirebasins, attain very considerable altitudes above the levelof the sea. Tims the London clay at Highbcach, in Essex,reaches the height of 750 feet, an elevation exceeding thatSic above, p. 248.Ch. XXII.]AMOUNT OF DENUDATION. 313of large districts of the chalk and other denuded secondaryrocks. But these facts do not, we think, militate against thetheory above proposed, for we have assumed a long-continuedseries of elevatory movements in a region where the degradationand reproduction of strata were in progress.If this be granted, it is evident that the great antagonistpowers, the igneous and the aqueous, would, throughout thewhole period, be brought into play in their fullest energy, theigneous labouring continually to produce the greatest inequalityof surface, by uplifting certain lines of country and depressingothers ; the aqueous no less incessantly engaged in reducing thewhole to a level, by cutting off the summits of the upraisedtracts, and throwing the materials thence removed into theadjoining hollows. If the volcanic forces eventually prevail,so as to convert the whole region into land, we must expectthat some of the materials drifted into the hollows, and formingthe newer strata, will be brought up to view, while the denudeddistricts are raised at the same time. If these lastcontinue, in general, to occupy a higher position above thelevel of the sea, it is all that can be expected after the levellingoperations before alluded to.Now the tracts occupied by our Eocene formations are low,not so much with reference to the secondary rocks which remain,as to these masses which must be supposed by our theoryto have disappeared, having been carried away by denudation.Let the portions removed from the space intervening betweenthe North and South Downs, and which are expressed by faintlines in our section, wood-cut No. 63, be restored, and we mayreadily conceive that those masses may have formed shoalsand dry land for ages before any part of our tertiary basinsemerged.The estimate of Mr. Martin is not, perhaps, exaggerated,when he computes the probable thickness of strata removedfrom the highest part of the Forest ridge to be about 1900feet. So that if we restore to Crowborough Hill, in Sussex,the beds of Weald clay. Lower green-sand, Gault, and chalk,314 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXII.which have been removed by denudation, that hill, instead ofrising to the height of 800 feet, would be more than trebledin altitude *, and be about 2700 feet high. It would thentower far above the highest outlets of tertiary strata whichare scattered over our chalk, for Inkpen Hill, the greatestelevation of chalk in England, rises only 1011 feet above thelevel of the sea.Some geologists who have thought it necessary to supposeall the strata of the London and Hampshire basins to havebeen once continuous, have estimated the united thickness ofthe three marine Eocene groups before described,, as amountingto 1300 feet, and have been bold enough to imagine a mass ofthis height to have been once superimposed upon the chalkwhich formerly covered the axis of the Weald f . Hence theywere led to infer that Crowborough Hill was once 4000 feethigh, and was then cut down from 4000 to 800 feet by diluvialaction.We, on the contrary, deem it wholly unnecessary to supposeany removal of rocks newer than the secondary from the centralparts of the valley of the Weald ; and we suppose thewaste of the older rocks to have been caused gradually duringthe emergence of the country. The small strips of land whichwere first protruded in an open sea above the level of the waves,may have been entirely carried away, again and again, in theintervals between successive movements, until at last a greatnumber of reefs and islands rising at once, afforded protectionto each other against the attacks of the waves, and the landsbegan to increase. We do not conceive, therefore, that amountain ridge first rose to the height of more than 2000 feet,and was then lowered to less than half that elevation ; but thata stratified mass, more than 2000 feet thick, was, by the continualstripping off of the uppermost beds as they rose,diminished to a thickness of about 800 feet.It is not our intention, at present, to point out the applicantMag. and Annals, No. 26, New Series, p. 117.f Martin, ibid.Ch. XXII.] VERTICAL STRATA OF ISLE OF WIGHT. 31 5tion of the above theory to the region immediately westwardof the great line of chalk escarpment which runs through thecentral parts of England from Dorsetshire to Cambridgeshire.The denudation in that country has doubtless been on a greatscale, and was, perhaps, effected during the Eocene period ;for we know of no reason why one line of movements shouldnot have been in progress in a direction north-east and southwest,while others were heaving up the strata in lines runningeast and west. We may remark, at the same time, that if thechalk in the interior of England, in those tracts from which ithas been extensively swept away, began to rise during the tertiaryepoch, and before the emergence of the chalk which onceextended over the central axis of the Weald, some tertiarydeposits may, in that case, have been thrown down upon thatcentral ridge. We have at present, however, no data to lendcountenance to such conjectures.Vertical strata of the Isle of Wight. A line of vertical andinclined strata running east and west, or parallel to the centralaxis of the Weald, extends through the isles of Wight andPurbeck, and through Dorsetshire, and has been observed byDr. Fitton to reappear in France, north of Dieppe. Thesame strata which are elevated in the Weald Valley are upheavedalso on this line in the centre of the Isle of Wight,where all the tertiary strata appear to have partaken in thesame movement *.From the horizontality of the fresh-water series in AlumBay, as contrasted with the vertical position of the marine tertiarybeds, Mr. Webster was at first led very naturally toconclude, that the latter had undergone great derangementbefore the deposition of the former. It appears, however,from the subsequent observations of Professor Sedgwick f ,that these appearances are deceptive, and that at the easternSee Mr. Webster's section, Geol. Trans., vol. ii. First Series, plate XI.f Anniv. Address to the Geol. Soc., Feb. 1831, p. 9. Professor Sedgwick informsme that his observations, made six years ago, have recently been confirmedby Professor Henslowe.316 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXII.extremity of the Isle of Wight, part of the fresh-water seriesis vertical, like the marine. Hence it is now ascertained thatas the chalk is horizontal at the southern extremity of the Isleof Wight, while it is vertical in the centre of that island, so theEocene strata are horizontal in the north of the island, andvertical in the centre. We have only to imagine that the greatflexure of the secondary and tertiary beds, so ingeniouslysuggested by Mr. Webster in his theoretical section *, extendedto the freshwater formations, in order to comprehend how avery simple scries of movements may have brought the wholeof the Isle of Wight groups into their present position.We are unable to assign a precise date to the convulsionswhich produced this great curve in the stratified rocks of theIsle of Wight ; but we may observe that, although subsequentto the deposition of the fresh-water beds, it does not follow thatit was not produced in the Eocene period. It may have beencontemporaneous with those movements which raised the centralparts of the London and Hampshire basins, which, as webefore explained, were subsequent to the principal elevation anddenudation of the central axis of the Weald.Land has certainly been elevated on our eastern coast sincethe commencement of the older Pliocene period, as is attestedby the moderate height attained by the crag strata-)-. But thesechanges of level may have been partial, and if the crag does notextend farther over the Eocene formations, and into the WealdValley, it is probably because those regions were dry landwhen the strata of crag were forming in the sea.The first land that rose in the south-eastern extremity ofEngland may have been placed, as we before hinted, where wenow find the central axis of elevation in the Weald. Perhapsthe chalk islands there formed may have supported thattropical vegetation whereof we find memorials in the fossilKnglefield's Isle of Wight, plate XLVII. %. 1.f We alluded, at p. 182, to the supposed discovery of recent marine shells atthe height of 140 feet above the sea in Sheppey ; hut we have since learnt fromProfessor Sedgwick that the information communicated to the Geological Societyon this subject was erroneous.Ch.XXIL] Eocene ALLUVIUMS. 317plants of Sheppey ; and the shores of those islands may havebeen frequented, during the depositing season, by the turtlesand crocodiles, of which the teeth and skeletons are imbeddedin the London clay *.Eocene alluviums. The river which produced that body ofwater in which the fresh-water strata of Hampshire originated,must have drained some contiguous lands which may haveemerged during the Eocene period. On these lands we maysuppose the Paleothere, Anoplothere, and Roscius of Binsteadto have lived. The discovery of the two former genera, associatedas they are with well-known Eocene species of testaceousmost interesting. It shows that in England, or rather onthe space now occupied by part of our island, as well as in theParis basin, Auvergne, Cantal, and Velay, there were mammaliaof a peculiar type during the Eocene period. Yet wehave never found a single fragment of the bones of any of thesequadrupeds in our alluviums or cave breccias. In theseformations we find the bones of the mastodon and mammoth,of the rhinoceros, hippopotamus, lion, hyaena, bear, and otherquadrupeds, all of extinct species. They are accompanied byrecent fresh-water shells, or by the marine fossils of the crag,and evidently belong to an epoch posterior to the Eocene.Where, then, are the terrestrial alluviums of that surface whichwas inhabited by the Paleothere and its congeners ? Have theremains which were buried at so remote a period decomposed,so that they no longer afford any zoological characters whichmight enable us to distinguish the Eocene from more modernalluviums?It seems clear that a peculiar and rare combination of favourablecircumstances is required to preserve mammiferous orother remains in terrestrial alluviums in sufficient quantity toafford the geologist the means of assigning the date of suchdeposits. For this reason we are scarcely able, at present, toform any conjecture as to the relative ages of the numerousWe have introduced these islands into the map of Europe, in the '2nd volume,which may be supposed to relate to the commencement of the Eocene period.318 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXII.alluviums which cover the surface of Scotland, a country whichprobably became land long before the commencement of thetertiary epochs.Elevation of land gradual As we have assumed, throughoutthis and the preceding chapter, that the elevatory forcewas developed in a succession of minor convulsions in the southeastof England, we may seem called upon to answer an objectionwhich has been drawn from the verticality of the stratain the Isles of Wight and Purbeck. Mr. Conybeare hasremarked, that the vertical strata are traced through a districtnearly 60 miles in length, so that { if their present position werethe effect of a single convulsion, no disturbance in the leastcomparable with it has occurred in modern times V As wecan by no means dissent from this proposition, we only askwhere is the evidence that a single effort of the subterraneanforce, rather than reiterated movements, produced that sharpflexure of which we suppose the vertical strata of the Isle ofWight to form a part, the remainder of the arc having beencarried away by denudation.It appears extremely probable that the Cutch earthquake of1819, so often alluded to by usf, may have produced an incipientcurve, running in a linear direction through a tract atleast 60 miles in length. The strata were upraised in theAllah Bund, and depressed below the level of the sea in theadjoining tract, where the fort of Kindred was submerged. Itwould be impossible, if the next earthquake should raise theBund still higher, and sink to a lower depth the adjoiningtract, to discriminate, by any geological investigations, the differenteffects of the two earthquakes, unless a minute surveyof the effects of the first shock had been made and put onrecord. In this manner we may suppose the strata to be bent,again and again, in the course of future ages, until parts ofthem become perpendicular.To some it may appear, that there is a unity of effect in thePhil. Mag. and Annals, No. 49, new Series, p. 21.f Vol. i.) Second Edition, p. 465, and vol. ii., First Edition, p. 265.Ch. XXII.]EXCAVATION OF VALLEYS. 319line of deranged strata in the isles of Wight and Purbeck, asalso in the central axis of the Weald, which is inconsistentwith the supposition of a great number of separate movementsrecurring after long intervals of time. But we know thatearthquakes are repeated throughout a long series of ages, inthe same spots, like volcanic eruptions. The oldest lavas ofEtna were poured out many thousand, perhaps myriads, ofyears, before the newest, and yet they have produced asymmetrical mountain ; and if rivers of melted matter thuscontinue to flow in the same direction, and towards the samepoints, for an indefinite lapse of ages, what difficulty is thereinconceiving that the subterranean volcanic force, occasioningthe rise or fall of certain parts of the earth's crust, may, byreiterated movements, produce the most perfect unity ofresult ?Excavation of Valleys. In our attempt to explain the originof the existing valleys in the south-east of England, it will beseen that we refer their excavation chiefly to the ocean. Weareaware that we cannot generalize these views and applythem to the valleys of all parts of the world, In CentralFrance, for example, rivers and land-floods, co-operating withearthquakes, have deeply intersected the lacustrine and volcanicdeposits, and have hollowed out valleys as deep, perhaps, asany in our Weald district. In what manner these effects maybebrought about in the course of time, by the action of runningwater, even without the intervention of the sea, may beunderstood by what we have said of the removal of rock byaqueous agency during the Calabriann earthquakes *.Those geologists who contend that the valleys in Englandare not due to what they term ( modern causes,' are in thehabit of appealing to the fact, that the rivers in the interior ofEngland are working no sensible alterations, and could never,in their present state, not even in millions of years, excavatethe valleys through which they now flow. We suspect that afalse theory is involved even in the term ' modern causes,' asVol, i, chap. xxiv.320 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXII.if it could be assumed that there were ancient causes differingofrom those which are now in operation. But if we substitutethe phrase, existing causes, we shall find that the argumentnow controverted amounts to little more than this, ' that in acountry free from subterranean movements, the action of runningwater is so trifling that it could never hollow out, in anylapse of ages, a deep system of valleys, and, therefore, no knowncombination of existing causes could ever have given rise toour present valleys ! 'The advocates of these doctrines, in their anxiety to pointout the supposed absurdity of attributing to ordinary causesthose inequalities of hill and dale, which now diversify theearth's surface, have too often kept entirely out of view themany recorded examples of elevations and subsidences of landduring earthquakes, the frequent assuring of mountains, andopening of chasms,, the damming up of rivers by landslips,the deflection of streams from their original courses, and moreimportant, perhaps, than all these, the denuding power of theocean, during the rise of our continents from the deep. Fewof the ordinary causes of change, whether igneous or aqueous,can be observed to act with their full intensity in any one placeat the same time ; hence it is easy to persuade those whohave not reflected long and profoundly on the working ofthe numerous igneous and aqueous agents, that they are entirelyinadequate to bring about any important fluctuations inthe configuration of the earth's surface.Recapitulation. We shall now briefly recapitulate the conclusionsto which we have arrived respecting the geology ofthe south-east of England, in reference to the nature and originof the Eocene formations considered in this and the two precedingchapters.1. In the first place, it appears that the tertiary strata restexclusively upon the chalk, and consist, with some trifling exceptions,of alternations of clay and sand.2. The organic remains agree with those of the Paris basin,but the mineral character of the deposit is extremely different,Ch. XXII.] RECAPITULATION. 321those rocks in particular, which are common to the Paris basinand Central France, being wanting, or extremely rare, in theEnglish tertiary formations.3. The Eocene deposits of England are generally conformableto the chalk, being horizontal where the beds of chalk arehorizontal, and vertical where they are vertical ; so that bothseries of rocks appear to have participated in nearly the samemovements.4. It is not possible to define the limits of the ancient bordersof the tertiary sea in the south-east of England, in thesame manner as can be frequently done in those countries wherethe secondary rocks are unconformable to the tertiary.5. Although the tertiary deposits are chiefly confined to thetracts called the basins of London and Hampshire, insulatedpatches of them are, nevertheless, found on some of the highestsummits of the chalk intervening between these basins.6. These outliers, however, do not necessarily prove thatthe great mass of tertiary strata was once continuous betweenthe basins of London and Hampshire, and over other parts ofthe south-east of England now occupied by secondary rocks.7. On the contrary, it is probable that these secondary districtswere gradually elevated and denuded when the basins ofLondon and Hampshire were still submarine, and while theywere gradually becoming filled up with tertiary sand and clay.8. If, in illustration of this theory, we examine one of thedistricts thus "supposed to have been denuded, we find in theValley of the Weald decided proofs, that since the emergenceof the secondary rocks, an immense mass of chalk and subjacentformations has been removed by the force of water.9. We infer from the existence of large valleys along theoutcrop of the softer beds, and of parallel chains of hills whereharder rocks come up to the surface, that water was the removingcause ; and from the shape of the escarpments presentedby the harder rocks, and the distribution of alluviumover different parts of the surface of the Weald district, weVOL. III. Y322 EOCENE PERIOD. [Ch. XXII.conclude that the denudation was successive and gradual duringthe rise of the strata.10. We may suppose that the materials carried away fromthe denuded district were conveyed into the depths of the contiguoussea, through channels produced by cross fractureswhich have since become river-channels, and which now intersectthe chalk in a direction at right angles to the general axisof elevation of the country.11. The analogous structure of the Valley of Kingsclere,and other valleys which run east and west, like the Valley ofthe Weald, but are much narrower, accord also with the hypothesis,that they were all produced by the denuding power ofwater co-operating with elevatory movements.12. The mineral composition of the materials thus supposed tohave been removed in immense abundance from the Valley ofthe Weald, are precisely such as would, by degradation, formthe English Eocene strata.13. It is probable that there were many oscillations of levelduring the Eocene period, so that some tracts were alternatelyland and then sea, and then land again. These fluctuationsmay account for the furrowed surface of the chalk on which thetertiary strata sometimes repose, for the valleys on its surface,for the banks of shingle associated with the Plastic clay, forthe partial deposits of sand and clay on elevated tracts of chalk,and for the alternations of marine and fresh-water strata in theHampshire basin.14. The volcanic eruptions of the Eocene period in Auvergne,the changes of level which took place at the same timein the Paris basin, and those above alluded to in the south-eastof England, may all have belonged to one theatre of subterraneanconvulsion.15. The basins of London and Hampshire may have beenpartly formed by subsidences in the bed of the sea, contemporaneouslywith the elevation and emergence of the Wealddistrict.Ch. XXII.] RECAPITULATION. 32316. The movements which threw the chalk and the tertiarystrata of the isles of Wight and Purbeck into a vertical position,were subsequent to the formation of the Eocene freshwaterstrata of the Isle of Wight, but may possibly haveoccurred during the Eocene period.17. The masses of secondary rock which have been removedby denudation from the central axis of the Weald would, ifrestored, rise to more than double the height now attained byany patches of tertiary strata in England.18. If, therefore, the Eocene strata do not appear to occupya much lower level than the secondary rocks, from the destructionof which they have been formed, it is because the highestsummits of the latter have been cut off during the rise of theland, and thrown into those troughs where we now find thetertiary deposits.19. The upheaving of the strata of the London and Hampshirebasins may have been in great part effected towards theclose of the Eocene period ; but it must also have been in somepart due to the movements which raised the crag.Y 2CHAPTER XXIII.Secondary formations Brief enumeration of the principal groups No speciescommon to the secondary and tertiary rocks Chasm between the Eocene andMaestricht beds Duration of secondary periods Former continents placedwhere it is now sea Secondary fresh-water deposits why rare Persistency ofmineral composition why apparently greatest in older rocks Supposed universalityof red marl formations Secondary rocks why more consolidated Whymore fractured and disturbed Secondary volcanic rocks of many different ages.SECONDARY FORMATIONS.As we have already exceeded the limits originally assigned tothis work, it is not our intention to enter, at present, upon adetailed description of the formations usually called ' Secondary,'the elucidation of which might well occupy anothervolume. By ' secondary,' we mean those stratified rocks olderthan the tertiary, which contain distinct organic remains, andwhich sometimes pass into the strata called ( Primary,' to hedescribed in our concluding chapters.The observations which we are about to offer have chieflyfor their object to show that the rules of interpretation adoptedby us for the tertiary formations, are equally applicable to thephenomena of the secondary series. This last has been dividedinto several groups, and we shall briefly enumerate some ofthe principal of these for the convenience of reference, withoutpretending to offer to the student a systematic classification,founded on a full comparison of fossil remains.PRINCIPAL SECONDARY GROUPS. (Descending Series.)1. Strata from the chalk of Maestricht to the lower greensandinclusive.The number of species of testacea already procured from thedifferent members of this division amount to about 1000.The principal subdivisions are the Maestricht beds, the chalkwith and without flints, the upper green sand, the gault, andCh. XXIII.] Maastricht AND V,'EALDEN BEDS. 325the lower green-sand. The first of these groups is seen atSt. Peter's Mount, Maestricht, reposing upon the upper flintychalk of England and France. It is characterized by a peculiarassemblage of organic remains, perfectly distinct from thoseof the tertiary period. M. Deshayes, after a careful comparison,and after making drawings of more than 200 species ofthe Maestricht shells, has been unable to identify any one ofthem with the numerous tertiary fossils in his collection. Onthe other hand, there are several shells which are decidedlycommon to the calcareous beds of Maestricht and the whitechalk. The names of twelve of these, communicated by M.Deshayes, will be found in Appendix II., p. 60.But the fossils of the Maestricht beds extend not merelyinto the white chalk of the French geologists, but into theirgreen-sand,' which appears to correspond very nearly withthe upper green-sand of the English geologists. A list offive species of shells, common to the Maestricht beds andthe upper green-sand of France, will be found in AppendixII., p. 60.It will be seen by the above lists, that the belemnite, one ofthe cephalopodes not found in any tertiary formation, occursin the Maestricht beds ; an ammonite has also been discoveredin this group by Dr. Fitton, and is now in the collection of theGeological Society of London.That gigantic species of reptile, theMososaurus of Maestricht,has also been found by Mr. Mantelll in the English chalk.2. The Wealden, or the strata from the Weald clay to thePurbeck limestone inclusive.The numerous fossil shells of this group are referable to freshwatergenera, which are associated with many remains offluviatile and terrestrial reptiles and land-plants. We believethat no species, whether animal or vegetable, in this group, hasbeen distinctly identified with any found either in the superincumbentmarine beds of the first division, or in the subjacentrocks of the group No. 3, which are also of marine origin.326 SECONDARY FORMATIONS. [Ch. XXIII.3. Oolite, or Jura limestone formation.This division, in which we do not include the lias, contains agreat number of subordinate members, several of which mayrelate, perhaps, to periods as important as our subdivisions ofthe great tertiary epoch. The shells, even of the uppermostpart of the series, appear to differ entirely from the speciesfound in the division No. 1.4. The Lias.The shells of the argillaceous limestone, termed lias, andother associated strata, differ considerably from those of thepreceding group, as do the greater number of species of vertebratedanimals.5. Strata intervening between the Lias and the Carboniferousgroup.The formations which are referable to the interval whichseparated the great coal formations from the division last mentioned,are very various, and some of them, like the new redsandstone, contain few organic remains. One group, however,belonging to this period, the Muschelkalk of the Germans,which has no precise equivalent among the English strata, containsmany organic remains belonging to species perfectlydistinct from the fossils of the lias, and equally so from thoseof the carboniferous era next to be mentioned.6. Carboniferous group, comprising the coal-measures, themountain limestone, the old red sandstone, the transitionlimestone, the coarse slates and slaty sandstones called graywackeby some writers, and other associated rocks.The mountain and transition limestones of the English geologistscontain many of the same species of shells in common,and we shall therefore refer them for the present to the sameCh. XXIII.] SECONDARY FOSSILS. 327great period ; and, consequently, the coal, which alternates insome districts with mountain limestone, and the old red sandstonewhich intervenes between the mountain and transitionlimestones, will be considered as belonging to the same period.The coal-bearing strata are characterized by several hundredspecies of plants, which serve very distinctly to mark the vegetationof part of this era. Some of the rocks, termed gray wackein Germany, are connected by their fossils with the mountainlimestone.With this group we shall conclude our enumeration for thepresent ; for although other divisions may hereafter be requisite,we are not aware that any antecedent periods can yet beestablished on the evidence of a distinct assemblage of fossilremains. Traces of organization undoubtedly occur in rocksmore ancient than the transition limestone, and its associatedsandstones called gray wacke; but we cannot refer them to adistinct geological period, according to the principles laid downin this work, until we have obtained data for determining thespecific characters of a considerable number of fossil remains.In reviewing the above groups we may first call the reader'sattention to the important fact stated on the authority of M .Deshayes, that no species of fossil shells has yet been foundcommon to the secondary and tertiary formations*. Thismarked discordance in the organic remains of the two seriesis not confined to the testacea, but extends, so far as a carefulcomparison has yet been instituted, to all the other departmentsof the animal kingdom, and to the fossil plants. I am informedby M. Agassiz, whose great work on fossil fish isanxiously looked for by geologists, that after examining about500 species of that class, in formations of all ages, he could discoverno one common to the secondary and tertiary rocks ;nay, all the secondary species hitherto known to him, belong toM. Deshayes assures me that he has seen no tertiary shells in the Gosau beds,supposed by some geologists to be intermediate between the secondary and tertiaryformations ; but that some of the most characteristic species of Gosau occur in thegreen-sand beneath the chalk, at Mons in Belgium.SECONDARY FORMATIONS. [Ch. XXIII.(jencra distinct from those established for the classification oftertiary and recent fish.Chasm between the Eocene and Maestricht formations.There appears, then, to be a greater chasm between the organicremains of the Eocene and Maestricht beds, than between theEocene and Recent strata ; for there are some living shells inthe Eocene formations, while there are no Eocene fossils in thenewest secondary group. It is not improbable that a greaterinterval of time may be indicated by this greater dissimilarityin fossil remains. In the 3rd and-th chapters we endeavouredto point out that we have no right to expect, even when wehave investigated a greater extent of the earth's surface, thatwe shall be able to bring to light an unbroken chronologicalseries of monuments from the remotest eras to the present ;but as we have already discovered a long succession of depositsof different ages, between the tertiary groups first known andthe recent formations, so we may, perhaps, hereafter detect anequal, or even greater series, intermediate between the Maestrichtbeds and the Eocene strata.Duration of secondary periods. The different subdivisionsof the secondary group No. 1, extending from the chalk ofMaestricht to the lower green-sand inclusive, may, perhaps,relate to a lapse of ages as immense as the united tertiaryperiods, of which we have sketched the eventful history in thisvolume. Such a conjecture, at least, seems warranted, if wecan form any estimate of the quantity of time, by comparingthe amount of vicissitude in animal life which has occurredduring its lapse.Position of former continents. The existence of sea aswell as land, at every geological period, is attested by the remainsof terrestrial plants imbedded in the deposits of all ages,even the most remote. We find fluviatile shells not unfrequentlyin the secondary strata, and here and there somefresh-water formations ; but the latter are less common thanin the tertiary series. Eor this fact we have prepared thereader's mind, by the views advanced in the third chapterCh. XXIII.] FORMER CONTINENTS WHERE NOW SEA. 329respecting the different circumstances under which we conceivethe secondary and tertiary strata to have originated. We havethere hinted, that the former may have been accumulated in anocean like the Pacific, where coralline and shelly limestone areforming, or in a basin like the bed of the western Atlantic,,which may have received for ages the turbid waters of greatrivers, such as the Amazon, and Orinoco, each draining a considerableextent of continent. The tertiary deposits, on theother hand, may have been accumulated during the growthof a continent, by the successive emergence of new lands, andthe uniting together of islands. During such changes, inlandseas and lakes would be caused, and afterwards filled up withsediment, and then raised above the level of the waters.That the greater part of the space now occupied by theEuropean continent was sea when some of the secondary rockswere produced, must be inferred from the wide areas overwhich several of the marine groups are diffused ; but we donot suppose that the quantity of land was less in those remoteages, but merely that its position was very different. In theabove tabular view of the secondary rocks, we have shownthat immediately below the division No. 1, or ' the chalk andgreen-sand,' is placed a fresh-water formation called, in thesouth-east of England, the Wealden. This group has beenascertained to extend from west to east (from Lulvvorth Coveto the boundary of the Lower Boulonnois) about 200 Englishmiles, and from north-west to south-east (from Christchurch toBeauvais), about 220 miles, the depth or total thickness of thebeds, where greatest, being about 2000 feet *.Now these phenomena most clearly indicate, that there wasa constant supply in this region, for a long period, of a considerablebody of fresh water, such as might be supposed to havedrained a continent, or a large island, containing within it a loftychain of mountains. Dr. Fitton, in speaking of these appearances,recalls to our recollection that the delta of the newly-discoveredQuorra, or Niger, in Africa, stretches into the interiorFitton's Geology of Hastings, p. 58,330 SECONDARY FORMATIONS.[Ch. XXIII.for more than 170 miles, and occupies, it is supposed, a spaceof more than 300 miles along the coast, thus forming a surfaceof more than 25,000 square miles, or equal to about one halfof England *.Now if this modern e delta,' or, in other words, that part ofthe bed of the Atlantic which has been converted into land bymatter deposited immediately at the river's mouth, be soextensive, how much larger may be the space over which thesame kind of sediment may be distributed by the action of thetides and currents ! If, then, groups like the Wealden maybeformed near the mouths of great rivers, others, like thelias, may be produced by the wider dispersion of similar materialsover larger submarine areas. For we may conceive thatthe Niger may carry out the remains of land plants, and thecarcasses and bones of fluviatile reptiles, into places where theymay be swept away by currents and afterwards mingled farand wide with the marine shells and corals of the Atlantic.The reader will remember that we stated, in the first volumes ,that the common crocodile of the Ganges frequents both freshand salt water, the same species being sometimes seen far inland,many hundred miles from the sea, and at the same time swarmingon the sand-banks in the salt and brackish water beyondthe limits of the delta.If we are asked where the continent was placed from theruins of which the Wealden strata were derived, we are almosttempted to speculate on the former existence of the Atlantisof Plato, which may be true in geology, although fabulous asan historical event. We know that the present Europeanlands have come into existence almost entirely since the depositionof the chalk, and the same period may have sufficed forthe disappearance of a continent of equal magnitude, situatedfarther to the west.Secondary fresh-water deposits why rare. If there wereextensive tracts of land in the secondary period, we may presumethat there were lakes also ; yet we are not aware of anyFitton's Geology of Hastings, p. 58, who cites Lander's Travels.f Page 243 ; Second Edition, p, 279.Ch. XXIII.] PERSISTENCY OF MINERAL CHARACTER.pure lacustrine formations inter stratified with rocks older thanthe chalk. Perhaps their absence may be accounted for by theadoption of the theoretical views above set forth ; for if thepresent ocean coincides for the most part with the site of theancient continent, the places occupied by Jakes must have beensubmerged. It should also be recollected, that the areacovered by lakes, at any one time,, is very insignificant in proportionto the sea, and, therefore, we may expect that, after theearth's surface has undergone considerable revolutions in itsphysical geography, the lacustrine strata will be concealed, forthe most part, under superimposed marine deposits.Persistency of mineral character. In the same manner as itis rare and difficult to find ancient lacustrine strata, so also wecan scarcely expect to discover newer marine groups preservingthe same lithological characters continuously throughout wideareas. The chalk now seen stretching for thousands of milesover different parts of Europe, has become visible to us by theeffect, not of one, but of many distinct series of movements.Time has been required, and a succession of geological periods,to raise it above the waves in so many regions ; and if calcareousrocks of the Eocene or Miocene periods have been formed,preserving an homogeneous mineral composition throughoutequally extensive regions, it may require convulsions as numerousas all those which have occurred since the origin of thechalk, to bring them up within the sphere of human observation.Hence the rocks of more modern periods may appear ofpartial extent, as compared to those of remoter eras, not becausethere was any original difference of circumstances throughoutthe globe when they were formed, but because there has notbeen sufficient time for the development of a great series ofsubterranean volcanic operations since their origin.At the same time, the reader should be warned not to placeimplicit reliance on the alleged persistency of the same mineralcharacters in secondary rocks *. When it was first ascertainedthat an order of succession could be traced in the principalSee some remarks on this subject, vol. i. p, 90, and Second Edition, p. 102.332 SECONDARY FORMATIONS. [Ch. XXIII.groups of strata above enumerated by us, names were given toeach, derived from the mineral composition of the rocks inthose parts of Germany, England or France, where they happenedto be first studied. When it was afterwards acknowledgedthat the zoological and phytological characters of thesame formations were far more persistent than their mineralpeculiarities, the old names were still retained, instead of beingexchanged for others founded on more constant and essentialcharacters. The student was given to understand, that theterms chalk, green sand, oolite, red marl, coal, and others,were to be taken in a liberal and extended sense ; that chalkwas not always a cretaceous rock, but, in some places, as on thenorthern flanks of the Pyrenees, and in Catalonia, a saliferousred marl. Green-sand, it was said, was rarely green, and frequentlynot arenaceous, but represented in parts of the southof Europe by a hard dolomitic limestone. In like manner, itwas declared that the oolitic texture was rather an exceptionto the general rule in rocks of the oolitic period, and that noparticle of carbonaceous matter could often be detected in thetrue coal formation of many districts where it attains greatthickness. It must be obvious to every one, that inconvenienceand erroneous prepossessions could hardly fail to arise fromsuch a nomenclature, and accordingly a fallacious mode of reasoninghas been widely propagated, chiefly by the influence ofa language so singularly inappropriate.After the admission that the identity or discordance ofmineral character was by no means a sure test of agreement ordisagreement in the age of rocks, it was still thought, by manygeologists, that if they found a rock at the antipodes agreeingprecisely in mineral composition with another well known inEurope, they could fairly presume that both are of the sameage, until the contrary could be shown.Now it is usually difficult or impossible to combat such anassumption, on geological grounds, so long as we are imperfectlyacquainted with the geology of a distant country, inasmuchas there are often no organic remains in the foreignCh. XXIII.] SUPPOSED UNIVERSALITY OF RED MARL. 333stratum, and even if these abound and are specifically differentfrom the fossils of the supposed European equivalent, it maybeobjected, that we cannot expect the same species to haveinhabited very distant quarters of the globe at the same time.Supposed universality of red marl. We shall select a remarkableexample of the erroneous mode of generalizing now alludedto. A group of red marl and sandstone, sometimes containingsalt and gypsum, is found in England interposed between thelias and the carboniferous strata. For this reason, other redmarls and sandstones, associated some of them with salt andothers with gypsum, and occurring not only in different partsof Europe, but in Peru, India, the salt deserts of Asia, thoseof Africa, in a word, in every quarter of the globe, have beenreferred to one and the same period. The burden of proof isnot supposed to rest with those who insist on the identity ofage of all these groups, so that it is in vain to urge as an objection,the improbability of the hypothesis which would implythat all the moving waters on the globe were once simultaneouslycharged with sediment of a red colour.But the absurdity of pretending to identify, in age, all thered sandstones and marls in question, has at length been sufficientlyexposed, by the discovery that, even in Europe, theybelong decidedly to many different epochs. We have alreadyascertained, that the red sandstone and red marl with whichthe rock-salt of Cardona is associated, may be referred to theperiod of our chalk and green-sand *. We have pointed outthat in Auvergne there are red marls and variegated sandstones,which are undistinguishable in mineral composition,from the new red sandstone of English geologists, but whichwere deposited in the Eocene period ; and, lastly, the gypseousred marl of Aix in Provence, formerly supposed to be a marinesecondary group, is now acknowledged to be a tertiary freshwaterformation.I was led to this opinion when I visited Cardona in 1330, and before I wasaware that M. Dufrenoy had arrived at the same conclusions. Ann. des Sci. Nat.,Avril, 1831, p. 449.SECONDARY FORMATIONS [Ch. XXIII.Secondary rocks ivy more consolidated. One of the pointswhere the analogy between the secondary and tertiary formationshas been supposed to fail is the greater degree of solidityobservable in the former. Undoubtedly the older rocks, ingeneral, arc more stony than the newer ; and most of the tertiarystrata are more loose and incoherent in their texture thanthe secondary. Many exceptions, however, may be pointedout, especially in those calcareous and siliceous deposits whichhave been precipitated in great part from the waters of mineralsprings, and have been originally compact. Of this descriptionare a large proportion of the Parisian Eocene rocks, which aremore stony than most of the English secondary groups.But a great number of strata have evidently been consolidatedsubsequently to their deposition by a slow lapidifyingprocess. Thus loose sand and gravel are bound together bywaters holding carbonate and oxide of iron, carbonate of lime,,silica, and other ingredients, in solution. These waters percolateslowly the earth's crust in different regions, and oftenremove gradually the component elements of fossil organicbodies, substituting other substances in their place. It seems.,moreover, that the draining off of the waters during theelevation of land may often cause the setting of particularmixtures, in the same manner as mortar hardens when desiccated,or as the recent soft marl of Lake Superior becomeshighly indurated when exposed to the air *. The conversionof clay into shale, and of sand into sandstone, may, inmany cases, be attributed to simple pressure, produced by theweight of superincumbent strata, or by the upward heavingof subjacent masses during earthquakes. Heat is anothercause of a more compact and crystalline texture, which willbe considered when we speak of the strata termed ' primaryAll the changes produced by these various means require timefor their completion ; and this may explain, in a satisfactorymanner, why the older rocks are most consolidated, withoutVol. i. p. 226, and Second Edition, p. 259.Ch. Xxii]WHY MORE DISTURBED. 335entitling us to resort to any hypothesis respecting an originaldistinctness in the degree of lapidifi cation of the secondarystrata.Secondary rocks why more disturbed. As the older formationsare generally more stony, so also they are more fractured,curved, elevated, and displaced, than the newer. Are we, then,to infer, with some geologists, that the disturbing forces weremore energetic in remoter ages ? No conclusion can be moreunsound ; for as the moving power acts from below, the newerstrata cannot be deranged without the subjacent rocks participatingin the movement ; while we have evidence that theolder have been frequently shattered, raised, and depressed,again and again, before the newer rocks were formed. It isevident that if the disturbing power of the subterranean causesbe exerted with uniform intensity in each succeeding period,the quantity of convulsion undergone by different groups ofstrata will generally be great in proportion to their antiquity.But exceptions will occur, owing to the partial operation of thevolcanic forces at particular periods, so that we sometimes findtertiary strata more elevated and disturbed, in particular countries,than are the secondary rocks in others.Some of the enormous faults and complicated dislocations ofthe ancient strata may probably have arisen from the continuedrepetition of earthquakes in the same place, and sometimes fromtwo distinct series of convulsions, which have forced the samemasses in different, and even opposite directions, sometimes byvertical, at others by horizontal movements.Secondary volcanic rocks of different ages. The associationof volcanic rocks with different secondary strata is such as toprove, that there were igneous eruptions at many distinctperiods, as also that they were confined during each epoch, asnow, to limited areas. Thus, for example, igneous rocks contemporaneouswith the carboniferous strata abound in somecountries, but are wanting in others. So it is evident that thebottom of the sea, on which the oolite and its contemporarydeposits were thrown down, was, for the most part, free from336 SECONDARY FORMATIONS. [Ch. XXIII.submarine eruptions ; but at some points,, as in the Hebrides,it seems that the same ocean was the theatre of volcanic action.We have mentioned in the first volume *, that as the ancienteruptions occurred in succession, sufficient time usually interveningbetween them to allow of the accumulation of manysubaqueous strata, so also should we infer that subterraneanmovements, which are another portion of the volcanic phenomena,occurred separately and in succession.Chap. v. p. 88 ; and Second Edition, p. 100.CHAPTER XXIV,On the relative antiquity of different mountain-chains Theory of M. Elia deBeaumont His opinions controverted His method of proving that differentchains were raised at distinct periods His proof that others were contemporaneousHis reasoning, why not conclusive His doctrine of the parallelismof contemporaneous lines of elevation Objections Theory of parallelism atvariance with geological phenomena as exhibited in Great Britain Objectionsof Mr. Conybeare How far anticlinal lines formed at the same period areparallel Difficulties in the way of determining the relative age of mountains.RELATIVE ANTIQUITY OF MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.THAT the different parts of our continents have been elevated,in succession, to their present height above the level of the sea,is an opinion which has been gradually gaining ground withthe progress of science ; but no one before M. Else de Beaumonthad the merit even of attempting to collect together therecorded facts which bear on this subject, and to reduce themto one systematic whole. The above-mentioned geologist waseminently qualified for the task, as one who had labouredindustriously in the field of original observation, and whocombined a considerable knowledge of facts with an ardentlove of generalization.But he has been ambitious, we think unfortunately, ofanticipating the march of discovery in reference to the comparativeantiquity of different mountain-chains and their supposedconnexion with changes in the animate world. Hisspeculations differ entirely from the conclusions to which wehave arrived, and we therefore think it necessary to explainfully the reasons of our dissent. In order to put the reader inpossession of the principal points of M. de Beaumont's theory,we shall first offer a brief sketch of them, and then proceedto analyze the data on which they are founded.VOL. Ill, Z338 RELATIVE ANTIQUITY [Ch. XXIV.Theory of M. Else de Beaumont.1st. He supposes * that in the history of the earth therehave been long periods of comparative repose, during whichthe deposition of sedimentary matter has gone on in regularcontinuity, and there have also been short periods of paroxysmalviolence during which that continuity was broken.2ndly. At each of these periods of violence or " revolution "in the state of the earth's surface, a great number of mountain-chainshave been formed suddenly.*sadly. All the chains thrown up by a particular revolutionhave one uniform direction, being parallel to each other withina few degrees of the compass, even when situated in remoteregions ; but the chains thrown up at different periods have,for the most part, different directions.4thly. Each " revolution," or, as it is sometimes termed,"frightful convulsion," has coincided in date with another geologicalphenomenon, namely, te the passage from one independentsedimentary formation to another," characterized by aconsiderable difference in (t organic types."5thly. There has been a recurrence of these paroxysmalmovements from the remotest geological periods, and they maystill be reproduced, and the repose in which we live may hereafterbe broken by the sudden throw of another system ofparallel chains of mountains.Gthly. We may presume that one of these revolutions hasoccurred within the historical era when the Andes were upheavedto their present height, for that chain is the best definedand least obliterated feature observable in the present exteriorconfiguration of the globe, and was probably the last elevated.C 7thly. The instantaneous upheaving of great mountainmasses must cause a violent agitation in the waters of the sea,and the rise of the Andes may, perhaps, have produced thattransient deluge which is noticed among the traditions of somany nations.Lastly. The successive revolutions above mentioned cannotCh. XXIV.] OF MOUNTAIN-CHAINS. 339be referred to ordinary volcanic forces, but may depend on thesecular refrigeration of the heated interior of our planet.'It will at once be seen, that the greater number of the abovepropositions are directly opposed to that theory which we haveendeavoured to deduce, partly from the study of the earth'sstructure, and partly from the analogy of changes now in progressin the animate and inanimate world.Our opinions respecting the alternation of periods of generalrepose and disorder have been explained in former chapters f ;and we have pointed out our objections to the hypothesiswhich substitutes paroxysmal violence for the reiterated recurrenceof minor convulsions J.The speculation of M. de Beaumont concerning the ' secularrefrigeration' of the internal nucleus of the globe, considered asacause of the instantaneous rise of mountain-chains, appears tousmysterious in the extreme, and not founded upon any inductionfrom facts; whereas the intermittent action of subterraneanvolcanic heat is a known cause capable of giving riseto the elevation and subsidence of the earth's crust withoutinterruption to the general repose of the habitable surface.We have shown, in the second volume, that we believe thechanges in physical geography, which are unceasingly in progress,to be among the causes which contribute, in the courseof ages, to the extermination of certain species of animals andplants ; but the influence of these causes is slow and, for themost part, indirect, and has no analogy with those suddencatastrophes which are introduced into the theory now underreview. What have appeared to us to be the true causes ofthe abrupt transitions from one set of strata to another, containingdistinct organic remains, have been explained at lengthin the third and fourth chapters of this volume.Ann. des Sci. Nat., Septembre, Novembre, et De"cembre, 1829. RevueFranchise, No. 15, May, 1830. The last version by M. de B. which I haveseen is in the Phil. Mag. and Annals, No. 58, new series, p. 241.f Vol. i. pp. 64 and 88, and Second Edition, pp. 73 and 100; vol. ii. p. 196,and Second Edition, p. 203.J Vol. i, p. 79, and Second Edition, p. 90.See particularly from p. 26 to p, 34.Z 2340 RELATIVE ANTIQUITY [Ch.XXlV.The notion of deluges accompanying the protrusion ofmountain-chains is founded on a belief of the instantaneousnessof the movement which we are prepared to controvert, and onother assumptions which we have discussed in a former part ofthis volume *. On these topics, therefore, it will be unnecessaryfor us to dilate at present, and we shall merely addressourselves to the analysis of that evidence whereby M. de Beaumontendeavours to establish the successive elevation of differentmountain-chains, and the supposed law of parallelism inthe lines of contemporaneous elevation.M. de Beaumont's proofs that different chains were raised atdifferent epochs. ' We observe says M. Else de Beaumont,along nearly all mountain-chains, when we attentively examinethem, that the most recent rocks extend horizontally up to thefoot of such chains, as we should expect would be the case ifthey were deposited in seas or lakes of which these mountainshave partly formed the shores ; whilst the other sedimentarybeds tilted up, and more or less contorted on the flanks of themountains, rise in certain points even to their highest crests f.'There are, therefore, in each chain two classes of sedimentaryrocks, the ancient or inclined beds, and the newer or horizontal.It is evident that the first appearance of the chain itself was anevent ' intermediate between the period when the beds, nowupraised, were deposited., and that when the strata were producedhorizontally at its feet.'No. 82.Thus the chain A received its present form after the depositionof the strata 6, which have undergone great movements,and before the deposition of the group c, in which the stratahave not suffered derangement.See above, p. 148.f Phil, Mag. and Annals, No. 58, new Series, p. 242.Ch. XXIV.]OF MOUNTAIN-CHAINS. 341If we then discover another chain, 13, in which we find notonly the formation b, but the group c also, disturbed andNo. 83.thrown on its edges, we may infer that the latter chain is ofsubsequent date to A ; for B was elevated after the depositionof c, and before that of the group d ; whereas A originatedbefore the strata c were formed.In order to ascertain whether other mountain ranges are ofcontemporaneous date with A and B, or whether they arereferable to distinct periods, we have only to inquire whetherthe geological phenomena are identical, namely, whether theinclined and undisturbed sets of strata correspond to those inthe types above mentioned.Objections to M. de Beaumont's theory. Now all this reasoningis perfectly correct, so long as the particular groups ofstrata b and c are not confounded with the geological periodsto which they may belong, and provided due latitude is givento the term contemporaneous ; for it should be understood toallude not to a moment of time, but to the interval, whetherbrief or protracted, which has elapsed between two events,namely, between the accumulation of the inclined and that ofthe horizontal strata.But, unfortunately, the distinct import of the terms ' formation' and c period ' has been overlooked, or not attended tobyM. de Beaumont, and hence the greater part of his proofsare equivocal, and his inferences uncertain; and even if noerrors had arisen from this source, the length of some of hisintervals is so immense, that to affirm that all the chains raisedin such intervals were contemporaneous, is an abuse of language.In order to illustrate our argument, let us select thePyrenees as an example. This range of mountains, says M.de Beaumont, rose suddenly (a un seul jet) to its present342 RELATIVE ANTIQUITY [Ch. XXIV.elevation at a certain epoch in the earth's history, namely,between the deposition of the chalk and that of the tertiaryformations; for the former are seen in vertical, curved, anddistorted beds on the flanks of the chain, while the latter restupon them in horizontal strata at its base.The only proof offered of the extreme suddenness of theconvulsion is the shortness of the time which intervenedbetween the formation of the chalk and that of the tertiarystrata. ' For it follows,' we are told, ' from the unconformableposition of two systems of beds, the inclined and the horizontal,that the elevation of the former has not been effected in acontinuous and progressive manner, but that it has been producedin a space of time comprised between the periods ofdeposition of the two consecutive rocks, and during which noregular series of beds was formed ; in a word, that it was suddenand of short duration VWe are prepared to show that the Pyrenees cannot beassumed to have risen, as M. de Beaumont imagines, in the intervalbetween the period of the chalk and that of the tertiarystrata ; for we can only say that the movement took place afterthe commencement of the chalk epoch, and before the closeof the Miocene tertiary period. But, first, let us suppose thepremises of our author to be correct, and let us permit him toexclude the whole period of the chalk, on one hand, and of thetertiary formations in contact with it on the other ; what willthen be the duration of the interval ? We can only estimateits importance by ascertaining what description of chalk isfound on the flanks of the Pyrenees, and what horizontal tertiaryformations at their base.Now the beds called chalk, although they differ widely inmineral composition from the white chalk with flints ofEngland and France, contain the same species of fossil shells,and may, therefore, on that evidence, be referred to the sameage f . On the other hand, the horizontal tertiary strata at thePhil. Mag. and Annals, No. 58, new series, p. 243.f The fossils which I collected in company with Captain S. E. Cook, R. N.,Ch. XXIV.] OF MOUNTAIN-CHAINS. 343western end of the Pyrenees, near Bayonne, are certainly ofthe Miocene period.Such, then, being the age of the strata, and granting eventhat the movement occurred after the period of the whitechalk, and before the beginning of the Miocene era, there stillremains ample scope for conjecture as to the date of the event.For the upheaving of the Pyrenees may have been going onwhen the animals of the Maestricht beds flourished, or duringthe indefinite ages which may have elapsed between their extinctionand the introduction of the Eocene tribes, or duringthe Eocene epoch, or between that and the Miocene. Or therise may have been going on continuously throughout severalor all of these periods.But this is not all ; we must include within the possible spaceof time wherein the convulsions may have happened, part of theepochs both of the chalk and of the Miocene species. We havestated, that the newer Pliocene beds in Sicily have been raisedduring the newer Pliocene epoch, partly, perhaps, in theRecent, but this latter supposition will lend equal support toour present argument. Now, it is evident that the greater partof the species of testacea which pre-existed in the Mediterraneanhave survived the elevation of the newer Pliocene beds inSicily, and in the same manner there is no reason to concludethat the rise of the chalk in the Pyrenees exterminated theanimals which lived in the sea wherein the chalk was formed.In that case, a series of convulsions may not only have begun,but may even have been completed before the era when theMaestricht beds originated.In like manner the sea may have been inhabited by Miocenetestacea for ages before the deposition of those particularMiocene strata which occur at the foot of the Pyrenees, andthe disturbing forces may have operated in the Miocene period,from the newest secondary beds on the flanks of the Pyrenees, near Bayonne, wereexamined by M. Deshayes, and found identical with species of the chalk nearParis.344 RELATIVE ANTIQUITY [Ch. XXIV.notwithstanding the horizontality of the tertiary formationsof that age.In order to illustrate the grave objections above advanced,which are aimed at the validity of the whole of de Beaumont'sreasoning, let the reader suppose, that in some country threestyles of architecture had prevailed in succession, each for aperiod of 1000 years ; first the Greek, then the Roman, andthen the Gothic ; and that a tremendous earthquake was knownto have occurred in the same district during some part of thethree periods,, a shock of such violence as to have levelled tothe ground every building. If an antiquary, desirous of discoveringthe date of the catastrophe, should first arrive at acity where several Greek temples were lying in ruins and halfengulf plied in the earth, while many Gothic edifices werestanding uninjured, could he determine on these data the eraof the shock ? Certainly not. He could merely affirm thatit happened at some period after the introduction of the Greekstyle, and before the Gothic had fallen into disuse. Should hepretend to define the date of the convulsion with greater precision,and decide that the earthquake must have occurred inthe interval between the Greek and Gothic periods, that is tosay, when the Roman style was in use, the fallacy in his reasoningwould be too palpable to escape detection for a moment.Yet such is the nature of the erroneous induction which wearc now exposing. For, in the example above proposed, theerection of a particular edifice is not more distinct from theperiod of architecture in which it may have been raised, than isthe deposition of chalk, or any other set of strata, from the geologicalepoch to which they may belong. Yet, if on these groundswe are compelled to include in the interval in which the elevationof each chain may have happened, the periods of thosetwo classes of formations before alluded to, the deranged andthe horizontal, it follows that, even if all the facts appealed tobyde Beaumont are correct, his intervals are of indefiniteextent. He is not even warranted in asserting that the chain~Ch. XXIV.] OF Mountain CHAINS. 345A (p. 340) is older than B (p. 341), if he means that it waselevated at a different geological period, for both may have beenupheaved during the same period, namely, that when the stratac were formed.Supposed parallelism of contemporaneous lines of elevation.So, also, when he infers that two chains were simultaneouslyupraised, the proof fails, since the close of the period of thedisturbed strata and the commencement of the era of the undisturbedmust be added to the lapse of time during which thetwo chains may have originated, and in separate parts of whicheach may have been produced. With the insufficiency of theabove evidence the whole force of the argument in supportof the parallelism of lines of contemporaneous movement isannihilated.This hypothesis, indeed, of parallelism appears, even asstated by the author, in some degree at variance with itself.When certain European chains had been assumed to have beenraised at the same time on the data already impugned, it wasfound that several of these contemporaneous chains had aparallel direction. Hence it was presumed to be a general lawin geological dynamics that the chains upheaved at the sametime are parallel. For example, it was said that the Pyreneesand other cutaneous chains, such as the northern Apennines,have a direction about W. N. W. and E. S. E., and to this linethe Allegiance in North America conform, as also the ghautsof Malabar, and certain chains in Egypt, Syria, northernAfrica, and other countries ; and from this mere conformity indirectionit was presumed that all these mountain-ranges werethrown up simultaneously.To select another example, the principal chain of the Alps,differing in age and direction from the Pyrenees, is parallel tothe Sierra Morea, the Balkan, the chain of Mount Atlas, thecentral chain of the Caucasus, and the Himalaya. All theseridges, therefore, were probably heaved up by the same paroxysmalconvulsion ! The western Alps, on the other hand, rose ata still earlier period, when the parallel chains of Kill, in RELATIVE ANTIQUITY [Ch. XXIV.linaria, certain chains in Morocco, and the littoral Cordilleraof Brazil, were formed !Not only do these speculations refer to mountains nevertouched, as M. Boue remarks, by the hammer of the geologist,but they proceed on the supposition, that in these distant chainsthe geological and geographical axes always coincide. Nowwe know that in Europe the strike * of the beds is not alwaysparallel to the direction of the chain. As an exception, we mayinstance that pointed out by Von Dechen f , who states that inthe Hartz the direction or strike of the strata of slate and greywackeis sometimes from E. and W. and frequently N. ElandS. W.; whereas the geographical direction of the mountain-chainis decidedly from E. S. E. to W. N. W.In addition to these uncertainties, which should, in thepresent state of science, have deterred a geologist even fromspeculating on the phenomena of unexplored regions, the importantadmission is made by M. de Beaumont himself, that theelevating forces, whose activity must be referred to differentepochs, have sometimes acted in Europe in parallel lines. ' Itis worthy of remark, says that author, that the directions ofthree systems of mountains, namely, first, that of the Piles andthe Cote door; secondly, that of the Pyrenees; and thirdly,that of the islands of Corsica and Sardinia, are respectivelyparallel to three other systems, namely, first, that of Westmorelandand the Hunsdruck, secondly, that of the Gallons(or Vosges) and the hills of the Bocage, in Calvados ; andthirdly, the system of the north of England. The correspondingdirections only differ in a few degrees, and the twoseries have succeeded each other in the same order, leading tothe supposition, that there has been a kind of periodicalThe term * strike ' has been recently adopted by some of our most eminentgeologists from the German ' stretch,' to signify what our miners call the * line ofbearing ' of the strata. Such a term was much wanted, and as we often speak ofstriking off in a given direction, the expression seems sufficiently consistent withanalogy in our language.t Trans, of De la Beche's Geol. Manual, p. 41.Ch. XXIV.] OF MOUNTAIN-CHAINS. 347recurrence of the same, or nearly the same, directions ofelevation VHere then we have three systems of mountains, A, B, C,which were formed at successive epochs, and have each a differentdirection ; and we have three other systems, D, E, F,which, although they are assumed to have the same strike, as theseries first mentioned (D corresponding with A, E with B, andF with C), are nevertheless declared to have been formed atdifferent periods. On what principle, then, is the age of anIndian or transatlantic chain referred to one of these Europeanlines rather than another? why is the age of the Allegiance, orthe ghauts of Malabar, determined by their parallelism to Brather than to E, to the Pyrenees rather than to the Gallons ofthe Vosges? 'The substance of the last objection has been anticipatedby M. Bouef, who, at the same time, disputes the accuracy ofmany of the facts appealed to by M. de Beaumont. Othererrors in fact have also been pointed out by MM. Keferstein,Von Dechen, and De la Beche J. But the incorrectness of someof these data might not have affected the validity of the generaltheory if it had been founded on a solid basis. In regardto the Alps, MM. Necker and Studer have informed me, thaton re-examining that chain since de Beaumont's memoirs werepublished, they have been unable to reconcile the phenomenathere exhibited with his views relating to the strike and dip ofthat great chain.Professor Sedgwick has declared his adhesion to the opinionsof de Beaumont ; but we are not aware that he had maturelyconsidered them in all their bearings ; and he has stated someimportant objections to the doctrine of ' parallelism .' Amongothers, he has remarked, that in consequence of the spheroidalfigure of the earth, different mountain-chains, running north andPhil. Mag. and Annals, No. 58, new series, pp. 255, 256.f Journ. de Geologic, tome iii. p. 338.J Geol. Manual, p. 501, and Second Edition, p. 519.Anniv, Address to the Geol. Soc., Feb., 1831.348 RELATIVE ANTIQUITY I Ch. XXIV.south, cannot be strictly said to be parallel, since they would,if prolonged, cross each other at the poles.Objections of Mr. Conybeare. An inquiry was proposed, in1831, by the British Association for the Promotion of Science,whether the theory of M. Else de Beaumont, concerning theparallelism of lines of elevation of the same geological era, isagreeable to the phenomena as exhibited in Great Britain ? 'Mr. Conybeare, in the first part of his report, in answer to thisinquiry *, points out many lines of distinct ages in Englandwhich are exactly parallel, and others which, according to therules laid down by M. de Beaumont, ought to agree in age withcertain continental chains, and yet do not, having an entirelydifferent direction. He imagines that the general strike of thesecondary strata of our island, from N. E. to S. W., has beenthe result, not of any violent or single convulsion, but, on thecontrary, of ( a gradual, gentle, and protracted upheaving, continuedwithout interruption during the whole period of theformation of all these strata.'The same author has also adverted to some of the difficultiesattending the exact determination of the geological epochs ofthe elevation of each chain, especially w r here the disturbed andundisturbed strata in contact are not very nearly of the sameage, or, as he expresses it, ' where they arc not terms immediatelyfollowing one another in the regular geological series f.'We were forcibly struck with the uncertainty arising from thiscause during a late tour, when we discovered that at the easternend of the Pyrenees, on the side of France, tertiary strata of theolder Pliocene epoch abut against vertical mica-schist ; whileat the western extremity of the same mountain-range we find thedisturbed series to consist of chalk, the undisturbed of Miocenestrata. The chain is then lost in the sea, and we are precludedfrom pushing our investigations farther to the westward ; butPhil. Mag. and Juiun. of Sci., No. 2, third scries, p. 118. The second part,I believe, is not yet published,t Ibid., p. 120.CU.XXIV.] OF'MOUNTAIN-CIIAINS. 349if we could follow the strike of the beds in their submarine prolongation,who shall say that the tilted group might not befound to include strata newer than the chalk, the horizontalbeds older than the Miocene ?Supposed instantaneous rise of a mountain-chain. 'Everythingshows, says M. Else de Beaumont, that the instantaneouselevation of the beds of a whole mountain-chain is an event ofa different order from those which we daily witness *.'We observe with pleasure the rejection, by Mr. Conybeare,of the hypothesis that the disturbances affecting large geographicaldistricts have been produced at one blow, rather than bya series of shocks which may have occurred at intervals througha long period of ages, and that he contends for the greaterprobability of successive convulsions, on the ground that suchan hypothesis is most conformable to the only analogy presentedby actual causes ' the operations of volcanic forces j.*Modern volcanic lines not parallel. By that analogy we areled to suppose that the lines of convulsion, at former epochs,were far from being uniform in direction, for the trains ofactive volcanos are not parallel, as every one is aware who hasstudied Von Buch's masterly survey of the general range ofvolcanic lines over the globe J, and the elevations and subsidencecaused by modern earthquakes, although they maysometimes run in parallel lines within limited districts, have notbeen observed to have a common direction in distant and independenttheatres of volcanic action.We do not doubt that in many regions the ridges, troughs,and fissures caused by modern earthquakes, are, to a certainextent, parallel to each other, but only within a limited rangeof country ; and such appears to have been the case in manydistricts at former eras. The anticlinal lines of the WealdValley, before alluded to, and of the Isle of Wight, may, inthis manner, have been contemporaneous, that is to say, bothPhil. Mag. and Annals, No. 58, new series, p. 243.t Phil. Mag. and Jour. of Sci., No. 2, third series, p. 121.J Physical, Bench, der Canarischeu luseln. Berlin, 1825.350 RELATIVE ANTIQUITY [Ch. XXIV.may have been formed in some part of the Eocene period, anhypothesis which does not involve the theory of their havingbeen due to paroxysmal convulsions during one part of that vastperiod.It should be observed, that as some trains of burning volcanosare parallel to each other, so at all periods some independentlines of elevation may be parallel accidentally, or notin obedience to any known law of parallelism ; but, on thecontrary, as exceptions to the general rule. We hope thatthe speculations of M. de Beaumont will be useful in inducinggeologists to inquire how far the uniformity in the directionof the beds, in a region which has been agitated at any particularperiod, may extend ; but we trust that travellers will notbe led away with the idea that, on arriving in India, America,or New Holland, they have only to use the compass andexamine the strike of the beds in order to discover the relativeera of the movement by which they were upraised. Suchproblems can in truth be only solved by a patient and laboriousinvestigation of the sedimentary formations occurring in eachregion, and especially by the study of their organic remains.Difficulties attending the determination of the relative age ofmountains. If we are asked whether we cherish no expectationof fixing a chronological succession of epochs of elevationof different mountain-chains, we reply, that in the present stateof our science we have no hope of making more than a looseapproximation to such a result. The difficulty depends chieflyon the broken and interrupted nature of the series of sedimentaryformations hitherto brought to light, which appears soimperfect that we can rarely be sure that the memorials of somegreat interval of time are not wanting between two groups nowclassed as consecutive. Another great source of ambiguityarises from the small progress which we have yet made in identifyingstrata in countries somewhat distant from each other.There may be instances where the same set of strata, preservingthroughout a perfect identity of mineral character, maybetraced continuously from the flanks of one independentCh.XXIV.] OF MOUNTAIN-CHAINS. 351mountain-chain to the base of another, the beds being verticalor inclined in one chain, and horizontal in the other. Wemight then decide with confidence, according to the methodproposed by M. de Beaumont, on the relative eras when thesechains had undergone disturbance ; and from one point thussecurely established, we might proceed to another, until wehad determined the dates of many neighbouring lines ofconvulsion.We fear that the cases are rare where such evidence can beobtained; and, for the most part, we can identify the ageof strata, not by their continuity and homogeneous mineralcharacter, but by organic remains. When by their aid weprove strata to be contemporaneous, we must generally speakwith great latitude, merely intending that they were depositedin the same geological epoch during which certain animals andplants flourished.CHAPTER XXV.On the rocks usually termed ' Primary ' Their relation to volcanic and sedimentaryformations The ' primary ' class divisible into stratified and unstratifiedUnstratified rocks called Plutonic Granite veins Their various forms andmineral composition Proofs of their igneous origin Granites of the samecharacter produced at successive eras Some of these newer than certain fossiliferousstrata Difficulty of determining the age of particular granitesDistinction between the volcanic and the plutonic rocks Trappean rocks notseparable from the volcanic Passage from trap into granite Theory of theorigin of granite at every period from the earliest to the most recent.ON THE ROCKS COMMONLY CALLED PRIMARY.WE shall now treat of the class of rocks usually termed c primary,'a name which, as we shall afterwards show, is not alwaysapplicable, since the formations so designated sometimes belongto different epochs, and are not, in every case, more ancientthan the secondary strata. In general, however, this divisionof rocks may justly be regarded as of higher antiquity thanthe oldest secondary groups before described, and they may,therefore, with propriety be spoken of in these concludingchapters, for we have hitherto proceeded in our retrospectivesurvey of geological monuments from the newer to those ofmore ancient date.In order to explain to the reader the relation which we conceivethe rocks termed ' primary' to bear to the tertiary andsecondary formations, we shall resume that general view of thecomponent parts of the earth's crust of which we gave a slightsketch in the preliminary division of our subject in the2nd chapter *.We there stated that sedimentary formations, containingorganic remains, occupy a large part of the surface of our continents,but that here and there volcanic rocks occur, breakingthrough, alternating with, or covering the sedimentary deposits,See above, p. 8,Ch.XXV.] Platonic ROCKS. 353so that there are obviously two orders of mineral masses formedat the surface which have a distinct origin, the aqueous andthe volcanic.No. 84.a, Formations called primary (stratified and unstratified).b, Aqueous formations. c, Volcanic rocks.Besides these, however, there is another class, which cannotbe assimilated precisely to either of the preceding, and which isoften seen underlying the sedimentary, or breaking up to thesurface in the central parts of mountain-chains, constitutingsome of the highest lands, and, at the same time, passing downand forming the inferior parts of the crust of the earth. Thisclass, usually termed ' primary,' is divisible into two groups, thestratified and the unstratified. The stratified consists of therocks called gneiss, mica schist, argillaceous-schist (or clay-slate),hornblende-schist, primary limestone, and some others.The unstratified, or Plutonic, is composed in great measure ofgranite, and rocks closely allied to granite. Both these groupsagree in having, for the most part, a highly crystalline texture,and in not containing organic remains.Plutonic rocks. The unstratified crystalline rocks have beenvery commonly called Plutonic, from the opinion that theywere formed by igneous action at great depths, whereas thevolcanic, although they also have risen up from below, havecooled from a melted state upon or near to the surface. Thetheory conveyed by the name Plutonic is, we believe, correct.Granite, porphyry, and other rocks of the same family, oftenoccur in large amorphous masses, from which small veins anddikes are sent off, which traverse the stratified rocks called'primary,' precisely in the manner in which lava is seen insome places to penetrate the secondary strata.Granite Veins. We find also one set of granite veinsintersecting another, arid granitiform porphyries intrudingVOL. Ill, 2 AGRANITE VEINS.[Ch. XXV.themselves into granite, in a manner analogous to that of thevolcanic dikes of Etna and Vesuvius, where they cut and shifteach other, or pass through alternating beds of lava and tuff.No. 85.Granite veins traversing stratified rocJis.The annexed diagram will explain to the reader the mannerin which these granite veins often branch off from the principalmass. Those on the right-hand side, and in the middle, aretaken from Dr. Macculloch's representation of veins passingthrough the gneiss at Cape Wrath, in Scotland*. The veinson the left are described, by Captain Basil Hall, as traversingthe argillaceous schist of the Table Mountain at the Cape ofGood Hope']-.No. 8G.(Irnmtc veins traversing gneiss at Cape Wrath, in Scotland.We subjoin another sketch from Dr. Macculloch's interestingWestern Islands, plate 31.t Account of the structure of the Table-Mountain, &c., Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin.,vol. vii.Ch.XXV.] GRANITE VEINS. 355representations of the granite veins in Scotland, in whichthe contrast of colour between the vein and some of the darkvarieties of hornblende-schist associated with the gneiss rendersthe phenomena more conspicuous.The following sketch of a group of granite veins in Cornwallisgiven by Messieurs Von Oeynhausen and Von Dechen*.No. 87.Granite veins passing through Hornblende slate, Carnsilver Cove, Cornwall.The main body of the granite here is of a porphyritic appearancewith large crystals of felspar; but in the veins it is fine-grainedand without these large crystals. The general height of theveins is from 16 to 20 feet, but some are much higher.The vein-granite of Cornwall very generally assumes a finergrain, and frequently undergoes a change in mineral composition,as is very commonly observed in other countries-thus,according to Professor Sedgwick, the main body of theCornish granite is an aggregate of mica, quartz, and felspar ; butthe veins are sometimes without mica, being a granular aggregateof quartz and felspar. In other varieties quartz prevailsto the almost entire exclusion both of felspar and mica; inothers, the mica and quartz both disappear, and the vein issimply composed of white granular felspar f.Changes are sometimes caused in the intersected strata veryPhil, Mag. and Annals, No. 27, new Series, March, 1829.f On Geol. of Cornwall. Trans, of Cambridge Soc., vol. i. p. 124.2 A 2JUNCTION OF GRANITE AND LIMESTONE. [Ch. XXV.analogous to those which the contact of a fused mass might besupposed to produce.No. 88.Junction of granite and limestone in Glen Tilt.a, Granite.^ Limestone.c, Blue argillaceous schist.The above diagram from a sketch of Dr. Macculloch, representsthe junction of the granite of Glen Tilt in Perth-shire,with a mass of stratified limestone and schist. Thegranite, in this locality , often sends forth so many veins asto reticulate the limestone and schist, the veins diminishingtowards their termination to the thickness of a leaf of paper orathread. In some places fragments of granite appear entangledas it were in the limestone, and are not visibly connectedwith any larger mass, while sometimes, on the other hand, alump of the limestone is found in the midst of the granite.The ordinary colour of the limestone of Glen Tilt is lead blue,and its texture large grained and highly crystalline; but whereit approximates to the granite, particularly where it is penetratedby the smaller veins, the crystalline texture disappears, and itCh. XXV.]GRANITES OF DIFFERENT AGES. 357assumes an appearance exactly resembling that of horn-stone.The associated argillaceous schist often passes into hornblendeslate, where it approaches very near to the granite *.In the plutonic, as in the volcanic rocks, there is everygradation from a tortuous vein to the most regular form of adike, such as we have described as intersecting the tuffs andlavas of Vesuvius and Etna. In these dikes of granite, whichmay be seen, among other places, on the southern flank of MountAttach, one of the Grampian, the opposite walls sometimespreserve an exact parallelism for a considerable distance. It isnot uncommon for one set of granite veins to intersect another,and sometimes there are three sets, as in the environs ofHeidelberg, where the granite of the right bank of the Rhineis seen to consist of three varieties differing in colour, grain, andvarious peculiarities of mineral composition. One of these,which is evidently the second in age, is seen to cut through anolder granite, and another, still newer, traverses both thesecond and the first. These phenomena were lately pointedout to me by Professor Leon hard at Heidelberg.In Shetland there are two kinds of granite. One of these,composed of hornblende, mica, felspar, and quartz, is of a darkcolour, and is seen underlying gneiss. The other is a redgranite which penetrates the former everywhere in veins y.Granites of different ages. It was formerly supposed thatgranite was the oldest of rocks, the mineral product of a particularperiod or state of the earth formed long antecedently tothe introduction of organic beings into the planet. But itis now ascertained that this rock has been produced againand again, at successive eras, with the same characters, penetratingthe stratified rocks in different regions, but not alwaysassociated with strata of the same age. Nor are organic remainsalways entirely wanting in the formations invaded by granite,although their absence is more usual. Many well authenticatedexceptions to the rule are now established on the authority ofMacculloch, Geol. Trans., vol. iii. p. 259.t Macculloch, Syst. of Geol., vol. i. p. 58.358 GRANITES OF DIFFERENT AGES. [Ch. XXV.numerous observers, amongst the earliest of whom we may citeVon Buch, who discovered in Norway a mass of granite overlyingan ancient secondary limestone, containing orthocerataand other shells and zoophytes*.A considerable mass of granite in Sky is described byDr. Macculloch as incumbent on limestone and shale, whichare of the age of the English lias f . The limestone, which,at a greater distance from the granite, contains shells, exhibitsno traces of them near the junction of the igneous rock,where it has been converted into a pure crystalline marble J.This granite of Sky was at first termed ' Syenite by whichname many geologists have denominated the more moderngranites ; but authors have entirely failed in their attempt toestablish a distinction between granites and senates on mineralogicalcharacters. The latter have sometimes been defined toconsist of a triple compound of felspar, quartz, and hornblende,but the oldest granites are very commonly composed of theseingredients only. In his later publications Dr. Macculloch haswith great propriety, we think, called the plutonic rock of Skya granite .In different parts of the Alps a comparatively modern graniteis seen penetrating through secondary strata, which containbelemnites, and other fossils, and are supposed to be referableto the age of the English lias. According to the observations ofM. Else de Beaumont and Hugi, masses of this granite are sometimesfound partially overlying the secondary beds, and alteringthem in a manner which we shall describe more particularlywhen we treat of the changes in composition and structure superinducedupon sedimentary deposits in contact with Plutonicrocks (see wood-cut, No. 90, p. 371).In such examples we can merely affirm, that the granite isTravels through Norway and Lapland, p. 45. London, 1813.f See Murchison, Geol. Trans., 2nd Series, vol. ii. part ii. p. 311321.j Western Islands, vol. i. p. 330.Syst. of Geol., vol. i. p. 150.|| Else de Beaumont, Sur les Montagnes de 1'Oisans, Mem. de la Soc. d'Hist.Nat, de Paris, tome v. Hugi, Nature, Historical Alpenreise, Soleure, 1830.Ch. XXV.]TRAP ROCKS. 359newer than a secondary formation containing belemnites, butwe can form no conjecture when it originated, not even whetherit be of secondary or tertiary date. It is, indeed, verynecessary to be on our guard against the inference that a graniteis usually of about the same age as the group of strata intowhich it has intruded itself, for in that case we shall be inclinedto assume rashly that the granites found penetrating a moremodern secondary rock, such as the lias for example, are muchnewer than those found invading strata older than the carboniferousseries. The contrary may often be true, for theplutonic rock which was last in a melted state, may not havebeen forced up anywhere so near the surface as to enter intothe newer groups of strata, and it may have been injectedinto a part of the earth's crust formed exclusively of the oldersedimentary formations.'In a deep series of strata,' says Dr. Macculloch, 'the superioror distant portions may have been but slightly disturbed, orhave entirely escaped disturbance, by a granite which has notemitted its veins far beyond its immediate boundary. Howevercertain, therefore, it may be, that any mass of granite isposterior to the gneiss, the micaceous schist, or the argillaceousschists, which it traverses, or into which it intrudes, we areunable to prove that it is not also posterior to the secondarystrata that lie above them *.'There can be no doubt, however, that some granites aremore ancient than any of our regular series which we identifyby organic remains, because there are rounded pebbles of granite,as well as gneiss, in the conglomerates of the oldest fossiliferousgroups.Distinction between volcanic and plutonic rocks Trap.The next point to consider is the distinction between the plutonicand volcanic rocks. When geologists first began toexamine attentively the structure of the northern parts ofEurope, they were almost entirely ignorant of the phenomenaof existing volcanos, and when they met with basalt and otherSyst. of Geol.,vol.i.p.;i36,360 TRAP ROCKS. [Ch. XXV.rocks composed chiefly of augite, hornblende, and felspar,which are now admitted by all to have been once in a state offusion, they were divided in opinion whether they were ofigneous or of aqueous origin. We have shown in our sketchof the history of geology in the first volume, how much thepolemical controversies on this subject retarded the advancementof the science, and how slowly the analogy of the rocks inquestion to the products of burning volcanos was recognized.Most of the igneous rocks first investigated in Germany,France, and Scotland, were associated with marine strata, andin some places they occurred in tabular masses or platformsat different heights, so as to form on the sides of some hills asuccession of terraces or steps, from which circumstance theywere called trap' by Bergman (from trappa, Swedish for astaircase), a name afterwards adopted very generally into thenomenclature of the science.When these trappean rocks were compared with lavas producedin the atmosphere, they were found to be in general lessporous and more compact ; but in this instance the terms ofcomparison were imperfect, for a set of rocks, formed almostentirely under water, was contrasted with another which hadcooled in the open air.Yet the ancient volcanos of Central France were classed,in reference probably to their antiquity, with the trap rocks,although they afford perfect counterparts to existing volcanos,and were evidently formed in the open air. Mont Dor andthe Plomb du Cantal, indeed, may differ in many respects fromVesuvius and Etna in the mineral constitution and structure oftheir lavas; but it is that kind of difference which we must expectto discover when we compare the products of any two activevolcanos, such as Teneriffe and Hecla, or Hecla and Cotopaxi.The amygdaloidal structure in many of the trap formationsproves that they were originally cellular and porous like lava,but the cells have been subsequently filled up with silex, carbonateof lime, zeolite, and other ingredients which form the nodules.Dr.Macculloch, after examining with great attention theCh. XXV.] RELATIONS OF GRANITE AND TRAP. 361igneous rocks of Scotland, observes ' that it is a mere disputeabout terms to refuse to the ancient eruptions of trap the nameof submarine volcanos, for they are such in every essentialpoint, although they no longer eject fire and smokesThe same author also considers it not improbable that someof the volcanic rocks of the same country may have beenpoured out in the open airs .The recent examination of the igneous rocks of Sicily,especially those of the Val di Not, has proved that all themore ordinary varieties of European trap have been producedunder the waters of the sea in the Newer Pliocene period, thatis to say, since the Mediterranean has been inhabited by a greatproportion of the existing species of testacea. We are, therefore,entitled to feel the utmost confidence, that if we couldobtain access to the existing bed of the ocean, and explore theigneous rocks poured out within the last 5000 years beneaththe pressure of a sea of considerable depth, we should beholdformations of modern date scarcely distinguishable from themost ancient trap rocks of our island. We cannot, however,expect the identity to be perfect, for time is ever workingsome alteration in the composition of these mineral masses, as,for example, by converting porous lava into amygdaloids.Passage from trap into granite. If a division be attemptedbetween the trappean and volcanic rocks, it must be madebetween different parts of the same volcano, nay even the samerock, which would be called ' trap where it fills a fissure andhas assumed a solid crystalline form on slow cooling, must betermed volcanic, or lava, where it issues on the flanks of themountain. Some geologists may perhaps be of opinion thatmelted matter, which has been poured out in the open air,may be conveniently called volcanic, while that which appearsto have cooled at the bottom of the sea, or under pressure, butat no great depth from the surface, may be termed f trap ;'but we believe that such distinctions will lead only to confusion,and that we must consider trap and volcanic as synonymous.On the other hand, the difficulty of discrimi-Syst, of Geol., vol. ii. p. 1 14. f Ibid362 GRANITE AND TRAP. [Ch. XXV.eating the volcanic from the plutonic rocks is sufficientlygreat 5 for we must draw an arbitrary line between them, therebeing an insensible passage from the most common forms ofgranite into trap or lava.The ordinary granite of Aberdeen shire says Dr. Mac-bullock,' is the usual ternary compound of quartz, felspar, andmica, but sometimes hornblende is added to these, or thehornblende is substituted for the mica. But in many placesa variety occurs which is composed simply of felspar andhornblende, and in examining more minutely this duplicatecompound it is observed in some places to assume a fine grain,and at length to become undistinguishable from the greenstoneof the trap family. It also passes in the same uninterruptedmanner into a basalt, and at length into a soft claystone, with aschistose tendency on exposure, in no respect differing fromthose of the trap islands of the western coast.' The sameauthor mentions, that in Shetland a granite composed of hornblende,mica, felspar, and quartz, graduates in an equallyperfect manner into basalt f.It would be easy to multiply examples to prove that thegranitic and trap-rocks pass into each other, and are merelydifferent forms which the same elements have assumed accordingto the different circumstances under which they have consolidatedfrom a state of fusion. What we have said respecting themode of explaining the different texture of the central and externalparts of the Vesuvian dikes may enable the reader in somemeasure to comprehend how such differences may originate J.The same lava which is porous where it has flowed overfrom the crater, and where it has cooled rapidly and undercomparatively slight pressure, is compact and porphyritic inthe dike. Now these dikes are evidently the channels of communicationbetween the crater and the volcanic foci below ; sothat we may suppose them to be continuous to the depth ofseveral hundred fathoms, or perhaps two or three miles, or evenmore ; and the fluid matter below, which cools and consolingof Geol,, vol. i. p. 157. f Ibid., p, 158.J See above, p. 124.Ch. XXV.]ORIGIN OF GRANITE. 363dates slowly under so enormous a pressure, may be supposedto acquire a very distinct texture and become granite.If it be objected that we do not find in mountain-chains volcanicdikes passing upwards into lava, and downwards intogranite, we may answer that our vertical sections are usuallyof small extent, and it is enough that we find in certain localitiesa transition from trap to porous lava, and in others apassage from granite to trap. It should also be remembered,that a large proportion of the igneous rocks, when first formed,cannot be supposed to reach the surface, and these may assumethe usual granitic texture without graduating into trap, or intosuch lava and scoriae as are found on the flanks of a volcaniccone.Theory of the origin of granite at all periods. It is notuncommon for lava-streams to require more than ten years tocool in the open air, and a much longer period where theyare of great depth. The melted matter poured out fromJorullo, in Mexico, in the year 1759, which accumulated insome places to the height of 550 feet, was found to retain ahigh temperature half a century after the eruption*. Forwhat immense periods, then, must we not conclude that greatmasses of subterranean lava in the volcanic foci may remain inared hot or incandescent state, and how gradual must be theprocess of refrigeration ! This process may be sometimesretarded for an indefinite period, by the accession of freshsupplies of heat, for we find that the lava in the crater of Stromboli,one of the Lipari islands, has been in a state of constantebullition for the last 2000 years, and we must suppose thisfluid mass to communicate with some cauldron or reservoir offused matter below. In the Isle of Bourbon, also, where therehas been an emission of lava once in every two years for a longperiod, we may infer that the lava below is permanently in astate of liquefaction.When melted matter is injected into the fissures of a contiguousrock at a considerable depth, it may cool rapidly if thatrock has not acquired a high temperature ; but suppose, on heSee vol. i. p, 378, and Second Edition, p, 433.36-t AGE OF PLUTONIC ROCKS. [Ch. XXV.contrary, that it has been heated, and still continues for centuries,or thousands of years, at a red heat, the vein mayacquire a highly crystalline texture.The great pressure of a superincumbent mass, and exclusionfrom contact with air or water, are probably the usual conditionsnecessary to produce the granitic texture; but thesame may sometimes be superinduced at a slighter distancefrom the surface by slow refrigeration, when additional suppliesof heat check, from time to time, the cooling process andcause it to be indefinitely protracted.If, for the reasons above alluded to, we conceive it probablethat plutonic rocks have originated in the nether parts of theearth's crust, as often as the volcanic have been generated atthe surface, we may imagine that no small quantity of theformer class has been forming in the recent epoch, since wesuppose that about 2000 volcanic eruptions may occur in thecourse of every century, either above the waters of the sea orbeneath them *.We may also infer, that during each preceding period,whether tertiary or secondary, there have been granites andgranitiform rocks generated, because we have already discoveredthe monuments of ancient volcanic eruptions at almostevery period.In the next chapter we shall endeavour to show, that inconsequenceof the great depths at which the plutonic rocksusually originate, and the manner in which they are associatedwith the older sedimentary strata of each district, it is rarelypossible to determine with exactness their relative age. Yetthere is reason to believe that the greater portion of the plutonicformations now visible are of higher antiquity than the oldestsecondary strata. We shall also endeavour to point out, thatthis opinion is by no means inconsistent with the theory thatequal quantities of granite may have been produced in succession,during equal 2^criods of time, from the earliest to the mostmodern epochs.Sec vol. i. clap. xxii.CHAPTER XXVI.On the stratified rocks usually called 'primary' Proofs from the disposition oftheir strata that they were originally deposited from water Alternation of bedsvarying in composition and colour Passage of gneiss into granite Alterationof sedimentary strata by trappean and granitic dikes Inference as to theorigin of the strata called ' primary ' Conversion of argillaceous into hornblendeschist The term * Hypogene ' proposed as a substitute for primaryMetamorphic' for ' stratified primary ' rocks No regular order of successionof hypogene formations Passage from the metamorphic to the sedimentarystrata Cause of the high relative antiquity of the visible hypogene formationsThat antiquity consistent with the hypothesis that they have been producedat each successive period in equal quantities Great volume of hypogenerocks supposed to have been formed since the Eocene period Concludingremarks.ON THE STRATIFIED ROCKS CALLED < PRIMARY.'WE stated in the last chapter, that the rocks usually termed'primary' are divisible into two natural classes, the stratifiedand the unstratified. The propriety of the term stratified, asapplied to the first-mentioned class, will not be questionedwhen the rocks so designated are carefully compared with strataknown to result from aqueous deposition.Mode of sf ratification. If we examine gneiss, which consistsof the same materials as granite, or mica-schist which is abinary compound of quartz and mica, or clay-slate, or anyother member of the so-called primary division, we find thatit is made up of a succession of beds, the planes of whichare, to a certain extent, parallel to each other, but which frequentlydeviate from parallelism in a manner precisely analogousto that exhibited by sedimentary formations of all ages.The resemblance is often carried farther, for in the crystallineseries we find beds composed of a great number of layersplaced diagonally, as we have shown to be the case in the366 STRATIFIED ROCKS [Ch. XXVI.Crag and other formations *. This disposition of the layersNo. 89.Lamination of clay-slate, Montague de Seguinat, near Gavarnie, in the Pyrenees.is illustrated in the accompanying diagram, in which I haverepresented carefully the stratification of a coarse argillaceousschist, which I examined in the Pyrenees, part of which approachesin character to a green and blue roofing slate, whilepart is extremely quartzose, the whole mass passing downwardsinto micaceous schist. The vertical section here exhibited isabout three feet in height, and the layers are sometimes so thinthat fifty may be counted in the thickness of an inch. Someof them consist of pure quartz.The stratification now alluded to must not be confoundedwith that fissile texture sometimes observed in the older rocks,by virtue of which they divide in a direction different bothfrom the general planes of stratification and from the planesof those transverse layers of which a single stratum may bemade up.Another striking point of analogy between the stratificationof the crystalline formations and that of the secondary andtertiary periods is the alternation in each of beds varyinggreatly in composition, colour, and thickness. We observe, forinstance, gneiss alternating with layers of black hornblende-schist,or with granular quartz or limestone, and the interchangeof these different strata may be repeated for an indefinitenumber of times. In like manner, mica schist alternates withchlorite-schist, and with granular limestone in thin layers.As we observe in the secondary and tertiary formationsSee above, p. 173,Ch. XXVI.]CALLED e PRIMARY.' 367strata of pure siliceous sand alternating with micaceous sandand with layers of clay, so in the * primary' we have beds ofpure quartz rock alternating with mica-schist and clay-slate.As in the secondary and tertiary series we meet with limestonealternating again and again with micaceous or argillaceous sand,so we find in the ' primary 1 gneiss and mica-schist alternatingwith pure and impure granular limestones.Passage of gneiss into granite If, then, reasoning from theprinciple that like effects have like causes, we attribute thestratification of gneiss, mica-schist, and other associated rocks,to sedimentary deposition from a fluid, we encounter this difficulty,that there is often a transition from gneiss, one of thestratified series, into granite, which, as we have shown, is ofigneous origin. Gneiss is composed of the same ingredients asgranite, and its texture is equally crystalline. It sometimesoccurs in thick beds, and in these the rock is often quiteundistinguishable, in hand specimens, from granite; yet thelines of stratification are still evident. These lines imply depositionfrom water, while the passage into granite would lead usto infer an igneous origin. In what manner can we reconcilethese apparently conflicting views ? The Huttonian hypothesisoffers, we think, the only satisfactory solution of this problem.According to that theory, the materials of gneiss were originallydeposited from water in the usual form of aqueous strata, butthese strata were subsequently altered by their proximity togranite, and to other plutonic masses in a state of fusion, untilthey assumed a granitiform texture. The reader will be prepared,by what we have said of granite, to conclude, that whenvoluminous masses of melted rock have been for ages in anincandescent state, in contact with sedimentary deposits, theymust produce some alteration in their texture, and this alterationmay admit of every intermediate gradation between that resultingfrom perfect fusion, and the slightest modification whichheat can produce.The geologist has been conducted, step by step, to this368 ALTERATIONS PRODUCED[Ch. XXVI.theory by direct experiments on the fusion of rocks in the laboratory,and by observation of the changes in the compositionand texture of stratified masses, as they approach or come incontact with igneous veins and dikes. In studying the latterclass of phenomena, we have the advantage of examining thecondition of the rock at some distance from the dike where ithas escaped the influence of heat, and its state where it hasbeen near to, or in contact with, the fused mass. The changesthus exhibited may be regarded as the results of a series ofexperiments, made on a great scale by nature under everyvariety of condition, both as relates to the mineral ingredientsof the rocks, the intensity of heat or pressure, the celerity orslowness of the cooling process, and other circumstances.Strata altered by volcanic dikes Plas Newydd. We shallselect a few examples of these alterations in illustration of ourpresent argument. One of the most interesting is the modificationof strata in the proximity of a volcanic dike near PlasNewydd, in Anglesea, described by Professor Henslowe. Thedike is 134 feet wide, and consists of basalt (dolerite ofsome authors), a compound of felspar and augite. Strata ofshale and argillaceous limestone, through which it cuts perpendicularly,are altered to a distance of thirty, or even in someplaces to thirty-five feet, from the edge of the dike. Theshale, as it approaches the basalt, becomes gradually morecompact, and is most indurated where nearest the junction.Here it loses part of its schistose structure, but the separationinto parallel layers is still discernible. In several places theshale is converted into hard porcellanous jasper. In the mosthardened part of the mass the fossil shells, principally Produce,are nearly obliterated, yet even here their impressions mayfrequently be traced. The argillaceous limestone undergoesanalogous mutations, losing its earthy texture as it approachesthe dike, and becoming granular and crystalline. But themost extraordinary phenomenon is the appearance in the shaleof numerous crystals of analcime and garnet, which areCh. XXVI.] BY VOLCANIC DIKES. 369distinctly confined to those portions of the rock affected by thedike*. Garnets have been observed, under very analogouscircumstances, in High Tweeddale, by Professor Sedgwick,where they also occur in shale and limestone, altered by abasaltic dike. This discovery is most interesting, becausegarnets often abound in mica-schist, and we see in the instancesabove cited, that they did not previously exist in the shale andlimestone, and that they have evidently been produced by heatin rocks in which the marks of stratification have not beeneffaced.Stirling Castle. To select another example : we find in therock of Stirling Castle, a calcareous sandstone fractured andforcibly displaced by a mass of green-stone, which has evidentlyinvaded the strata in a melted state. The sandstone has beenindurated, and has assumed a texture approaching to hornstonenear the junction. So also in Arthur's Seat and Salisbury Craig,near Edinburgh, a sandstone is seen to come in contact withgreenstone, and to be converted into a fastidious rock f.Antrim. In the north of Ireland, in several parts of thecounty of Antrim, chalk, with flints, is traversed by basalticdikes. The chalk is converted into granular marble near thebasalt, the change sometimes extending eight or ten feet fromthe wall of the dike, being greatest at that point, and thencegradually decreasing till it becomes evanescent. ' The extremeeffect,' says Dr. Berger, presents a dark brown crystallinelimestone, the crystals running in flakes as large as those ofcoarse primitive limestone ; the next state is saccharine, thenfine-grained and arenaceous ; a compact variety having a poreaspect, and a bluish-grey colour succeeds ; this,towards the outer edge, becomes yellowish-white, and insensiblygraduates into the unaltered chalk. The flints in thealtered chalk usually assume a grey yellowish colour J.' AllTrans, of Cambridge Phil. Soc., vol. i. p. 406.f illust. of Hurt. Theory, $ 253 and 261. Dr. Macculloch, Geol. Trans., 1stseries, vol. ii. p. 305.I Dr. Berger, Geol. Trans., 1st series, vol. iii. p. 172.VOL. III. 2 B370 ALTERATION OF STRATA[Ch. XXVI.traces of organic remains are effaced in that part of the limestonewhich is most crystalline.As the carbonic acid has not been expelled, in'this instance,from that part of the rock which must be supposed to havebeen melted, the change must have taken place under considerablepressure ; for we know , by the experiments of Sir JamesHall, that it would require the weight of about 1700 feet ofsea-water, which would be equivalent to the pressure of acolumn of liquid lava 600 feet high, to prevent this acid frombeing given off.Another of the dikes of the north-east of Ireland has converteda mass of red sandstone into hornstone *. By another,the slate-clay of the coal-measures has been indurated, and hasassumed the character of flinty slate ( ; and in another placethe slate-clay of the lias has been changed into flinty slate,which still retains numerous impressions of ammonites J. Oneof the greenstone dikes of the same country passes through abed of coal, which it reduces to a cinder for the space of ninefeet on each side .The secondary sandstones in Sky are converted into solidquartz in several places where they come in contact with veinsor masses of trap ; and a bed of quartz, says Dr. Macculloch,has been found near a mass of trap, among the coal-strata ofFife, which was in all probability a stratum of ordinary sandstonesubsequently indurated by the action of heat ||.Alterations of strata in contact with granite. Havingselected these from innumerable examples of mutations causedby volcanic dikes, we may next consider the changes producedby the contiguity of plutonic rocks. To some of these wehave already adverted, when speaking of granite veins, andendeavouring to establish the igneous origin of granite. Wementioned that the main body of the Cornish granite sendsforth veins through the kills of that country", a coarseargillaceous schist, which is converted into hornblende-schistRev. W. Conybeare, Geol. Trans., 1st series, vol.iii. p. 201.f Ibid., p. 205. I Ibid. p. 213, and Mayfair, Illust. of Hurt. Theory, 253.Ibid., p. 206. || Syst. of Geol., vol. i.p.206. ^[ See diagram, No. 87.Ch.XXVL] ,IN CONTACT WITH GRANITE.near the contact with the veins. These appearances are wellseen at the junction of the granite and kills in St. Michael'sMount, a small island nearly 300 feet high, situated in the bay,at the distance of about three miles from Penzance.In the department of the Hautes Alpes, in France, nearVieille, M. Else de Beaumont traced a black argillaceouslimestone, charged with belemnites to within a few yards of amass of granite. Here the limestone begins to put on aNo. 90.Junction of granite ivith Jurassic or oolite strata in the Alps, near Chameleon.granular texture, but is extremely fine-grained. When nearerthe junction it becomes grey and has a saccharoid structure.In another locality, near Chameleon, a granite composed ofquartz, black mica, and rose-coloured felspar, is observedpartly to overlie the secondary rocks, producing an alterationwhich extends for about thirty feet downwards, diminishing inthe inferior beds which lie farthest from the granite. (See woodcutNo. 90.) In the altered mass the argillaceous beds arehardened, the limestone is saccharoid, the grits quartzose, and inthe midst of them is a thin layer of an imperfect granite. It isalso an important circumstance, that near the point of contactboth the granite and the secondary rocks become metalliferous,and contain nests and small veins of blende, galena, iron, andcopper pyrites. The stratified rocks become harder and more2 B 2372 PASSAGE OF GNEISS INTO GRANITE. [Ch. XXVI.crystalline, but the granite, on the contrary, softer and lessperfectly crystallized near the junction *.It will appear from sections described by M. Hugi, thatsome of the secondary beds of limestone and slate, which arein a similar manner overlaid by granite, have been alteredinto gneiss and mica-schist f. Some of these altered sedimentaryformations are supposed, by M. Else de Beaumont, tobe of the age of the lias of England, and others to be even asmodern as the Jurassic or oolite formations.We can scarcely doubt, in these cases, that the heat communicatedby the granitic mass reduced the contiguous stratato semi-fusion, and that on cooling slowly the rock assumeda crystalline texture. The experiments of Gregory Wattprove, distinctly, that a rock need not be perfectly melted inorder that a re- arrangement of its component particles shouldtake place, and that a more crystalline texture should ensue.We may easily suppose, therefore, that all traces of shells andother organic remains may be destroyed, and that new chemicalcombinations may arise, without the mass being so fused as thatthe lines of stratification should be wholly obliterated.In allusion to the passage from granite to gneiss beforedescribed, Dr. Macculloch remarks, that 'in numerous parts ofScotland, where the leading masses of gneiss are schistose,evenly stratified, and scarcely ever traversed by granite veins,they become contorted and irregular as they approach thegranite ; assuming also the granitic character, and becomingintersected by veins, numerous in proportion to the vicinity ofthe mass. The conclusion he adds, 'is obvious; the fluidgranite has invaded the aqueous stratum as far as its influencecould reach, and thus far has filled it with veins, disturbed itsregularity and generated in it a new mineral character, oftenabsolutely confounded with its own. And if the more remotebeds, and those alternating with other rocks, are not thusElse de Beaumont, Sur les Montagues de 1'Oisans, &c. ; Mem. de la Soc.d'Hist. Nat. de Paris, tome v.t Nature, Historical Alpenreise, Soleure, 1830.Ch.XXVi.] ALTERED ROCKS. 373affected, it is not only that it has acted less on those, but that,if it had equally affected them, they never could have existed,or would have been all granitic and venous gneiss *.According to these views, gneiss and mica-schist may benothing more than micaceous and argillaceous sandstones alteredby heat, and certainly, in their mode of stratification and lamination,they correspond most exactly. Granular quartz mayhave been derived from siliceous sandstone, compact quartz fromthe same. Clay slate may be altered shale, and shale appears tobe clay which has been subjected to great pressure. Granularmarble has probably originated in the form of ordinary limestone,having in many instances been replete with shells andcorals now obliterated, while calcareous sands and marls havebeen changed into impure crystalline limestones.Associated with the rocks termed primary we meet withanthracite, just as we find beds of coal in sedimentary formations,and we know that, in the vicinity of some trap dikes,coal is converted into anthracite. ' Hornblende schist,' saysDr. Macculloch, ' may at first have been mere clay, for clay orshale is found altered by trap into Lydian stone, a substancediffering from hornblende-schist almost solely in compactnessand uniformity of texture f.' ' In Shetland,' remarks the sameauthor, ( argillaceous schist (or clay-slate), when in contactwith granite, is sometimes converted into hornblende-schist,the schist becoming first siliceous, and ultimately, at thecontact, hornblende-schist J.'This theory, if confirmed by observation and experiment,may enable us to account for the high position in the seriesusually held by clay slate relatively to hornblende-schist, as alsoto gneiss and mica-schist, which so commonly alternate withhornblende-schist. For we must suppose the heat which altersthe strata to proceed, in almost all cases, from below upwards,and to act with greatest intensity on the inferior strata. If,therefore, several sets of argillaceous strata or shales be superimposedupon each other in a vertical series of beds in the sameSyst. of Geol., vol. ii. p. 145. f Ibid., vol. i. p. 210. J Ibid., p. 21 1IIYPOGENE ROCKS. [Ch.XXVI.district, the lowest of these will be converted into hornblende-schist,while the uppermost may continue in the condition ofclay-si ate.The term 'Ilypoyrne ' proposed for Primary. If our readershave followed us in the train of reasoning explained in this andthe preceding chapter, they must already be convinced thatthe popular nomenclature of Geology, in reference to the socalled ' primary ' rocks, is not only imperfect, but in a greatdegree founded on a false theory ; inasmuch as some granitesand granitic schists are of origin posterior to many secondaryrocks. In other words, some primary formations can alreadybe shown to be newer than many secondary groups a manifestcontradiction in terms.Yet granite and gneiss, and the families of stratified andunstratified rocks connected with each, belong to one greatnatural division of mineral masses, having certain characters incommon, and it is therefore convenient that the class to whichthey belong should receive some common name a name whichmust not be of chronological import, and must express, on theone hand, some peculiarity equally attributable to granite andgneiss (to the plutonic as well as the altered rocks), and which,on the other, must have reference to characters in which thoserocks differ both from the volcanic and from the unalteredsedimentary strata. We propose the term ' hypogene ' for thispurpose, derived from Veto, sumter, and yjvcpoai, nuscor, a wordimplying the theory that granite and gneiss are both netlicr-formed rocks, or rocks which have not assumed their presentform and structure at the surface. It is true that gneiss andall stratified rocks must have been deposited originally at thesurface, or on that part of the surface of the globe which iscovered by water; but according to the views explained in thisand the foregoing chapter, they could never have acquiredtheir crystalline texture, unless acted upon by heat under pressurein those regions, and under those circumstances wherethe plutonic rocks are generated.Tku 1 1.' nn ' Metamorphic ' yrupuscd fur stratified primary*Ch. XXVI.] Metal ORPHIC ROCKS. 375We divide the hypogene rocks, then, into the unstratified, orplutonic, and the altered stratified. For these last the termmetamorphic ' (from /xsra, trans, and //,o(p7j, form) may beused. The last-mentioned name need not, however, be oftenresorted to, because we may speak of hypogene strata, hypogenelimestone, hypogene schist, and this appellation will sufficeto distinguish the formations so designated from the plutonicrocks. By referring to the table (No. I.) at the close of thischapter, the reader will see the chronological relation which weconceive the two classes of hypogene rocks to bear to the strataof different ages.No order of succession in hypogene formations. When weregard the tertiary and secondary formations simply as mineralmasses uncharacterized by organic remains, we perceive anindefinite series of beds of limestone, clay, marl, siliceous sand,sandstone, coal, and other materials, alternating again andagain without any fixed or determinate order of position. Thesame may be said of the hypogene formations, for in these asimilar want of arrangement is manifest, if we compare thoseoccurring in different countries. Gneiss, mica-schist, ,quartz rock, hypogene limestone, and the rest,have no invariable order of superposition, although, for reasonsabove explained, clay-slate must usually hold a superior positionrelatively to hornblende schist.We do not deny, that in a particular mountain-chain, achronological succession of hypogene formations may be recognized,for the same reason that in a country of limited extentthere is an order of position in the secondary and tertiaryrocks, limestone predominating in one part of the series, clayin another, siliceous sand in a third, and so of other compounds.It is probable that a similar prevalence of a regular order ofarrangement in the hypogene series throughout certain districts,led the earlier geologists into a belief, that they shouldbe able to fix a definite order of succession for the variousmembers of this great class throughout the world.376 METAMORPHIC ROCKS. [Ch. XXVI.That expectation has not been realized ; yet was it more reasonablethan the doctrine of the universality of certain rockswhich were admitted to be of sedimentary origin ; for there iscertainly a remarkable identity in the mineral character of thehypogene formations, both stratified and unstratified, in allcountries ; although the notion of a uniform order of successionin the different groups must be abandoned.The student may, perhaps, object to the views above givenof the relation of the sedimentary and metamorphic rocks, onthe ground that there is frequently, indeed usually, an abruptpassage from one to the other. This phenomenon, however,admits of the same explanation as the fact, that the beds oflakes and seas are now frequently composed of hypogene rocks.In these localities the hypogene formations have been broughtup to the surface and laid bare by denudation. New sedimentarystrata are thrown down upon them, and in this mannerthe two classes of rocks, the aqueous and the hypogene, comeinto immediate contact, without any gradation from one to theother. As we suppose the plutonic and metamorphic rocks tohave been uplifted at all periods in the earth's history, so as tohave formed the bottom of the ocean and of lakes, by the sameoperations which have carried up marine strata to the summitsof lofty mountains, we must suppose the juxtaposition of thetwo great orders of rocks now alluded to, to have been a necessaryresult of all former revolutions of the globe.But occasionally a transition is observable from strata containingshells, and displaying an evident mechanical structure,to others which are partially altered, and from these again wesometimes pass insensibly into the hypogene series. Some ofthe argillaceous-schists in Cornwall are of this description, beingundistinguishable from the hypogene schists of many countries,and yet exhibiting, in a few spots, faint traces of organic remains.In parts of Germany, also, there are schists which,from their chemical condition, are identical with hypogene-schists,yet are inter stratified with greywacke, a rock probablyCh. XXVI.] AGE OF IIYPOGENE ROCKS. 377modified by heat, but which contains casts of shells, and oftendisplays unequivocal marks of being an aggregate of fragmentsof pre-existing rocks.Those geologists who shrink from the theory, that all thehypogene strata, so beautifully compact and crystalline as theyare, have once been in the state of the ordinary mud, clay, marl,sand, gravel, limestone, and other deposits now forming beneaththe waters, resort, in their desire to escape from suchconclusions, to the hypothesis, that chemical causes once actedwith intense energy, and that by their influence more crystallinestrata were precipitated ; but this theory appears to us to be asmysterious and unphilosophical as the doctrine of a ( plasticvirtue,' introduced by the earlier writers to explain the originof fossil-shells and bones.Relative age of the visible hypogene rocks. We shall nowreturn to the subject already in part alluded to at the close ofthe last chapter the relative age of the hypogene rocks ascompared to the secondary. How far are they entitled ingeneral to the appellation of ' primary,' in the sense of beinganterior in age to the period of the carboniferous strata, inwhich last we include the greywacke and many of the rockscommonly called transition ? It is undoubtedly true that wecan rarely point out metamorphic or plutonic rocks which canbe proved to have been formed in any secondary or tertiaryperiod. We can, in some instances, demonstrate, as we havealready shown, that there are granites of posterior origin tocertain secondary strata, and that secondary strata have sometimesbeen converted into the metamorphic. But examples ofsuch phenomena are rare, and their rarity is quite consistentwith the theory, that the hypogene formations, both stratifiedand unstratified, have been always generated in equal quantitiesduring periods of equal duration.We conceive that the granite and gneiss, formed at periodsmore recent than the carboniferous era, are still for the mostpart concealed, and those portions which are visible can rarelybe shown, by geological evidence, to have originated during378 RELATIVE AGE OF [Ch. XXVI.secondary periods. It is very possible, for example, that considerabletracts of hypogene strata in the Alps may be alteredoolite, altered lias, or altered secondary rocks inferior to thelias ; but we can scarcely ever hope to substantiate the fact,because, whenever the change of texture is complete, no charactersremain to afford us any insight into the probable age ofthe mass. Where granite happens to have intruded itself insuch a manner as partially to overlie a mass of lias or otherstrata, as in the case before alluded to (diagram No. 90, p. 371),we may prove that fossiliferous strata have become gneiss,mica-schist, clay-slate, or granular marble ; but if the action ofthe heat upon the strata had been more intense, the same inferencescould not have been drawn. It might then have beensupposed that no Alpine hypogene strata were newer than thecarboniferous period.The metamorphic strata of Scotland are certainly in greatpart older than the carboniferous, which are found incumbentupon them in an unaltered state ; but it appears that secondarydeposits as new, or newer than the lias, have come in contact,in the Western Islands, with granite, and have there assumedthe hypogene texture.A considerable source of difficulty and misapprehension, inregard to the antiquity of the metamorphic rocks, may arisefrom the circumstance of their having been deposited at oneperiod, and having assumed their crystalline texture at another.Thus, for example, if an Eocene granite should invade thelias and superinduce a hypogene structure, to what period shallwe refer the altered strata ? Shall we say that they are metamorphicrocks of the Eocene or Lassie eras ? They assumedtheir stratified form when the animals and plants of the liasflourished; they became metamorphic during the Eocene period.It would be preferable in such instances, we think, to considerthem as hypogene strata of the Eocene period, or of that inwhich they were altered ; yet it would rarely be possible toestablish their true age. We should know the granite, towhich the change of texture was due, to be newer than the liasCh, XXVI.] HYPOGENE ROCKS. 379which it penetrated ; but there would rarely be any date toshow that it might not have been injected at the close of theLassie period, or at some much later era.The metamorphic rocks must be the oldest, that is to say,they must lie at the bottom of each series of superimposedstrata, because the influence of the volcanic heat proceeds frombelow upwards ; but the hypogene strata of one country maybe,and frequently are, of a very different age from those ofanother. The greater part, however, of the visible hypogenerocks are, we believe, more ancient than the carboniferous formations.In the latter, we frequently discover pebbles of hypogenerocks, namely, granite, gneiss, mica schist, and clay-slate ;and the carboniferous rocks often rest unchanged upon thehypogene. According to our views of the operations of earthquakes,we ought not to expect plutonic and metamorphic rocksof the more modern eras to have reached the surface generally,for we must imagine many geological periods to elapse before amass which has put on its particular form far below the level ofthe sea, can have been upraised and laid open to view abovethat level. Beds containing marine shells sometimes appear atthe height of two or three miles in the principal mountain-chains,but they always belong to formations of considerable antiquity ;still more should we be prepared to find the hypogene rocksnow in sight to be of high relative antiquity, since, in order tobe brought up to view, they must* probably have risen from aposition far inferior to the bottom of the ocean.We shall endeavour to elucidate the cause of the great ageof the plutonic and metamorphic rocks, now in sight, by afamiliar illustration. Suppose two months to be the usualtime required for passing from some tropical country to ourisland, and that an annual importation takes place of a certaintropical species of insect, the ordinary term of whose life is twomonths, and which can only be reared in the climate of thatequatorial country. It is evident that no living individualscould ever be seen in England except in extreme old age. Theyoung may come annually into the world in great numbers,380 RELATIVE AGE OF[Ch. XXVI.but in order to see them, we must travel to lands near theequator.In like manner, if the hypogene rocks can only originate atgreat depths in the regions of subterranean heat, and if itrequires many geological epochs to raise them to the surface,they must be very ancient before they make their appearancein the superficial parts of the earth's crust. They may still beforming in every century, and they may have been produced inequal quantities during each successive geological period of equalduration ; but in order to see them in a nascent state, slowlyconsolidating from a state of fusion, or semi-fusion, we mustdescend into the ( fuelled entrails ' of the earth, into the regionsdescribed by the poets., where for ages the land hasever burn'dWith solid; as the lake with liquid fire.As the progress of decay and reproduction by aqueous agencyis incessant on the surface of the continents, and in the bed ofthe ocean, while the hypogene rocks are generated below, orare rising gradually from the volcanic foci, thus there mustever be a remodelling of the earth's surface in the timeintermediate between the origin of each set of plutonic andmetamorphic rocks, and the protrusion of the same into theatmosphere or the ocean. Suppose the principal source of theEtncan lavas to lie at the depth of ten miles, we may easilyconceive that before they can be uplifted to the day severaldistinct scries of earthquakes must occur, and between each ofthese there might usually be one or more periods of tranquillity.The time required for so great a development of subterraneanelevator movements might well be protracted until the depositionof a series of sedimentary rocks, equal in extent to allour secondary and tertiary formations, had taken place. Weconceive, therefore, that the relative age of the visible plutonicand metamorphic rocks, as compared to the unaltered sedimentarystrata, must always IK? determined by the relations of t\voforces, the power which uplifts the hypogene rocks, and thataqueous agency which degrades and renovates the earth'sCh. Xxvi] HYPOGENE FORMATIONS. 381surface ; or, in other words, it must depend on the quantity ofaqueous action which takes place between two periods, thatwhen the heated and melted rocks are cooled and consolidatedin the nether regions, and that when the same emerge to theday.Volume of hypogene rocks supposed to have been formedsince the Eocene period. If we were to indulge in speculationson the probable quantity of hypogene formations, both stratifiedand unstratified, which may have been formed beneathEurope and the European seas since the commencement of theEocene period, we should conjecture, that the mass has equalled,if not exceeded in volume, the entire European continents. Thegrounds of this opinion will be understood by reference to whatwe have said of the causes which may have upheaved part ofSicily to a great height above the level of the sea since the beginningof the Newer Pliocene period*. If the theory which, inthat instance, attributes the disturbance and upheaving of thesuperficial strata to the action of subterranean heat be deemedadmissible, the same argument will apply with no less force toevery other district, elevated or depressed, since the commencementof the tertiary period.But we have shown, in our remarks on the map of Europe,in the second volume, that the conversion of sea into land, sincethe Eocene period, embraces an area equal to the greaterpart of Europe, and even those tracts which had in part emergedbefore the Eocene era, such as the Alps, Apennines, and othermountain-chains, have risen to the additional altitude of from1000 to 4000 feet since that era. We have also stated theprobability of a great amount of subsidence and the conversionof considerable portions of European land into sea during thesame period changes which may also be supposed to arise fromthe influence of subterranean heat.From these premises we conclude, that the liquefaction andalteration of rocks by the operation of volcanic heat at sue-seeabove, p. 107.382 CONCLUDING REMARKS. [Ch. XXVI.excessive periods, has extended over a subterranean space equalat least in area to the present European continent, and oftenthrough a portion of the earth's crust 4000 feet or more inthickness.The principal effect of these volcanic operations in the netherregions, during the tertiary periods, or since the existing speciesbegan to flourish, has been to heave up to the surface hypogeneformations of an age anterior to the carboniferous. Weimagine that the repetition of another series of movements, ofequal violence, might upraise the plutonic and metamorphicrocks of many of the secondary periods ; and if the same forceshould still continue to act, the next convulsions might bringup the tertiary and recent hypogene rocks, by which time weimagine that nearly all the sedimentary strata now in sightwould either have been destroyed by the action of water, orwould have assumed the metamorphic structure, or would havebeen melted down into plutonic and volcanic rocks.At the close of this chapter the reader will find a table ofthe chronological relations of the principal divisions of rocksaccording to the views above set forth. The sketch is confessedlyimperfect, but it will elucidate our theory of the connexionwhich may exist between the hypogene rocks of differentperiods, and the alluvial, volcanic, and sedimentary formations.A second table is added, containing the names of some of theprincipal groups of sedimentary strata mentioned in this work,arranged in their order of superposition.Concluding Remarks. In our history of the progress ofgeology, in the first volume, we stated that the opinionoriginally promulgated by Mutton, < that the strata calledprimitive were mere altered sedimentary rocks,' was vehementlyopposed for a time, the main objection to the theorybeing its supposed tendency to promote a belief in the pasteternity of our planet. Previously the absence of animaland vegetable remains in the so-called primitive strata, hadbeen appealed to, as proving that there had been a period whenthe planet was uninhabited by living beings, and when, as wasCh. XXVI.] CONCLUDING REMARKS.also inferred, it was uninhabitable, and, therefore, probably inanascent state.The opposite doctrine, that the oldest visible strata mightbe the monuments of an antecedent period, when the animateworld was already in existence, was declared to be equivalentto the assumption, that there never was a beginning to thepresent order of things. The unfairness of this charge wasclearly pointed out by Mayfair, who observed, ' that it wasone thing to declare that we had not yet discovered the tracesof a beginning, and another to deny that the earth ever had abeginning.'We regret, however, to find that the bearing of our argumentsin the first volume has been misunderstood in a similarmanner, for we have been charged with endeavouring to establishthe proposition, that ' the existing causes of change haveoperated with absolute uniformity from all eternity *.'It is the more necessary to notice this misrepresentation ofour views, as it has proceeded from a friendly critic whosetheoretical opinions coincide in general with our own, but whohas, in this instance, strangely misconceived the scope of ourargument. With equal justice might an astronomer be accusedof asserting, that the works of creation extend throughoutinfinite space, because he refuses to take for granted that theremotest stars now seen in the heavens are on the utmost vergeof the material universe. Every improvement of the telescopehas brought thousands of new worlds into view, and it would,therefore, be rash and unphilosophical to imagine that wealready survey the whole extent of the vast scheme, or that itwill ever be brought within the sphere of human observation.But no argument can be drawn from such premises in favourof the infinity of the space that has been filled with worlds ;and if the material universe has any limits, it then follows thatit must occupy a minute and infinitesimal point in infinitespace. So, if in tracing back the earth's history, we arrive at themonuments of events which may have happened millions of agesQuarterly Review, No. 86, Oct. 1830, p. 464.384 CONCLUDING REMARKS. [Ch. XXVI.before our times, and if we still find no decided evidence of acommencement, yet the arguments from analogy in support ofthe probability of a beginning remain unshaken ; and if thepast duration of the earth be finite, then the aggregate of geologicalepochs, however numerous, must constitute a meremoment of the past, a mere infinitesimal portion of eternity.It has been argued, that as the different states of the earth'ssurface, and the different species by which it has been inhabited,have had each their origin, and many of them their termination,so the entire series may have commenced at a certainperiod. It has also been urged, that as we admit the creationof man to have occurred at a comparatively modern epochas we concede the astonishing fact of the first introduction of amoral and intellectual being, so also we may conceive the firstcreation of the planet itself.We are far from denying the weight of this reasoning fromanalogy ; but although it may strengthen our conviction, thatthe present system of change has not gone on from eternity, itcannot warrant us in presuming that we shall be permitted tobehold the signs of the earth's origin, or the evidences of thefirst introduction into it of organic beings.In vain do we aspire to assign limits to the works of creationin space, whether we examine the starry heavens, or that worldof minute animalcules which is revealed to us by the microscope.We are prepared, therefore, to find that in time also, the confinesof the universe lie beyond the reach of mortal ken. But inwhatever direction we pursue our researches, whether in timeor space, we discover everywhere the clear proofs of a CreativeIntelligence, and of His foresight, wisdom, and power.As geologists, we learn that it is not only the presentcondition of the globe that has been suited to the accommodationof myriads of living creatures, but that many former statesalso have been equally adapted to the organization and habitsof prior races of beings. The disposition of the seas, continents,and islands, and the climates have varied ; so it appearsthat the species have been changed, and yet they have allCh. XXVI.] CONCLUDING REMARKS. 385been so modelled, on types analogous to those of existingplants and animals, as to indicate throughout a perfect harmonyof design and unity of purpose. To assume that the evidenceof the beginning or end of so vast a scheme lies withinthe reach of our philosophical inquiries, or even of our speculations,appears to us inconsistent with a just estimate of therelations which subsist between the finite powers of man andthe attributes of an Infinite and Eternalo*VOL. HI. 2 CRELATIVE AGES OFTABLE I.Showing the Relations of the Alluvial, Aqueous, Volcanic, andHypocjene Formations of different ages.Formations.Some of the Localities where the Formations occur.A..,, . , (beds of existing rivers, &c., vol. ii.1 ch. xiv.r ,., . f Coral reefs of the Pacific, vol. ii.\a. Marine. < , .-feed of Lake Superior, &c., vol. i.| ch. xiii.Volcanic Etna, Vesuvius, vol. i. ch. xix. xx. xxi.f Concealed ; foci of active volcanos,1 vol. iii. ch. xxv.f Concealed ; around the foci of active\ volcanos, vol. iii. ch. xxvi.*. Freshwater.{a./b.-D, , .Plutonic.AT x vMetamorphic./1. NewerPliocene.B.2. Older Pliocene.C.3. Miocene.,D.>4. Eocene. .\Alluvial.Aqueous.Volcanic.Hypogeiie.Alluvial.Aqueous.Volcanic.Hypogene.Alluvial.Aqueous.Volcanic.Hypogene,Alluvial.Aqueous.Volcanic.Hypogene.{Loess of the Rhine gravel coveringthe Newer Pliocene strata ofSicily.Val di Not, Sicily.Colle, in Tuscany.Val di Not, Sicily.f Concealed ; foci of Newer Pliocene volcanoes underneath the Val di1 Not, vol. iii. p. 107, and ch. xxv.f Concealed; near the foci of Newer Pli-1 scene volcanos underneath the1 ch. xxvi.Norfolk? vol. iii. p. 173.Subapennine formations.Near Sienna, vol. iii. p. 160.Tuscany, vol. iii. p. 159.I Concealed; foci of Older Pliocene{ volcanos beneath Tuscany.Concealed; probably near the same{ foci.(Mont Perrier, Auvergne Orleanais,1 vol. iii. p. 217.Bordeaux. Dax.Saucats, near Bordeaux, vol. iii. p. 207.Hungary, vol. iii. ch. xvi.f Concealed; foci of Miocene volcanos\ beneath Hungary.Concealed; probably around the samef Summit of North and South Downs ?vol. iii. p. 311.Paris and London basins.Isle of Wight Auvergne.f Oldest volcanic rocks of the LimagneI d' Auvergne, vol. iii. ch. xix.(Concealed; foci of Eocene volcanos\ beneath theLimagne d' Auvergne.Concealed } probably near the samefauMarine.Freshwater.fu.Plutonic.Metamorphic.f a. Marine.\ 6. Freshwater.{a, Plutonic.b. Metamorphic.itMarine.Freshwater.tPlutonic.Metamorphic.ftMarine.Freshwater.tPlutonic.Metamorphic.DIFFERENT FORMATIONS.TABLE I. continued.Periods.Formations.Some of the Localities where the Formations occur./Alluvial.1. Cretace-Aqueous.f*UMarine.Freshwater.f Wiltshire. North Downs. Flambo-1 rough Head.vous group.F. Table II.Volcanic.f Northern flanks of the Pyrenees ?1 near Dax ?Hypogene.(a.UPlutonic.Metamorphic.r Alluvial.Portland ' Dirt-bed.'2. Wealdengroup. *Aqueous.fa.UMarine.Freshwater.f Weald of Surrey, Kent, and Sussex,\ vol. iii. ch. xxi.G. Table II.Volcanic..Hypogene.fa.U,Plutonic.Metamorphic.Alluvial.3. OoliteAqueous.fa.marine.Freshwater.Oxford. Bath, Jura chain.group.HTihla TTHebrides ?\AtlDiCJLJL..Hypogenefa.Plutonic.Metamorphic.Concealed ; beneath the Hebrides.iJ(Alluvial.MAqueous.fa.Marine.Freshwater.Lyme Regis, Whitby. Bertha,ITaKiji TT 1 VolcanicHebrides ?laurie 11. j v Lav -fa.Plutonic.''Hypogene.CMetamorphic.f Alps ? ch. xxvi. p. 371. Valorsine in1 Savoy P'Alluvial.5. New RedSandstoneAqueous.tMarine.Freshwater.cheshire. Staffordshire. Vosges.I Westphalia (Muschelkalk).group.Krp y/i TTVolcanic.Near Exeter, Devon.laDieii..Hypogene.{*:Plutonic.Metamorphic.Concealed beneath Devonshire ?Alluvial,6. Carbonaceous,{?:Marine.Freshwater.Clifton. Dudley. Mentis. [Fife.Coal measures of Somersetshire andserous ,group.L. Table II.\Volcanic.Hypogene,fForfarshire. Edinburgh. Durham.t High Tweeddale.Concealed; beneath edinburgh, Northcumberland, Durham.| Near the Plutonic rocks of the same1 period.CPlutonic.Metamorphic.2 C 2DIAGRAMShewing the relative position which the Plutonic and SedimentaryFormations of different ages may occupy ;(in illustration of TABLE I.)No. 91.Tertiary strata.4. Recent platonic.In the above diagram an attempt is made to shew the inverted order in whichthe sedimentary and platonic formations may occur in the earth's crust; interpositionin the plutonic, like superposition in the sedimentary rocks, being for themost part characteristic of a newer age. By aid of this illustration, and what wehave said in Chap. 25 and 20, the reader will comprehend why so large a portionof the plutonic rocks of later periods are concealed, and why the more ancient ofthis class have risen nearest to the surface, so as to have been denuded in someregions and exposed to view.The primary formations here mentioned are those, whether stratified or unitratified, which are older than the carboniferous deposits.TABLE II.Showing the Order of Superposition, or Chronological Succession,of the principal Sedimentary Deposits or Groups ofStrata in Europe.This Table is referred to in the Glossary, and includes the Secondary Formations alludedto in this Work, but not described in detail.Periods andNames of the principal Members find general Mineral nature ofSome of the Localities where theGroups.the Formation.Formation occurs.The deposits of this period are for the most part concealed underoexisting lakes and seas.o&HAa. Delta of the Rhone.MMConsolidated sandy and gravelly beds (),travertin limestones (6), calcareous sandstoneswith broken shells (c), coral limestone, consistingof^corals, shells, &c. (d)b. Tivoli, and other partsof Italy.c. Shore of island of Guamd. Coral reefs in Pacific,&c.BMARINE.Limestone, sands,FRESHWATER.Sands, clays, santa.Sicily, Ischia, Morea ?NewerPliocene.clays, sandstones, conglomerates,marls withgypsum ; containingmarine fossils (a).stones, lignites, &c. ;containing land andfreshwater fossils (6).b. Colle in Tuscany.OMp jCSubapenninc marl,Similar deposits toa. Subapennine formamsSubapennine yellowsand, English ' crag*B; containing/awe/ andfreshwater fossils (6).tons, Perpignan, Nice,Norfolk and Suffolk.H% 8and other deposits, asb. Near Sienna, &c.PSM'&in B, containing marineHMPHfossils (a).DIFaluns of the Loire,and other deposits ofsimilar mineral compositionwith B and C,Similar deposits to Band C! ; containingland and freshwaterfossils (b).a. Touraine, Bordeaux,Valley of Bormida, Supergaganear Turin, Basinof Vienna.Scontaining marine foss.Saucats, twelve milessils (a).south of Bordeaux.ORDER OF SUPERPOSITION OFTABLE II. continued.Periods andGroups.Names of the principal Members and general Mineralnature of the Formation.Some of the Localities where theFormation occurs.CalcaireGrossier (a),plastic clay, sands,sandstones, &c., withmarine fossils 6.Calcaire siliceuxsandstones and conglomerates,red marl,greenand white marls, limestone,gypseous marls,with land and freshwaterfossils (c).a. Paris basin.b. Paris, London, andHampshire basins, Isleof Wight.c. Paris Basin, Isle ofWight, Auvergne, Delay,Cantal.1. MaestrichtBeds. Earthy whitelimestone with siliceous masses, resemblingchalk (marine).2. Chalk with fonts (marine).3. Chalk without flints (marine).4. Upper green sand (marine).Marly stone, and sand with greenparticles; layers of calcareous sandstone.5. Gault (marine). Blue clay,withnumerous fossils, passing into calcareousmarl in the lower parts.6. Lower green sand (marine).Grey, yellowish, and greenish sands,ferruginous sands and sandstones,clays, charts, and siliceous limestones.St. Peter's Mount, Maestricht.North and South Downs, andparts of the intervening Weald ofKent, Surrey, and Sussex.Isle of Wight, coasts of Hampshireand Dorsetshire, Yorkshire,North of Ireland.G1. Weald clay (freshwater). Clay,for the most part without intermixtureof calcareous matter, sometimesincluding thin beds of sand and shellylimestone.2. Hastings sands (freshwater).Grey, yellow, and reddish-brownsands, sandstones, clays, calcareousgrits passing into limestone.3. Purbeck beds (freshwater). Variouskinds of limestones and marls.1, 2. Extensively developed in thecentral parts of Kent, Surrey, andSussex.3. Isle of Purbeck, in Dorset,shire.THE PRINCIPAL STRATA IN EUROPE.TABLE II. continued.Periods andGroups.Names of the principal Members and general Mineralnature of the Formation.Some of the Localities where the Formation occurs.III. SECONDARY PERIOD, continued.HP-IO1-3Stf1 . Portland beds (marine). Coarseshelly limestone, fine-grained whitelimestone, compact limestone allmore or less of an oolitic structure ;beds of charts.Isle of Portland, Tilbury in Wiltshire,Aylesbury.2. Kimmeridge clay (marine).Blue and greyish-yellow slaty clay,containing gypsum, bituminous slate(Kimmeridge coal).Near Kimmeridge on coast of Dor-seashoreSunning Well, near Oxford.3. Coral rag (marine). Calcareousshelly freestone, largely oolitic ;coarse limestone, full of corals ; yellowsands; calcareous siliceous grits.Leamington, near Oxford Warrington,in Berkshire Cane and SteepleAshton in Wiltshire Somersetshire.4. Oxford clay (marine). Darkblue tenacious clay with septaria, bituminousshale, sandy limestone (Gallowayrock), iron pyrites, gypsum.New Malton, in Yorkshire LincolnshireCambridgeshire Huntingdonshire,and midland countiesabundantly near Oxford Somerset-shireDorsetshire.5. Cornbrash (marine). Grey orbluish rubble limestone, separated bylayers of clay.Salisbury, Afford, Wraxall, Chip-pelham.6. Forest marble (marine). sand and grindstone ;thin fissile beds of limestone, withclay partings ; coarse shelly limestone.Whichwood Forest, OxfordshireFrome, south-east of Bath.7. Great oolite (marine). Whiteand yellow oolitic calcareous freestone,coarse shelly limestone, layers of clay.Oolitic limestone, with remains ofland animals, birds, amphibia, plants,sea-shells (a).Kettering, in NorthamptonshireBath Burt'ord, in OxfordshireBradford, in Wiltshire,(a) Stonesfield, near Woodstock,Oxfordshire.8. Inferior oolite (marine). Fuller'searth, soft freestone, sand withcalcareous concretions.Cotteswold Hills Sundry Hill,near Bristol.Limestones of various qualities, clays, sands, and sandstone, containing thesame fossils as those occurring in the series of the oolitic group of England,constitute the main body of the Jura chain of mountains, and cover vasttracts of country in Germany.ORDER OF THE SUPERPOSITION OFTABLE II. continued.Periods andGroups.Names of the principal Members and general Mineralnature of the Formation.Some of the Localities where the Formation occurs.Lias (marine). Blue, white, andyellow earthy limestone, usually inthin beds, interest ratified with clay,often slaty and bituminous.Dark blue marl, with a few irregularrubble limestone beds saucymarston.Lyme Regis, in Dorsetshire, andin many parts of Somersetshire, Gloucestershire,Warwickshire, Nottinghamshire,and Yorkshire in Southernthe Hebrides, and North ofIreland.In France, and, to a considerableextent, in Germany.K1. Keuper, or variegated marls.Red, grey, green, blue, and whitemarls, sandstones, conglomerates, andshells, containing gypsum and rock-salt.Neighbourhood of Vosges mountains,and many parts of Nurembergand Westphalia, and other parts ofGermany.2. Muschelkalk (marine). Grey,blue, and blackish limestone, withmany fossils, particularly encrinites ;siliceous layers and nodules ; magnesianlimestone, marls of different colours,gypsum, and rock-salt.Extensively developed in Germanyand Fiance. Hitherto no beds in Englandhave been identified with theformation.3. Variegated sandstone. Red,white, blue, and green siliceo-argilla-cous sandstone, often micaceous, andcontaining gypsum and rock-salt.Nottinghamshire Yorkshire. Itis uncertain whether the variegatedsandstone of England belongs to theKeuper formation of Germany, or tothe variegated sandstone which liesunder the Muschelkalk in Westphalia,Nuremberg, the Vosges, &c.4. Magnesian limestone (marine).Compact shelly limestone, yellowmagnesian limestone, marl slate, redmarl, and gypsum.Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire,York-shire, Durham, Northumberland.Departments of Stone and Loire,Hartz mountains, Thuringia, Westphalia.5. Red conglomerate. Sandstones,conglomerates, sands, and marls.Neighbourhood of Exeter YorkshireDurham Westphalia NurembergVosges mountains.THE PRINCIPAL STRATA IN EUROPE,TABLE II. continued.Periods andGroups.Names of the principal Members and general Mineralnature of the Formation.Some of the Localities where the Formation occurs.1 . Coal measures (freshwater ?).Sandstones,grits, conglomerates, clayswith ironstone, shales, and limestone,inter stratified with beds of coal.Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire,Lancashire, Derbyshire,Stafford-shire, Gloucestershire, Somersetshire,South Wales, Valleys of the Forth andClyde.District of Liege, Westphalia, Silesia,Bohemia, &c.2. Mountain limestone (marine).Grey, compact, and crystalline limestone,abounding in lead ore in Northof England, and alternating with coalmeasures in Scotland.Mentis Hills, Somersetshire, Derbyshire,Yorkshire, Lancashire,' ( Westmoreland,Durham, Northumberland,Lancashire, Linlithgowshire, manyparts of Ireland.North-west of Germany, Belgium,North of France.3. Old red sandstone. Coarse andfine siliceous sandstones and conglomeratesof various colours, red predominating.Extensively developed in Shropshireand Herefordshire, Brecknockshire,Dumfriesshire, Forfarshire.Silesia, Bohemia.4. Grauwacke and transition limestone(marine). Coarse and fineslates, sandstones, and conglomeratescrystalline limestones.Westmoreland, Cumberland, Wales,Somersetshire, Devonshire, South ofScotland, South of Ireland.North of France, North-west ofGermany, &c.INSTRUCTIONSFOR USINGM. DESHAYES's TABLES OF SHELLS,APPENDIX I.THE object of these Tables is to give a list, not of the characteristicshells of the different tertiary formations, of which some figures aregiven in plates 1, 2, and 3, but to show the connexion of different periodsby indicating the shells common to two or more periods, or common tosome tertiary period and to the recent epoch.The names also of a considerable number of species are given, as beingfound common to two or more formations of the same tertiary period.The localities where the fossil species are met with, and the known habitationsof the living species, are also given.No allusion is made to any secondary fossil shells ; the word fossil,therefore, must always be understood to refer to tertiary formations.The number of species of recent and fossil shells which were examinedand compared in constructing these tables amounted to 7,816, as follows:Living Species. Fossil Species.Univalves .3,616 . . . . 2,098Bivalves . 1,164 9384,780 3,036Of these 3,036 fossil species, 426 were identified with individuals foundamong the 4,780 living species; 123 of them are only known in a fossilstate, but are mentioned as being common to more than one tertiaryperiod ; and 233 are enumerated by name, although not common to twotertiary periods, or to some tertiary period and the recent epoch, merelybecause they have been found in two or more formations of the same396 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USINGperiod. Thus the number of fossil species named in the tables amountsto 782, consisting ofSpecies found both living and fossil 426Species fossil only, but common to more than one tertiary period 123Species fossil only, and named merely as found in two or moreformations of the same period 233A few will be found without specific names, because they have not yetbeen described or named by any authors.The tables are continuous from p. 2 to p. 45, and the description ofeach species extends across two pages.The following examples will best illustrate the object of the tables. Ifwe take the first genus, Aspergillum (p. 2), we find thatColumn 1 gives the name of the genus.2 shows that four living species of the genus are known toM. Deshayes.3 that he has seen one fossil species.4 is left blank, because the single fossil species has not yetbeen identified with any living species.5 is also blank, because the fossil species is only known inone period or formation.6 is also blank, because the fossil species not having beenidentified with a living species, it was unnecessary tomention the habitation of any of the four living species.The columns of the three periods are left blank, because the fossilspecies has not been found in more than one period. In the column oflocalities on the right of the right-hand page, in the subdivision headedBordeaux, the figure 1 denotes that one species of fossil Aspergillumhas been found in that locality.To select another example : if we take the genus Solen (p. 2), we findthatColumn 2 shows that twenty-six living species of the genus areknown to M. Deshayes.3 that he has seen nineteen fossil species of the genus.Column 4 gives the name of the species Solen vagina, becausethat species is found both living and fossil.5 is left blank, because the names of those species only areplaced in this column which have no living analogues,but are found in more than one period, or in more thanone formation of the same period. [Thus, in the nextline, Solen siliquarius has no living analogue, but itoccurs in two formations of the Miocene period, viz. atBordeaux and in Touraine.]6 shows that the living species of Solen vagina inhabits theEuropean Ocean and Mediterranean.The two asterisks in the column of the Pliocene period show that thespecies is found in two formations of that period, viz. in the Subapenninehills arid the English crag.The asterisk in the column of the Miocene period shows that this speciesis found in the basin of Vienna.The word Baden in the next column indicates that the species is alsofound fossil in that locality.The column of the Eocene period is blank, because the shell has notbeen found in any formation belonging to that period.The figures in the column of localities will be understood by what wesaid above. In summing up these figures it will be found that theyamount to thirty-one, whereas it is stated, in the third column of the left-handpage, that only nineteen fossil species have been found. The disagreementarises from this that the same species occur in more thanone locality, and thus come to be counted more than once in the columnof localities.N.B. In some cases, before the totals of the species in the columns oflocalities can tally with the figures in the third column, the species enumeratedin the supplementary table of localities, p. 46, must be taken intoaccount.A note of interrogation added to the asterisk (*?) indicates a doubtas to the correct identification of the shell, either because the shell is avariety which has a somewhat distant analogy to the recognized type of398 M. DESIIAYES's TABLES OF SHELLS.the species, or because the specimen examined was in rather an imperfectstate.The specific names of the tertiary fossil shells which have been foundby M. Deshayes to belong to one period only, and for which he has notyet discovered any living analogues, are not given, as their enumerationwould have required more space than could be allotted to such a subjectin a treatise on Geology; but their aggregate number is included in thesubdivisions of the column in the right-hand page headed 'No. of speciesin each genus in the following localities,' and in the supplementary table,p. 4G.APPENDIX I.TABLES OF FOSSIL SHELLS,BYMonks G. R DESHAYES,Member of the Geological Society of Paris, $c.N.B. For a full explanation of the object of these Tables, and instructionsas to the manner of using them, see the preceding four pages.GENERA.No^1'CMofgta%~-|Species foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD.IEnglish Crag.VariousLocalities.AspergillumClavagella . .fMediterraneanOceanSeptaria . .Teredina . .Teredo . . .Pholas . . .Fistula. .new species .Candida . .Temp. EuropeIndian Ocean .*?Mediterr. . . .ampullaria .' * * 1Solen . . .2G1GEuropean OceanMediterr.siliquarius .. .Regimen .coarctatus .strigilatus .ibidibid. . . .. .ibidibidSiliqua. . .PholadomyaGlaciers .Panopo3a . .Mya. . . .Aldrovandi .Mediterr. . . .Temp. Europ.andNorthern OceanSenegal . . .-.Morea . . .Uddevalla .Morea . . .Thracia . .HemicyclosteraLutraria . .'32Gcorbuloides .pub e seen s .new species .Mediterr. . . .ibid{Europ. Ocean &Mediterr.ibid. ibid. .Indian Ocean .new species .Mactra. . .ibid. . . .solid .European Oceanibid. .crassatella ?tviangula . .Mediterr. . . .moreaPerpignanMesodesma .Crassatella .Angelina . .Solemn . .AmphidesmarIMIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, Dax.|IVariousLocalities.-AVariousLocalities.QQaQQEnglish Crag.IBordeaux.G|i|i"tjIii|-Pauliac . JBelgium . .oii.1j##Jo}-.:=.1##Valognes . ."''Ronca . . .a 2formula . . 1035 nucleuscomplaintstriata .new speciesPLIOCKNE I'UUOl).European Seas ISaxicava . . 511 minuteEuropean Oceanibid. . *Petricola . . 13 10 uchroleuca ..'. , . laniuilosa. .Mediiibid.Yenerupis J S Iras . . . .ibid, Mediterr. * . . ;,-LI r f Mediterr.Psammobia.jlS 4 hesperia .< european Ocean *' Y '.'. .' niuricata . . ! ibid . . . . *PsammotBDa j 8 1 ' . .Telling. . .0354 strigosa . . : ! Senegal. .' planta . .'' \ Mediterr *. .' lacunosa . . African Ocean *. J J I Oudardii. .1 | Mediterr . .*. i tennis . . .f | Mediterr.i * ' ' ' | European OceanI I pulchella . J | ibid-. . . ' ' Lantivii . . j ibidj-. . J. .'. . serrata . . .'ibid.L T nknnev species . jcarnatic .. Senegal . . .European Ocean*l"Mediterr.ell i plica . .jipariita. .! ,. donacina . Mediterr . . *Ti-llinides. ,1 IIOrbis . . . iij 2 ; pectunculus( Indian Ocean,Lucina. . .2059 tiirnna . ! -' -Senegal,. . . } Morca, Baden-. . . divaricata ., Almost all Seas * * j Perpignansquamosa,radula .Mf 1MlcScene PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.1 Bordeaux, Dax-Touraine.Vienna.VariousLocalities.jLondon.VariousLocalities.f7:Mu^TcTouraine..5|Ma'cU-is<jjta%"aiZ'GP3##ff.TransylvaniaSc#'1oo*?-#g###5X-Volhynia .i-.:=sitf AngersVolhyniaAngers . .Valognes . 1#Species foundIOCENK I'F.KIUD.Lucina. cc nt. . J amph'ulesmoules Mediterr. . . . * -:' scopulornmDonax . . .-9 if) oblongata Senegal . ..'! 19 iucrassatanew speciesnew species . . . .Danmoiiiensis , Temp.ibid. . * :C'ycCvrlas'Graveslatina . .trine . ..)Islandica . .North Seas . .PerpignanihenoaSf)V)Indian Ocean .j j I.I J J Chionc. . .| Senegal, MeditJ *#. .Morea,Pcrr>jUnknown . . ..! ' ! china | New Holland .{ ] j |f M edit err.\ European Ocean>, . l ' | concentric . j Indian Ocean . . *[. . , I ]Medit. Senegal ' :: !.' mnltilamella ' ' Indian Ocean ' # , *A'enus . . 1014.! vernicosa . .i 1 ir-'ii !i lueancrr. . . .Meditrrr.Ivuroj'ean ( )canj-.;: '-I:|wIschia . . .1 Morea,i. .j pJicata . . .South Furor Oc|{ requoi.anK'luirup. Oc. A must.: . . .I Seas. Lain.MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD. [j No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, Dax='sH.1cVariousLocalities.:Li;,|VariousLocalities.^,P|Cfljjo.1tHg;I|.1HcfihHt>|London.i2P38?oVolhynia##}Jco'f#t r/{Mayence,Belgium#Belgium'.<'?#^y-poIE#= P#Valognes .'(.* * * )Salles . . .::::'}Venn;, conf. radiata. . .lOC'KNK PK1UOD.. Mediterr. . . . *Brongniarti ibid. . . .i Indian Ocean- (;v>era . -. Coincides?,lediterr.rotundity ,I S co uj - Papilla. . . Indian Ocean 'f Vonericardial ,. ~ n , , - T - , \ \ Salles,| elCardita I' 2550 sulcata Mediterr . . * * j i^niai.I . . Ajar. SeiH'iral .. . , . train ezra . .JouanettihippopeaCoraviura .acitticostaJ 1 ! intermediate . : New Holland-.:=.an<ri:sticostaimliricata . .i. ! . new species -:Cardium. . . 5339 rinjrcns i General .I ' i i. I ciliary . . . European Ocean * * . .'. ' ecliinatum . ! ibid. Senegal * * .L ( . c alles,^Ion-a,sulcatnm . . European Ocean ;: : -' } P T n r n r. edule . i ibid. Medit. J*'*|* Morea . . .. multicostattim ! *I ! ! i.' ; pi an at urn . . ! Mediterr . . *discrepancy .hans . . .senncraniiLitnuiPerpignan,verrucosnm .C-ypricardia . 4 7 coralliophaga i Mediterr . . '*-MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE Period.No. of Species in each Genus in the followng Localities.QX|K'2asCg>VariousLocalities.:iIVariousLocalities.&XCO|English Crag.IBordeauxx*oiIIcH|jg<.1afiLondon.|toI-.'.:###idcqRnKIff#####Angers1 VolhyniaV>::#'f5^###Moravia ..-v#("Valo^nes,BelgiumValognesibid . .f Valognes,\ BelgiumCastelgomberto*p#?\*?-:=-:=#Valognes#.-Castelgomrjerto ,\'.'Genera.No. ofSpeciesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD.at't|VariousLocalities.tf-Catella . .oEuropean Ocean*!Maryland? .new species .9,5-1semitortaNose. . . .NewHolland, LMediterraneanOceanibid. ibid.Jamaica, SenegaEuropean Ocean,SenegalMagellan . . .:-fSalles? . .j. . .barbara/Perpignan .. . .MagellanicaHelbingiiIAfr. Oc. SenegaInd. & Afr. Oc.MediterraneanOcean .;;. . .antiquata ./perpignan,t MorearhombusI. . .clathratanew species .Gaymardi .ibidibidnew species .quadrilateral .Pectunculus .new species .glycimeris .piousVisiter. Europ. Oceanibid. ibid. .Northern EuropeMediterr. . . .4i#Perpignan,j Morea/violacescens .Ipulvinatus .terebratularisangusticostatusnew species .Mediterr. . .4>dfcpar .Nucula . . .margaritaceaPella.European OceanMediterr. . . .ibidibid4iIemarginata .new species .ovata iTrigonia . .Castalia . .11 )MIOCENE PERIOD. | EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus In the follow fig Localities.ifTouraine.Vienna.VariousLocalities..'jVariousLocalities.McLJwEnglish Crag.ITouraine..si>c' J.2|^TcSiI?#:::!::}i-?J#:;s##Angers . .AngerSjNantes#Valognes .#ibid. . .##ibid. . .ibid. . ,j5l-;:-,#Valognes .Belgium .-.##ibid###Valognes .Valognes . %-5SVolhynia . ..: .i##Valognes . JiGENERA.NS Pj.of:cheISpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving SpeciesPLIOCENE PERIOD.[fjwV.English Cni.'.VariousLocalities.AnodontaSyria . . .Riding. . .Chamaa . . .gryphons .crenulata ? .sinistrorsa .new species .Mediterr. . . .Senegal . . ..Mediterr. . . .ibid . . . .'f-VMorea . . .ecbinulata .lamellosa .Siberia. . .Tridacna . .Hippo opus . .Modiola . .discrepancyib. New HollandMediterr. Indian& African Ocean. .lithophaga .f-argentina .Mytilus . .Chemnitzii .Riv. of GermanyEuropean Ocean-Vf Baden, Centtral AustriaPinna . . .nobilis . .new species .Mediterr. . . .#?*,)Morea . .margaritaceaCrenatula . .Pena . . .Malleus * .Vincula et |Meleagrina jLima . . .Mediterr. . . .ibid. Af'r.OceanAustralian SeasMediterr.Mediterr. . . .*?squainosa .linguatula .nivea . .. . .{Pecten . . .Jacobaeus .Laurentian .pleuronectes .opercularis .European OceanAmerican SeasMediterraneanOcean .European OceanMediterr. . . .European OceanMediterr. . . .#*?Perpignan. .Corsica ? . . :/I\ Salles, Perpig-iiisn, MoreaMorea . . .. .MIOCENE Period.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species n each Genus n the follow ing Localities.x"i:2HiVariousLocalities.iIVariousLocalities.'iCO7i='u."iiLa=ai|c^Ji<^|ToiH?i:=i's.1Anders .#Castelgomberto )'.-'fp'?ff5JC###Belgium . J<]##1 '^r#Angers . .Jj1-1 )GEM:UA.No.SpiesSpcvios foundboth living andSiu'cies foundiWmati, n.Habitations 01living sTcues.ri.lOCFNK. I'KHIOD.-~VariousLocalities.]>ruei . . .ibidibidfibidibid;;. . .flabelliformisPovpio-nan. ;Moreanodus .BurdigalensisIndian Ocean .Perpignan .stri'itusPerpignan,Salliesplcbeius< -,/generous .laticostatus .new species .new species .Perpignan .Piicatula . .Spoudylus .Moditcrr. . . .Gryphcca. .Ostrea . . .5 icornucopias .edulis . . .Virginia . .hippopus . .flabellulaIndian Ocean .European OceanAmerican OceanEuropean OceanCorsica . .. .navicularis .Foi.,kali . .IMediturr. . . .African Ocean,lied Sea-.:-un Tdnev, - species .1MediterraneanOceanJPerpignan,Salles, MoreaIlinnites . .VulsullaPlacing . .Amnnia . .Jpapyracca .epblpplUin/Red Sea . . .EgyptPerpignan .Mediterr.European Oceanibid-.:-d tibiaMIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD. || No. of Species in each Genus n the following Locality es.iojaId.1VariousLocalities.London.VariousLocalities.| XVia,M~J.CM)X|EjjImj|\i|"Nuqoo^C#.Transylvania-Angers, Doueibid. . . .-#IBelgium,ValognesSiSAugers . . .{oV-:=?f Valognes1 Belgium#Belgium .#Montpellier .Doue*?#'ft irci^iviniSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).I'l.loCKNF. 1'KHIOD.Local it iAnemia coil ' striata . . .'Crania . 3 3 personate , . ' Mediterr . . # . .'Orbicular . . 2Terebratula . 15 13 vitrea . . J Mediocre . .' **? .' . . .capt serpents ' ibid * .tmucaia ; ibid * ' ! .. ampulla . J # # ' . . MoreaThecidea . . 1 1 Mediterranean : Mediterr . .'*' 'Linirala . . 1Hvalaja . . 10 2Theodora . . 14 3 lanceolateAfrican Ocean * Anti . . .strangulationnew species. Morea . . .-. . . Garland . .Limacina . 1Cymbulia . 1Chitonellus . 1Chiton . . .33Dentalium .'23 34! eleiihantiiiuni' Indies. Mediterr., I. | sexangulare.. ; dental . . ' Mediterr. . . ,i e -i. I I hostile . . .. novem costatumj Kuropoau Ocean *pscudo-eniaiis ' '. entalis .European Ocean 1 * **? Moi'ea . . .. ^ interdum . . 'I.' eburneum . Indian SeasI. ! fissura ibidcoarctatum .stranorulatum Mediterr. .l j stella . . 10-110 ef|ualis . . . (European OceanSiplionaria .21 3 j !Umbrella. .'21 Mediterranean 1 I Mediterr . .Paring thorns '- 2Morea .Kniar^inula. 711 fissure . . .' Europ. Oc. Met. . . ' . . *Fis-,nrella. .33 S Gest-ca . . . ' Kurop. Oc. Ind # #neglect Mediterr. . . .mitisPileopsis . .1 7 1 G Ungarica [European Ocean *MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE Period.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Locality es.Bordeaux, Dadc|cc~PVariousLocalities.London.VariousLocalities.^>'3g."sbencajITouraine.fl*jI<!s,j1 j!.s\#f:::::)-Baden . . .ibid. . . .5X#Baden . . .Valognes. )fMoravia . ..-5*.j*NotSpecierSpecies foundSpecies foundsail in more thancue tertiaryformation.PI.Eocene PERIOD.Habitations ofliving Species.1 1tVarious'fj> Localities.GENERA.1 ''5 iboth living and;. fossil (tertiary).lipponyx . 6 '.2 new species .European Ocean *cornucopia .|Crepidula . 14Calyptraea . 193 catalinaEuropean OceanNew ZealandMedit. IndiesEuropean Ocean *ibid *Mediterr. . *I. Morea . .ibid. . . .:rochiformis .Bullet . 2Bulla . . .2623 lignaria . .ampulla . .European Ocean #ibid, andIndiescylindrical .angistoma .striated . .clathratacylindroides .LajonkairianaDolabella. . 10Testaceous . 2Vitriol. . . bHelix . . 82535 asperse ? varTemperate and. . Teneriffe . .. . Cette, Nice;: . . ibid. ibid.. . Query . .Southern EuropeibidEuropeibid. cespitum .. nemoralis .Raymond .Anostoma . $Southern Europe . .ibidEuropeSouthern Europe . .Bourbon. . Nice .. . ibid. . | -f. . ibid. . | j. . ibid. .. lapicida .. vermiculata. cselatura .Pupa . . . 9JClausilia . . 5'Bulimus . . 8.Achatina . . 5Succinea . .11Auricula . . ITemp. Europe . .ibidNice. . . .Puy-de-D8me. muscorum3 bullies .IndiesMIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Q|.='Vienna.VariousLocalities.p|VariousLocalities.'.5Baden.Bordeaux.iTouraine.I|<3Jfs4>##iiMoravia . .f ?Belgium J}#Valognes .Angers . . .Valognes .^IZu##Valognes .. . . }f Castelroberto4iJ^Auvergne .rnGENERA.No. ofSpecie* r,.unafossil (tertiary).Specie foundone tertiaryHabitation, ofPLKKT.NK I'KUIOD.jVariousLocalities.I;iGbuccinoa . .imbrium . .^lediterr. . . . ! *Amboyna~'f-.'.:NiceScarabaeus .Cyclostoma .Angelus . .Planorbis . .Europe. . . .cleans . . .corneas . .rotundity .marginatus .,Temp. Europe. . .EuropeibidTold. Bavariaibid ibid C'ettc!,spirorbis .Europe. . . .ibidNice. . . .Query . . .nitidusPhys . . .Limnea . .perugia . .axiricularisEuropeibidibid:'.::'.=. Laureate . .ibid. . . .A' T eniufl'itapalustris . .EuropePhilippine Isles : . .Melania . .. .. inilexa . . .castellated , ./Mediterr. . . .,'.-Cambessedesiir.ew species .lactea . . .coclilearella .MudiK-rr. . . .Lakes of Conicand (teiH'vaMediterr. . . .Indian Ocean .-.'.=Rissoa . . .oMelanopsis .buccinoidea .asia. Spain,Greece-Vlic int::Greece . . ..costal a. . .\ft\a"1" -; ; r .,.-Al.vdns. . .Vulgate . .t\FurorejPallida . .achatina . .IcntaibidunicolorVsi iIC 21 )MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, Dax.icHe|VariousLocalities..25jVariousLocalities.goA>,fuXJI=aiHcHVienna.<.*IiIAngers, Baden-.Valognes . -v#pf Auvergne,1 Cantal\Auvergne .fAuvergne .If'f*p#Auvergne .ibid. . .ibid. . .sSstAbbeville. 'Tours,j Valognes .Rouca . .Angers . .Valognes .#-'-Arapatack%Angers. . .Valognes . /-Hungary . .pGENERA.;;-Specie? foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in morn thanfornr.it ion.Habitations ofliving Speeds.PLIOCENE PE1UOP.7. i:Localities.-"aludina, cunt.Ampullaria .impure . . .YVillemetii .Europe. *Navicella. .Neritina . .>0i/~fluviatilis . .EuropeNerita . . .1S1Gr 'millepunctataGuilleraini .new species .Natica . . .European OceanMediterr .#-.:= *Morea, 1'crpign^nEuropean OceanMediterr.English Channelibid, and SenegalInd.&Europ. Oc.English Channel# ,-'f# . .*'f-'f',-'f-'fMorea, PerpignanValenciennes!Dilwynii . .mi firm::::'{Morca, Perpignan. mon ili fera .mamilla . .Indian Ocnn. .. .' zebra . .Iepiglottis .Indian Ocean,Senegal-',-LintermediateSigaretus . .Illcanaliculatt sStomatella .Sarmatia . .II allot is . .Tornatt'lla .ff>iMldepressus.| 1, ralitv unknowni fossil specietuhcrculatafasciata .1. Jin flat a1 Seas of the MoluccaIslandsEuropean andAfrican OceanEuropean Ocean. * *\Pyranridella.lll 5MIOCENE PERIOD. EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.a|VariousLocalities.VariousLocalities.fP|c JBI|Vienna.London.jjCastelgombertoQnPodolia . .Valognes.::=-TransylvaniaVolhynia,Baden, Moravia'Ronca, Angers,i Transylvania*?Valognes.Castelgomberto \/tfMRonca . . .f\ ValognesBelgiumibid . .Castelgomberto.seIjr-Augers . .Valognes .whirl 1No. ofSpecies foundSpecies foundPLIOCENE I'EUIOD.ic7.'J. Z. 1VariousLocalities.GENERA. ? both living andt - ! C- fossil (tertiary.)one tertiaryformation.cNew Genus. V jterebellatus .JMediterraneanOcean.European OceanMediterr. . . .ibidMediterraneanOcean#5'^-V*?Magnus . .12Samaria . . 1422 communistftcrasslcostatamust i lamellacancellariasubulata . .marginata .Delphinula .712,Solarium . .1216 variegated .Mediterr. Indies *Mediterr. . . . ' . .ibid .. ./ pseudo per-\ spectrumumbrosum .new species .plicatulum .|Estella. . . 4European Ocean, 1 ^Senegal. .Ischia . . .\in-uHtir: : : {Adriatic . . . * *Mediterr. East Ind. ^ .,.America, &c.Mediterr. . . .#!European Ocean *, * *?ibid !*i i" ! " TfmH " SIschia . . .ibid. .infundibulumUnknown . . .c re n ul at us .Mediterr. . .. .MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, Dax.IHeI>VariousLocalities.aiVariousLocalities.sxItaly, Subap.English Crag.cH|tzE.i>Angers..aIjto>Belgium.AngerSjBaden-Valognes . .i^<r*p*?Acresoi.ct.t^#>;;=Valognes . .<#Valognes .ibid. . .ibid. . . ,-/ v g!srI roberto-#####*,J Angers, Volhynia,I Transylvania.yGENERA.No. ofSpeciesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD,iV.IEnglish Crag.VariousLocalities.cFossil (term.)Trochus, cont.new species .PleurotomariaMonodonta .Turbo . . .Pharaohs .Mediterr. . . .Indian Ocean .Mediterr. . . .p.*in4i'inew species .Littorina . .litteredjSeas of NorthernEurope-fInew species .striataEuropean OceanPlanaxis . .Phasianella .Turritella. .pullus .European Oceanibid. . . .new species .Cigar. . t ..terebellata .imbricataria .ibid . ..new species .Desmarestinasubangulata.vermicularis .Proto. . . .Cerithium .cathedrals/European Ocean,SenegalMediterr. . . .ibid.#Morea, IschiaIschia . . .\giganteum .New Holland??hexagon .pleurotomoides.Cornucopia .geminatum .veut rico sum .Lamarck .C 27 )MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. ofSpecicsIn each Genus in the following Localities.aOK|sHBCSCVariousLocalities.jVariousLocalities.gSoX^llEnglish Crag.J|MTouraine.Igm-e&ti###1CIG5'.:1MMImmMemMM*HwmimValognes .id. Belgium*?W5'.:'f~'f\/Transylvania| Cracovia,(. Volhynia~'f. XKSHBMW1MKWM'f##Montpellier,\ Podolia#C nen,L MayenceValognes .ibid. . .f ibid. Castelroberto-Auvergne .mmmmVMi*^mmrMi^ iNo. ofSpeciesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD.It|IVariousLocalities.GENERA.f.Fossil (term.)}erithium,co/tricinctum .margaritaceuuicorrugated .inconstant .)apaveraceumraultisulcatumnew species .granules .Mediterr. . . .fMediterr . .new species .new species .pupaeforme .oPleurotoma .15Gcataracts .new species .new species .interrupt .4]Cordiericaumarmondibidibid. . . .ibid. . . .ibid. . . ..*'f4i-.'.=tarticulate .new species .tuberculous .deuticula .new species .pustules . ..,new species .new species .-MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities .II#IHH|'NefariousLocalities.sIIVariousLocalities.>>i^^English Crag.i"3Touraine.cfig^-Xsc<iG|>sToI###5*#Weissenau .Montpellier .{Volhynia.Transyl-maniaPodolia, Hungary5*Baden . . .Angers . .#Valognes.#s:Moravia . .Volhynia .*?V*p'- 1 ?-.;=f##-#ff*?#^#Baden . .ibid. . . .".#-#-Angers . .ibid. . . .ibid. . . .GENERA.No. ofSpeciesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.Pliocene PERIOD.BOIEnglish Crag.VariousLocalities.||Pleurotomacontinuedclavicularis .muliinoda .Turbinella .Cancellaria .cancellaria ..{varicose . .Mediterranean-.:=hirta. . , .Fasciolaria .Fusus . . .craticulatus .new species .Mediterr. . .ibidibidibidUnknown . .Mediterr. . .Seas of NorthernEuropeibidibidibid#sinistrorsus .Parentis .. .|brcvicauda .I*?Peruvians .Unknown ; Peru??. .mitrseformisalleviates .Burdigalensisnew species .bulbiformis .Nosepolygons .'. . .postulates .subcarinatus. .new species .MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities..SaIiVariousLocalities.London.VariousLocalities.jj,!aOfg<English Crag.IjITouraine.cIsc.s><iLondon.>Belgium.Angers, Ronca##5^'f:'.=Valognes .ibid. . .ibid. . . 'ibid. . .r#?Baden .^5*iffc*p##*?ibid. . . .-y-#GENERA.No. ofSpeciesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary) .Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD.IItaly, Subap.cMVariousLocalities.iFossil (term.)FusuSj cont. ,new species .new species .new species ,sublavatus .Pyrrha .Indian Ocean .ibidibid, andSenegalibid. ibid.#. .-melongena ./lajvigatasubcarinata .StruthiolariaRanella . .1?Mediterr. . .Indian Ocean ?Senegal ?European OceanIsle of France ./Ilaevigata .4lf Perpignan,\ MoreaMurex . . .Brandaris .tmnculus .Mediterr. . . .bid. & Indian Oc.SenegalSurop. Oc. Medit.Indian OceanMediterr. . . .ibid4i|i#*?f Toulon, Pcrpig-l nan, MoreaMorea . . .f Perpignan,\ Morea./I. .-tripterus . .cristatusfistulosus ..lucifersuberinaceusnew species .elonjratus . .. ..(ibid, andIndian OceanI. .ibid. . . .new species .Sicilypolymorphouscontabulatustric ari natus ..Assigned .Mediterr. . . .-:=:l=C 33 )MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, DatoCgHcHjcVariousLocalities.London.VariousLocalities.ICOjsOQEnglish Crag.Bordeaux.QTouraine.c'Zjs.1iic<jI|j/-12ibid. . . .Sc#~\*5Valognes .ibid. . .*P*?JfBaden . . .^*p*p#Baden . . .#Angers . . .#Valognes .VOL. Ill,GENERA.;No. ofSpeciesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiary-formation.Habitations ofliving Specie*.PLIOCENE PERIOD.7.|VariousLocalities.-j.t;|Murex, cant.new species.new speciessublavaiusMediterr. . . .Triton . . .nodiferum .lampas . . .scrobiculatorsuccinct .clathratum .unifilosum .{Mediterr. andIndian Ocean .:'.=:'.:?Mediterr . . . --i'J|il.id., NowHolland? Lain.Indian Ocean .:.intermediatecancelling .gibbous .nodularium .viperinum .Rostellaria .pes pelican! .pes carbonic .new species .European OceanMediterr. . . .ibid . . .:'.=Morea,PerpignanPterocera . .Strombus . .fIndian Ocean &"vest Indies:: ,1new species.BonelliCassidaria .~echinophora.Mediterr. . . .ibid . . .. .morea,Perpignannew species .Cassis . . .flamejIndian andAfrican Oceans-iK. .Saturn . .new species,bisulcata .Medit. SenegalUnknown . .:'fMorea . . .cypraeformis .Riciaula . .I iMIOCENE PERIOD. EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following LocalitiesTouraine.Vienna.VariousLocalities..,JVariousLocalities.|MdnJSPw|&dHcIicXC|mCiifnoGJscCracovia .ibid. . .Baden . .##'^###Valognes .ibid. . . . JBelgium .ibid . .-5!Valognes .Moravia . .#j>#:::::)>!*?if#J ValognesBelgiums!=r-Baden . .#GENERA.NoSpec.ofliesSpecies foundfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanformation.Habitation.? ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD./s.VariousPurpura . .ba?mastoma.Medit., Senegal'.new species .Cnew species .Monoceros .Harpe . . .Dolium . .Buccinum .Indian Ocean .European Seas,Senegalibid. ibid. .Mcditerr. . . .ibid*':-.x'' ?:'.sJ1Morea . . .1 Perpignan,\ Moreaibid. . . .Morea . . .Ischia . ..maculosum .mutableclatliraturn .NcnteumIndian Ocean .ibid. Medit.Senegal . . .Medit err. . . .ibidibid.Destroyers .prismaticspeculum .museum.ibidUnknown . .Mediterr. . . .ibidIndian Oceanibid#| Perpignan,1 Moreapolygonum .D'Orbignii .Linnaoinew species ..new species .Unknown . .dittoibidditto . . .erratumPerpignan .baccatum1 Perpignan,\ Moreanew species .| new species,rrtirulatimialliiiis:K burn aMIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE Period.No. of Species n each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, DaxHVienna.VariousLocalities.London.VariousLocalities.wish Crag.c|gjj><c|Belgium..SiceWia#i\:::::\-.>#Podolia . .*?J=P##V/*P#4i#Podolia ;. .-Baden, MoraviaGENERA.No.liesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD./.iJiIEnglish Crag.VariousLocalities.I!Vertebra . .Fatal . . .Senegal,Indian Ocean.Perpignan,\ Moreanew species .stigmataI.Ind Oc Senegal.*new species .ibidColumella .Mitra . . .new species .scrobiculata .uniforms .{ Morea,I Perpignan. .'.lutescenscorneaibid . .columbellatatransforms .expressing .|Volta . . .UnknownSouth Seas ?;:crassicosta .athlete . . .Marginal .Volvaria . .1 7Mediterr. . .onobilis . .*yacutiuscula .Ovula . . .Cypraea . .fspeltIndian Ocean .#new species .ibid. . . .ibid. . . .African OceanEuropean Ocean4i.new species .MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Touraine..=Vienna.VariousLocalities.MfiVariousLocalities.>.sc^.|in%English Crag.|aTouraineiVienna.c<London.iI####Baden . . .o-.###?^Valognes . ,ii?Valognes .Valognes . ,?:=#'-?-Valognes .5^#ibid. .Valognes .Valognes . )#:::::,(Cct-*?4>TransylvaniaGENERA.SpeoftiSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.Pliocene PERIOD.>u.=VariousLocalities.Cornea, cont.f now species :I 8ph ^ ?Unknown . .:'.:jsanguiuolenta .Senegal . . .Oliva . . .;shiatus. . - -flammulata ..1African Ocean.Madagascar\# /Cancellaria .glandiformisTcreljcllum .convoluted .Coins . . .MediterraneanMediterr, . .IfMorea . . .exercitus .scabriusculusacutangulus. .ponderous .nuw species .Beloptera. .Spinster .Sepia . . ./INodosaria .;;2]obloncraibidibidLin^ulina .Rimulina . .iicarinata . .West Into. Seas#MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, Dax..cH.2>VariousLocalities.jjVariousLocalities.>,Ifr/2Itoaccia|.2cct-j>gGn#Angers, Nantes#\-Valognes .#5XAngers . .Valognes,1 Belgium#ftAngers . .##5',SValognes .ibid. . .ibid. . .f Pauliac, 11 Valognes,1 Belgium-.sXValognes .*?##dangers, Volhynia,Moravia###Si *:::::!/IGENERA.No. ofSpeciesSpecies foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryHabitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD.iLBVariousLocalities.IYagiuuliua .MarginulinaPlanularia .Pavonina . .Bigenerina .Textularia .Q>Mediterr. . .ibid. . . .Adriatic . . .ibid.::5'.=#sagittula . .Mediterr. . .#VulvulinaMorphine .^olymorphiuaMediterr. . .Mediterr. . .ibid. . . .ihul'f'::::-.communiscantata;K;,Ijovata . .ibid . . .VirgulinaSphseroidinaClavulina. .Uvigerina .Bulimina . .Valvulinabullies . .communis .Medit. Ind. Oc.Mediterr. . .;;#globular .. .filRosalie . .surroundarmataibid. . . .Cayenne . . .-.:=communiaItalica . .{Mediterr.MadagascarMediterr. . .VtllKV /1<1 T.H15X"XCalcarina. .Globigerina .GyroidinaTruncatulinaPlanulinaPlanorbulinaOperculum .Soldan . .Cassidulina .Anomalies .,")oIfs vis . . .ibid. . . .ibid. Ind. Oc.European Ocean-.'.:tuberculata .it e t *t.C 43 )MIOCENE PERIOD.EOCENE PERIOD.No. of Species in each Genus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, Dax-.5HVariousLocalities..2jVariousLocalities.nEnglish Crag.Baden.Bordeaux.Touraine.c|Vienna.iLondon.afr,or,jR##yt'f::*?-Valognes . jibid. . . j^Angers . .#I44 ) .GENERA.N*P>.of>ciC3~Species foundboth living andfossil (tertiary).Species foundfossil in more thanone tertiaryformation.Habitations ofliving Species.PLIOCENE PERIOD.IHzSi>.English Crag.VariousLocalities.VertebrataPolystomellaangular . .jSenegal, Australian,Indian, Mediocre. andAfrican Oceans.Coasts of Africastigmata .ITang de TaiDendritina .Penelope's .It o bul in a . .cultrata . .calcar . .ibidWest Indian'sMediterr. . .ibid. . . .Mediterr. . . .ibidibid., Madagas-marginata .Cristellaria .4iMtuberculata .ItalicaNonionina .NummulitesBiloculina .umbilical .communis .IISpiroloculinaTriloculina .G1Clongirostris .depress . .Mediterr. . . .ibidibidibid-"-depress . .eribba . . .Mediterr. . . .ibidArticulate.-{ibid., Indian &European OceansWest Indies . .BrongniartiIQuinqueloculinaMediterr. . . .ibid.St. Helena4>4>-.. .\ : .triangularis .bicarbonatef1seminulum .ibidAdelosina .AmphisteginaHeterostegiuaOrbicular .Alveoli . .MIOCENE PERIOD.Eocene E PERIOD. No. of Species in each (Jesus in the following Localities.Bordeaux, Dax.Touraine.VariousLocalities. .21 <i .Various , | J1 Localities - t * I | 1 sJ jq pq CQ QS-s 1 i i -a 1 1 '1yjljjljjS||. *. . Angers, Nantes .^. . .14. . .# . . .. . .. o . . . . 4 j .5 . . 2. Valognes .A if). Valognes . >1 'J- '- 2 'il46 )SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE,Containing Localities for which there was not sufficient space in thepreceding tables.jtr-GENERA.ricM-3^c---X-d~~Jh:c-T-~,">,tt<^r.stj^s.-.~r-\\||b=Zc^-|=I||Iw|''~=4,w'"'hi^ur"^^~/.SCycles . . .\Cyrene . . .OTridacna . .}PenaPecten . . .^\Invites . .Helixr,PupaBulimus. ~. .Achatina . .Planorhis . .oLimnea . . .Paludina . .oAmpullaria .Cerithium . .Textularia . .\A.nornalina .4? )GENERAL RESULTSDEDUCED FROMA COMPARISON OF THE SPECIES EXAMINED IN COMPILINGTHE FOREGOING TABLES.PLIOCENE PERIOD.Italy, Sicily, the Morea, Perpignan, and the English Crag. The fossilsof Perpignan and the Morea are, with the exception of three or fourspecies, the same as those of Italy.No. ofspecies.In Italy . 569,ofwhich238 are still living, and 331 extinct (or unknown)Sicily . 226 ,,216 10The Crag 111 45 66No, of species common to Italy and Sicily . 103Italy and the Crag* 4Sicily and the Crag 4Italy, Sicily, and the Crag 18No. of species proper to Sicily . 65to the Crag . 23By subtracting from the total number of species enumeratedas belonging to the above localities . . . 906those species which are common to different localities . 129We find the real number of the species of this epoch to be . 777The number of living analogues is 350, which is in the proportion of49 in 100.MIOCENE PERIOD.Bordeaux, Dax, Touraine, Turin, Baden, Vienna, Moravia, Hungary,Cracovia, Volhynia, Podolia, Transylvania, Angers, and Roncat.The species of Moravia, Hungary, Cracovia, Volhynia, Podolia, andTransylvania, are the same, with a very few exceptions, as those ofVienna and Baden.The statement that there are only 4 species common to Italy and the Crag,may seem inconsistent with the fact that 18 are common to those places and toSicily ; but the reader will understand that there are only 4 species which arecommon to Italy and the Crag, and which are not also common to some otherPliocene locality. The same remark is applicable to similar statements in thesequel.f Ronca may very probably belong to the Eocene epoch ; but in this, as in respectto a few other localities mentioned in the tables, the number of analogues istoo small to lead to certain conclusions.48 )No. ofspecies.Bordeaux and Dax* 594, of which 136 are still living, and 458 extinct.TouraineTurinViennaBadenAngersRone a1GGG8Common to Bordeaux, Dax, Touraine .TurinVienna .BadenAngers .Ronca .Touraine and Turin . .Touraine and ViennaTouraine and Baden .Touraine and AngersTouraine and Ronca .Touraine, Turin and ViennaTouraine, Turin and AngersTouraine, Vienna and AngersTurin and ViennaTurin and RoncaBaden and AngersTouraine and Angers .Touraine and Turin .Touraine and Vienna .Touraine and Baden .Turin and RoncaVienna and AngersAngers and RoncaTouraine, Vienna and BadenTouraine, Vienna, Angers and BadenBordeaux, Dax, Touraine, Turin, Vienna and Angersib. ib. ib. Turin, Vienna and Badenib. ib. ib. Vienna and Badenib. ib. ib. Vienna, Angers and BadenCarried overib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.ib.No ofspecies.G225GThere are at Bordeauxand ut Dax44G speciesmaking a total of . . 919but from the groat number of species common to the two localities there are, inreality, only 594 species, as above mentioned.No. ofSpeciesBrought over . . . . 256Common to Bordeaux, Dax, Touraine, Tnrin,Vienna, Angers & Baden 1ib. ib. ib. Angers and Baden . . 2ib. ib. Vienna and Baden . 4By adding to the above 134 species which are common to theMiocene, and the two other epochs . . . . 134Ie total number of analogues will be found to be . . 397By subtracting from the total number of species of the abovelocalities 1418those species which are common to different localities . . 397We find the real number of species of this epoch to be . 1 021The number of living analogues is 176, which is in the proportion ofrather less than 18 in 100; the number of fossil analogues, after subtractingthose which pass from the Miocene into both the Pliocene andEocene epochs, is 168, which is very nearly in the same proportion.The species which pass from the Miocene into the Pliocene period arein number 196, of which 114 are living, and 82 fossil, which is verynearly in the proportion of 20 in 100 of the total number of species ofthe latter epoch. Thus it is remarkable that there are 18 in 100 livinganalogues, 18 in 100 of analogous fossil species, and that 20 in 100 ofthese species pass from the Miocene to the Pliocene epoch.The 114 living species, and the 82 fossil ones, which are common tothe Miocene and Pliocene periods, are distributed, in the last-mentionedepoch, in the following manner :LIVING. FOSSIL.Crag . 4 Crag . . 4Italy . . . 48 Sicily . . 1Sicily . 5 Italy . .71Sicily and Italy . 46 Sicily and Italy . 5Sicily, Italy, and the Crag 1 1 Sicily and the Crag 1114 82The preceding distribution of species will show that Italy is representedin the Miocene period by 181 species, Sicily by 69, and the Cragby 20.EOCENE PERIOD.Paris, London, Valognes, Belgium, Castelgomberfo, and Pauliac.A small number of species only have been examined from Belgium,Pauliac, and Castelgomberto, but which agreed, with few exceptions,with species of the Paris basin. So also in regard to Valognes.VOL. in. dNumber of specie?, Paris . 1122 of which 38 are still living, and1084 extinct (or unknown).London . 239 of which 12 are still living, and227 extinct (or unknown).Valognes . 332Belgium . 49By subtracting from these localitiesthe number of analogousspecies . . . . 504The real number of species ofthis epoch is . .1238The number of fossils of this period identified with living species is 42,which is to 1238 in the proportion of 3} in 100. The number of fossilspecies which pass from the Eocene into the two other periods is 46,that is to say, in nearly the same proportion as the living analogues.Among the fossil species, four only are common to the three epochs,which are the following :1 Dentalium coarctatum, 3 Bulimus terebellatus.2 Tornatellainflata. 4 Corbula complaint.The 42 other fossil species, which go no farther than the Mioceneepoch, are distributed in the following manner :Bordeaux and D ax . , . . .17Turin 3Angers 2Ronca 7Bordeaux, Dax and Touraine . 4ib. ib. and Turin 1ib. ib. Touraine and Angers . 2ib. ib. Turin, Vienna and Baden . . 1ib. ib. Touraine, Turin, Vienna and Angers . 1ib. ib. Touraine, Vienna, Angers and Baden . 1Turin and Rorica . 2Angers and Ronca . 1Of the 42 living species, the following 13 are common to the threeepochs,1 Dentalium entalis, 7 Murex lucifer,- strangulatum, 8 Polymorphina gibbs,3 Fissurella graeca, 9 Triloculina oblonga,4 Bulla lignaria, 10 Lucina divaricata,5 Rissoa cochlearella, 11 gibbosula,G Murex fistulosus, 12 Isocardia cor,13 Nucula manraritacea.Of the other species, 7 go no farther than the Miocene epoch, and aredistributed in the following manner,Bordeaux and Dax . . .3ib. ib. and Baden . . 1ib. ib. and Touraine . . 1ib. ib. and Angers . . 1ib. ib. Touraine and Angers . 1Total number of species in the three periods,In the Pliocene . . 777In the Miocene . . 1021In the Eocene . . 1238From the above lists it will appear that there are 17 species which arecommon to the three epochs, and which may therefore be said to characterisethe entire tertiary formations of Europe. Thirteen of them arespecies still living, while four are only known as fossil. There is not asingle species common to the Pliocene and Eocene epochs which is notalso found in the Miocene.GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE LIVING SPECIES WHICHHAVE THEIR FOSSIL ANALOGUES.Pliocene Epoch, 350 species.In the Mediterranean 242In the Indian Ocean 25At Senegal . 5Common to the Mediterranean and Senegal . 14an( i the African Ocean 8Indian Ocean and to Senegal . 7and to America 5Fossil inSicilyand Italy.In the Northern European Ocean . . . 43 i Fossil inPacific Ocean lj the Crag.Miocene Epoch, 176 species, (100 species common to thepreceding epoch.)Species.At Senegal, of which 13 are common to the Indian Ocean, and 12to the Mediterranean . . . . .79In the Mediterranean and Southern European Ocean, of which 10are common to the Indian Ocean, and 12 to Senegal . 86In the Indian Ocean, 10 of which are common to the SouthernEuropean Ocean . . . . . .29Carried over . . . . 194Species.Brought over . . . . 1 94In the Equatorial Seas of America, 2 of which are common to theIndian Ocean . . . . . .7In the Pacific Ocean . . . . . .2Number common to different localities 27Eocene Epoch, 42 species, of which 26 are common to thetwo preceding epochs.In the Mediterranean, 5 of which are common to India and NewHolland . . . . . .19In the Indian Ocean . 7In New Holland 3In Senegal . 3Of the fluviatile and terrestrial species, 5 are still living in Europe,1 in the Philippine Islands, and 4 in Asia, Spain and Greece 1APPENDIX II.I. FOSSIL SHELLS COLLECTED BY THE AUTHOR FROM VariousLOCALITIES OF THE NEWER PLIOCENE FormationIN SICILY; NAMED BY M. DESHAYES.N. B. Those which are marked with an asterisk in this and the following listsare unknown as recent.FOSSIL SHELLS FROM THE FLANKS OF ETNA, ImmediatelyABOVE THE BAY OF TREZZA.In day and volcanic tuff. (See p. 79.)Mactra triangula, Broc.Corbula nucleus.Astarte, unnamed.ditto.Venus Brongniarti, Payraudeau.radiata.species doubtful.Cytherea exoleta.linda.Cardiuru edule.sulcatum.Area antiquata, Lamk.barbara, Lamk.Pectunculus glycimeris.pious.Nucula, new species.margaritacea.Chamaa unicorn.Pecten ornate.an, new species ?Bruei, Payr.opercularis.unicolor.Jacobus.Ostrea edulis.Anomia ephippium.Dentalium entalis.,, * new species.strangulatum, Desk.novem statum.Pileopsis Ungarica.Calyptraea Chinensis.Natica millepunctata.Natica Dillwynii, Payr.Guillemini, Payr.glancing.Trochus magus.romulus.Adamson, Payr.Turbo rufous.Monodonta Viellotii, Payr.Turritella terebra, Broc.Cerithium sulcatum.Pleurotoma, new species.Cancellaria cancellaria.Fusus, new species,new species,craticulatus, Blaine.strigosus.ignatius.Murex trunculus.Brandaris.erinaceus.Triton an please ?Rostellaria pes pelican.Cassidaria echinophora.Buccinum museum, Broc.mutable.maculosum.unnamed.Calmelii.semistriatum.Columella rustica.Mitra lutescens.Conus MediterraneanVILLASMONDE. (See p. 65.)Mactralaetaea.Corbula nucleus.Pecten opercularis.Dentalium novem costatura.Natica glancing.canna.Rostellaria pes pelicanMILITELLO. (V. DI NOTO.) (See p. 65.)Cytherea chine ?Cardium edule.Area antiquata.Pecten Jacobaeus.varius.Pecten opercularis.Ostrea edulis.Dentaliuiri, new species.Buccinum prismaticura ?An Turbo rufous ? ? ?GIRGENTI. (In limestone and clay. See p. 65.)Corbula nucleus.Mactra triangula ? Broc.Pectunculus pious.Modiola, species doubtful.Pecten Jacobaeus.Pecten opercularis.Dentalium entails.Natica millepunctata.Turritella ternate.Buccinum semistriatum.SYRACUSE. (Seep. 67.)Thracia pubescens.Tellina ?Cardium sulcatum.edule.echinatum.Isocardia cor.Area antiquata.Pectunculus pious.glycimeris.Pecten, an nodus ?Jacobaeus.Audouini, Payr.opercularis.Pecten coarctatus, Broc.varius.Ostrea edulis.Dentalium, new species.strangulatum, Desk.,, sexangulare, Broc.Haliotis tuberculata.Trochus romulus.Turritella terebra.Murex trunculus ?Buccinum semistriatum.Cyprsea tufa.Conus Mediterranean ? ?CALTANISETTA. (In clay and yellow sand. See p. 67.)Lucina lactea ?Venus multilamella.Cardium echinatum.edule.Area antiquata.Pecten Jacobaeus.Ostrea edulis.Dentalium, new species.fossile.sexangulare.Natica Guillemini, Payr.millepunctata.Turritella subangulata, Broc.ternate, Broc.,, terebra.Cerithium vulgate.Fusus ignatius.Rostellaria pes pelican.Buccinum semistriatum.IVfitra lutescens.CALTAGIRONE. (See p. 67.)Mactra triangula, Broc.Amphidesma, new species.Corbula nucleus.Psammobia angular (Tellina, Lin.)Cytherea lincla.Venus multilamella,Cardita sulcata, Brag.,, squamosa.Cardium echinatum.Area antiquata.Nucula Italica, Def.Pecten opercularis.Bruei, Payr.Dentalium, new species.,. entalis.novera statum.Fissurella contraria, Desk.Calyptraea chinensis.Bulla lignaria.Natica canna.Natica Dilwynii, Payr,,, Valenciennesiiii, Payr.,, Guillemini, Payr.Samaria tenuicostata, Mich.Turritella terebra.Cerithium Laurelled, Payr.Pleurotoma, new species.,, vulpecula, Broc.articulate, Broc.Fusus craticulatus, Blain.,, ignatius.,, rostratus.Murex Brandaris.Rostellaria pes pelican.Buccinum semistriatum., mutable.prismatic, Broc.turbinellus, Broc.Mitra lutescens.Cypraea coryza, Duclos.CASTROGIOVANNI. (See p. 67.)Lucina lactea.Nucula Italica, Def.Pecten Jacobaeus.Pecten opercularis.Natica Guillemini, Payr.Mazzini.Murex Brandaris.PIAZZA.Ostrea edulis.Pectunculus glycimeris.VAL DI NOTO.| Pecten opercularis.PALERMO. (In limestone and clay. See p. 65.)Tellina Donacina.Clavagella bacillus, Desk.Solen coarctatus, Broc.Panacea Aldrovandi.Thracia corbuloides, Desk.pubes cens, Desk.Lutraria solenoides.Corbula nucleus.,, new species.Lucina radula.,, new species, a lupin? Broc.lactea.Astarte, new species, an incrassata ?,> new species.PALERMO continued.Cytherea rugosa, Broc.exoleta.Chine.Venus radiata, Broc.species doubtful.Cardita squampsa.Cyprian Islandicoides.Cardium sulcatum.edule.,, echinatum.,, Deshayesii, Payr.Isocardia cor.Area antiquata.Pectunculus pious.Nucula, new species.,, margaritacea.Chamaa gryphons ?unicorn.Pecten ornate.,, coarctatus, Broc.an, new species,opercularis.new species.Jacobaeus.varius ? ?pleuronectes.Ostrea cornucopias ?edulis.Virginica.hippopus.Terebratula truncated.ampulla.Dentalium, new species.fossile, Lin. Var.strangulatum, Desk.Patella bonnardii, Payr.Marginal curvirostris, Desk.Fissurella, species doubtful.Graeca.Pileopsis Ungarica.Bulla lignaria.Auricula dulcinea.Natica millepunctata.Gu, : fleming, Payr.Natica Canna.Valenciennesiiii, Payr.'Samaria communis.pseudo salaries.Solarium strained ?Trochus magus.agglutinans.circulates, Broc.Adamson, Payr.paulus.cinereous.Turbo rufous.Turritella terebra.Cerithium tricinctum.margaritaceum.new species.Pleurotoma Cordieri.Caumarmondi, Mich.new species.Fasciolaria tarentina.Fusus sinistrorsus, Desk.strigosus.rostratus.cravats.craticulatus.new species,ignatius.Ranella gigantic.laevigata.Murex Brandaris.,, trunculus.Triton unifilosum, Bon.Rostellaria pes pelican.Cassidaria echinophora.Cassis saturn.Dolium pomum.Buccinum prismatic, Broc.new species.new species.semistriatum.new species.,, mutable.Conus Mediterranean.2. FOSSIL SHELLS COLLECTED BY THE AUTHOR INISCHIA, AND NAMED BY M. DESHAYES. (Seep. 126.)Solen coarctatus, Broc.Lucina lupin, Broc.Venus radiata, Broc.verrucosa.Cardium sulcatum.edule.Pectunculus violacescens.Area, new species, An area quoi ?Payr.Nucula margaritacea.Pecten varius.Jacobus.Dumas, Payr.opercularis.Dentalium novem costatura.Melania Cambessedesii, Payr.Natica Guillemini, Payr.Valenciennesiiii? Payr.Trochus magus.,, concludes.,, new species.Turritella terebra.Cerithium Laurelled, Payr.new species.vulgate.doliolum, Broc.Rostellaria pes pelican.Buccinum prismatic, Broc.Cypraea lurid.The four following shells have since been sent to me from Ischia. Theyare all of recent species :Trochus credulous.Pectunculus pious.Natica glancing ?Turritella duplicata.FOSSIL SHELLS FROM THE WESTERN BORDERS OF THERED SEA, COLLECTED BY MR. JAMES BURTON, COM-Mutilated BY G. B. GREENOUGH, ESQ., P.G.S.Lutraria splendid ?,, plicatella ? ?Mactra stultorum ?Corbula.Psammobia.Tellina lingua felix.rugosa.,, virgata.prostrate.Lucina globosa.Cyprian.Cytherea tigerina.picta.castrensis.erycina.scripta ?Venus geographical.reticulated.ovata ? ?paphian.Cardium rugosum.-(Eolicum ?retusum.Cardita turgid.calculate,Cypricardia.Chamaa lazarus.Tridacna squamosa.Area scapha.,, antiquata.Nose.Pectunculus pectiniformis.Pecten maximus.pes felix.Spondylus gaderopus.Parmophorus elegant.Fissurella Graeca.Bulla ampulla.,, solid.Helix deserted.Nerita.Natica melanostoma.familiars.mamilla.Graeca.alba.Haliotis tuberculata ?striata ?Donatello.Pyramidal.RED SEA SHELLS continued.Solarium perspective.Trochus maculatus.virtus.Mauritius.Monodonta tectum.Pharaohs.^Egyptica.Turbo chrysostom.petholatus.TurritellaCerithium rotulorum.sulcatum.virtus.Pleurotoraa virgo.Turbinella lineolata.Cancellaria constabulary.Fasciolaria trapezium.Pyrrha abbreviated.papa.citron.,, reticulated.franco ins.Ranella granifera.cremona.Murex crassispina.scorpio.Triton variegated.,, lampas.please.maculosum.Strombus gigs (young).bituberculatus.lineolatus.,, gibberulus.terebellatus.Cassis vibex.saturn.erinaceus.Ricinula arachnoides.Dolium perdix.Dolium pomum.Buccinum coronation.arcularia.senticosum.Vertebra crenulata.subulata.myosurus.,, maculata.duplicata.Columella torturing ?Mitra striata.coronet ?Cypraea kappa.Arabica.tala.africa.vitellus.rosa.,, carniola.turdus ?lurid ?flaveola ?nucleus.stercus musaeum ?caput serpents ?Cancellaria.Oliva erythrostoma.Conus irenaeus.generalis.literatus ?betulinus.stratum.episcopus.tesselated.textile,nussatella.clavus.terebra ? ?capitals.Cerebellum subulatum.The above shells were named by Mr. GRAY, F.R.S., and Mr. Tremble.FOSSIL SHELLS COLLECTED BY THE AUTHOR FROMTHE LOESS OF THE VALLEY OF THE RHINE.(See p. 151.)Helix obvoluta, Drap,ericetorum, io.carthusianella, ib.plebeian, ib.portia.nemoralis, ib.fruticum, Drap.arbustorum.Helix striata, Drap.Succinea elongata.Cycles palustris, Drap.lacustris, ib.Galata piscinalis.Limnea oyata, Drap.Paludina impure.SIENNA. (See pp. 160 and 163.)Serpula arenaria.ditto, var.new species.glomerata.Mactra triangula.Tellina complaint.Cytherea rugosa, Broc.Cardita intermediate.new species.Cardium edule.Area antiquata.Pectunculus pious.summaries.curious.Nucula margaritacea.Pecten Jacobaeus.opercularis.stratum ?laticostatus.Ostrea edulis, Lin.edulis? junior.,, (nobis incognita).Dentalium sexangulare.fossile.Auricula dulcinea, Desk.Melanopsis buccinoides.Natica glancing.punctata.,, Marochiensis.Trochus fermonii, Payr.,, new species, with its colour.Turbo rufous.Turritella terebra.,, imbricataria, Broc.subangulata.ternate.varicose.Cerithium vulgatura.doliplum.tricinctuin.new species.new species.Pleurotoma cataracts.interrupt, Broc,oblonga, Broc.Pleurotoma rotate, Broc.reticulated, Broc.textile, Broc.turricula, Broc.timidity, Broc. (den-tate,Lamk.),, timidity, var.Cancellaria cancellaria.varicose.Lyrata.Fusus ignatiusmitraeformis.,, subulatus.,, longiroster.,, tiara, Broc.Ranella bimarginata,Murex cornutus, var.lucifer.horrid.spinspma.pomum.,, brackets, Broc.,, new species.Triton unifilosus, Bonelli.f reticulated, Broc.,, new species.Rostellaria pes pelican.Strombus Bonelli, Bring.Cassis saturn.Buccinum clathratum ? Broc.erratum, Broc.,, postulates.,, gibbosulum.Vertebra linaria.,, duplicata.Mitra pyramidal, Broc.scrobiculata.Marginal cypraapla.Conus antediluvian, Broc.ponderous.mercator.pyrrha, Broc.,, betulinoides.virginis.SECONDARY FOSSIL SHELLS.FOSSIL SHELLS COMMON TO THE MAESTRICHT BEDSAND THE WHITE CHALK; COMMUNICATED BYM. DESHAYES. (See p. 325.)Catullus (Ignoramus) Cuvier?(specimens imperfect.)Plagiostoma spinosa.,, Hoperi.Pecten fragilissimus.Ostrea vesicular.carinata.Crania Parisians.Terebratula octoplicata.carne.,, pupils (magus, Sow.),, Defrancii.Belemnites mucronatus.FOSSIL SHELLS COMMON TO THE MAESTRICHT BEDSAND THE UPPER GREEN-SAND; COMMUNICATEDBY M. DESHAYES. (See p. 325.)Plagiostoma spinosa.Ostrea vesicular.,, carinata,Belemnites mucronatus.Baculites Faujasii.GLOSSARYOf Geological and other Scientific Terms used in this Work.Several of the Author's friends, who had read the first and second volumes ofthe Principles of Geology, having met with difficulties from their previous un-acquaintancewith the technical terms used in Geology and Natural History,suggested to him that a Glossary of those words would render his work muchmore accessible to general readers. The Author willingly complied with this suggestion,but finding that his own familiarity with the subject made him not a verycompetent judge of the terms that required explanation, he applied to the friendsabove alluded to for their assistance, and from lists of words supplied by them, thefollowing Glossary has been constructed. It will be obvious to men of science,that in order to attain the object in view, it was necessary to employ illustrationsand language as familiar as possible to the general reader.ACEPHALOUS. The Acephala are that division of molluscous animalswhich, like the oyster and scallop, are without heads. The classAcephala of Cuvier comprehends many genera of bivalve shells,and a few genera of mollusca which are devoid of shells. Etym. ta, a, without, and Ke<f>a\rj, cephalic, the head.Algae. An order or division of the cryptogamic class of plants.The whole of the sea-weeds are comprehended under this division,and the application of the term in this work is to marineplants. Etym., Alga, sea-weed.ALUM-STONE, Albumen, ALUMINOUS. Alum is the base of pure clay,and strata of clay are often met with containing much iron-pyrites.When the latter substance decomposes, sulphuric acid is produced,which unites with the aluminous earth of the clay toform sulphate of alumine, or common alum. Where manufactoriesare established for obtaining the alum, the induratedbeds of clay employed are called Alum-stone.ALLUVIAL. The adjective of alluvium, which see.ALLUVION. Synonymous with alluvium, which see.ALLUVIUM. Earth, sand, gravel, stones, and other transportedmatter which has been washed away and thrown down by rivers,floods, or other causes, upon land not permanently submergedbeneath the waters of lakes or seas. Elym., Alluo, to washupon. For a further explanation of the term, as used in thiswork, see vol. ii. chap, xiv., and vol. iii. p. 145.62 GLOSSARY.AMMONITE. An extinct and very numerous genus of the order ofmolluscous animals, called Cephalopoda, allied to the moderngenus Nautilus, which inhabited a chambered shell, curvedlike a coiled snake. Species of it are found in all geologicalperiods of the secondary strata ; but they have not yet beenseen in the tertiary beds. They are named from their resemblanceto the horns on the statues of Jupiter Ammon.AMORPHOUS. Bodies devoid of regular form. Etym t> a, a, without,and fJLoptyr], morpheus form.AMYGDALOID. One of the forms of the Trap-rocks, in which agatesand simple minerals appear to be scattered like almonds in acake. Etym., a^uvy^aXa, amygdala, an almond.ANALCIME. A simple mineral of the Zeolite family, of frequentoccurrence in the trap-rocks.ANALOGUE. A body that resembles or corresponds with anotherbody. A recent shell of the same species as a fossil-shell, isthe analogue of the latter.ANOPLOTHERE, ANOPLOTHERIUM. A fossil extinct quadruped belongingto the order Pachydermata, resembling a pig. It hasreceived its name because the animal must have been singularlywanting in means of defence, from the form of its teeth and theabsence of claws, hoofs, and horns. Etym., avoTrXoe, apollos,unarmed, and Q^PLOV, Thereon, a wild beast.ANTAGONIST POWERS. Two powers in nature, the action of the onecounteracting that of the other, by which a kind of equilibriumor balance is maintained, and the destructive effect preventedthat would be produced by one operating without a check.ANTENNAE. The articulated horns with which the heads of insects areinvariably furnished.ANTHRACITE. A shining substance like black-lead ; a species ofmineral charcoal. Etym., av0pa^, anthrax, coal.ANTHRACOTHERIUM. A name given to an extinct quadruped, supposedto belong to the Pachydermata, the bones of which werefound in lignite and coal of the tertiary strata. Etym., avOpa^anthrax, coal, and Qripiov, thereon, wild beast.ANTHROPOMORPHOUS. Having a form resembling the human. Etym.,a>0/)W7roe, atropos, a man, and fiop^r;, morphia, form.ANTICLINAL Axis. If a range of hills, or a valley, be composedof strata, which on the two sides dip in opposite directions,the imaginary line that lies between them, towards which thestrata on each side rise, is called the anticlinal axis. In a rowof houses with steep roofs facing the south, the slates representinclined strata dipping north and south, and the ridge is an eastGLOSSARY. 63and west anticlinal axis. For a farther explanation, with a diagram,see vol. iii. p. 293.ANTISEPTIC. Substances which prevent corruption in animal andvegetable matter, as common salt does, are said to be antiseptic.Etym.y auri) against, and aqiru, sept, to putrefy.ARENACEOUS. Sandy. Etym., Arena, sand.ARGILLACEOUS. Clayey, composed of clay. Etym., Argyll, clay.ARRAGONITE. A simple mineral, a variety of carbonate of lime, socalled from having been first found in Arragon, in Spain.AUGITE. A simple mineral of a dark green, or black colour, whichforms a constituent part of many varieties of volcanic rocks.AVALANCHES. Masses of snow which, being detached from greatheights in the Alps, acquire enormous bulk by fresh accumulationsas they descend ; and when they fall into the valleys belowoften cause great destruction. They are also called savages,and launches, in the dialects of Switzerland.BASALT. One of the most common varieties of the Trap-rocks. Itis a dark green or black stone, composed of augite and felspar,very compact in texture, and of considerable hardness, oftenfound in regular pillars of three or more sides, called basalticcolumns. Very remarkable examples of this kind of rock areseen at the Giant's Causeway, in Ireland, and at Fingal's Cave,in the island of Staffa, one of the Hebrides. The term is used byPliny, and is said to come from basal, an .ethiopian word signifyingiron, not an improbable derivation, inasmuch as the rockoften contains much iron, and as many of the figures of thaEgyptian temples are formed of basalt.BASIN' of Paris, ' BASIN' of London. Deposits lying in a greathollow or trough surrounded by low hills or high land, sometimesused in geology almost synonymously with ' formationBELEMNITE. An extinct genus of the order of molluscous animalscalled Cephalopoda, that inhabited a long, straight, and chamberedconical shell. Etym., fit\tiivov, belemnon, a dart.BITUMEN. Mineral pitch, of which the tar-like substance which isoften seen to ooze out of the Newcastle coal when on the fire,and which makes it cake, is a good example. Etym., Bitumen,pitch.BITUMINOUS SHALE. An argillaceous shale, much impregnated withbitumen, which is very common in the coal measures.BLENDE. A metallic ore, a compound of the metal zinc with sulphur.It is often found in brown shining crystals, hence itsname among the German miners, from the word blended, tQdazzle.G4 GLOSSARY.BLUFFS. High banks presenting a precipitous front to the sea or ariver. A term used in the United States of North America.BOTRYOIDAL. Resembling a bunch of grapes. Etym.> po-pvc, botrys,a bunch of grapes, and ticoc, eidos, form.Boulders. A provincial term for large rounded blocks of stone lyingon the surface of the ground, or sometimes imbedded in loosesoil, different in composition from the rocks in their vicinity,and which have been therefore transported from a distance.BRECCIA. A rock composed of angular fragments connected togetherby lime or other mineral substance. An Italian term.CALC SINTER. A German name for the deposits from springs holdingcarbonate of lime in solution petrifying springs. Elym.,Talk, lime, sister, to drop.CALCAIRE GROSSIER. An extensive stratum, or rather series ofstrata, belonging to the Eocene tertiary period, originally foundin, and specially belonging to, the Paris Basin. See Table II.E, p. 390. Etym., Calcairc, limestone, and grosser, coarse.CALCAREOUS ROCK. Limestone. Etym., Calx, lime.Chalcedony. A siliceous simple mineral, crystallized. Agatesare partly composed of chalcedony.Carbon. An decomposed inflammable substance, one of the simpleelementary bodies. Charcoal is almost entirely composedof it. Ety?n., Carbo, coal.CARBONATE of LIME. Lime combines with great avidity with carbonicacid, a gaseous acid only obtained fluid when united withwater, and all combinations of it with other substances arecalled Carbonates. All limestones are carbonates of lime, andquick lime is obtained by driving off the carbonic acid by heat.CARBONATED SPRINGS. Springs of water, containing carbonic acidgas. They are very common, especially in volcanic countries, andsometimes contain so much gas, that if a little sugar be throwninto the water it effervesces like soda-water.CARBONIC ACID GAS. A natural gas which often issues from theground, especially in volcanic countries. Etym., Carbo, coal,because the gas is obtained by the slow burning of charcoal.CARBONIFEROUS. A term usually applied, in a technical sense, tothe lowest group of strata of the secondary rocks, see Table II.L, p. 393 ; but any bed containing coal may be said to be carboniferous.Etym., Carbo, coal, andyi.ro, to bear.CATACLYSM. A deluge. Etym., Kra*:Xvw, cataduso, to deluge.CEPHALOPODA. A class of molluscous animals, having their organsof motion arranged round their head. Etym., K-a/mA?/, ccphale,head, and Trots, vota* feet.GLOSSARY. G5I!ETACEA. An order of vertebrated mammiferous animals inhabitingthe sea. The whale, dolphin, and narwal, are examples. Etym.,Cete, whale.Chalk. A white earthy limestone, the uppermost of the secondaryseries of strata. See Table II. F, p. 390.Chert. A siliceous mineral, approaching in character to flint, butless homogeneous and simple in texture.CHLORITIC SAND. Sand coloured green by an admixture of thesimple mineral chlorite. Etym., K\(t>poe, chorus, green.COAL FORMATION. This term is generally understood to mean thesame as the Coal Measures. See Table II. L, p. 393. Thereare, however, * coal formations' in all the geological periods,wherever any of the varieties of coal form a principal constituentpart of a group of strata.Cleopatra. An order of insects (Beetles) which have four wings,the upper pair being crustaceous and forming a shield. Etym.tKo\og, coles, a shield, and Tn-epov, pteron, a wing.CONGENERS. Species which belong to the same genus.CONGLOMERATE. Rounded water worn fragments of rock, or pebbles,cemented together by another mineral substance, whichmay be of a siliceous, calcareous, or argillaceous nature. Etymontogether, glover, to heap.CONIFERS. An order of plants which, like the fir and pine, bearcones or tops in which the seeds are contained. Etym., Conus,cone, and/ero, to bear.COOMB. A provincial name in different parts of England for avalley on the declivity of a hill, and which is generally withoutwater.CORNBRASH. A rubble stone extensively cultivated in Wiltshire forgrowth of corn. It is a provincial term adopted by Smith.Brash is derived from break, Saxon, to break. See Table II.H, p. 391.Cornerstone. A provincial name for a red limestone, forming a subordinatebed in the Old Red Sandstone group.COSMOGONY, COSMOLOGY. Words synonymous in meaning, appliedto speculations respecting the first origin or mode of creation ofthe earth. Etym., Koapog, cosmos, the world, and yovij, gone,generation, or Xoyoc, logos, discourse.CRAG. A provincial name in Norfolk and Suffolk for a deposit,usually of gravel, belonging to the Older Pliocene period. SeeTable II. C, p. 389.CRATER. The circular cavity at the summit of a volcano, from whichthe volcanic matter is ejected. Etym., Crater, a great cup or bowl.VOL. III. e66 GLOSSARY.CRETACEOUS. Belonging to chalk. Elym., Creta, chalk.CROP OUT. A miner's or mineral surveyor's term, to express therising up or exposure at the surface of a stratum or series ofstrata.CRUST OF THE EARTH. See Earth's crust.CRUSTACEA. Animals having a shelly coating or crust which theycast periodically. Crabs, shrimps, and lobsters are examples.CRYPTOGAMIC. A name applied to a class of plants in which thefructification, or organs of reproduction are concealed. Etym.,Kpvn-Tos, kryptos, concealed, and ya/zoe, games, marriage.CRYSTALS. Simple minerals are frequently found in regular forms,with facets like the drops of cut glass of chandeliers. Quartzbeing often met with in rocks in such forms, and beautifullytransparent like ice, was called rock-crystal, ^voraXXoc, crystals,being Greek for ice. Hence the regular forms of otherminerals are called crystals, whether they be clear or opake.CRYSTALLIZED. A mineral which is found in regular forms or crystals,is said to be crystallized.CRYSTALLINE. The internal texture which regular crystals exhibitwhen broken, or a confused assemblage of ill-defined crystals.Loaf-sugar and statuary-marble have a crystalline texture.Sugar-candy and calcareous spar are crystallized.CYCADE.E. An order of plants, which are natives of warm climates,mostly tropical, although some are found at the Cape of GoodHope. They have a short stem, surmounted by a peculiarfoliage, termed pinnated fronds by botanists, which spreads inacircle. The growth of these plants is by a cluster of freshfronds shooting from the top of the stem, and pushing theformer fronds outwards. These last decay down to their bases,which are broad, and remain covering the sides of the stem.The term is derived from jcv/tae, cycas, a name applied by theancient Greek naturalist Theophrastus to a palm, said to growin Ethiopia.CYPERACEA. A tribe of plants answering to the English sedges ;they are distinguished from grasses by their stems being solidand generally triangular, instead of being hollow and round.Together with graminece they constitute what writers on botanicalgeography often call glumaceas.Debate. A great rush of waters, which breaking down all opposingbarriers, carries forward the broken fragments of rocks, andspreads them in its course. Etym., dealer, French, to unbar,to break up as a river does at the cessation of a long-continuedfrost.GLOSSARY.DELTA. When a great river before it enters the sea divides intoseparate streams, they often diverge and form two sides of atriangle, the sea being the base. The land included by the threelines, and which is invariably alluvial, is called a delta from itsresemblance to the letter of the Greek alphabet which goes bythat name A. Geologists extend the boundaries of the delta,so as to include all the alluvial land outside the triangle, whichhas been formed by the river.DENUDATION. The carrying away of a portion of the solid materialsof the land, by which the inferior parts are laid bare. Etym,,denudo, to lay bare.DESICCATION. The act of drying up. Etym., desicco, to dry up.DIAGONAL STRATIFICATION. For an explanation of this term, seevol. iii. p. 174.DICOTYLEDONOUS. A grand division of the vegetable kingdom,founded on the plant having two cotyledons or seed-lobes.Etym., &e, dis, double, and cotyledon.DIKES. "When a mass of the unstratified or igneous rocks, such asgranite, trap, and lava appears as if injected into a great rent in thestratified rocks, cutting across the strata, it forms a dike ; andas they are sometimes seen running along the ground, and projecting,like a wall, from the strata on both sides of them beingworn away, they are called in the north of England and inScotland dikes, the provincial name for wall. It is not easy todraw the line between dikes and veins. The former are generallyof larger dimensions, and have their sides parallel for considerabledistances ; while veins have generally many ramifications,and these often thin away into slender threads.DILUVIUM. Those accumulations of gravel and loose materialswhich, by some geologists, are said to have been produced bythe action of a diluvian wave or deluge sweeping over the surfaceof the earth. Etym., diluvium, deluge.DIP. When a stratum does not lie horizontally, but is inclined, thepoint of the compass towards which it sinks is called the dip ofthe stratum, and the angle it makes with the horizon is calledthe angle of dip or inclination.Litera. An order of insects, comprising those which have onlytwo wings. Etym., &e, dis double, and Trrepov, pteron, wing.DOLERITE. One of the varieties of the trap-rocks, composed ofaugite and felspar.DOLOMITE. A crystalline limestone, containing magnesia as a constituentpart. Named after the French geologist Dolomieu.DUNES. Low hills of blown sand that skirt the shores of Holland,GS GLOSSARY.Spain, and other countries. Etyni., dun or chine is an Anglo-saxonword for hill.EARTH'S CRUST. Such superficial parts of our planet as are accessibleto human observation,ELYTRA. The wing-sheaths, or upper crustaceous membranes, whichform the superior wings in the tribe of beetles, being crustaceousappendages which cover the body and protect the true membranouswing. Etym., eXvrpor, elytron, a sheath.EOCENE. See explanation of this word, vol. iii. p. 55.ESCARPMENT, the abrupt face of a ridge of high land. Etym., scarsFrench, to cut steep.ESTUARIES. Inlets of the land, which are entered both by rivers andthe tides of the sea. Thus we have the estuaries of the Thames,Severn, Tay, &c. Etym. Jesus, the tide.Fauns. A provincial name for some tertiary strata abounding inshells in Touraine, which resemble in lithological charactersthe ' crag' of Norfolk and Suffolk.FAULT, in the language of miners, is the sudden interruption of thecontinuity of strata in the same plane, accompanied by a crackor fissure varying in width from a mere line to several feet,which is generally filled with broken stone, clay, &c., and sucha displacement that the separated portions of the once continuousstrata occupy different levels.No. 92. The strata , b, c, &c.,must at one time havebeen continuous, but afracture having takenplace at the fault F,c either by the upheavingof the portion A, or theJ* sinking of the portion B,the strata were so displaced, that the bed a in B is manyfeet lower than the same bed a in the portion A.FAUNA. The various kinds of animals peculiar to a country constituteits FAUNA, as the various kinds of plants constitute itsFLORA. The term is derived from the Fauna, or rural deities inIvoman Mythology.Fr.LSPAR. A simple mineral, which constitutes the chief material ofmany of the unstratified or igneous rocks. The white angularportions in granite arc felspar. Jt is originally a Germanminers' term. Etym., fold, field, and spalh, a very old jnincra-GLOSSARY. 69logical word in Germany, which seems to have been at firstspecially applied to a transparent kind of gypsum called selenite.FELSPATHIC. Of or belonging to felspar.FERRUGINOUS. Anything containing iron. Etym., ferrum, iron.Fleets ROCKS. A German term applied to the secondary strata bythe geologists of that country, because these rocks were supposedto occur most frequently in flat horizontal beds. Etym.,flotz, a layer or stratum ; the word is applied in some parts ofGermany to pavements and plastered floors.FLORA. The various kinds of trees and plants found in any countryconstitute the Flora of that country in the language of botanists.FLUVIATILE. Belonging to a river. Etym.,fluvius, a river.FORMATION. A group, whether of alluvial deposits, sedimentarystrata, or igneous rocks, referred to a common origin or period.FOSSIL. All minerals used to be called fossils, but geologists nowuse the word only to express the remains of animals and plantsfound buried in the earth. Etym.,fossilis, anything that maybedug out of the earth.GALENA, a metallic ore, a compound of lead and sulphur. It hasoften the appearance of highly polished lead. Etym., yaXew,gale to shine.GARNET. A simple mineral generally of a deep red colour, crystallized,most commonly met with in mica slate, but also ingranite and other igneous rocks.GAULT. A provincial name in the east of England for a series ofbeds of clay and marl, the geological position of which isbetween the upper and the lower greensand. See Table II.F, p. 390.GEOLOGY, GEOGNOSY. Both mean the same thing, but with anunnecessary degree of refinement in terms, it has been proposedto call our description of the structure of the earth geognosy.(Etym. yea, gea, earth, and ytvwo-Kw, ginosco, to know,) and ourtheoretical speculations as to its formation geology. (Etym.,yea, and Xoyoc, logos, a discourse.GLACIER. The vast accumulations of ice and hardened snow in theAlps and other lofty mountains. Etym. glace, French for ice.GLACIS. A term borrowed from the language of fortification, whereit means an easy insensible slope or declivity, less steepthan a talus, which see.GNEISS. A stratified primary rock, composed of the same materialsas granite, but having usually a larger proportion of mica,and a laminated texture. The word is a German miner's term.70 GLOSSARY.GRAMINEJE, the order of plants to which grasses belong. Etym.,gramen, grass.GRANITE. An unstratified or igneous rock, generally found inferiorto or associated with the oldest of the stratified rocks, and sometimespenetrating them in the form of dikes and veins. It iscomposed of three simple minerals, felspar, quartz, and mica,and derives its name from having a coarse granular structure ;granum, Latin for grain. Westminster, Waterloo, and Londonbridges, and the paving-stones in the carriage-way of the Londonstreets are good examples of the most common varieties ofgranite.GRAUWACKE, a German name, generally adopted by geologists forthe lowest members of the secondary strata, consisting of sandstoneand slate, and which form the chief part of what aretermed by some geologists the transition rocks. The rock isvery often of a grey colour, hence the name, gray being Germanfor grey, and wacke being a provincial miner's term.GREENS AND. Beds of sand, sandstone, limestone, belonging to theCretaceous Period. See Table II. F, p. 390. The name isgiven to these beds, because they often, but not always, containan abundance of green earth or chlorite scattered through thesubstance of the sandstone, limestone, &c. See vol. iii. p. 324.GREENSTONE, a variety of trap, composed of hornblende and felspar.GRIT, a provincial name for a coarse-grained sandstone.GYPSUM, a mineral composed of lime and sulphuric acid, hencecalled also sulphate of lime. Plaster and stucco are obtainedby exposing gypsum to a strong heat. It is found so abundantlynear Paris, that Paris plaster is a common term in thiscountry for the white powder of which casts are made. Theterm is used by Pliny for a stone used for the same purposes bythe ancients. The derivation of it is unknown.GYPSEOUS, of, or belonging to, gypsum.GYROGONITES. Bodies found in fresh-water deposits, originally supposedto be microscopic shells, but subsequently discovered tobe the seed-vessel of fresh-water plants of the genus clara. Seevol. ii. p. 273, and 2d Edit. p. 280. Etym. yvpoc, gyros, curved,and york, go7ios, seed, on account of their external structure.Hemiptera, an order of insects, so called from a peculiarity in theirwings, the superior being coriaceous at the base, and membranousat the apex, ?//.ao-v, hcmisu, half, and Trrefov, ptcron,wing.HORNBLENDE, a simple mineral of a dark green or black colour,GLOSSARY. 71which enters largely into the composition of several varieties ofthe trap rocks.HYDROPHYTES. Plants which grow in water. Etym., i^wp, hydor,water, and 0i/rov, phyton, plant.HYPOGENE ROCKS. For an explanation of this term, see vol. iii.p. 374.ICEBERG. The great masses of ice, often the size of hills, which floatin the polar and northern seas. Etym., ice, and berg, Germanfor hill.ICHTHYOSAURUS, a gigantic fossil marine reptile, intermediate betweena crocodile and a fish. Etym., IX$VG, ichthus, a fish, ando-avpa, saura, a lizard.INDUCTION, a consequence, conclusion or inference, drawn frompropositions or principles first laid down, or from the observationand examination of phenomena.Industry Aim ALC Rules. Minute living creatures generated in manyinfusions ; and the term infusoria has been given to all suchanimalcules whether found in infusions or in stagnant water,vinegar, &c.INSPISSATED, Thickened. Etym., missus, thick.Vertebrates ANIMALS. Animals which are not furnished witha back-bone. For a further explanation, see " VertebratedAnimals."ISOTHERMAL. Such zones or divisions of the land, ocean, or atmosphere,which have an equal degree of mean annual warmth,are said to be isothermal, from to-oe, isis, equal, and %>/**/,there, heat.Jura LIMESTONE. The limestones belonging to the oolite group,see Table II. H, p. 391, constitute the chief part of the mountainsof the Jura, between France and Switzerland, and hence thegeologists of the Continent have given the name to the group.Simmering CLAY, a thick bed of clay, constituting a member ofthe Oolite Group. See Table II. H, p. 391. so called because itis found well developed at Kimmeridge in the isle of Purbeck,Dorsetshire.LACUSTRINE, belonging to a lake. Etym., Lacus, a lake.LAMINA. Latin for plates ; used in geology, for the smaller layers.of which a stratum is frequently composed.Lamartine. A living species of the herbivorous cetacea or whale72 GLOSSARY.tribe, which inhabits the mouths of rivers on the coasts of Africaand South America ; the sea-cow.Umbelliferous. A stone composed of thin plates or leaves likepaper. Etym., lamella, the diminutive of lamina, plate, andhero, to bear.LANDSLIP. A portion of land that has slid down in consequence ofdisturbance by an earthquake, or from being undermined, bywater washing away the lower beds which supported it.Classification Lapidifying process. Conversion into stone.Etym., lapis, stone, and^o, to make.LAPILLI. Small volcanic cinders. Camillus, a little stone.LAVA. The stone which flows in a melted state from a volcano.LEUCITE. A simple mineral found in volcanic rocks, crystallized,and of a white colour. Etym., XZVKOQ, leucos, white.LIAS. A provincial name, adopted in scientific language, for a particularkind of limestone, which being characterized, togetherwith its associated beds, by peculiar fossils, is formed in thiswork into a particular group of the secondary strata. SeeTable II. I, p. 392.LIQNIPERDOUS. A term applied to insects which destroy wood.Etym. lignum, wood, and per do, to destroy.LIGNITE. Wood converted into a kind of coal. Etym., lignum,wood.LITHODOMI. Molluscous animals which bore into solid rocks, andlodge themselves in the holes they have formed. Etym,, \i0oe,lithos, stone, and domus, house.LITHOLOGICAL. A term expressing the stony structure or characterof a mineral mass. We speak of the lithological character of astratum as distinguished from its zoological character. Etym.,\tdog, lithos, stone, and Xoyoc, logos, discourse.LITHOPHAGI. Molluscous animals which bore into solid stones.Etym., \idoQ, lithos, stone, and tyayeiv, chagrin, to eat.LITTORAL. Belonging to the sea-shore. Etym., litmus, the shore.LOAM. A mixture of sand and clay.LYCOPODIACEJE. Plants of an inferior degree of organization toConiferae, some of which they very much resemble in foliage,but all recent species are infinitely smaller. Many of the fossilspecies are as gigantic as recent conifenje. Their mode of reproductionis analogous to that of ferns. In English they arecalled club-mosses, generally found in mountainous heaths inthe north of England.MADREPORE. A genus of corals, but generally] applied to all theGLOSSARY. 73corals distinguished by superficial star-shaped cavities. Thereare several fossil species.MAGNESIAN LIMESTONE. An extensive series of beds lying ingeological position, immediately above the coal-measures, socalled because the limestone, the principal member of the series,contains much of the earth magnesia as a constituent part. SeeTable II. K, p. 392.MAMMILLARY. A surface which is studded over with rounded projections.Etym., manilla, a little breast or pap.MAMMIFEROUS. Animals which give suck to their young. Etym.,mamma, a breast, and hero, to bear.MAMMOTH. An extinct species of the elephant (E. primi genius), ofwhich the fossil bones are frequently met with in various countries.The name is of Tartar origin, and is used in Siberia foranimals that burrow underground.MARL. A mixture of clay and lime ; usually soft, but sometimeshard, in which case it is called indurated marl.MARSUPIAL ANIMALS. A tribe of quadrupeds having a sack or pouchunder the belly, in which they carry their young. The kangaroois a well-known example. Etym., marsupium, a purse.MASTODON. A genus of fossil extinct quadrupeds allied to the elephant.So called from the form of the hind teeth or grinders,which have their surface covered with conical mammillary crests.Etym., /uaoroG, masts, manilla or little pap, and oduv, don,tooth.MATRIX. If a simple mineral or shell, in place of being detached, bestill fixed in a portion of rock, it is said to be in its matrix.Matrix, womb.MECHANICAL ORIGIN, Rocks of. When rocks are composed of sand,pebbles, or fragments, to distinguish them from those of anuniform crystalline texture, which are of chemical origin.Medusa. A genus of marine radiated animals, without shells ;so called because their organs of motion spread out like thesnaky hair of the fabulous Medusa.MEGALOSAURUS. A fossil gigantic amphibious animal of the saurianor lizard and crocodile tribe. Etym., /-teyaXr/, regale, great,and <ravpa, saura, lizard.MEGATHERIUM. A fossil extinct quadruped, resembling a giganticsloth. Etym., ftcya, mega, great, a.nddripioi>,therion, wild-beast.MELASTOMA. A genus of MELASTOMACEA, an order of plants of theevergreen tree, and shrubby exotic kinds. Etym., /^eXae, melts,black, and oro/m, stoma, mouth ; because the fruit of one of thespecies stains the lips.74 GLOSSARY.MESOTVPE. A simple mineral, white, and needle-shaped, one of theZeolite family, frequently met with in the trap rocks.METAMORPHIC ROCKS. For an explanation of this term, see vol. iii.p. 374.MICA. A simple mineral, having a shining silvery surface, andcapable of being split into very thin elastic leaves or scales.It is often called talc in common life, but mineralogists applythe term talc to a different mineral. The brilliant scales ingranite are mica. Etym., mice, to shine.MICA-SLATE, MICA-SCHIST, MICACEOUS Schists. One of the lowestof the stratified rocks, belonging to the primary class, which ischaracterized by being composed of a large proportion of mica,united with quartz.MIOCENE. See an explanation of this term, vol. iii. p. 54.MOLASSE. A provincial name for a soft, green sandstone, associatedwith marl and conglomerates, belonging to the Miocenetertiary period, extensively developed in the lower country ofSwitzerland. See vol. iii. p. 212.Mollusca, Molluscous Animals. Animals, such as shell-fish, which,being devoid of bones, have soft bodies. Etym., mollis, soft.MONITOR. An animal of the saurian or lizard tribe, speciesof which are found in both the fossil and recent state.MONOCOTYLEDONOUS. A grand division of the vegetable kingdom,founded on the plant having only one cotyledon, or seed-lobe.Efym., fjiovoQ, mons, single.Roscius. The quadruped resembling the chamois or mountain-goat,from which the perfume musk is obtained.MOUNTAIN LIMESTONE. A series of limestone strata, of which thegeological position is immediately below the coal measures, andwith which they also sometimes alternate. See Table II. L, p. 393.Mora. A term applied in South America to mud poured out fromvolcanos during eruptions.MURIATE OF SODA. The scientific name for common culinary salt,because it is composed of muriatic acid and the alkali soda.MUSACE^J. A family of tropical monocotyledonous plants, includingthe banana and plantains.MUSCHELKALK. A limestone which, in geological position, belongsto the red sandstone group. This formation has not yetbeen found in England, and the German name is adopted byEnglish geologists. The word means shell-limestone : muscles,shell, and kalkstein, limestone. See Table II. K, p. 392.NAPHTHA. A very thin, volatile, inflammable, and fluid mineralGLOSSARY.substance, of which there are springs in many countries, particularlyin volcanic districts.NENUPHAR. A yellow water-lily.NEW RED SANDSTONE. A series of sandy, argillaceous, and oftencalcareous strata, the predominant colour of which is brick-red,but containing portions which are of a greenish grey. Theseoccur often in spots and stripes, so that the series has sometimesbeen called the variegated sandstone. The Europeanformation so called lies in a geological position immediatelyabove the coal-measures. See Table II. K, p. 392.NODULE. A rounded irregular-shaped lump or mass. Etym., diminutiveof nodus, knot.NORMAL GROUPS. Groups of certain rocks taken as a rule or standard.Etym. norma, rule or pattern.NUCLEUS. A solid central piece, around which other matter is collected.The word is Latin for kernel.NUMMUHTES. An extinct genus of the Order of Molluscous animals,called Cephalopoda, of a thin lenticular shape, internally dividedinto small chambers. Etym., nummus, Latin for money, andAi0og, lithos, stone, from its resemblance to a coin.OBSIDIAN. A volcanic product, or species of lava, very like commongreen bottle-glass, which is almost black in large masses,but semi-transparent in thin fragments. Pumice-stone isobsidian in a frothy state ; produced most probably by waterthat was contained in or had access to the melted stone,and converted into steam. There are very often portions inamass of solid obsidian, which are partially converted intopumice.OGYGIAN DELUGE. A general inundation of fabulous history, whichis supposed to have taken place in the reign of Ogyges inAttica, whose death is fixed in Blair's Chronological Tables inthe year 1764 before Christ.OLD RED SANDSTONE. A stratified rock belonging to the Carboniferousgroup. See Table L, p. 393.OLIVINE. An olive-coloured, semi-transparent, simple mineral, veryoften occurring in the forms of grains and of crystals in basaltand lava.OOLITE, Oolitic. A limestone, forming a characteristic feature of agroup of the secondary strata. See Table II. H, p. 391. Itis so named, because it is composed of rounded particles, like theroe or eggs of a fish. Etym. wow, on, egg, and Xt0o, thos,stone.76 GLOSSARY.Realized WOOD. Wood petrified by siliceous earth, and acquiringa structure similar to the simple mineral called opal.OPHIDIOUS REPTILES. Vertebrated animals, such as snakes and serpents.Etym., o0te, ophir, a serpent.ORGANIC REMAINS. The remains of animals and plants; organizedbodies, found in a fossil state.ORTHOCERATA. An extinct genus of the order of Molluscous Animals,called Cephalopoda, that inhabited a long chambered,conical shell, like a straight horn. Etym., opdos, orthos, straight,and Kept, ceres, horn.OSSEOUS BRECCIA. The cemented mass of fragments of bones ofextinct animals found in caverns and fissures. Osseus is a Latinadjective, signifying bony.OUTLIERS. When a portion of a stratum occurs at some distance,detached from the general mass of the formation to which itbelongs, some practical mineral surveyors call it an outlier,and the term is adopted in geological language.OVATE. The shape of an egg. Etym., ovum, egg.Depositing. The laying of eggs.OXYGEN. One of the constituent parts of the air of the atmosphere ;that part which supports life. For a further explanation of theword, consult elementary works on chemistry.OXIDE. The combination of a metal with oxygen ; rust is oxide ofiron.PACHYDERM Data. An order of quadrupeds, including the elephant,rhinoceros, horse, pig, &c., distinguished by having thickskins. Etym. WUQ, pachas, thick, and <5ep/ia, derma, skin orhide.PACHYDERMATOUS. Belonging to pachydermata.PALJSOTHERIUM, PALEOTHERE. A fossil extinct quadruped, belongingto the order pachydermata, resembling a pig or tapir, but ofgreat size. Etym. iraXaioe, palais, ancient, and drjpiov, thereon,wild beast.PELAGIAN, PELAGIC. Belonging to the deep sea. Etym. pelagius,sea.Peering. An Italian name for a particular kind of volcanic rock,formed, like tuff, by the cementing together of volcanic sand,cinders, or scoriae, &c.PETROLEUM. A liquid mineral pitch, so called because it is seento ooze like oil out of the rock. Etym. petra, rock, and oleum,oil.PHANEROGAMIC PLANTS. A name given by Linnaeus to those plantsGLOSSARY. 77in which the reproductive organs are apparent. Etym. ^avepoc,pharos, evident, and ya/zoe, games, marriage.PHYSICS. The department of science, which treats of the propertiesof natural bodies, laws of motion, &c., sometimes called Naturalphilosophy and mechanical philosophy. Etym. tyvgtg, physic,nature.PHYTOLOGY, PHYTOLOGICAL. The department of science which relatesto plants synonymous with botany and botanical. Etym.0vrov, phyton, plant, and Xoyoc, logos, discourse.PHYTOPHAGOUS. Plant eating. Etym. QVTOV, phyton, plant, and(fxtyetv, chagrin, to eat.Pillar, a misprint for Pistil, in vol. ii. p. 98, 1st ed., p. 102, 2cled. The plant mentioned by Malte-Brun is probably the Pistilstatutes, a floating plant, related to English duck-weed, butvery much larger.Polite. A stone possessing a structure like an agglutination ofpease. Etym. niaov, prison, pea, and Xi0oe, lithos, stone.PIT COAL. Ordinary coal ; called so because it is obtained by sinkingpits in the ground.PITCH STONE. A rock of an uniform texture, belonging to the unstratifiedand volcanic classes, which has an unctuous appearance,like indurated pitch.PLASTIC CLAY. One of the beds of the Eocene tertiary period (seeTable II. E, p. 390.) It is so called because it is used formaking pottery. Etym. TrXao-crw, lasso, to form or fashion.PLESIOSAURUS. A fossil extinct amphibious animal, resembling thesaurian, or lizard and crocodile tribe. Etym. irXriffiov, lesion,near to, and crai/pa, saura, a lizard.PLIOCENE. See explanation of this term, vol. iii. p. 53.PLUTONIC ROCKS. For an explanation of this term, see vol. iii.p. 353.POLYPARIA. CORALS. A numerous class of vertebrates animals, belongingto the great division called Radiata.PORPHYRY. An unstratified or igneous rock. The term is as oldas Pliny, and was applied to a red rock with small angularwhite bodies diffused through it, which are crystallized felspar,brought from Egypt. The term is hence applied to every speciesof unstratified rock, in which detached crystals of felsparare diffused through a base of other mineral composition.Etym. 7rop</>vpa, porphyry, purple.PORTLAND LIMESTONE, PORTLAND BEDS. A series of limestone strata,belonging to the upper part of the Oolite group (see Table II.78 GLOSSARY.IF, p. 391.), found chiefly in England, in the Island of Portlandon the coast of Dorsetshire. The great supply of the buildingstone used in London is from these quarries.POZZUOLANA. Volcanic ashes, largely used as mortar for buildings,similar in nature to what is called in this country Roman cement.It gets its name from Pozzuoli, a town in the bay of Naples,from which it is shipped in large quantities to all parts of theMediterranean.PRODUCTS. An extinct genus of fossil bivalve shells, occurring onlyin the older of the secondary rocks. It is closely allied to theliving genus Terebratula.PUBESCENCE. The soft hairy down on insects. Etym., pubes,the first growth of the beard.PUMICE. A light spongy lava, of a white colour, produced by gases,or watery vapour getting access to the particular kind of glassylava called obsidian, when in a state of fusion it maybe calledthe froth of melted volcanic glass. The word comes from theLatin name of the stone, piime.x.PURBECK LIMESTONE, PURBECK BEDS. Limestone strata belongingto the Wealden group. See Table II. G, p. 390.PYRITES (Iron). A compound of sulphur and iron, found usually inyellow shining crystals like brass, and in almost every rockstratified and unstratified. The shining metallic bodies, so oftenseen in common roofing slate, are a familiar example of themineral. The word is Greek, and comes from TTV/), pyr, fire,because, under particular circumstances, the stone producesspontaneous heat and even inflammation.Quadrant. The order of mammiferous animals to which apesbelong. Etyin., quarts, a derivation of the Latin word forthe number four, and mais, hand, the four feet of thoseanimals being in some degree usable as hands.QUA-universal DIP. The dip of beds to all points of the compassaround a centre, as in the case of beds of lava roundthe crater of a volcano. Etym., qua-qua verswn, on everyside.QUARTZ. A German provincial term, universally adopted in scientificlanguage, for a simple mineral composed of pure silex, or earthof flints ; rock-crystal is an example.RED MARL. A term often applied to the New Red Sandstone, whichGLOSSARY.is the principal member of the Red Sandstone group. SeeTable II. K, p. 392.RETICULATE. A structure of cross lines, like a net, is said to bereticulated, from rete, a net.ROCK SALT. Common culinary salt, or muriate of soda, found invast solid masses or beds, in different formations, extensively inthe New Red Sandstone formation, as in Cheshire, and it isthen called rocfc-salt.Ruminant. Animals which ruminate or chew the cud. Etym.,the Latin verb rumino, meaning the same thing.Saccharine, SACCHARINE. When a stone has a texture resemblingthat of loaf-sugar. Etym., o-afcjcap, sacchar, sugar, andei&>e, eidos, form.SALIENT ANGLE. In a zig No. 93.zag line, a a are thesalient angles, b b there-entering angles.Etym., satire, to leap or bound forward.SALT SPRINGS. Springs of water containing a large quantity ofcommon salt. They are very abundant in Cheshire and Worcestershire,and culinary salt is obtained from them by mereevaporation.SANDSTONE. Any stone which is composed of an agglutination ofgrains of sand, which may be either calcareous or siliceous.SAURIAN. Any animal belonging to the lizard tribe. Etym., aavpa,saura, a lizard.SCHIST. Synonymous with slate. Etym., part of the Latin verbscinde, to split, from the facility with which slaty rocks maybesplit into thin plates.SCHISTOSE ROCKS. Synonymous with slaty rocks.Scoriae. Volcanic cinders. The word is Latin for cinders.SEAMS. Thin layers which separate two strata of greater magnitude.SECONDARY STRATA. An extensive series of the stratified rocks whichcompose the crust of the globe, with certain characters in common,which distinguish them from another series below them,called primary, and from a third series above them called tertiary.See vol. iii. p. 324, and Table II. p. 390.SECULAR REFRIGERATION. The periodical cooling and consolidationof the globe, from a supposed original state of fluidity fromheat. Speculum, age or period.SEDIMENTARY ROCKS, are those which have been formed by theirGLOSSARYmaterials having been thrown down from a state of suspensionor solution in water.SELENITE. Crystallized gypsum, or sulphate of lime a simplemineral.SEPTARIA. Flattened balls of stone, generally a kind of iron-stone,which, on being split, are seen to be separated in their interiorinto irregular masses. Etym., septa, inclosures.SERPENTINE. A rock usually containing much magnesian earth, forthe most part unstratified, but sometimes appearing to be analtered or metamorphic stratified rock. Its name is derivedfrom frequently presenting contrasts of colour, like the skin ofsome serpents.SHALE. A provincial term, adopted in geological science, to expressan indurated slaty clay. Etym., German scale, to peal, tosplit.SHELL MARL. A deposit of clay, peat, and other substances mixedwith shells, which collects at the bottom of lakes.SHINGLE. The loose and completely water-worn gravel on the seashore.SILEX. The name of one of the pure earths, being the Latin wordfor flint, which is wholly composed of that earth. French geologistshave applied it as a generic name for all minerals composedentirely of that earth, of which there are many of differentexternal forms.SILICA. One of the pure earths. Etym. t silex, flint, because foundin that mineral.SILICATE. A chemical compound of silica and another substance,such as silicate of iron. Consult elementary works on chemistry.SILICEOUS. Of or belonging to the earth of flint. Etym., silex, whichsee. A siliceous rock is one mainly composed of silex.SILICIFIED. Any substance that is petrified or mineralized by siliceousearth.SILT. The more comminuted sand, clay, and earth, which is transportedby running water. It is often accumulated by currentsin banks. Thus we speak of the mouth of a river being siltedup when its entrance into the sea is impeded by such accumulationof loose materials.SIMPLE MINERAL. Individual mineral substances, as distinguishedfrom rocks, which last are usually an aggregation of simple minerals.They are not simple in regard to their nature, for whensubjected to chemical analysis, they are found to consist of avariety of different substances. Pyrites is a simple mineral inGLOSSARY. 81the sense we use the term, but it is a chemical compound ofsulphur and iron.SOLFATARA. A volcanic vent from which sulphur, sulphureous,watery, and acid vapours and gases are emitted.Spores. The reproductive corpuscle (minute bodies) of cryptogamicplains. Etym., o-Tropa, sport, a seed.STALACTITE. When water holding lime in solution deposits it as itdrops from the roof of a cavern, long rods of stone hang downlike icicles, and these are called stalactites. Etym., oraAa^w,stalazo, to drop.STALAGMITE. When water holding lime in solution drops on thefloor of a cavern, the water evaporating leaves a crust composedof layers of limestone ; such a crust is called stalagmite,from oraXayjua, stalagma, a drop, in opposition to stalactite,which see.STILBITE. A white crystallized simple mineral, one of the Zeolitefamily, frequently included in the mass of the trap rocks.STRATIFIED. Rocks arranged in the form of strata, which see.STRATIFICATION. An arrangement of rocks in strata, which see.STRATUM, STRATA. When several rocks lie like the leaves of a book,one upon another, each individual forms a stratum ; strata isthe plural of the word. Etym., stratum, part of a Latin verbsignifying to strew or lay out.STRIKE. The direction or line of bearing of strata, which is alwaysat right angles to their prevailing dip. For a fuller explanation,see vol. iii. p. 346.5UBAPENNINES. Low hills which skirt or lie at the foot of the greatchain of the Apennines in Italy. The term Subapennine is appliedgeologically to a series of strata of the Older Pliocene period.SYENITE. A kind of granite, so called because it was brought fromSyene in Egypt. For geological acceptation of the term, seevol. iii. p. 358.SYNCLINAL Axis. See explanation of this term, vol. iii. p. 293.Falls. When fragments are broken off by the action of theweather from the face of a steep rock, as they accumulate at itsfoot, they form a sloping heap, called a talus. The term isborrowed from the language of fortification, where talus meansthe outside of a wall of which the thickness is diminished bydegrees, as it rises in height, to make it the firmer.FARSI. The feet in insects, which are articulated, and formed offive or a less number of joints.Tertiary STRATA. A series of sedimentary rocks, with charactersVOL. III. /82 GLOSSARY.which distinguish them from two other great series of strata,the secondary and primary, which lie beneath them. SeeTables, p. 61, &c.TESTACEA. Molluscous animals, having a shelly covering. Etym.,testa, a shell, such as snails, whelks, oysters, &c.THIN OUT. When a stratum, in the course of its prolongation inany direction, becomes gradually less in thickness, the two surfacesapproach nearer and nearer ; and when at last they meet,the stratum is said to thin out, or disappear.TRACHYTE. A variety of lava essentially composed of glassy felspar,and frequently having detached crystals of felspar inthe base or body of the stone, giving it the structure of porphyry.It sometimes contains hornblende and augite; andwhen these last predominate, the trachyte passes into thevarieties of trap called greenstone, basalt, chlorite, &c. Theterm is derived from rpacvc, trochus, rough, because the rockhas a peculiar rough feel.TRAP and TRAPPEAN ROCKS. Volcanic rocks composed of felspar,augite, and hornblende. The various proportions and state ofaggregation of these simple minerals, and differences in externalforms, give rise to varieties, which have received distinctappellations, such as basalt, amygdaloid, chlorite, greenstone,and others. The term is derived from trappa, a Swedishword for stair, because in Sweden the rocks of this class oftenoccur in large tabular masses, rising one above another, likethe steps of a staircase. For further explanation, see vol. iii.p. 359.TRAVERTIN. A limestone, usually hard and semi-crystalline, depositedfrom the water of springs holding lime in solution. Theword is Italian, and a corruption of the term Libertines, thestone being formed in great quantity by the river Anno, atTibur, near Rome, and hence it was called by the ancientsLapis Libertines.Trophy, of Insects. Organs which form the mouth, consisting ofan upper and under lip, and comprising the parts called mandibles,maxilla), and palpi.TUFF, or Tufa. An Italian name for a variety of volcanic rock, ofan earthy texture, seldom very compact, and composed of anagglutination of fragments of scoriae and loose matter ejectedfrom a volcano.TUFACEOUS. A rock with the texture of tuff or tuft, which see.TURBINATED. Shells which have a spiral or screw-form structure.Etym.) turbinated, made like a top.GLOSSARY./BINS, Mineral. Cracks in rocks filled up by substances differentfrom the rock, which may either be earthy or metallic. Veinsare sometimes many yards wide ; and they ramify or branch offinto innumerable smaller parts, often as slender as threads, likethe veins in an animal, and hence their name.vertebrates ANIMALS. A great division of the animal kingdom,including all those which are furnished with a back-bone, as themammalia, birds, reptiles, and fishes. The separate joints of theback-bone are called vertebra, from the Latin verb vero, to turn.vesicle. A small circular inclosed space, like a little bladder.Etym.y diminutive of vesica, Latin for a. bladder.volcanic BOMBS. Volcanos throw out sometimes detached massesof melted lava, which, as they fall, assume rounded forms (likebomb-shells), and are often elongated into a pear shape.volcanic For. The subterranean centres of action in volcanos,where the heat is supposed to be in the highest degree ofenergy.ZEOLITE. A family of simple minerals, including stilbite, meso-type, analcime, and some others, usually found in the trap orvolcanic rocks. Some of the most common varieties swell orboil up when exposed to the blow-pipe, and hence the nameof ew, 2eo, to froth, and Aifloe, lithos, stone.ZOOPHYTES. Corals, sponges, and other aquatic animals allied tothem, so called because, while they are the habitation of animals,they are fixed to the ground, and have the forms of plants.Elym., faov, soon, animal, and 0i/rov, phyton, plant.INDEX,VOL. Ill,Aberdeenshire, passage from trap intogranite in, 361hesse, near Dax, section of inland cliff at,see wood-cut No. 53, 210cquapendente, alternations of volcanictuffs with the Subapennine marls at,dawson on the age of the baobab tree, 99dodington hills, 279.derno, opposite dip of the strata in twosections near, 78dour, section of tertiary strata in the valleyof the see diag. No. 51, 207dur, view of the transverse valley of theriver see wood-cut No. 73, 299gassiz, M., on fossil fish of the browncoal formation, 200on the fossil fish of the Paris basin,on the distinctness of the secondaryand tertiary fossil fish, 327ge of volcanos, mode of computing the, 97ages, relative, of rocks how determined, 35dat, Lake, how formed, 269ix, in Provence, tertiary strata of, 276fossil insects abundant in the calcareousmarl of, 277Ibenga, height of the tertiary strata abovethe sea at, 165, 166resemblance of the strata at, tothe Subapennines, 167Han, Mr. T., his discovery of the bonesof mammalia in the fresh-water strata ofthe Isle of Wight, 281lier, river, section of volcanic tuff andfresh-water limestone on the banks ofthe, 258lluvium, passage of marine crag stratainto, 181ancient, of the valley of the Rhine,of the Weald valley, 295lluviums formed in all ages, 145of the newer Pliocene period, 139,145, 151- distinction between regular subaqueousstrata and, 145marine, 145British, how formed, 147r^ European, in great part tertiary, 150Alluviums, underlying lavas 'of Catalonia,188, 189, 190, 192of the Miocene era, localities of,trachytic breccias alternating withinAuvergne see wood-cut No. 54, 21 7of Auvergne, extinct quadrupeds in,of different ages covered by lava inAuvergne see wood-cut No. 61, 266of the Eocene period, 317Alps, shells drifted into the Mediterraneanfrom the, 48erratic blocks of the, 148Maritime, tertiary strata at the baseof the, 164secondary strata penetrated by granitein the, 358strata of oolite altered in the, 371Altered strata in contact with granite, 370,strata, enumeration of the probableconversions of sedimentary stratainto well-known metamorphic rocks, 373Alternations of strata with and withoutorganic remains, how caused, 254Alum Bay, alternation of the London andplastic clay in, 278Amer, geological structure of the countrynear, 185Anapo, valley of the, 111Andernach, gorge of, 152loess and volcanic ejectionsalternating at, 153Andes, sudden rise of the, said to havecaused the historical deluge, 148Angers, fossil shells found at see tablesAppendix I.Anglesea, changes caused by a volcanicdike in, 368Animals, their fossilization partial, 31remains of, in the successive tertiaryperiods, 59Anoplotherium found in the fresh-waterformation of the Isle of Wight, 281, 317Anthracite, whence derived, 373Anticlinal axis of the Weald valley seewood-cuts Nos. 63 and 64, 288Anticlinal and synclinal lines described-=rsee wood-cut No. 68, 293,INDEX.Anticlinal lines, how far those formed atthe same time are parallel, 349Antilles, recent shells imbedded in limestonein the, 133Antrim, chalk in. converted into marble bytrap-dike, 369altered coal and lias in. 369Apennines, tertiary strata at the foot of the,Apollinaris does not mention lire volcanosin his description of Auvergne, 269Areas of sedimentary deposition, shiftingof the, 26Argillaceous strata, change caused by adike of lava in, 70Arno, river, yellow sand like the Subapen-nines deposited by the, 161Arun, transverse valley of the, 298, 299Asia, western, great cavity in. 29, 270Astroni, crater of, 187Atlantis of Plato, 330Atrio del Cavallo, dikes in the, 124Aurillac, fresh-water formation of, 236silex abundant in the fresh-waterstrata of, 237resemblance of the fresh-waterlime-stone and flints to the chalk, 237proofs of the gradual deposition ofthe fresh-water marls of, 239Australian breccias, bones of marsupialanimals in, 143Auvergne, appearance of some of the lavasof, 94position of the Miocene alluviums ofsee wood-cut No. 54, 217extinct quadrupeds in the alluviumsof, 218age of the volcanic rocks of, 224lacustrine deposits of. 226map of the lacustrine basins andvolcanic rocks of see wood-cut No.56, 226tertiary red marl and sandstone of,like new red sandstone, 229, 333industrial limestone of, 232dip of the tertiary strata of, 233, 235arrangement and origin of the freshwaterformation of, 233analogy "f the tertiary deposits of,to those of the Paris basin, 241geographical connexion of the Parisbasin and, 241probably once connected \vitn theParis basin by a chain of lakes, 241volcanic rocks of, 257igneous rocks associated with thelacustrine strata of, 25 Svolcanic breccias of, how formed, 259minor volcanos ol, 2'>0, 263long succession of eruptions in, I'fiOravines excavated through lava in,Auvergne, lavas resting on alluviums of differentages in heywood-cut No. 6 1,266age of the volcanos of, 268, 269Aventine, Mount, a deposit of calcareoustufa on, 138Bayeux, alternation of plastic clay andcalcaire grossier at, 244Bagshot sand, its composition, cvc., 280Bfmos del Pujio, elevated sea-cliff near,Baobab tree, its size, probable age, &c.,99, 272Barque, la Petite, section of verticalmarls in a ravine near see wood-cutNo. 57, 231Barcelona, height of the marine tertiarystrata of, 193Barcombe, section from the north escarpmentof the South Downs to seewood-cut No. 71, 296Baron, gypsum found in the Subapen-nine marls near, 159Basalt, theory of the aqueous origin of, 4Basalts of the Bay of Trezza, Paterno, &c.,their relative age, 82Basterot, M. de. on the fossil shells ofBordeaux and Dax, 20, 206Attach, Mount, granite veins of, 357Bay of Trezza, sub-Etnean formations exposedin the, 78proofs of ancient submarine eruptionsin the, 78Bayou ne, age of the tertiary strata near,age of the newest secondary stratanear, 343Bawdesey, inclination of the crag stratanear, 174Beauchamp, remains of a palEuotheriurn andfresh-water shells in calcaire glossierat. 252Beachy Head, termination of the chalkescarpment at, 291thickness of the upper green-sandat, 292Beginning of things, supposed proofs of,Belbel, section of while limestone in thequarry of, 237Belgium, tertiary formations of, 276fossil shells from sec table, AppendixI.Beliemi, Mount, caves in, 143Beudant, M., on the volcanic rocks ofHungary, 222Bingen, gorge of, 152i Instead, mammiferons remains found inj the quarries of, 28 1 , 317Blaye, limestone of, 208its position see wood-cut No. 52,INDEX.true marl with shells of the Val di Not,Joblaye, M., on the successive elevationsoftheMorea, 113,132on the formation of osseous brecciasin the Morea, 144on the tertiary strata of the"Morea,Solos, Don Francisco, on the volcanos ofOlot, in Catalonia, 187, 191, 193on the destruction of Olot by earthquake,in 1421, 191lonely, Signer, on the fossil shells ofSavona, 166on the fossil shells of the Superga,John, blocks of quartz containing casts offresh-water shells found near, 199remains of frogs from the brown coalformation in the museum at, 200Bordeaux, tertiary strata of, 20, 206Eocene strata in the basin of, 208fossil shells of see table, AppendixI.Jormida, tertiary strata of the valley ofthe, 211Mosque de Tosca, a mound of lava nearOlot, 186Motley Hill, height of, 288loue, M., on the loess of the valley of theRhine, 151on the value of zoological charactersin determining the chronologicalrelations of strata, 208term molasse vaguely employed by,on the tertiary formations of Hungaryand Transylvania, 213on the fossil shells of Hungary,on the volcanic rocks of Transylvania,223his objections to the theory of M.Else de Beaumont, 346, 347juillet, M., on the extinct quadrupeds ofMont Perrier, 218on alluviums of different ages inAuvergne, 267Solace, position of the alluviums of thesee wood-cut No. 54, 217Boulon and Cerett, dip of the tertiarystrata between, 170Bourbon, Isle of, a volcanic eruption everytwo years in the, 3633owdich, Mr., fossil shells of recent speciesbrought from Madeira by, 134kaganza river, brown clay deposited bythe, 161Breaks in the series of superimposed formations,causes of, 26, 33Breccias in the Val del Bove, 93osseous, in Sicilian caves, 139Breccias, in Australian caves, 143now in progress in the Morea,trachytic, alternations of alluviumand see wood-cut No. 54, 217volcanic, of Auvergne, 259Brighton, deposit containing recent shellsin the cliffs near, 182British alluviums, how formed, 147their age, 147, 272Brocchi on the tertiary strata of theSubapennines, 18, 155on the number of shells common toItaly and the Paris basin, 156on the age of the Italian tertiarystrata, 156- on the organic remains of the sub-apenninestrata, 163Bromley, pebble with oysters attached toitfound in the plastic clay at, 278Brongniart, M. Alex., on the formations ofthe Paris basin, 16on the conglomerate of the hill ofthe Superga, 211tabular view of his arrangement ofthe strata of the Paris basin see woodcutNo. 58, 243, 247Bronn, M., on the loess of the Rhine, 151,153, 154Brown coal formation near the valley ofthe Rhine, 199organic remains of the, 200Cruel, quarry of, 237Buckland, Dr., on the Val del Bove, 83on the grooved summits of the Cors-morphineHills, 147on the effects of the Deluge, 271on the Plastic clay, 278on tertiary outliers on chalk hills.on the former continuity of the Londonand^Hampshire basins, 283on valleys of elevation, 305, 307,Budoshagy, rent exhaling sulphureous vapoursin the mountain of, 223Bufadors, jets of air from subterraneancaverns called, 190Bulimus montague drifted from the Alpsinto the Mediterranean, 48Buried cones on Etna, sections of, 88Burton, Mr. J., his discovery of tertiarystrata on the western borders of theRed Sea, 135Cadibona, section of the fresh-water formationsof see wood-cut No. 55, 221lignites of, remains of an anthraco-thrum found in, 222Caernarvonshire, tertiary strata of, 135Caesar, volcanos of Auvergne not mentionedby, 269INDEX.Cairo, green sand containing shells at, 211Calabria, recent tertiary strata of, 22collects of the earthquake of 1783,142,319Calais, ripple marks formed by the windson the dunes near see wood-cut No.36, 176Calanna, lava of Etna turned from itscourse by the hill of see wood-cut No.18, 86description of the valley of, 85, 91Calcaire grossier, alternation of the Plasticclay and, 244number of fossil shells of the, 245abundance of carinthia in the, 245alternates with fresh-water limestoneat Triel, 246manner in which it was deposited,in part destroyed when the uppermarine strata were formed, 248abundance of microscopic shells inthe, 250Palseotherium and fresh-water shellsin, 252Calcaire siliceux of the Paris basin, 246alternates with calcaire grossier atTriel, 246how formed, 246Calcareous grit and peperino, sections ofsee diagrams Nos. 9 and 10, 72Caltagirone, blue shelly marl of, 66, 67- fossil shells from see list, AppendixII., 55Caltanisetta, dip of the tertiary strata at,list of fossil shells from. AppendixII., 54Cambridgeshire, great line of chalk escarpmentfrom, to Dorsetshire, 315Campagna di Roma, age of the volcanicrocks of the, 183Campania, tertiary formation of, 118comparison of recorded changes in,with those commemorated by geologicalmonuments, 118age of the volcanic and associatedrocks of, 1-26external configuration of the countryhow caused, 127affords no signs of diluvial waves,Canadian lakes, changes which would takeplace in the Gulf of St. Lawrence ifthey were filled up, 28(,'antal, fresh-water formations of, 236fresh-water limestone and flints resemblingchalk in the, 237proof's of the gradual deposition ofmarl in the, 239Cape wrath, granite veins of see woodcutsNos. 85 and 86, 354Capitol, hill of the, a deposit of calcareoustufa found on the, 138Capo Santa Croce, shelly limestone restingon lava at, 68Capra, flowing of the lavas of 1811 and1819 round the rock of see wood-cutNo. 21, 92traversed by dikes, 92Carboniferous series, 32GCarcare, tertiary strata of see wood-cutNo. 55, 207, 222fossil shells of, 211Cardona, rock salt of, its relative age, 333Casamicciol, shells found in stratified tuffat, 126Caspian Sea, level of the, 29, 271Castell de Stones, ravine excavated in lavaopposite the, 189Castell Follies, extent of the lava stream ofsee map, wood-cut No. 43, 184section of lava cut through by riverat see wood-cut No. 46, 189, 190Castello d'Aci, 81Castrogiovanni, section of cheval di Notseries at see diagram No. 5, 64hill of, its height, 66capped by the Val di Not limestone,66fossil fish found in gypseous marlsat, 67list of fossil shells from AppendixII., 55Castelgomberto, fossil shells of see Table,Appendix I.Catalonia, volcanic district of, 183extent of the volcanic region of seemap, wood-cut No. 43, 184volcanic cones and lavas of (seeFrontispiece), 185ravines, excavated through lava in,188,189age of the volcanos of, 191superposition of rocks in the volcanicdistrict of see wood-cut No. 47,Catania, volcanic conglomerates formingon the beach at, 73plain of, 75, 76marine formation near, 78Catastrophes, remarks on theories respecting,6, 33Catclif!', Little, section of part of, showingthe inclination of the layers in oppositedirections see wood-cut No. 33, 175Cavalaccio, Monte, shells procured fromthe tuft's of, 79Caves in Sicily, osseous breccias found in.perforated in the interior by litho-domi, 140, 141Australian, bones of marsupial animalsin, 143INDEX.Cavo delle Neve, hollow in Ischia calledthe, 127- ancient sea-beach seen near, 127Cellent, lava current of see map, woodcut,No 43, 184section above the bridge of, seewood-cut No. 45, 188Central France, volcanic rocks of, 224,- fresh-water, formations of, 225analogy of the tertiary depositsof, to those of the Paris basin, 241,247- valleys of, how formed, 319Cer, valley of the, sections of foliatedmarls in the, 239Cerett and Boulon, dip of the tertiary stratabetween, 170Cerithia, abundance of in the calcaire grossier,245Chariot, M., on the fossil mammalia ofMont Perrier, 218Chart, politic limestone of, 232Chalk, protruded masses of in the cragstrata see wood-cuts Nos. 41 and 42,179, 180English tertiary strata, conformableto the, 282deep indentations filled with sand,&c., on its surface, 282tertiary outliers on, 283fissure in the, filled with sand nearLewes, 283and upper green sand of the Wealdvalley, 286escarpments of the Weald valley,once sea-cliffs see wood-cuts Nos. 65and 66,289,290,291- . why no ruins of, on the central districtof the Weald, 295of the North and South Downs, itsformer continuity, 303the alternative of the hypothesisthat it was once continuous considered,- valleys and furrows in the, howcaused, 311cliffs, rapid waste of on Sussexcoast, 311greatest elevation attained by it inEngland, 314great line of escarpment formed bythe, through the central parts of England,nearly all the land in Europe hasemerged since the deposition of the,has been elevated at successive periods,331converted into marble by trap dikein Antrim, 369Chalk-flints, analysis of, 238Cavaliers, near Clermont, section at.Chamber, lake of, formed by the lava ofthe Puy de Margaret, 264Chamouni, glaciers of, 150Champlain, tertiary red marls of, 229Chameleon in the Alps, strata alterednear, 371Champradelle, section of vertical marls at,see wood-cut No. 57, 231Chili, Newer Pliocene marine strata atgreat heights in, 130Christie, Dr. T., his account of the Caveof San Giro, 140on caverns in Mount Beliemi, Sicily,Cirque of Gavarnie, in the Pyrenees, 88Cisterna on Etna, formed by a subsidencein 1792,96,129Classification of tertiary formations in chronologicalorder, 45Clay-slate, lamination of, in the Pyreneessee wood-cut No. 89, 366may be altered into shale, 373 - "convertible into hornblende schist,Clermont, section of littoral deposits near,section of vertical marls near seewood-cut No. 57, 231alternations of volcanic tuff andfresh-water limestone near, 258Clift, Mr., on the bones of animals fromAustralian caves, 144Climate, effects of changes of, on species,Coal reduced^to cinder by trap dike, 370Colle, fresh-water formation of, 137fossil shells of living species in the,Comb Hurst, hills of, 279Come, lava current of, 186Conception Bay, fossil shells of recent speciesfound at great heights in, 130.Conglomerate, tertiary, of Nice, 167- now formed by the rivers near Nice,168,169time required for the formation ofgreat beds of, 170ConglomerateSjYolcanic, of the Val di Not,now forming on the shores of Cataniaand Ischia, 73Contemporaneous origin of Rocks, howdetermined, 37Contemporaneous, remarks on the term, 52Continents, position of former, 328, 330Contortions in the Newer Pliocene stratain the Isle of Cyclops see wood-cutNo. 15, 80Conybeare, Rev. W. D., on the Englishcrag, 19DOINDEX.Conybeare, Rev. W. D., on the thicknessof the London clay, 279on the organic remains of the Londonclay, 2 Soonindentations in the chalk near Rochester,282on the transverse valleys of the Northand South Downs, 298on the former continuity of the chalkof the North and South Downs, 303his objections to the theory of M. E.de Beaumont, 343Coomb, view of the ravine called the, nearLewes see wood-cut No. 75, 301Coquimbo, parallel roads of, 131Corals standing erect among igneous andaqueous formations at Galieri, 73Cornwall, granite veins of see wood-cutNo. 87, 355, 370argillaceous schist, containing organicremains in, 37GCosta de Pujou, structure of the hill ofsee frontispiece, 186Corstorphine hills, parallel grooves ontheir summits, how formed, 147Cotentin, tertiary formation of the, 276Coudes, tertiary red marl and sand-stone of,like 'new red sand-stone.' 229Couze, river, lake formed by the filling upof its ancient bed by lava, 264Crag of England, organic remains of the ; 19its relative age, 171number of shells found in the, 171its mineral composition, 171relative position of the see diag.No. 30. 172lacustrine deposits resting on the, 1 73forms of stratification of the see\vuod-cuts 173, 174. 175dip of the strata of the, 174, 175comparison between the Faluns ofTouraine and the, 203derangement in the strata of thesee wood-cuts, 177passage of, into alluvium, 181its resemblance to formations now inprogress, 177, Disproportionof living species in the fossilshells of the see Appendix I., p. 47number common to Italy and the, il.number common to Sicily and the, ib.number common to Italy, Sicily, andthe,*/,. 47geographical distribution of the livingspecies found in the, rl>. 47, 51Craters, volcanic, of the Eifel, how formed,19GCreta, argillaceous deposit called, 67, 70re-thug on columnar lava in the Isleof Cyclops see wood-cut No. 14, 79Crocodile of the Ganges found in both saltand fresh water, 330Croizet, M., on extinct quadrupeds ofMount Perrier, 213on alluviums of different ages inAuvergne, 267Cromer, bent strata of loam in the cliffsnear see wood-cut No. 37, 178Crowborough hill, height of, 283thickness of strata removed fromthe summit of, 313Cruckshanks, Mr. A., on distinct lines ofancient sea-cliffs on the coast of Peru,Cuckmere,transverse valley of the, 298,299Curtis, iMr. J., on the fossil insects of Paix,in Provence, 277Cussac. bones of extinct quadrupeds inalluvium under lava at, 219Cutch, changes caused by the earthquakeof 1819 in, 104,249, 318Cuvier, M., on the mammiferous remainsof the Upper Val d'Arno, 221on the tertiary strata of the Parisbasin, 1G, 247, 243on the fossil organic remains ofthe Paris basin, 253Cyclops, view of the island of, in the Bayof Trezza see wood-cut No. 14, 79its height, &c., 79stratified marl resting on columnarlava in the see woodcut No. 14, 79Cyprus, abundance of the remains of, inthe fresh-water strata of Auvergne, 230habits of the living species of, 230Darent, transverse valley of the, 298, 299Daubeny, Dr., on the Val di Not limestones66on the volcanic region of Olot, inCatalonia, 181on the volcanic district of the LowerRhine and Eifel, 201on the age ot the Auvergne volcano*} 269D'Aubuisson, on the appearance of someof the Auvergne lavas, 94Dan, lake-craters of the Eifel seen near,Dax, tertiary formations of, 20, 206section of tertiary strata overlyingthe chalk near, see diag. No. 51,207section of inland cliff near see woodcutNo. 53, 210fossil shells of see tables Appendix I.De Beaumont, M. Erie, on the cause of thehistorical deluge, 143, 272his theory of the contemporariesorigin of parallel mountain chains considered,337his proofs that different chains wereraised at different epochs, 340INDEX.3e Beaumont, M. Else, objections to thetheory of, 341on modern granite of the Alps, 358De Candle on the longevity of trees, 99De la Beche, Mr., on M. Else de Beaumont'stheory, 347Delta, of the Niger, size of the, 329of the Nile, preyed on by currents, 28of Rhone, in lake of Geneva, 27De Luc, on the deluge, 271Deluge, on exchanges caused by the, 270M. Else Beaumont, on the causeof the historical, 148Denudation, effects of, 30, 32of the Valley of the Weald, 285Deposition, sedimentary, shifting of theareas of, 2P>Descartes, 97Deshayes, M., his comparison of the fossilshells of Touraine, S. E. of France,Piedmont and Vienna, 21his tables of fossil shells, 49 seeAppendix I.- on the shells of the Val di Not,series, 65, 67on shells of the sub-Etnean beds, 79on the fossil shells of Ischia, 126on the fossil shells of the Antilles,on the fresh-water shells of Colle,on the fossil shells of the Crag, 171on the limestone of Blaye, 208on the fossil shells of Volhynia andPodolia, 215on the fossil shells of Hungary, 223on the abundance of Cerithia in theParis basin, 245on the changes which the Cardiumporulosum underwent during its existencein the Paris basin, 250on the microscopic shells of the Parisbasin, 251on the fossil shells of the Netherlands,276on the number of shells commonto the Maestricht beds, chalk, and uppergreen sand, 325on the distinctness of the secondaryand tertiary fossil shells, 327on the secondary fossil shells ofthe Pyrenees, 343Desmoulins, M. Ch., on the Eocene depositsof the environs of Bordeaux, 209Desnoyers, M., on the organic remains ofthe Faluns, 205on the tertiary formations of touraine,20, 203on the resemblance of the EnglishCrag and the Faluns of the Loire,204Desnoyers, M., on the fossil organic remainsof the Orleanais, 219on the alternation of the plasticclay and calcaire grossier in the Parisbasin, 244on the tertiary formations of the Cotentin,276on the marine tertiary strata nearRennes, 276Devil's-dyke, view of the chalk escarpmentof the South Downs, takenfrom the see wood-cut No. 65, 290Diagonal stratification of the Crag stratasee wood-cuts, 174, 175cause of this arrangement, 176Dikes, intersecting limestone, 69traversing peperino near Palagonia,see diagrams Nos. 6 and 7, 69on the summit of the lime-stoneplatform, Val di Not, 70off tuff or peperino, how formed.changes caused in argillaceous strataby, 70on Etna, their form, origin, and composition,90at the base of the Serra del Solfiziosee wood-cut, No. 19, 90changes caused by, in the escarpmentof Somma, 91in the Val del Bove, as seen fromthe summit of Etna see wood-cut No.22,93some caused by the filling up offissures by lava, 122, 123of Somma see wood-cut No. 25,cause of the parallelism of their oppositesides, 122varieties in their texture, 124volcanic, in Madeira, 134strata altered by, 368Diluvial theories, 270Diluvial waves, whether there are signs oftheir occurrence on Etna, 101no signs of, in Campania, 128Dip and direction of the tertiary strata ofSicily, 73of the marine strata at the foot ofEtna, 78Dominica, alternations of coral and lavain, 133Dorsetshire, valleys of elevation in, 308Dorsetshire and Cambridgeshire, great lineof chalk escarpment between, 315Doue, M. Bertrand de, on the fossil mammiferousremains of Velay, 219on the lacustrine deposits of Velay,235, 236on the igneous rocks of Velay,INDEX.Doue, M. Bertrand de, on Auvergne allusionsunder lava, 267Du Bois, M., on the tertiary strata of/Vol-hynia and Podolia, 215Dufrenoy, M., on the limestone of. Blaye,near Bordeaux, 209on the hill of Gergovia, 258on the age of the red marl and rock-saltof Cardona, 333Durance, river, land-shells brought fromthe Alps into the Rhone by the, 48Dunwich, thickness of the crag strata inthe cliffs near, 172Dunwich, dip of the crag strata in a cliffbetween Miser and see wood-cutNo. 33, 175Dunes, near Calais, ripple marks formedby the winds on the see wood-cut, No.36, 176Earthquake, Olot destroyed by, in 1421,of Cutch, effects of the, 104, 249,Earthquakes, their effects on the excavationof valleys, 113during the Eocene period, 312Earth's crust, signs of a succession of formerchanges recognizable in, 1arrangement ot the materials composingthe, 8Earth's surface may be greatly changed inone part while an adjoining tract remainsstationary, 128East Indian Archipelago, tertiary formationsof the, 133Ehrenhausen, coralline limestone of thehills of, 214Eichwald, M., on the tertiary deposits ofVolhynia and Podolia, 215Eifel, volcanos of the, 193map of the volcanic district of thesee wood-cut No. 48, 194-lake-craters of the see wood-cut,No. 49, 195trass of the, and its origin, 197age of the volcanic rocks of the, 199Elevation of land, how caused, 105Elevation, proofs of successive, 111Elsa, valley of the, fresh-water formationsof, 137England, tertiary strata of, 19, 135, 171,comparison between the tertiarystrata of Paris and those of, 282tertiary strata of, conformable to thechalk, 282origin of the tertiary strata of, 284great line of chalk escarpmentthrough the central parts of, 315elevation of land on the east coast of,since the Older Pliocene period, 316England, elevation of land gradual in theSee. of, 318on the excavation of valleys in theSee. of, 319Senza, river, nature of the sediment depositedby the, 161Eocene period, derivation of the term, 55proportion of living species in thefossil shells of the, 55position of the beds referable tothis era see diagrams Nos. 3 and 4,20, 21geographical distribution of the recentspecies found in the, 55mammiferous remains of the, 59fresh-water formations of the,marine formations of the, 241our knowledge of the physical geography,fauna and flora of the, considerable,254- volcanic rocks of the, 2571 map of the principal tertiary basins ofthe see woodcut No. 62, 275earthquakes during the, 312alluviums of the, 317chasm between the newest secondaryformations and those of the, 328great volume of hypogene rocksformed since, 381- number of species of fossil shellscommon to different formations referableto the, Appendix I., p. 49 .number of living species in the fossilshells of the, ib., 50- number common to the Pliocene,Miocene, and, ib. t 50geographical distribution of the livingspecies found in the, ib., 51Eocene strata in the Bordeaux basin, 208its' relative position see wood-cutN No. 52,209Epomeo, shells found in volcanic tuff nearthe summit of, 126Erratic blocks of the Alps, 148transported by ice, 149Escarpments, manner in which the seadestroys successive lines of, 111, 292Escarpments of the chalk in the Wealdvalley, once sea-cliffs see wood-cuts,Nas. 65 and 66, 289,291 'Estuary deposits, arrangement of, 9Eternity of the earth, or of present systemof changes not assumed in this work,Etna, marine and volcanic formations atits base, 75view of, from the limestone platformof Primosole see diagram No. 11, 75connexion of the strata at its basewith those of the Val di Not seediagram No. 12, 76INDEX.Etna, southern base of, 77recent shells in clay at the foot of, 77dip of the marine strata at the baseof, 78eastern side of, 78shells in tuffs and marls on the eastside of, 79lavas of the Cyclopian isles, not currentsfrom, 81P- internal structure of the cone of, 83great valley on the east side of seewood-cut No. 17, 83lateral eruptions of, 84manner of increase of the principalcone of, 84sections of buried cones on, 88form, composition, and origin of thedikes on, 90veins of lava on see wood-cut No.20, 91view from the summit of, into theVal del Bove see wood-cut No. 22,subsidences on, 96antiquity of the cone of, 97whether signs of diluvial waves areobservable on, 101list of fossil shells from the flanksof Appendix II., p. 53,Europe, newest tertiary strata of, 22large portions of, submerged whenthe secondary strata were formed, 23almost all the land in, has emergedsince the deposition of the chalk, 330European tertiary strata, successive originof the, 18European alluviums in great part tertiary,excavation of valleys, 319salons of Touraine, 203comparison between the Englishcrag and the, 203, 204were formed in a shallow sea, 204organic remains of the, 204, 206'asano, escarpment of marine strata seennear, 78sault in the cliff-hills near Lewes seesection, wood-cut No. 76,301^inochio, view of the rock of, with thelavas of 1811 and 1819 flowing roundit see wood-cut No. 21, 92limestone of the Weald Valley, 286terrace formed by the harder bedsof see wood-cut No. 67, 291, 292wish, skeletons of, by no means frequentin a fossil state, 47fossil, of Castrogiovanni, 67'itton, Dr., on the secondary rocks of theValley of the Weald, 286on the denudation of the Weald Valley,289Fitton, Dr., on faults in the strata of theForest ridge, 293on a line of vertical and inclinedstrata from the Isle of Wight toDieppe, 315an ammonite found in the Maestrichtbeds by, 325on the extent and thickness of theWealden, 329on the delta of the Niger, S29Fiume Also, in Sicily, 252Fleming, Dr., on the effects of the deluge,,Flinty slate, slate-clay of the lias, convertedinto, by trap dike, 370Flood, supposed effects of the, 270hypothesis of a partial, 270Floridia, schistose and arenaceous limestoneof, 66Fluvia, river, ravines in lava excavated by,186, 189Forest ridge of the Weald Valley, 293faults in the strata of the, 293thickness of masses removed fromthe, 313Formations, causes of the superposition ofsuccessive, 26universal, remarks on the theoryof, 38new subdivisions of the tertiary,Fossa Grande, section of Vesuvius seen in,Fossilization of plants and animals partial,Fossils, distinctness of the secondary andtertiary, 327Fresh-water deposits, secondary, why rare,Fuveau, in Provence, tertiary strata of,Mabel Tor, volcano of, 136Galieri, a bed of corals found standingerect among igneous and aqueous formationsat, 73Ganges, the crocodile of the, found bothin fresh and saltwater, 330Gannat, fresh-water limestone of, 232Garnets, in altered shale, 369Garrinada, hill of, described (see frontispiece,)187Gavarnie, cirque of, 88lamination of clay-slate near seewood-cut No. 89, 366Gault of the Valley of the Weald,valley formed at its out-crop, 292forms an escarpment towards theWeald clay, 293Gemunden Maar, view of the see woodcutNo. 49, 195INDEX.Geneva, lake of, advance of the delta oftho Rhone in/27- change which will take place in thedistribution of sediment when it is filledGenoa, height (if the tertiary strata abovethe sea at, 165, 166- - position of the strata see diagramNo. 28, 166Geological periods, their distinctness mayarise from our imperfect information, 56Gergovia, hill of, alternation of volcanictut' and fresh-water marls in the, 238- section of, 259- intersected by a dike of basalt seewood-cut, No. GO, '259GiaconiOj St., valley of, described, 84, 85,Gillenfeld. description of the Pulvermaarof, 197'Girgenti, section at see diagram No. 5.- - shells found in the limestone of, G5- dip of the tertiary strata at, 74- list of fossil shells from AppendixII., p. 54Gironde, tertiary strata of the basin of the,Glaciers of Savoy, great quantities of rockbrought down by the, 149Glen Roy, parallel roads of, 131Glen Tilt, junction of limestone and granitein see wood-cut No. 88, 356Ugly, river, tertiary strata in the valley ofthe, 170Gneiss, mineral composition of, 365, 367- passage of, into granite, 367, 372was originally deposited from water,- whence derived, 373Go/zo degli Martin, dikes intersectinglimestone at, 69view of the valley of see wood-cutNo. 23, 110Grammichcle, beds of incoherent yellowsand with shells found near, 66- - bones of the mammoth found inalluvium at, 1.51Grampian, granite veins of the, 357Granada, tertiary strata of, 170Granite, junction of limestone and, in GlenTilt see wood-cut No. 88, 356formed at different periods, 13, 357- passage from trap into, 361- origin of, 12, 363- pass-age of gneiss into, 3G7, 372- - changes produced by its contactwith strata of lias and oolite in the Alps,Griuiiie veins, their various forms andmineral composition sec: wood-cuts,N o s . 85, 86, 87, and 88, 353, 356, 370Gravesend, deep indentations in the chalkfilled with sand, gravel, &c., near, 282Greywacke, 377of the Easel, 194age of the rocks termed, 327Greenough, Mr., on fossil shells from theholders of the Red Sea, 136Grifone, Monte, caves containing the remainsof extinct animals in, 141Grit, calcareous, and peperino, sections ofsec diagrams Nos. 9 and 10, 72Grooved surface of rocks, how formed,Grosoeil, near Nice, tertiary strata foundat, 135fjuadaloupe, active volcanos in, 133Guidotti, Signor, on the shells of the gypsumof Monte Cerio, 159Gypseous marls containing fish found atCas'.rogiovanni, 63, 67Gypsum, and marls, of the Paris basin, 247bones of quadrupeds, c., in, 251on the entire absence of marine remainsin the, 252of St. Remain on the Allier, 233beds of, unrestrained with the sub-apenninemarls, 159unaltered shells in the, 159Gyrogonites, abundant in the fresh-waterformations of the Paris basin, 250Hall, Sir James, his experiments on rocks,on the grooved summits of the Cor-morphinehills, 147Hall, Capt. 13., on the parallel roads ofCoquimbo, 131on vertical dikes of lava in Madeira,on the veins traversing the TableMountain, Cape of Good Hope, 354Hamilton, Sir VV., his account of thetion of Vesuvius in 1779, 122Hampshire basin, tertiary formations of the18, 280mammiferous remains of the, 280, 281on the former continuity of the Londonand, 283Happisborough, diagonal stratification ofthe crag strata near see wood-cut No.32, 174Hartz mountains, geological and geographicalaxes of the, 346Hastings sands, their composition, 280anticlinal axis formed by the, 287Haute Loire, fresh-water formation of the,Headen Hill, section of, 281Heat, its influence on the consolidation ofstrata, 334Hebrides, age of the volcanic rocks of the,erupINDEX.Heidelberg, shells found in the loess at,loess and gravel alternating at, 153granites of different ages near, 357henslowe, Professor, on the changes causedby a volcanic dike in Anglesea, 368filbert, Dr., on the extinct volcanos ofthe Rhine, 197, 201on the loess of the valley of theRhine, 151on the mammiferous remains ofVelay, 219lighbeach, in Essex, height of the Londonclay at, 312hoffman, Professor, his examination ofSicily, 63on the limestone of Capo Santa Croce,on the new island of Sciacca, 71on the Val del Bove, 88on cave deposits in Sicily, 139, 140,Honduras, recent strata of the, 133hornblende schist, altered clay or shale,Corner, Mr. Leonard, his map of the volcanicdistrict of the Eifel and LowerRhine see wood-cut No. 48, 194on the geology of the Lower Rhineand Eifel, 201rlugi, M., on secondary strata altered intogneiss in the Alps, 372on modern granite in the Alps, 358Human remains now becoming imbeddedin osseous breccias in the Morea, 144Humboldt, on the depression of a largepart of Asia, below the level of the sea,ETundsruck, beds and veins of quartz foundin the mountains of the, 201Hungary, tertiary formations of, 212age of the tertiary strata of, 215volcanic rocks of, 222age of the igneous rocks of, 223Mutton, his opinion as to altered sedimentaryrocks, 382Huttonian hypothesis of the origin ofgneiss, 366Hypogene, term proposed as a substitutefor primary, 374formations, no order of successionin, 375rocks, their identity of character indistant regions, 376produced in all ages in equal quantities,377their relative age, 377volume of, formed since the Eoceneperiod, 381Icebergs, rocks transported by, depositedwherever they are dissolved, 149, 150Guienne, volcanic mountain of, 252Indusial limestone of Auvergne, 232Inkpen Hill, the highest point of the chalkin England, 314Inland cliff near Dax see wood-cut No.53, 209Inland cliffs on East side of Val di Not,Insects, fossil, of Aix, 277Ischia, volcanic conglomerates now inprogress on the shores of, 73fossil shells of recent species foundat great heights in, 126external configuration of, how caused,list of fossil shells fromAppendixII., 57Isle of Bourbon, a volcanic eruption everytwo years in, 363Isle of Cyclops, in the bay of Trezza, viewof see wood-cut No. 14, 79its height, &c., 79stratified marl resting on columnarlava in the see wood-cut No. 14, 79contortions in the newer Pliocene,strata of see wood-cut No. 15, 80divided into two parts by a greatfissure, 80.1 i newer Pliocene strata invaded bylava in see wood-cut No. 16, 81lavas of, not currents from Etna, 81Isle of Purbeck, traversed by a line of verticalor inclined strata, 315Isle of Wight, geology of the, 18fall of one of the Needles of the, intothe sea in 1772, 181fresh-water strata of the, 280mammiferous remains of the, 281,vertical strata of the, 315Italy tertiary strata of, 18age of the volcanic rocks of, 183number of living species in the fossilshells of see Appendix L, 47, number of those common to Sicilyand, ib. 47 ;number common to the Crag and,ib. 47number common to Sicily, theand, ib. 47Jack, Dr., on the geology of the island ofPulo Nias, 134Jamaica, fossil shells of recent speciesfrom, in the British Museum, 133Java, subsidence of the volcano of Pagansin the island of, 96vegetation destroyed by hot sulphuricwater from a mountain in, 252Jobert, M., on the extinct quadrupeds ofMont Perrier, 218on the hill of Gergovia, 258INDEX.Jobert, M.,'on the different ages of Auvergnealluviums, 267Jorullo, time for which the lava of, retainedits heat, 363Jura, erratic blocks of the, 148Kaiserstuhl, volcanic hills in the plains ofthe Rhine, 152covered nearly to their summits withloess, 152Katavothrons of the plain of Tripolitza nowfilling up with osseous breccias, 144Eater, Capt., on recent deposits nearRamsgate, 182Keferstein, M., his objections to M. deBeaumont's theory, 347Kingsclere, valley of, ground plan of thesee wood-cut No. 78, 305section across the, from North toSouth see wood-cut No. 79, 305section of the, with the heights on atrue scale see wood-cut No. 80, 306anticlinal axis of the, 306proofs of denudation in the, 307Kills of Cornwall, 370Leach, lake-crater of, 197Lacustrine deposits overlying the cragsee diagrttrr-No. 30, 173Lake Aidan", formed by the damming up ofa river by lava, 269Lake-craters of the Eifel see wood-cutsNos. 49 and 50, 195, 196 ,how formed, 196Lakes, arrangement of deposits in, 8Lake Superior, recent deposits in, analogousto those of the Eocene lakes inAuvergne, 230nature of the recent deposits in, 334the bursting of its barrier would causean extensive deluge, 270Lamarck, his list of the fossil shells of theParis basin, 156La Motta, valleys excavated through bluemarl capped with columnar basalt at, 77volcanic conglomerate of see diagramNo. 13, 77relative age of the basalts of, 82Lancashire, tertiary strata of, 135Land, elevation of, caused by subterraneanlava, 105Land-shells drifted from the Alps into theMediterranean, 48Landers, on the delta of the Niger, 330Landes, tertiary strata of the, 206La Roche, section of the hill of, 229Las Planas, lava current of, 189Latinity, near Nice, fossil shells of, 168Lauder, Sir T. D., on the parallel roads ofGlen Roy, 131Lava, a bed of oysters between two currentsof, at Vizzini, 73Lava, columnar, stratified marl resting on,in the Isle of Cyclops see wood-cutNo. 14, 79minerals in cavities of, 81i veins of, on Etna, 91great length of time which it requiresto cool, 363Lava streams solid externally while in motion,86Lavas of the Cyclopian isles not currentsfrom Etna, 81Lavas and breccias of the Val del Bove, 93Lavas excavated by rivers in Catalonia,186, 189Lavas and alluviums of different ages inAuvergne see wood-cut No. 61, 266La Vissiere, fresh-water limestone coveredby volcanic rocks at, 263faults in the limestone at, 263Leeward Islands, geology of the, 132Le Grand aussi, M., on alluviums underlava in Auvergne, 267Leith Hill, height of, 293Lentini, volcanic pebbles covered withserpulae in the limestone near, 73dip of the strata at, 74valleys near, their origin, 111Leonhard, M., on the loess of the valley ofthe Rhine, 151on the volcanic district of the LowerRhine, 201"' on granites of different ages nearHeidelberg, 357Lewes, fissures in the chalk filled withsand near, 283view of the ravine called the Coombnear see wood-cut No. 75, 301fault in the cliff-hills near-see woodcutNo. 76/301Lesbos, fresh-water limestone of, 237Lias, strata of the, 326strata between the carboniferousgroup and the, 326converted into flinty slate by trapdike in Antrim, 370altered in the Alps, 372- altered in Hebrides, 378Laconia, relative age of the basalts of, 82Lignite inter stratified with the sub-apenninemarls, 159Lima, valley of, proofs of the successiverise of the, 130Limagne auvergne, lacustrine depositsand volcanic rocks of the see map,wood-cut No. 56, 226Limestone formation of the Val di Notdescribed see diagram No. 5, 64its organic remains, 65Limestone, resting on lava at Capo SantaCroce, 68Lithological character of the sub-apenninebeds, 157, 162INDEX.jckart, M., on the fossil remains ol theOrleanais, 219jess of the valley of the Rhine, 151mineral, composition of the, 151its thickness and origin, 152gravel, &c. alternating with, 153list of shells from the see AppendixII., 58sire, tertiary strata of the basin of the,relative age of the strata of the seediagram No. 3, 20faluns' of the, 203sidon basin, tertiary deposits of the, 18,on the former continuity of theHampshire and, 283fossil shells of the see Tables, AppendixI.proportion of living species in thefossil shells of the Appendix I., 50jndon clay, its composition, thickness,&c., 279septaria of the, 279the fossil shells identifiable withthose of the Paris basin, 280organic remains of the, 280Dover green-sand described, 286ower Rhine, see Rhine.itcina divaricata, wide geographicalrange of the, 254uy, section of tertiary strata in the valleyof the see diagram No. 51, 207ears, or lake-craters of the Eifel seewood-cuts Nos. 49 and 50, 195, 196how formed, 196acculloch, Dr., on the parallel roads ofGlen Roy, 131sub-Apennine strata termed marinealluvia by, 157on the granite veins of Cape Wrath,in Scotland, 354on the junction of granite and limestonein Glen Tilt, 356on the granitic rocks of Shetland, 357on the granite of Sky, 358on the trap rocks of Scotland, 360on the granite of Aberdeenshire,on the passage of gneiss into granite,[acigno of the Italians the greywacke ofthe Germans, 162lecture, Dr., on the geology of the LeewardIslands, 132on the volcanic district of Olot inCatalonia, 184his observations preceded by thoseof Don Bolos, 193madeira, fossil shells of recent speciesbrought from, 134VOL. III.Madeira,' vertical dikes of compact lavaseen in, 134violently shaken by earthquakes duringthe last century, 134Maestricht beds, fossils of the, 324chasm between the Eocene and,number of fossil shells common tothe chalk and, 325number common to the upper greensandand, 325Magnan, river, 167section from Monte Calvo to the seaby the valley of see diagram, No. 29,Malaga, tertiary strata of, 170Mammalia, fossil, importance of the remainsof, 47duration of species in, more limitedthan in testacea, 140shells of living species found withextinct, 140Mammiferous remains of the successivetertiary eras, 59Mammoth, tusk of the, found in calcareoustufa near Rome, 139Man, remains of, now becoming imbeddedin osseous breccias in the Morea, 144Mantelll, Mr., on the fossil shells of thecrag, 171on deposits containing recent shellsin the cliffs near Brighton, 182on tertiary outliers on the chalk,on die secondary rocks of the Wealdvalley, 286his section of the valley of theWeald, with the heights on a truescale see wood-cut No. 64, 288his section from the North escarpmentof the South Downs to Barcombesee wood-cut No. 71, 296on the absence of chalk detritus onthe central ridge of the Weald, 296his section of a fault in the cliff-hillsnear Lewes see wood-cut No. 76,his discovery of the Mososaurus ofMaestricht in the English chalk, 325Map of the volcanic district of Cataloniasee wood-cut, No. 43, 184of the volcanic region of the Eifelsee wood-cut No. 48, 194of Auvergne, showing its geographicalconnexion with the Paris basin seewood-cut No. 56, 226Marplot, fresh-water limestone of, 232Mardolce, grotto of, bones of extinct quadrupedsfound in the, 140- pierced in the interior by boringtestacea, 141breccia in, how formed, 141INDEX.Marienforst, blocks of quartz containingcasts of fresh-water shells found near, 199Marine alluviums, 1-15Marine testacea, wide range of, 44, 48Marls, sub-Apennine, localities of the, 158,sometimes thinly laminated, 158inter stratified with lignite and gypsum,159capped by basalt at some places, 159Martin, Mr., on the Valley of the weald,on the transverse valleys of the Northand South Downs, '299i his supposed section of a transversevalley see wood-cut. No. 74, 300his estimate of the thickness ofstrata removed from the summit of theForest ridge. 31 3Maritime Alps, tertiary strain at the baseof the, 1G4Marsupial animals, their remains found inbreccias in Australian caves, 143Mascalucia, subsidence on Etna near thetown of, 90Medesano, lignite in the sub-Apennine marlsat, 159Mediterranean, organic remains of the, 40distinct from those of the Red Sea,41/205shells drifted from the Alps intothe, 48Medway, transverse valley of the, 298, 299Meerfelder Maar described, 197Melilli, view of a circular valley near seewood-cut No. 23, 110inland cliffs seen near, 111Merdogne, fresh-water marls intersected bya dike of basalt above the village ef, 259Metamorphic, the term proposed and defined,374rocks of the Alps, altered lias andoolite, 371sometimes pass into sedimentary, 370sometimes divided by strong line ofdemarcation, 37Gin what manner their age shouldbe determined, 378why those visible to us arc for themost part ancient, 380why they appear the oldest, 379Micaceous schist, whence derived, 373Microscopic fossil shells abundant nearSienna, 1G3shells of the Paris basin, see PlateIV., 250Militello, list of fossil shells from see AppendixII., p. 54Mineral character, persistency of, why apparentlygreatest in older rocks, 331characters, proofs of contemporaneousorigin derived from, 37Mineral composition of the sub-Apenninestrata, 157- of rocks no proof of contemporaneousorigin, 1G1Minerals in the cavities of lava, Isle of Cyclops,81Miocene period, term whence derived, 54- proportion of living species in thefossil shells of the, 54- position of the beds referable to thesee diagrams, Nos. 3 and 4, 20, 21- mammiferous remains of the. 59- Marine formations of the, 202- fresh-water formations of the, 219volcanic rocks of the, 222- alluviums, localities of, 217fossil shells of the see tablespencil I.- general resultdefrom the fossilshells of the Appendix I., p. 47number of fossil species of shellscommon to different formations referableto the, if., p. 47.number of living species in the fossilshells of the, t7., p. 48number of species common to thepliocene and, ib., p. 49geographical distribution of the livingspecies of the, ib., 51Mirabeau, red clay and sand of, 208Mismcr, dip of the crag strata in a dillbetween Dunvvich and see wood-cut,No. 33, 175Misterbianco, valleys excavated throughbine marl at, 77Mitchell, Major, on breccias in Australiancaves, 143Mitscheriich, M., on the minerals found inSomma, 121Modern causes, remarks on the term, 319Molasse, thickness of, at Stein, 153of Switzerland, 212its place in the series of tertiary formationsnot yet known, 212Mole, transverse valley of the. 298Molluscous animals, superior longevity olthe species of, 48Mont Dor, age of the volcano of, 200, 202its height, form, and composition, 201Mont Ferrat, tertiary strata of the hills of, 21hills of, geological structure of the, 211Monte Calvo, section from to the sea seediagram No. 29, 107Monte Cerio, unaltered shells found in thegypsum of, 159Monte (irifone, caves containing osseousbreccias in, 141Montrose, M., on alluviums of differentages in Auvergne, 207Monte Mario, marine strata of, 138shells changed into calcareous sparin, 100INDEX.Montmartre, gypsum of, 247bones of quadrupeds, &c. in the gypsumof, 25 1entire absence of marine remains inthe gypsum of, 252Mont Mezen, age of the, 260Monte Nuovo, formation of, 104, 128, 125Montpellier, tertiary strata of, 215Mont Perrier, position of the Miocenealluviums of see wood-cut, No. 54, 217remains of extinct quadrupeds in thealluviums of, 218age of the trachytic breccias of, 262Montsacopa, volcanic cone of (see Frontispiece,)186Mountain chains formed of successiveigneous and aqueous groups superimposedon each other, 240on the relative antiquity of, 337difficulty of determining the relativeages of, 350Moravia, fossil shells of see tables, AppendixI.Morea, osseous breccias now forming inthe, 144tertiary strata of the, 170distinct ranges of sea cliffs at variouselevations in the, 113, 132fossil shells of the see tables, AppendixI.Moropano, fossil shells found in tuff nearthe town of, 126Mosenberg, a mountain with a triple volcaniccone, 197Mososaurus of Maestricht found also in theEnglish chalk, 325Mundesley, protuberances of chalk in thecrag strata near, 180Murat, fresh-water deposits covered byvolcanic rocks near, 263Murchison, Mr., on the tertiary strata ofGrosoeil, near Nice, 135on tertiary strata at the base of theMaritime Alps, 166, 168his section of the manner in whichthe crag rests on the chalk see diagramNo. 30, 173on the Superga, 211on the tertiary formations of Styria,guam 213, 214on the fresh-water formation of ,222on the volcanic rocks of Styria, 224on central France, 227on the lacustrine strata of the Cantal,on Auvergne, 258on the Plomb du Cantal, 263on the excavation of valleys, 265on the tertiary formations of Aix, inProvence, 277on the terrace formed by the hardbeds of the upper green-sand, 292Murphy, Lieut. H., on the height of theNorth Downs, 288Musara, sections of buried cones seen nearthe rock of, 88flowing of the lava of 1811 and 1819round see wood-cut, No. 21, 92traversed by dikes, 92Nadder, valley of the, 308Nantes, tertiary strata near, resting on primaryrocks, 204Naples, recent tertiary strata in the districtaround, 22volcanic region of, changes whichit has undergone in the last 2000 years,recent shells in volcanic tuffs near,Necker, M. L. A., on the dikes of Somma,on the cause of the parallelism oftheir opposite sides, 122on the varieties in texture of thedikes of Somma, 124Needles of the Isle of Wight, fall of one ofthem into the sea in 1772, 181Nest, M., on the fossil elephant of theupper Vald'Arno, 221Netherlands, tertiary formations of the, 276Newer Pliocene period see Plioceneperiod, newerNewhaven, patches of tertiary strata foundon the chalk near, 286Nice, height of the tertiary strata above thesea at, 165, 167section from Monte Calvo to the sea,by the valley of Magnan near see diagramNo. 29, 167great beds of conglomerate near, 167dip of the strata, 168Niger, delta of the, area covered by the, 329Nile, its delta now preyed on by currents,Noeggerath, M., his map of the Eifel district,193on volcanic district of the Rhine, 201Norfolk, crag strata of, 171rapid waste of the cliffs on thecoast of, 297Northampton, Lord, fossil fish found nearCastrogiovanni by, 67North Downs, chalk ridge called the, 287section across the valley of theWeald from the south to the see woodcuts,No. 63 and 64, 288highest point of the, 288on the former continuity of the chalkof the, with that of the South Downs, 303Not, Val di, formations of the, 63volcanic rocks of the, 63, 67Novera, hill of, in Sicily, junction of tuffand limestone in the see diagram No.8,70INDEX.Odoardi, on the recent origin of the tertiarystrata of Italy, 1 9QEiningen, fossil reptile found at, 7Older Pliocene period see Pliocene period,olderOlivet, volcanic cone of (see frontispiece,)Olot, volcanic district of, 183its extent see map, wood-cut No.43, 184number of volcanic cones in (seefrontispiece, 185)- geological structure of the districtaround, 185age of the volcanos, 191town of, destroyed by an earthquakein 1421, 191country between Perpignan and, occasionallyshaken by earthquakes, 191Melius d'Halloy, on the former connexionof Auvergne and the Paris basin bylakes, 241Oolite, or jura limestone formation, 326converted into hypogene rock inthe Alps, 371Organic remains, controversy as to the realnature of, 3theories to account for their occurrencein high mountains, 4contemporaneous origin of rocksproved by, 39comparative value of different classesof, 46Origin of the globe, no geological proofsof, 384Orleanais, fossil remains of the, 219Orgies, tertiary strata of, 207Osseous breccias, in Sicilian caves, 139in Australian caves, 143now forming in the Morea, 144Otranto, tertiary strata of, 22Ouse, transverse valley of the, 298, 299has filled up an arm of the sea, 300Outlying patches of tertiary strata on chalkhills, 283Pachydermata, great abundance of thisorder in the Eocene period, 59Pacific, lines of ancient sea cliffs on theshores of the, 130Palaeotherium found in the fresh-waterstrata of the Lee of Wight, 281, 317Palagonia, dikes traversing peperino atsee diagrams Nos. 6 and 7, 69section to Paterno from see diagramNo. 12, 76Palermo, caves containing osseous brecciasnear, 140fossil shells from see list AppendixII., p. 55, 56Panella, in Ischia, ancient sea-beach seennear. 127Papandayang, subsidence of the volcaniccone of, 96Parallel roads of Coquimbo, 131of Glen Roy, 131Paris, comparison between the tertiarystrata of, and those of England, 282Paris basin, formations of the, 16organic remains of the, 16all tertiary formations at first referredto the age of those of the, 17 ,analogy of the deposits of centralFrance to those of the, 241geographical connexion of Auvergneand the, 241subdivisions of strata in the, 242diagrams showing the relation whichthe strata bear to each other see woodcuts,Nos. 58 and 59, 243superposition of different formationsin the, 244plastic clay and sands of the, 244calcaire grossier, 245calcaire siliceux described, 246gypsum and marls of the, 246second or upper marine group, 248third fresh-water formation, 249age of the deposits of the, 20, 250abundance of microscopic shells inthe, 20, 250bones of quadrupeds in gypsum, 251alternation of strata with and withoutorganic remains in the, 254number of living species in the fossiltestaceapfthe, 55, 253concluding remarks on the tertiarystrata of the, 254fossil shells of the see tables, AppendixI.number of living species in the fossilshells of the Appendix I., p. 50Parkinson, Mr., on the crag, 19, 156Parma, sub-Apennine marls thinly laminatednear, 158these marls intertratified with lignitein the territory of, 1 59silicified shells found in the marlsnear, 160blue marl of, a fresh-water univalvefilled with marine shells found inthe, 163river, brown clay deposited by the,Paroxysmal elevations, theory of, 128Parts, M., on the tertiary strata of thebasin of Vienna, 213Paterno, section from, to Palagonia seediagram, No. 12, 76valleys excavated through blue marat,77relative age of the basalts of, 82Pauliac, limestone of, 208Powell bay, recent deposits in, 182INDEX.Pen tali ca, great limestone of the Val diNot seen in the valley of, 64Pentland, Mr., on the bones of animalsfrom Australian caves, 144on the mammiferous remains ofthe Upper Val d'Arno, 220Peering, traversed by dikes near Palagoniasee diagrams, Nos. 6 and 7, 69dikes of, how formed, 70sections of calcareous grit and seediagrams Nos. 9 and 10, 72Peperinos, of the Val di Not, 71how formed, 71Perpignan, the country between Olot and,occasionally shaken by earthquakes, 191.- fossil shells of see Tables, AppendixI.Peru, proofs of successive elevation of thecoast of, 130Pewsey, Vale of, 308 'Phillips, Mr., his analysis of chalk flints,Philosopher's Tower on Etna, 128Phlegraean Fields, minor cones of the, 125Diana, conglomerate of, 211Piazza, dip of the tertiary strata at, 74Piedmont, tertiary strata of, 20, 21 1their relative age see diagram,No. 4, 21Pitchstone, a thin band of, formed at thecontact of the dikes of Somma andintersected beds, 124Placentia, character of the sedimenttransported by rivers in the territory of,Plants, their fossilization partial, 31fossil, importance of, in geology, 47Plas Newydd, changes caused in sedimentarystrata by a volcanic dike near,Plastic clay and sand of the London basin,its thickness, composition, &c., 278organic remains rare in the, 279clay and sand of the Paris basin,alternates with calcaire grossier, 244Pliny does not mention the Auvergne volcanosin his Natural History, 269Pliocene period, newer, derivation of theterm, 53proportion of living species in thefossil shells of the, 53marine formations of the, 62contortions in strata of the, in theIsle of Cyclops see wood-cut, No.15,80strata of the, invaded by lava seewood-cut No. 16, 81subterranean rocks of fusion, formedduring the, 107fresh-water formations of the, 137Pliocene period, newer, osseous brecciasand cave deposits of the, 139alluviums of the, 145extinct animals in breccias of the,Pliocene period, older, proportion of livingspecies in the fossil shells of the, 54position of the beds referable to thisera see diagrams No?. 3 and 4, 20, 21mammiferous remains of the, 59tertiary formations referable to the,volcanic rocks of the, 183elevation of land on the East coastof England since the commencement ofthe, 316Pliocene period, fossil shells of the seeTable, Appendix 1.general results derived from thefossil shells of the Appendix J., p. 47number of species of fossil shellscommon to different formations of theAppendix I., p. 47number of living species in the fossilshells of the Appendix I., p. 47number of species common to theMiocene and Appendix I., p. 49geographical distribution of theliving species of the Appendix I.,p. 51strata of Sicily, their dip and direction,73Pliocene strata of Sicily, origin of the, 103changes of the surface during andsince their emergence, 109strata, newer, only visible in countriesof earthquakes, 129Plomb du Cantal, successive accumulationof the, 240i a^e of the volcanic rocks of the,260, 262its height, form, structure, &c., 263fresh-water limestone covered byvolcanic rocks on the northern side ofthe, 263Plutonic rocks, 353distinction between volcanic and,their relative age, 364, 377changes produced by, 370why those now visible are for themost part very ancient, 379Podolia, tertiary formations of, 215Poggibonsi, conglomerate of, 160Pont du Chateau, alternation of volcanictuff and fresh-water limestone at, 258Patella di Calanna, furrows in the defilecalled, how formed, 147Pratt, Mr., on the mammiferous remains ofthe Isle of Wight, 281Pressure, effects of, on the consolidationof strata, 334INDEX,Prevost, M. Constant, on the tertiary strataof Vienna, 21, 212tabular view of his arrangement ofthe strata of the Paris basin see woodcutXo. 59, 243on the alternation of the calcairegrossier, and siliceous limestone, 24G.on the manner in which the mammiferousremains may have been preservedin the Paris gypsum, 252on the alternation of strata with andwithout organic remains. 254Primary, on the rocks usually termed, 10,352"their relation to volcanic and sedimentaryformations, 352divisible into two groups, the stratifiedand unstratified, 353on the stratified rocks called, 12, 365the term why faulty, 374strata, how far entitled to the appellation,377Primitive, term now abandoned, 13Primosole, termination of the Val di Not,limestone at, 75view of Etna from see diagramNo. 11, 75Provide. island of, would resemble Ischiaif raised, 127Pulo Ninus, fossil shells of recent speciesfound in the island of, 134Pulvermaar, description of the, 197Punto del Nasone on Somma, dikes orveins of lava seen at see wood-cut No.25, 122Punto di Guimento, veins of lava at seewood-cut No. 20, 91Purace, extinct volcano of, 252Pusanibio river, sulphuric and muriaticacids, and oxide of iron in the waters ofthe, 252Puy Arzet, chalk with conformable beds offull 1 in the hill called, 207Puy de Come, ravine excavated throughthe lava of the, 2G4Puy de Jussat, quartzose grits of, 229Puv de Marmot. alternation of volcanictuff and fresh-water marl in the, 258Puy de Pariou. 2'iSPuy Rouge, ravine cut through the lavaof the, 205I'uy de Margaret, 2G4Puy en Vela, bones of extinct quadrupedsin alluvium under lava near, 219fresh-water formation of, 2-35Pu/zuoli, inland cliff near, will be destroyed,112no great wave caused by the rise ofthe coast ne'er, in 1538, 128Pyrenees, tertiary strata at the eastern extremityof the, 170Pyrenees, tertiary formations between thebasin of the Gironde and the, 206their relative age, 341tertiary strata abutting against verticalmica-schist at the eastern end ofthe, 348lamination of clay-slate in the seewood-cut No. 89, 366Quartz, compact, whence derived, 373Quorra, or Niger, delta of the, 329Radicofani, sub-apennine marls cappedby basalt at, 159age of the volcanic rocks of, 183Ragusa, fossil fish found in great abundanceat, 67Raymond. M on alluuums of Auvergne,Ramsgate, recent deposits in the cliffsnear, 182Ravines excavated through the lavas ofAuvergne, 264, 265Recent formations, description of. 52form, a common point of departurein all countries, 53why first considered, 62Recent and Tertiary formations, synopticaltable of, 61Red marl and sandstone of Auvergne likenew red sand-tone,' 229, 333Red marl, supposed universality of, 333Red Sea, and Mediterranean, distinct assemblagesof species found in the, 41,tertiary strata found on its westernborders. 135list of fossil shells from see AppendixII 57Rennes, tertiary strata near, 276Rhine, lower, volcanos of the, 193map of the volcanic district of theol 91age of the volcanic rocks of the, uncertain,199origin of the trass of the. 197ancient alluviums of the, 20URhone, delta of. in lake of Geneva, 27shells drifted from the Alps to theMediterranean by the, 48Riccioli, Signior. tusk of the mammothfrom the Roman travertin shown to thuauthor by, 138Rima. valley of. lines of ancient sea-cliffsin, 130Ripple marks formed by the wind on the(lines near Calais see wood-cut No.36, 176Risso, M on the fossil shells of Grovel,near Nice. 135on the fossil shells of St. Madeleine,near Nice, 168Rivers, difference in the sediment of, 40INDEX..robert, M., on extinct quadrupeds of Cussocca di Ferro, shells in the tuffs of, 79rochester, indentations in the chalk filledwith sand, &c., near, 282rocks, distinction between sedimentaryand volcanic, 10, 352primary, 10origin of the primary, 11, 363distinction between primary, secondaryand tertiary, 10persistency of mineral character,why apparently greatest in the older, 331older, why most consolidated, 334older, why most disturbed, 335secondary volcanic, of many differentages, 335relative age of, how determined, 35proofs of. by superposition, 35proofs by included fragments of olderrocks, 36proofs of their contemporaneous originderived from mineral characters, 37proofs from organic remains, 39volcanic of the Val di Not, 63, 67grooved surface of, 147transportation of, by ice, 149identity of their mineral compositionno proof of contemporaneous origin,)herbert, crater of the, described, 198>me, travertins of, 138hills of, capped by calcareous tufa,inca, fossil shells found at see Table,Appendix I.>yat, ruins of Roman bridges and bathsat, prove that no great changes havetaken place since their erection, 269>zet, M., OQ the loess of the valley of theRhine, 151into, folding of the crag strata in thecliffs near see wood-cut No. 38, 178Christopher's, alternations of coral andvolcanic substances in, 133Eustatia, tertiary formations in, 133Hospice, tertiary strata in the peninsulaof, 135Lawrence, Gulf of, changes whichwould result in, on the filling up of theCanadian lakes, 28Madeleine, near Nice, shells abundantin the loamy strata of, 168Michael's Mount, Cornwall, 371Peter's Mount, Maestricht, fossils of,Remain, gypsum worked at, 233Vincent, active volcanos in, 133salisbury Craig, altered strata in, 369n Giro, cave of, breccia containing bon eof extinct quadrupeds in, 141San Giro, position of the cave of, seediagram No. 27, 141San Felix de Pallerols, deep ravine cutthrough lava near the town of, 189San Quirico, hills of, their composition,Sand and conglomerate of the sub-apenninestrata described, 159Santa Croce, Cape of, limestone restingon lava at, 68Santa Magdalena, section at the bridge of,Santa Margarita, size of the volcanic craterof, 187Sardinian volcanos, their age uncertain,rest on a tertiary formation, 193Tasso, Dr., on the tertiary strata of Genoa,on the fossil shells of Albenga, 167Saucats, fresh-water limestone of, 207Savona, tertiary strata of see wood-cutNo. 55, 166, 222Sciacca, volcanic island of, 69, 71Scores, Capt., on the transportation ofrocks by icebergs, 150Scotland, parallel grooves formed in thebeds of torrents in, 147granite veins of see wood-cutsNos. 85 and 86, 354Scrope, Mr. G. P., on the volcanic districtof Naples, 125on the extinct volcanos of the Rhine,197, 201on the hill of Gergovia, 258on Mont Dor, 261on the excavation of lava by theriver Sioule, 265on alluviums under lava at differentelevations in Auvergne, 267Sea-cliffs, successive elevations proved bysee wood-cut No. 24, 111manner in which the sea destroyssuccessive ranges of, 111, 292distinct ranges of ancient, in theMorea, 113found elevated to great heights inPeru, 130Seaport, waste of the chalk cliffs at, 311Secondary rocks, 14of the Weald valley divisible intofive groups, 286their rise and degradation gradual,enumeration of the principal groupsof, 324no species common to the tertiaryand, 327circumstances under which they originated,23, 329why more consolidated, 334why more disturbed, 335INDEX.Secondary rocks, volcanic, of many differentages, 335Secondary fresh-water deposits why rare,Secondary periods, duration of, 328Sedgwick, Professor, on diluvial waves,101, 272on the tertiary formations of Styria,213, 214on the volcanic rocks of Styria, 224on the Isle of Wight, 281, 315on synclinal lines, 293on the theory of M. Else de Beaumont,347on the Cornish granite veins, 355on garnets in altered shale, 369Sediment, changes in the distribution of,which would take place on the filling upof large lakes, 27Sedimentary deposition, causes which occasionthe shifting of the areas of, 26Sedimentary rocks, distinction betweenvolcanic and, 10Seguinat, Montagne de, lamination ofclay-slate in the see wood-cut, No. 89,Selenite found in clay at the foot of Etna, 77Septaria of the London clay described, 279Serre del Solfizio, sections of buried conesin the cliffs of, 88dikes at the base of see wood-cutNo. 19, 90Serres, M. Marcel de, on the drifting ofland shells to the sea by the Rhone, 48on the tertiary strata of Montpellier,on the fossil insects of Aix, 277Sicily, geological structure of, 22, 63dip and direction of the newer Pliocenestrata of, 73origin of the newer Pliocene strataof, 103form of the valleys of, 109r.o peculiar indigenous species foundin, 115breccias containing bones of extinctanimals in caves in, 139alluviums of the newer Pliocene,period in, 151fossil shells of see Tables, AppendixI.number of living species in the fossilshells of see Appendix I., 47number common to Italy and, ib. 47- number common to Italy, the Cragand, ib. 47number of species proper to, ib. 47Shells, tables of fossil (see Appendix,) 49characteristic tertiary (see Plates,)necessity of accurately determiningthe species of, 50Shells, recent, numerical proportion of inthe different tertiary periods, 58number of species of, found bothliving and fossil, 394fossil tertiary, number examined toconstruct the tables, 394fossil, number common to all thetertiary periods, Appendix I., 50li v i n gj number of those found in a fossilstate in all the tertiary periods, ib. 50geographical distribution of thosespecies which have their fossil analogues,ib. 51Sherringham, sections in the cliffs east ofsee wood-cuts, Nos. 39 and 40, 178,rapid waste of the cliffs at see section,wood-cut No. 72, 297Shetland, action of the sea on the coast of,granites of different ages in, 357passage of trap into granite in, 362Siebengebirge, volcanic phenomena of the,Sienna, Subapennine strata near the townof, 160microscopic fossil shells very abundantlist of fossil shells from AppendixII., 59Siliceous schist, clay converted into bylava, 70, 81Silvertop, Col., on the tertiary strata ofSpain, 170Simeto, plain of the, 76Sioule, river, ravines cut through lava-cur.rents by the, 265Sky, age of the granite of, 358Smith, Capt. W. H., his drawing of theIsle of Cyclops see wood-cut No. 14,on the extinct volcanos of Sardinia,193Somma, escarpment of, 84, 85, 87, 96changes caused by dikes in the, 91dikes of, 121minerals found in, 121parallelism of the opposite sides ofthe dikes of, 122varieties in the texture of the dikesof, 124Somma and Vesuvius, differences in thecomposition of, 120Sortino, great limestone formation seen inthe valleys of, 64bones of extinct animals in cavesnear, 139South Downs, chalk ridge called the, 287section from to the North Downsacross the Weald Valley see wood-cutsNo. 63 and 64, 288highest point of the, 288INDEX.out Downs, view of the escarpment ofthe see wood-cut No. 65, 290section from their northern escarpmentto Barcombe see wood-cut No.71, 296on the former continuity of the chalkof the North and, 303>paccaforno limestone, 65spain, tertiary formations of, 170extinct volcanos of the north of, 183lavas excavated by rivers in, 186, 189species, changes of, everywhere in progress,30effects of changes of climate on, 44superior longevity of molluscous, 48necessity of accurately determining,living, proportion of in the fossils ofthe newer Pliocene period, 53in the older Pliocene period, 54in the Miocene period, 54in the Eocene period, 55their geographical distribution, 55in Sicily older than the country theyinhabit, 115outlive great revolutions in physicalgeography, 115none common to the secondary andtertiary formations, 327?pinto, fossil shells in green sand at, 211Stringer, M., on the loess of the Rhine,on the volcanic district of the Eifel,Steyning, chalk escarpment as seen fromthe hill above see wood-cut No. 66,Stirling Castle, altered strata in the rockof, 369Stour, transverse valley of the, 298Strata, cause of the limited continuity of, 9order of succession of see diagramNo. 1, 14origin of the European tertiary, atsuccessive periods, 18Recent, form a common point of departurein all countries, 58with and without organic remainsalternating in the Paris basin, 254on the consolidation of, 334Stratification, unconformable, remarks on,30,33of the Crag see wood-cuts, 174,of primary rocks see wood-cut No.89, 365, 366Strike of beds, explanation of the term, 346Stromboli, lava of, has been in constantebullition for 2000 years, 363Studer, M., on the loess of the valley olthe Rhine, 152- ' on the molasse of Switzerland, 212Styria, tertiary formations of, 212age of the tertiary strata of, 214volcanic rocks of, 223Sub-Apennine strata, 18, 155opinions of Brocchi on the, 155lithological characters of the, 157,not all of the same age, 157termed marine alluvia by Dr. Macbullock, 157subdivisions of the, described, 158how formed, 160organic remains of the, 163fossil shells of the see Tables, AppendixI.Subaqueous deposits, our continents chieflycomposed of, 9how raised, 104distinction between alluvium and,Submarine eruptions, proofs of ancient, inthe Bay of Trezza, 78, 81Subsidence on Papandayang, in Java, 96on Etna, 96Subterranean lava the cause of the elevationof land, 105Subterranean rocks of fusion, probablestructure of the recent, 107Suffolk, relative age of the tertiary strataof see diagram No. 4, 21crag strata of, 171cliffs, thickness of the crao- in the,Superga, strata composing the hill of the,highly inclined, 211fossil shells of the, 211Superior, Lake. See Lake Superior.Superposition, of successive formations,causes of the, 26proof of more recent origin, 35exceptions in regard to volcanicrocks, 36no invariable order of, in Hypogeneformations, 375Surface, different states of the, when thesecondary and tertiary strata were formed,23Switzerland, 'molasse' of, 212Synclinal and anticlinal lines describedsee wood-cut No. 68, 293Senates not distinguishable from granites,Synoptical Table of Recent and TertiaryFormations, 61Syracuse, section at see diagram No. 5, 64shells found in the limestone of, 65range of inland cliffs seen to the northof, 111bones of extinct animals in cavesnear, 140list of fossil shells from AppendixII., P . 54INDEX.Table-Mountain, Cape of Good Hope, intersectedby veins see wood-cut No85, 354Tanaro, plains of the, 211Taro, river, nature of the sediment depositedby the, 161Faunus, beds and large quartz veins foundin the mountains of the, 201Tech, tertiary strata in the valley of the, 17(Ter, valley of the, 185Teronel, river, lava excavated by the, 189Terraces, manner in which the sea destroyssuccessive lines of see wood-cuNo. 24, 111,292Terranuova, dip of the]tertiary strata at, 74Tertiary formations, general remarks onthe, 15of the Paris basin, 16, 241at first all referred to the age of thoseof the Paris basin, 17, 19origin of the European, at successiveperiods, 18of the sub-Apennine hills, 18of Touraine, 20of Bordeaux and Dax, 20of Piedmont, 20of the Valley of the Bormida, 21of the Superga, near Turin, 21of the basin of Vienna, 21newer than the sub-apennines, 21the newest often blend with those ofthe historical era, 22different circumstances under whichthese and the secondary formations mayhave originated, 23, 329state of the surface when they wereformed, 24classification of, in chronologicalorder, 45new subdivisions of the, 52numerical proportion of recent shellsin different, 53, 54, 55, 58mammiferous remains of successive,Synoptical Table of Recent and, 61of Sicily, 63of Campania, 118of Chili and Peru, 130of the West India Archipelago, 132of the East India Archipelago, 133of Norway and Sweden, 135on the western borders of the RedSea, 135identity of their mineral compositionno proof of contemporaneous origin, 161of the Po, Arno, and Tiber, their resemblance,161at the base of the Maritime Alps, 164at the eastern extremity of the Pyrenees,170in Spain, 170in the Morea, 170of England, 18, 19, 135, 171, 277Tertiary formations, of Touraine, 20, 203of the basin of the Gironde and thedistrict of the Landes, 206of Piedmont, 211of Switzerland, 212of Styria, Vienna, Hungary, &c., 212of Volhynia and Podolia, 215of Montpellier, 215of Auvergne, 217, 226of Velay, 219, 235of the Orleanais, 219of the Upper Val d'Arno, 219of Cadibona, 221of the Cantal, 236of the Cotentin, or Valognes, 276of Rennes, 276of the Netherlands, 276of Aix in Provence, 276no species common to the secondaryand, 327Testacea, fossil, of chief importance, 47^marine, wide range of, 44, 48longevity of the species of, 48, 56Et, valley of the, tertiary strata foundin, 170Thames, basin of the, 18Theorizing in geology, different methodsof,lTiber, river, has flowed in its presentchannel since the building of Rome, 138yellow sand deposited by the, 161valley of the, 139Time, effects of prepossessions in regard tothe duration of past, 97Touraine, tertiary strata of, 20, 203and Paris, relative age of the tertiarystrata of see diagram No. 3, 20fossil shells of see Tables, Appendix I.Prachytic breccias and alluviums alternatingin Auvergne, 217Transition formations, remarks on, 13Transverse valleys in the North and SouthDowns see wood-cut No. 73, 298remarks on their formation, 299supposed section of one of themsee wood-cut No. 74, 300transylvania, tertiary formations of, 213- age of the tertiary strata of, 215volcanic rocks of, 223fossil shells stables, Appendix I.~>ap rocks, origin of the term, 360of Scotland, how formed, 360passage of, into granite, 361pass of the Rhine volcanos, 197its origin, 198'reverting of the valley of the Elsa, 137of Rome, recent shells with the tuskof the mammoth found in, 138 ^'trees, longevity of, 99, 272rezza, bay of, sub-Etnean formations exposedin the, 78proofs of sub marine eruptions in the78,81INDEX.gingham, manner in which the cragstrata rest on the chalk near see dia-ramNo. 30, 173- view of a promontory of chalk andrag near see wood-cut No. 41, 179section of the northern protuberancef chalk at see wood-cut No. 42, 180lolitza, plain of, breccias now formingi the, 144a, calcareous, the hills of Rome cappedy, 138- tusk of the mammoth found in, nearlome, 138f, dikes of, how formed, 70- in the hill of Novera see diagramJo. 8, 70volcanic, recent shells in, near names,126- shells found in, at great heights inischia, 126in, tertiary formations of, 211fossil shells of see Tables, Appendix I.icany, fresh-water formations of, 137age of the volcanic rocks of, 183de villa, elevated beaches of, 135conform ability of strata, remarks onhe, 30, 33universal formations, remarks on thehenry of, 38universality of red marl, remarks on thesupposed, 333of certain hypogene rocks, 376per marine formations of the Paris basinlow formed, 248i d'Arno, Upper, mineral character ofhe lacustrine strata of the, 161fresh-water formations of the, 219mammiferous remains of the, 220del Bove, great valley on east side ofEtna see wood-cut No. 17, 83its length, depth, &c., 84description of the, 87its circular form, 87dikes numerous in the, 87dip of the beds in the, 87section of buried cones seen in, 88difference in the dip of the bedskvhere these occur, 88scenery of the, 88form, composition, and origin of thedikes in, 90view of, from the summit of Etnasee wood-cut No. 22, 93lavas and breccias of the, 93origin of the, 95floods in, caused by melting of snowby lava, 96Demons, formations of, 751 di Calanna, its crateriform shape, 85dip of the beds in the, 85Val di Calanna, its origin, 85began to be filled up by lava in 1811and 1819 see wood-cut No. 18, 86Val di Not, formations of the, 63divisible into three groups see diagramNo. 5, 64volcanic rocks of the, 63, 67volcanic conglomerates of the, 73proofs of the gradual accumulation ofthe formations of the, 73connexion of the formations of the,with those at the base of Etna seediagram No. 12, 76form of the valleys in the limestonedistricts of the, 110inland cliffs seen on the east side of,igneous rocks of the, 361fossil shells from the see AppendixII., p. 53Vale of Pewsey, 308Valley of the Nadder, 308of the Weald see WealdValleys, of elevation, 305on Etna, account of, 83of Sicily, their form see wood-cutNo. 23,110most rapidly excavated where earthquakesprevail, 113, 148- and parallel troughs between theNorth and South Downs, how formed,transverse, of the North and SouthDowns, 298how formed see wood-cut No. 74,and furrows on the chalk, howcaused, 311of the South-east of England, howformed, 319Valmondoi's, rolled blocks of calcaire grossierin the upper marine sandstone of,Valognes, tertiary strata of the environs of,fossil shells of see Tables, AppendixI.Van der Wick, M., on the Eifel district,Var, river, large quantities of gravel sweptinto the sea by the, 168, 169Vatican, hill of the, calcareous tufa on the,Veaugirard, alternation of calcaire grossierand plastic clay at, 244Veins of lava on Etna see wood-cut No20, 91Velay, bones of extinct quadrupeds in volcanicscoriae in, 219fresh-water formations of, 235age of the volcanic rocks of, 224260, 262INDEX.Velay, ancient'alluviums covered by lavaat different heights in, 262Vertical and inclined strata, great line of,from the Isle of Wight to Dieppe, 315 TVesuvius, dikes of, 121channels formed by the flowing oflava from, in 1779, 122and Somma, difference in their composition,120Vichy, tertiary oolitic limestone of, 232dip of the lacustrine strata at, 233Vienna, tertiary formations of, 21, 212age of the tertiary strata of, 214, basin, fossil shells of the see Table,Appendix I.Vigilant, gypsum inter stratified with sub-apenninemarls at, 159Villasmonde, shells found in limestone at, 65list of fossil shells from AppendixII., 54Villefranche, bay of, tertiary strata foundnear the, 135Vinegar river, sulphuric and muriatic acids,and oxide of iron, in the waters of the,Violet, M., on the tertiary strata of theMorea, 170Viterbo, volcanic tuffs and sub-Apenninemarls alternating at, 159age of the volcanic rocks of, 183Vivianii, Professor, on the character of theSicilian flora, 115on the tertiary strata of Genoa, 166Vizzini, junction of inclined tuff and horizontallimestone near see diagram No.8,70changes caused by a dike of lava inargillaceous strata at, 70a bed of oysters between two lava-currentsat, 73Volcanic breccias in Auvergne, howformed, 259Volcanic conglomerates of the Val di Not,now forming on the shores of Cataniaand Ischia, 73Volcanic dikes, strata altered by, 70, 368Volcanic district of Catalonia, superpositionof rocks in the see wood-cut No. 47,Volcanic line?, modern, not parallel, 349Volcanic region of Naples, changes whichit has undergone during the last 2000years, 118Volcanic rocks, distinction between sedimentaryand, 10relative age of, how determined, 36of the Val di Not, 68of Campania, their age, 126of central France, 257secondary, of many different ages,Volcanic rocks, distinction between i>lu-tonic and, 359Volcanos, mode of computing the age of,sometimes inactive for centuries, 98of Olot, in Catalonia, described-seeFrontispiece, 183extinct, of Sardinia, 193of the Lower Rhine and the Eifel,the result of successive accumulation,240attempt to divide them into antediluvianand post-diluvian, 268Volhynia, tertiary formations of, 215Volts, M., on the loess of the Rhine, 151Von Buch, M., on the Eifel, 201on the tertiary formations of Volhyniaand Podolia, 215on the general range of volcanic linesover the globe, 349Von Dechen, M., on the volcanic district ofthe Lower Rhine, 201on the Hartz mountains, 346his objections to the theory of M. deBeaumont, 346, 347on the Cornish granite veins seewood-cut No. 87, 355Von Oeynhausen, his map of the Eifel district,193on the volcanic district of the Rhine.on the granite veins of Cornwallsee wood-cut No. 87, 355 ,,Walton, section of shelly crag near seewood-cut No. 31, 174lamination of sand and loam near-seewood-cut No. 34, 175Warburton, Mr., on the Bagshot sand, 280Watt, Gregory, his experiments on meltedrocks, 124,372Weald, denudation of the valley of the.secondary rocks of the, divisible intofive groups, 286section of the valley of the seewood-cuts Nos. 63 and 64, 287, 288clay, its composition, 286gradual rise and degradation of therocks of the, 289alluvium of the valley of the, 295extent of denudation in the valley ofthe, 303, 313Wealden, secondary group, called the, 325organic remains of the, 325its great extent and thickness, 329j .how deposited, 329Webster, Mr., on the geology of the Isle ofWight, 18, 315on the tertiary formations of theLondon and Hampshire basins, 278, 280INDEX.Wellington Valley, Australia, breccias containingremains of marsupial animalsfound in, 143Vest Indian Archipelago, tertiary formationsof the, 132Vey, transverse valley of the, 298, 299sewell, Rev. W., 53milton, thickness of the coralline limestoneof, 214Wiltshire, valleys of elevation in, 308fly, valley of the, 308finds, ripple-marks caused by, on thedunes near Calais see wood-cut No.35, 176froth Hill, height of, 288Yarmouth, thickness of crag in the cliffsnear, 172Ytrac, fresh-water flints strewed over thesurface near, 237Zaffarana, valleys extending from the summitof Etna to the neighbourhood of,Zocolaro, hill of, lava of Etna deflectedfrom its course by the see wood-cutNo. 18, 86Zoological provinces, great extent of, 40Zoophytes, recent species of, but littleknown, 47THE END.London : Printed by W. Closes, Stamford street.