PR I N C I P L E SOFGEOLOGY,BeingAN ATTEMPT TO EXPLAIN THE FORMER CHANGESOF THE EARTH'S SURFACE,BY Reference TO CAUSES NOW IN OPERATION.BYCHARLES LYELL, Esq., F.R.S.rOB. BBC, TO THE OEOL. SOC. PliOF. OF OEOL, TO KINO'S COLL., London.** The Inhabitants of the globe, like all the other parts of it, are subject to change. It isnot only the Individual that perishes, but whole species."*' A change in the animal kingdom seems to be part of the order of nature, and is visibleIn loBtancM to which human power cannot have extended*'Plat PAIR, Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory $413*VOLUME THE SECOND.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.MDCCCXXXir./LONDON!Printed \j WiuuM Cbaitm,8tamfor4.StrMt.• • • •• " *• • ••• «« •fTOWILLIAM JOHN BRODERIP, Esq., B. A.Barrister AT LAW,VICE PRESIDENT OP THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON.My Dear Friend,In dedicating this volume to you, I am glad of anopportunity of acknowledging the kind interest which youhave uniformly taken in the success of my labours, and thevaluable assistance which you have afforded me in severaldepartments of Natural History.I am.My Dear Friend,Yours, very sincerely,Charles Lyell,London, December Sih, 1831.Ivia CONTENTS.Fabplants — experiments of Kblreuter — The same repeated by Wiegmann —Vegetable hybrids prolific throughout several generations— Why so rare in awild state^Decandolle's opinion respecting hybrid plants — ^^The phenomenaof hybrids confirms the doctrine of the permanent distinctness of species-theoryof the gradation in the intelligence of animals as indicated by thefacial angle — Discovery of Tieddemaun that the brain of the foetus in mammaliaassumes successively the form of the brain of a fish reptile, and bird —Bearing of this discovery on the theory of progressive development andtransmutation — recapitulation 49CHAPTER V.Laws which regulate the geographical distribution of species — analogy ofclimate not attended with identity of species — Botanical geography— StationsHabitations — Distinct provinces of indigenous plants— Vegetation ofislands — Marine vegetation — In what manner plants become diffused—Effects of wind, rivers, marine currents — Agency of animals — Many seedspass through the stomachs of animals and birds undigested — Agency of manin the dispersion of plants, both voluntary and involuntary — Its analogy tothat of the inferior animals . . . . .66CHAPTER VI.Geographical distribution of Animals — buffon on the specific distinctnessof the quadrupeds of the old and new world — Different regions of indigenousmammalia — Quadrupeds in islands — Range of the Cetacea — Disseminationof quadrupeds — ^^Their powers of swimming — Migratory instincts — Driftingof quadrupeds on ice-floes — On floating islands of drift-timber— Migrations ofCetacea — Habitations of Birds — ^^Their migrations and facilities of diffusionDistribution of Reptiles and their powers of dissemination . . 87CHAPTER VII.Geographical distribution and migrations of fish — of testacea — Causeswhich limit the extension of many species — Their mode of division — Geographicalrange of zoophytes — ^^Their powers of dissemination — Distributionof insects — Migratory instincts of some species^Certain types characterizeparticular countries — ^^Their means of dissemination — Geographical distributionand diffusion of man — Speculations as to the birth-place of the humanspecies — progress of human population — Drifting of canoes to vast distances— On the involuntary influence of man in extending the range of manyother species .*•••••• 105CHAPTER VIII.Theories respecting the original introduction of species— Proposal of anhypothesis on this subject — Supposed centres or foci of creation — why theCONTENTS. IXPAQBdistinct provinces of animals and plants have not become more blended together— ^Broccbi's speculations on the loss of species — Stations of plants andanimals — Complication of causes on which they depend — Stations of plants,how affected by animals — Equilibrium in the number of Species, how preserved— Peculiar efficacy of insects in this task — Rapidity with which certaininsects multiply, or decrease in numbers — Effect of omnivorous animals inpreserving the equilibrium of species — reciprocal influence of aquatic andterrestrial species on each other . . . . . .^123CHAPTER IX.The circumstances which constitute the Stations of Animals are changeable— extension of the range of one species alters the condition of others —Supposed effects which may have followed the first entrance of the PolarBears into Iceland — ^^The first appearance of a new species in a region causesthe chief disturbance — Changes known to have resulted from the advance ofhuman population — ^^Whether man increases the productive powers of theearth — Indigenous Quadrupeds and Birds of Great Britain known to havebeen extirpated— Extinction of the Dodo — Rapid propagation of the domesticQuadrupeds over the American Continent — Power of exterminating speciesno prerogative of Mans-Concluding Remarks . . * « 141CHAPTER X.Influence of inorganic causes in changing the habitations of species-powersof diffusion indispensable, that each species may maintain its ground—How changes in the physical geography affect the distribution of species-rateof the change of species cannot be inform, however regular the actionof the inorganic causes — Illustration derived from subsidence by earthquakes—from the elevation of land by the same — from the formation of new islands—from the wearing through of an isthmus — each change in the physicalgeography of large regions must occasion the extinction of species — Effectsof a general alteration of climate on the migration of species — Gradual refrigerationcauses species in the northern and southern hemispheres to becomedistinct — Elevation of temperature the reverse — Effects in the distribution ofspecies which must result from vicissitudes in climate inconsistent with thetheory of transmutation . • • « «. • • 158CHAPTER XI.Theory of the successive extinction of species consistent with their limitedgeographical distribution — ^^The discordance in ^^The opinions of botanists respectingthe centres from which plants have been civilised may arise fromchanges in physical geography subsequent to the origin of living species—Whether there are grounds for inferring that the loss from time totime of certain animals and plants is compensated by the introduction ofwithin the historical en, even if tliej lead been as fieqpeal as cadi of extinction?— The qoesiioo whether the eiiiHng tperiei have been created in can only be decided hy igfewace to geological i MBiiai anta • • 176CHAFTKRXILEffects produced by the spoken of vitality on te alit af Oa mtlkH ear-face— Modifications in physical geography caused by organic beings on islandinferior to those caused in ta ■Bb>4iiWB regions-why the Tcgetahlesoil does not augment in tbirt-ws — dganic astir dnftad annaaUj ta thasea, andbnried in snbayieoos strata — ^Loas of noorahacait fiaaahow supplied— The theory, that n%iiiiliaB is an antagonist pawnlancing the degradation canst bj ranging walv^ lailiniliia 11 si tkaigneous causes are the tibia antagonist povan^ and not te action of animaland vegetable life— ConacrvatiTa influenza of f«gatnlia»— Ite beanag an thetheory of the fBsatttion af TaUoy% a^aBthai^a aC the eos of certainextinct Tokens — Bail djanimshad by the Ming of foieslB IKstnhatiaa afthe American roseate dependent an the diiadiaa of tria pmViiinanl windsInfluence of man in modi^ppig the physical fc^agiaphj of tha ^ba • • 185CHAPTER Xii.Effects produced by the action of animal and fegtHabfe life on the materialconstituents of the tearih*s crust — Imbedding of organic remains in depositson emerged land — Growth of Peat — Peat abundant in cold and humid — Site of many ardent forests in Europe now occn^M by Peat —Recent date of many of these changes — Sources of Bog Iron-ore — preservationof mammal substances in Peat — Causes of its antiseptic property — Miringof quadrupeds — Bursting of the Sway Moss— Bones of hedarorous quadrupedsfound in Peat— Imbedding of animal remain; in Cares and FissuresFormation of bony breccias — human bone and pottery intermixed withthe remains of extinct quadrupeds in caves in the South of Stance — ^In&r-encefi deducible from sadi associations • • • • • 209CHAPTER XIV.Imbedding of organic remains in alluring and the ruins caused by uf sudden inundations— Of landsHpa— Terrestrial nn""^^« mostabundantly preserved in alluTium and landslips, where earthquake prevail— erroneous theories which may arise from overlooking this circumstance— On the remains of works of art inducted in alluvial deposits — Imbeddingof organic bodies and human remains in blown sand — temple of Ipsam-hol on the 29ife— Dried carcasses of animals buried in the santa of thadeserts— Towns overwhelmed by sand-floods in England and FranceCQNUBNTS. XIPAGEImbedding of organic bodies and works of art ia volcanic formations onthe land^-Ciiiea and their inhabitants buried by showers of ejected matter—bjlav»— In tuffiiot mild composed of volcanic sand and ashes • • 228CHAPTER XV,Imbedding of organic remains in subalterns depots Division of the subject—Phenomena relating to terrestrial animals and plants first considered— >Wood sunk to a great depth in the sea instantly impregnated with salt-water—Experiments of Scores — Drift timber carried by the Mckenzie into SlaveLake and into the sea-cause of the abundance of drift timber in thisriver— Floating frees in the Mississippi— In the Gulf stream — immensequantity thrown upon the coast of Iceland Spitsbergen, and Labrador—Im-bedding of thei remains of insects— 0f the remains of reptile— Why the bonesof birds are so rare in subaqueous deposits — ^Irabedding of tapestried qmtdm-peds—Effects of a flood in the Solway Firth— Wild horses annually drownedin the savannahs of South America— Skeletons in recent shell marl — Driftingof mammiferous and other remains by tides and currents • « • 239CHAPTER XVLImbedding of the reams of man and his works in subaqueous strata-driftingof bodies to the sea by river-inundations— Destruction of bridges andhouses — Burial of human bodies in the sea— Loss of lives by shipwreck —Circumstances under which human corpses may be preserved under a greatthickness of recent deposits— Number of wrecked vessels — Durable characterof many of their contents — examples of fossil skeletons of men — Of fossilcanoes, ships, and works of art— Of the chemical changes which certainmetallic instruments have undergone after long submergence— Effects of thesubsidence of land in imbedding cities and forests in subalterns strata —Earthquake of Cutch in 1819— Submarine forests — ^Berkdy's arguments forthe recent date of the creation of man — Concluding remarks « • 253CHAPTER XVII.Imbedding of aquatic species in subaqueous strata— Inhumation of freshwaterplants and animals— Shell marl — Fossilized seed-vessels and stems ofCharms— Recent deposits in the American lakes — Fresh-water species driftedinto seas and estuaries— Lewes levels — alternations of marine and freshwaterstrata, how caused^Imbedding of marine plants and animals—Cetacea stranded on our shores — ^^Their remains should be more conspicuousin marine alluvium than the bones of land quadrupeds — Liability of littoraland estuary testacea to be swept into the deep sea — effects of a storm in theFaith of Forth — Burrowing shells secured from the ordinary action of wavesand currents— Living testacea found at considerable depths « » ^1^'•-^.-Xll CONTENTS.PAGECHAPTER XVIII.Formation of coral reefs — they are composed of shells as well as coralsConversion of a submerged reef into an island — Extent and thickness of coralformations — The Saliva isles — Growth of coral not rapid — sits geological 'importance — Circular and oval forms of coral islands — Shape of their lagoons—-Causes of their peculiar configuration — Openings into the lagoons — whythe windward side both in islands and submerged reefs is higher than theleewards-Stratification of coral formations — extent of some reefs in thePacific — That the subsidence by earthquakes in the Pacific exceeds the elevationdue to the same cause — Elizabeth, or Henderson Island — Coral andshell limestones now in progress, exceed in area any known group of ancientrocks — The theory that all limestone is of animal origin, considered — Thehypothesis that the quantity of calcareous matter has been and is still on theincrease, controverted ••••••• 283ERRATA.Frontispiece, /or Montag^ola read Montagnuola.Page 39, line 2 from the bottom, for exclusively read exclusively.131 — 14 -— top — Hypnum — Sphagnum.147 — 21 — top, dele of.178—8 — * top, for even read ever.e4^*.)I-I.•t • .•PRINCIPLES OF GEOLOGY.CHAPTER I.Changes of the Organic World now in progress — Division of the subject — examinationof the question, Whether Species have a real existence in Nature ?Importance of this question in Geology — Sketch of Lamarck's argumentsin favour of the Transmutation of Species, and his conjectures respecting the^ - Origin of existing Animals and Plants — His Theory of the transformationJ^ . of the Orang Outing into the Human Species.In our first volume we treated of the changes which havetaken place in the inorganic world within the historical era,and we must next turn our attention to those now in progressin the animate. creation. In examining this class of phenomena,we shall treat first of the vicissitudes to which species aresubject and afterwards consider the influence of the powers ofvitality in modifying the surface of the earth and the materialmconstituents of its crust.The first of these divisions will lead us, among other topicsto inquire, first, whether species have a real and permanentexistence in nature; or whether they are capable, as somenaturalists pretend, of being indefinitely modified in the courseof a long series of generations ? Secondly, whether, if specieshave a real existence, the individuals composing them have beenderived originally from many similar stocks, or each from oneonly, the descendants of which have spread themselves graduallyfrom a particular point over the habitable lands and waters ?Thirdly, how far the duration of each species of animal andplant is limited by its dependance on certain fluctuating andtemporary conditions in the state of the animate and inanimateVol. H. B• • •,LAMARCK S THEORY OF THE [Ch. I.world P^.^P'fi'urthly, whether there be proofs of the successiveexterjaomafion of species in the ordinary course of nature, andwhittier' there be any reason for conjecturing that new animals^and'pmnts are created from time to time, to supply their place ?'*• 'Before we can advance a step in our proposed inquiry, we/•rjuflust be able to define precisely the meaning which we attach to•'-./•'the term species. This is even more necessary in geology than. / in the ordinary studies of the naturalist ; for they who denythat such a thing as a species exists, concede nevertheless thata botanist or zoologist may reason as if the specific characterwere constant, because they confine their observations to abrief period of time. Just as the geographer, in constructinghis maps from century to century, may proceed as if theapparent places of the fixed stars remained absolutely thesame, and as if no alteration was brought about by the precessionof the equinoxes, so it is said in the organic world, thestability of a species may be taken as absolute, if we do notextend our views beyond the narrow period of human history jbut let a sufficient number of centuries elapse, to allow ofimportant revolutions in climate physical geography, andother circumstances and the characters say they, of the descendantsof common parents may deviate indefinitely fromtheir original type.Now, if these doctrines be tenable, we are at once presentedwith a principle of incessant change in the organic worlds andno degree of dissimilarity in the plants and animals which mayformerly have existed, and are found fossil would entitle us toconclude that they may not have been the prototypes and progenitorsof the species now living. Accordingly, M. GeoffreySt. Hilaire has declared his opinion, that there has beenan uninterrupted succession in the animal kingdom effectedby means of generation, from the earliest ages of the worldup to the present day ; and that the ancient animals whoseremains have been preserved in the strata, however different,may nevertheless have been the ancestors of those now inbeing. Although this notion is not generally received, weCh. I.] TRANSMUTATION OF Species. 8feel that we are not warranted in assuming the contrarywithout fully explaining the data and reasoning by which weconceive it may be refuted.We shall begin by stating as concisely as possible all thefacts and ingenious arguments by which the theory has beensupported and for this purpose we cannot do better than offerthe reader a rapid sketch of Lamarck's statement of the proofswhich he regards as confirmatory of the doctrine, and which hehas derived partly from the works of his predecessors, and inpart from original investigations.We shall consider his proofs and inferences in the order inwhich they appear to have influenced his mind, and point outsome of the results to which he was led while boldly followingout his principles to their legitimate consequences.The name of species, observes Lamarck, has been usuallyapplied to ^ every collection of similar individuals, producedby other individuals like themselves ** This definition, headmits, is correct, because every living individual bears a veryclose resemblance to those from which it springs. But thisis not all which is usually implied by the term species, for themajority of naturalists agree with Linnaeus in supposing thatall the individuals propagated from one stock have certaindistinguishing characters in common which will never vary,and which have remained the same since the creation of eachspecies.In order to shake this opinion, Lamarck enters upon thefollowing line of argument. The more we advance in theknowledge of the different organized bodies which cover thesurface of the globe, the more our embarrassment increases, todetermine what ought to be regarded as a species, and stillmore how to liknit and distinguish genera. In proportion asour collections are enriched, we see almost every void filledup, and all our lines of separation effaced ; we are reduced toarbitrary determinations, and are sometimes fain to seize uponPhiLZool. toin.L p. 54.B24 Lamarck's theory of the [Ch. i.the slight differences of mere varieties, in order to form charactersfor what we choose to call a species, and sometimes weareinduced to pronounce individuals but slightly differing, andwhich others regard as true species, to be varieties.The greater the abundance of natural objects assembledtogether, the more do we discover proofs that everything passesby insensible shades into something else ; that even the moreremarkable differences are evanescent, and that nature hasfor the most part, left us nothing at our disposal for establishingdistinctions save trifling and, in some respects, puerileparticularities.We find that many genera amongst animals and plants areof such an extent, in consequence of the number of speciesreferred to them, that the study and determination of theselast has become almost impracticable. When the species arearranged in a series, and placed near to each other, with dueregard to their natural affinities, they each differ in so minutea degree from those next adjoining, that they almost melt intoeach other, and are in a manner confounded together. Ifwe see isolated species we may presume the absence of somemore closely connected, and which have not yet been discovered.Already are there genera, and even entire orders,—nay, whole classes, which present an approximation to the stateof things here indicated.If, when species have been thus placed in a regular series,we select one, and then, making a leap over several intermediateones, we take a second, at some distance from the first,these two will, on comparison, be seen to be very dissimilar ;and it is in this manner that every naturalist begins to studythe objects which are at his own door. He then finds it aneasy task to establish generic and specific distinctions ; and itis only when his experience is enlarged, and when he has madehimself master of the intermediate links, that his difficultiesand ambiguities begin. But while we are thus compelled toresort to trifling and minute characters in our attempt to separatespecies, we find a striking disparity between individualsCh. I.] TRANSMUTATION OF SPECIES. 5which we know to have descended from a common stock, andthese newly-acquired peculiarities are regularly transmittedfrom one generation to another, constituting what are calledrcuies.From a great number of facts, continues the author, we learnthat, in proportion as the individuals of one of our specieschange their situation, climate, and manner of living, theychange also, by little and little, the consistence and proportionsof their parts, their form, their faculties, and even their organization,in such a manner, that everything in them comes atlast to participate in the mutations to which they have beenexposed. Even in the same climate a great difference ofsituation and exposure causes individuals to vary ; but if theseindividuals continue to live and to be reproduced under thesame difference of circumstances, distinctions are broughtabout in them which become in some degree essential to theirexistence. In a word, at the end of many successive generations,these individuals, which originally belonged to anotherspecies, are transformed into a new and distinct species *.Thus, for example, if the seeds of a grass, or any otherplant which grows naturally in a moist meadow, be accidentallytransported, first to the slope of some neighbouringhill, where the soil, although at a greater elevation, is dampenough to allow the plant to live ; and if, after having livedthere, and having been several times regenerated, it reachesby degrees the drier and almost arid soil of a mountaindeclivity, it will then, if it succeeds in growing and perpetuatesitself for a series of generations, be so changed thatbotanists who meet with it will regard it as a particular species. The unfavourable climate in this case, deficiency ofnourishment, exposure to the winds, and other causes, giverise to a stunted and dwarfish race, with some organs moredeveloped than others, and having proportions often quitepeculiar.Phil. Zool. torn. i. p. 62. t Ibid.6 Chaos IH Animals AND PLANTS [Ch. I.What nature brings about in a great lapse of time we^oecanonsuddenly by changing the circumstances in whicfa a species hasbeen accustomed to live. All are aware that Stables takenfrom their birth-place and cultivated in gardens, undergochanges which render them no longer recognisable as the sameplants. Many which were naturally hairy become smoothor nearly so ; a great number of such as were creepers andtrailed along the ground rear their stalks and grow erect*Others lose their thorns or asperities; otbos again tom theligneous state which their stem p o s s less ed in hot climatewhere they were indigenous, pass to the herbaceous, and,among them, some which were perennials become mere annuals.So well do botanists know the sects of such changes ofcircumstances, that they are averse to describe species fromgarden specimens, unless they are sure that they have been cultivatedfor a very slxHrt period.< Is not the cultivated wheat (TVilictim soitvuat) asksLamarck, ' a vegetable brought by man into the state in which^ we now see it ? Let any one tell me in what country a similar^ plant grows wild, unless where it has escaped from cultivatedfields ? Where do we find in nature our cabbages, lettuces,< and other culinary vegetables, in the state in which theyappear in our gardens ? Is it not the same in r^ard toa great quantity of animals which domesticity has changedor considerably modified * ? ' Our domestic fowls andpigeons are unlike any wild birds. Our domestic ducks andgeese have lost the faculty of raising themselves into the higherregions of the air, and crossing extensive countries in their flight,like the wild ducks and wild geese from which they wereoriginally derived. A bird which we breed in a cage cannotwhen restored to liberty, fly like others of the same specieswhich have been always free. This small alteration of circumstances,however, has only diminished the power of flight,without modifying the form of any part of the wrings. Butwhen individuals of the same race are retained in captivityPhil. Zool. tom-L p. 227.Ch. I.] CAUSED BY Domestication. 7during a considerable length of time, the form even of theirparts is gradually made to differ especially if climate nourishment,and other circumstances, be also altered.The numerous races of dogs which we have produced bydomesticity are nowhere to be found in a wild state. Innature we should seek in vain for mastiffs, harriers, spanielsgreyhounds and other races, between which the differences aresometimes so great, that they would be readily admitted asspecific between wild animals ; ^ yet all these have sungoriginally from a single race, at first approaching very nearto a wolf, if, indeed, the wolf be not the true type which at^ some period or other was domesticated by manesAlthough important changes in the nature of the placeswhich they inhabit modify the organization of animals as wellas vegetables, yet the former, says Lamarck, require moretime to complete a considerable degree of transmutation andconsequently, we are less sensible of such occurrences. Nextto a diversity of the medium in which animals or plants maylive, the circumstances which have most influence in modifyingtheir organs are differences in exposure, climate, the nature ofthe soil, and other local particulars. These circumstances areasvaried as are the characters of species and, like them, passby insensible shades into each other, there being every intermediategradation between the opposite extremes. But eachlocality remains for a very long time the same, and is alteredBO slowly that we can only become conscious of the reality ofthe change, by consulting geological monuments, by which welearn that the order of things which now reigns in each placehas not always prevailed, and by inference anticipate that itwill not always continue the same ♦.Every considerable alteration in the local circumstances inwhich each race of animals exists, causes a change in their wants,and these new wants excite them to new actions and habits.These actions require the more frequent employment of someparts before but slightly exercised, and then greater developsPhil. ;Sool, torn, i. p. 232.8 JuAmakck's theory of the [Ch. I.ment follows as a consequence of their more frequent use.Other organs no longer in use are impoverished and diminishedin size, nay, are sometimes entirely annihilated, while in theirplace new parts are insensibly produced for the discharge ofnew functions*.We must here interrupt the authors argument, by observingthat no positive fact is cited to exemplify the substitution ofsome entirely new sense, faculty, or organ, in the room of someother suppressed as useless. All the instances adduced goonly to prove that the dimensions and strength of membersand the perfection of certain attributes may, in a long successionof generations, be lessened and enfeebled by disuse;or, on the contrary, be matured and augmented by active exertion,just as we know that the power of scent is feeble in thegreyhound, while its swiftness of pace and its acuteness of sightare remarkable — that the harrier and stag-hound, on the contrary,are comparatively slow in their movements, but excel inthe sense of smelling.We point out to the reader this important chasm in thechain of the evidence, because he might otherwise imaginethat we had merely omitted the illustrations for the sake ofbrevity, but the plain truth is, that there were no examples tobe found ; and when Lamarck talks ' of the efforts of internalsentiment,' * the influence of subtle fluids,' and the * acts oforganization,' as causes whereby animals and plants mayacquire new organs, he gives us names for things, and with adisregard to the strict rules of induction, resorts to fictions, asideal as the * plastic virtue and other phantoms of the middleages.It is evident, that if some well authenticated facts couldhave been adduced to establish one complete step in the processof transformation, such as the appearance, in individualsdescending from a common stock, of a sense or organ entirelynew, and a complete disappearance of some other enjoyed bytheir progenitors, that time alone might then be supposedPhil, ZooL torn. i.p. 234.Ch. I.] TRANSMUTATION OF SPECIES. 9sufficient to bring about any amount of metamorphosis. Thegratuitous assumption, therefore, of a point so vital to thetheory of transmutation, was unpardonable on the part of itsadvocate.But to proceed with the system ; it being assumed as anundoubted fact, that a change of external circumstances maycause one organ to become entirely obsolete, and a new one tobe developed such as never before belonged to the species, thefollowing proposition is announced, which, however staggeringand absurd it may seem, is logically deduced from the assumedpremises. ^^ It is not the organs, or, in other words, the natureand form of the parts of the body of an animal which havegiven rise to its habits, and its particular faculties, but onthe contrary, its habits, its manner of living, and those ofits progenitors have in the course of time determined theform of its body, the number and condition of its organs, inshort, the faculties which it enjoys. Thus otters, beavers,water-fowl, turtles, and frogs, were not made web-footed inorder that they might swim ; but their wants having attractedthem to the water in search of prey, they stretched out the toesof their feet to strike the water and move rapidly along itssurface. By the repeated stretching of their toes, the skinwhich united them at the base acquired a habit of extension,until in the course of time the broad membranes which Howconnect their extremities were formed.In like manner the antelope and the gazelle were notendowed with light agile forms in order that they mightescape by flight from carnivorous animals ; but having beenexposed to the danger of being devoured by lions, tigers, andother beasts of prey, they were compelled to exert themselvesin running with great celerity, a habit which, In the course ofmany generations, gave rise to the peculiar slenderness oftheir legs, and the agility and elegance of their forms.The came leopard was not gifted with a long flexible neckbecause it was destined to live in the interior of Africa, wherethe soil was arid and devoid of herbage, but being reduced by10 Lamarck's thbort of the [cai. i.the nature of that country to support itself on the foliage oflofty trees, it contracted a habit of stretching itself up to reachthe high boughs, until its forelegs became longer than thehinder and its neck so elongated, that it could raise its head tothe height of twenty feet above the ground."Another line of argument is then entered upon, in farthercorroboration of the instability of species. In order it is saidthat individuals should perpetuate themselves unaltered bygeneration, those belonging to one species ought never to allythemselves to those of another : but such sexual unions do takeplace, both among plants and animals; and although theoffspring of such irregular connexions are usually sterile, yetsuch is not always the case. Hybrids have sometimes provedprolific where the disparity between the species was not toogreat; and by this means alone, says Lamarck, varieties maygradually be created by near alliances, which would becomeraces and in the course of time would constitute what we tinaspecies*.But if the soundness of all these arguments and inferencesbe admitted, we are next to inquire, what were the originaltypes of form, organization, and instinct, from which thediversities of character, as now exhibited by animals and plants,have been derived? We know that individuals which aremere varieties of the same species, would, if their pedigreecould be traced back far enough, terminate in a single stock ;so according to the train of reasoning before described, thespecies of a genus, and even the genera of a great family, musthave had a common point of departure. What then was thesingle stem from which so many varieties of form have ramified? Were there many of these, or are we to refer the originof the whole animate creation as the Egyptian priests didthat of the universe, to a single egg ?In the absence of any positive data for framing a theory on,90 obscure a subject the following considerations were deemedIf Importance to guide conjecture.P Phil. Zool p. 64.Ch. I] TRANSMUTATION OP SPECIES. 11In the first place, if we examine the whole series of knownanimals, from one extremity to the other, when they are arrangedin the order of their natural relations, we find that we may passprogressively, or at least with very few interruptions, from beingsof more simple to those of a more compound structure ; and inproportion as the complexity of their organization increases, thenumber and dignity of their faculties increase also. Amongplants a similar approximation to a graduated scale of being siapparent. Secondly it appears from geological observations,that plants and animals of more simple organization existed onthe globe before the appearance of those of more compoundstructure, and the latter were successively formed at laterperiods : each new race being more fully developed than themost perfect of the preceding era.Of the truth of the last*mentioned geological theory, Lamarckseems to have been fully persuaded ; and he also shews that hewas deeply impressed with a belief prevalent amongst the oldernaturalists, that the primeval ocean invested the wholeplanet long after it became the habitation of living beings,and thus he was inclined to assert the priority of thetypes of marine animals to those of the terrestrial, and tofancy, for example, that the testacea of the ocean existed first,until some of them, by gradual evolution, were improved intothose inhabiting the land.These speculative views had already been, in a great degree,anticipated by Delam6therie in his Teliamed, and by severalmodern writers, so that the tables were completely turned onthe philosophers of antiquity, with whom it was a receivedmaxim, that created things were always most perfect when theycame first from the hands of their Maker, and that there wasa tendency to progressive deterioration in sublunary thingswhen left to themselves —I omnia attilaejus mere, ac retro sublapsa referred.So deeply was the faith of the ancient schools of philosophyimbued with this doctrine, that Xq check ibis viniyersAl proneLamarck's theory of the [ch. i»ness to degeneracy, nothing less than the re-intervention ofthe Deity was thought adequate; and it was held, that therebythe order, excellence, and pristine energy of the moral andphysical world had been repeatedly restored.But when the possibility of the indefinite modification ofindividuals descending from common parents was onceassumed, as also the geological generalization respecting theprogressive development of organic liCe, it was natural thatthe ancient dogma should be rejected, or rather reversed;and that the most simple and imperfect forms and facultiesshould be conceived to have been the originals whence all otherswere developed. Accordingly, in conformity to these views, inertmatter was supposed' to have been first endowed with life ; untilin the course of ages, sensation was superadded to mere vitality :sight, hearing, and the other senses, were afterwards acquired ;and then instinct and the mental faculties ; until, finally, byvirtue of the tendency of things to progressive improvementthe irrational was developed into the rational.The reader, however, will immediately perceive, that if allthe higher orders of plants and animals were thus supposed tobe comparatively modem, and to have been derived in a longseries of generations from those of more simple conformation,some further hypothesis became indispensable, in order to explainwhy, after an indefinite lapse of ages, there were still somany beings of the simplest structure. Why have the majorityof existing creatures remained stationary throughoutthis long succession of epochs, while others have made suchprodigious advances ? Why are there still such multitudes ofinfusoria and polypes, or of conserves and other cryptogamicplants? Why, moreover, has the process of developmentacted with such unequal and irregular force on those classes ofbeings which have been greatly perfected, so that there arewide chasms in the series ; gaps so enormous, that Lamarckfairly admits we can never expect to fill them up by futurediscoveries ?The following hypothesis was provided to meet these object*Ch. I.] TRANSMUTATION OF SPECIES. 13tons. Nature, we are told, is not an intelligence, nor theDeity, but a delegated power — a mere instrument — a pieceof mechanism acting by necessity— an order of things constitutedby the Supreme Being, and subject to laws whichare the expressions of his will. This nature is obliged toproceed gradually in all her operations ; she cannot produceanimals and plants of all classes at once, but must alwaysbegin by the formation of the most simple kinds; andout of them elaborate the more compound adding to themsuccessively, different systems of organs, and multiplyingmore and more their number and energy.This Nature is daily engaged in the formation of the elementaryrudiments of animal and vegetable existence, which correspondto what the ancients termed spontaneous generations.She is always beginning anew, day by day, the work of creation,by forming monads, or * rough draughts ' (debauches), which arethe only living things she ever gives birth to directly.There are distinct primary rudiments of plants and animals,and probably of each of the great divisions of the animal andvegetable kingdoms *-. These are gradually developed into thehigher and more perfect classes by the slow, but unceasingagency of two influential principles: first, the tendency toprogressive advancement in organization, accompanied bygreater dignity in instinct, intelligence, &c. ; secondly, the forceof external circumstances or of variations in the physical conditionof the earth, or the mutual relations of plants and animals.For as species spread themselves gradually over theglobe, they are exposed from time to time to variations inclimate, and to changes in the quantity and quality of theirfood ; they meet with new plants and animals which assist orretard their development, by supplying them with nutriment,or destroying their foes. The nature also of each locality isin itself fluctuating, so that even if the relation of otheranimals and plants were invariable, the habits and organizationAnimaux dans Vert, torn. i. p. 56, introduction.14 COXTBB8IOX OF THE OBA3fOH>inrASG [Ck I.of species would be modified by the influence of hoed rerola^tons.Nowe if the first of these riddles, the iendemey to progranite development, were left to exert itself with perfectfreedonii it would gire rise, says Lamarck in the course «ifages, to a graduated scale of being, where the most insensibletradition might be traced from the simplest to the most compoundstructure, from the humblest to the most exalted dsgndof intelligence. But in consequence of the perpetual interferenceof the external causes before mentioned, this regularorder is greatly interfered with, and an approximation only tosuch a state of things is exhibited by the animate creatiixi,the progress of some, races hang retarded by unfiivouraldejand that of others moderated by favourable, combinations ofcircumstances. Hence all kinds of anomalies interrupt thecontinuity of the jean, and chasms, into which whole genera orfamilies might be inserted, are seen to separate the nearestexisting portions of the series.Such is the machinery of the Lamarckian system ; but ourreaders will hardly, perhaps, be able to form a perfect oono^-tion of so complicated a piece of mechanism, aimless we exhibitit in motion, and shew in what manner it can work out, underthe author's guidance, all the extraordinary effects which webehold in the present state of the animate creation. We hareonly space ter exhibiting a small part of the entire p process bywhich a complete metamorphosis is achieved, and shall, therefore,omit the mode whereby, after a countless succession ofgenerations, a small gelatinous body is transformed into anoak or an ape. We pass on at once to the last grand step inthe progressive scheme, whereby the orang-outang, havingbeen already evolved out of a monad, is made slowly to attainthe attributes and dignity of man.One of the races of quadrumanous animals which hadreached the highest state of perfection, lost, by constraint ofcircumstances, (concerning the exact nature of which traditionis unfortunately silent,) the habit of climbing trees, and ofCh. X] INTO THE HUMAN SPECIES* 16hanging on by grasping the boughs with their feet as withhands. The individuals of this race being obliged for a longseries of generations to use their feet exclusively for walking,and ceasing to employ their hands as feet were transformedinto bimanous animals and what before were thumbs becamemere toes, no separation being required when their feet wereused solely for walking* Having acquired a habit of holdingthemselves upright their legs and feet assumed insensibly aconformation fitted to support them in an erect attitude, till atlast these animals could no long go on all fours without muchinconvenience*The Angola orange Simia troglodytes, Linn, is the mostperfect of animals much more so than the Indian cn*ang,Simia Satyres which has been called the orang^^outang,although both are very inferior to man in corporeal powersand intelligence. These animals frequently hold themselvesupright, but their organization has not yet been sufficientlymodified to sustain them habitually in this attitude, so thatthe standing posture is very uneasy to them. When the Indianorang is compelled to take flight ftotn pressing danger he immediatelyfils down upon all fours, shewing dearly that thiswas the original position of the animal. Even in man, whoseorganization, in the course of a long series of generations, hasadvanced so much farther, the upright posture is fatiguingand can only be supported for a limited time, and by aid ofthe contraction of many muscles. If the vertebral columnformed the axis of the human body, and supported the headand all the other parts in equilibrium, then might the uprightposition be a state of repose ; but as the human head does notarticulate in the centre of gravity; as the chest, belly, and otherparts, press almost entirely forward with their whole weightyand as the Vertebral column reposes upon an oblique base, awatchful activity is required to prevent the body from falling.Children which have large heads and prominent bellies canhardly walk at the end even of two yeai-s, and their frequent16 COXTEftSIOX OF THE OBAN6-OVTAN6 [Cll. I.tumbles indicate the natural tendency in man to resume thequadrupedal state.Now, when so much progress had been made by the quadrateanimals before mentioned, that they could hold themselveshabitually in an erect attitude, and were accustomed toa wide range of vision, and ceased to use their jaws for fighting,and tearing, or for clipping herbs for food, their snout becamegradually shorter, their incisor teeth became vertical, and thefatal angle grew more open.Among other ideas which the natural tendency to perfectionengendered, the desire of ruling suggested itself, and this racesucceeded at length in getting the better of the other animals,and made themselves masters of all those spots on the surfaceof the globe which best suited them. They drove out theanimals which approached nearest to them in organization andintelligence, and which were in a condition to dispute withthem the good things of this world, forcing them to takerefuge in deserts, woods and wildernesses, where their multiplicationwas checked, and the progressive development oftheir faculties retarded, while in the mean time the dominantrace spread itself in every direction, and lived in large companieswhere new wants were successively created, excitingthem to industry, and gradually perfecting their means andfaculties.In the supremacy and increased intelligence acquired by theruling race, we seigi an illustration of the natural tendency ofthe organic ijorld to grow more perfect, and in their influencein repressing the advance of others, an example of one of thosedisturbing causes before enumerated, that ybrce of external circumstanceswhich causes such wide chasms in the regular seriesof animated beings.When the individuals of the dominant race became verynumerous, their ideas greatly increased in number, and theyfelt the necessity of communicating them to each other, andof augmenting and varying the signs proper for the communi.I.] INTO THE HUMAN SPECIES. 17xii cation of ideas. Meanwhile the inferior quadrumanousanimals, although most of them were gregarious, acquiredno new ideas being persecuted and restless in the deserts,and obliged to fly and conceal themselves so that theyconceived no new wants. Such ideas as they already hadremained unaltered, and they could dispense with the com- .medication of the greater part of these. To make themselves,therefore, understood by their fellows, required merelya few movements of the body or limbs — whistling, and theuttering of certain cries varied by the inflexions of the voice.On the contrary, the individuals of the ascendant race, animatedwith a desire of interchanging their ideas, which becamemore and more numerous, were prompted to multiply the meansof communication and were no longer satisfied with mere pantomimicsigns, nor even with all the possible inflexions of thevoice, but made continual efforts to acquire the power ofuttering articulate sounds, employing a few at first, but afterwardsvarying and perfecting them according to the increaseof their wants. The habitual exercise of their throat, tongueand lips, insensibly modified the conformation of these organs,until they became fitted for the faculty of speech*.In effecting this mighty change, " the exigencies of the individualswere the sole agents, they gave rise to efforts, and theorgans proper for articulating sounds were developed by theirhabitual employment." Hence, in this peculiar race, theorigin of the admirable faculty of speech ; hence also the diversityof languages, since the distance of places where the individualscomposing the race established themselves, soon favouredthe corruption of conventional signs •}•.Lamarck's Phil. Zool., torn. i. p. 356. f Ibid. p. 357.Vol. II.CHAPTER II.Recapitulation of the arguments in favour of the theory of transmutation of species^^^Their insufficiency — ^^The difficulty of discriminating species mainly attributableto a defective knowledge of their history-some mere varieties possiblymore distinct than certain individuals of distinct species — variability in aspecies consistent with a belief that the limits of deviation are fixed — No findsof transmutation au^^Thenticated — Varieties of ^^The Dog — ^^The Dog and Wolfdistinct species — Mummies of various animals from Egypt identical in characterwith living individuals — Seeds and plants from the Egyptian tombModifications produced in plants by agriculture and gardening.The theory of the transmutation of species, considered in thelast chapter, has met with some degree of favour from manynaturalists, from their desire to dispense, as far as possiblewith the repeated intervention of a First Cause, as oftenas geological monuments attest the successive appearance ofnew races of animals and plants, and the extinction of thosepre-existing. But, independently of a predisposition to account,if possible, for a series of changes in the organic world, by theregular action of secondary causes, we have seen that manyperplexing difficulties present themselves to one who attemptsto establish the nature and the reality of the specific character.And if once there appears ground of reasonable doubt, inregard to the constancy of species, the amount of transformationwhich they are capable of undergoing, may seem toresolve itself into a mere question of the quantity of timeassigned to the past duration of animate existence.Before we enter upon our reasons for rejecting Lamarck'shypothesis, we shall recapitulate, in a few words, the phenomena,and the whole train of thought, by which we conceiveit to have been suggested, and which have gained for this andanalogous theories, both in ancient and modern times, a considerablenumber of votaries.In the first place, the various groups into which plants andCfa. 11.] Permanence OF THIS SPECIFIC CHARACTER. 19animals may be thrown, seem almost invariably, to a beginner,to be so natural, that he is usually convinced at first, as wasLinnaeus to the last, ^^ that genera are as much founded innature as the species which compose them *." When, by examiningthe numerous intermediate gradations, the student findsall lines of demarcation to be in most instances obliterated,even where they at first appeared most distinct, he grows moreand more sceptical as to the real existence of genera, and finallyregards them as mere arbitrary and artificial signs, inventedlike those which serve to distinguish the heavenly constellationsfor the convenience of classification, and having as little pretensionsto reality.Doubts are then engendered in his mind as to whetherspecies may not also be equally unreal. The student isprobably first struck with the phenomenon, that some individualsare made to deviate widely from the ordinary typeby the force of peculiar circumstances, and with the stillmore extraordinary fact, that the newly-acquired peculiaritiesare ffuthfuUy transmitted to the offspring. How far, he asks,may such variations extend in the course of indefinite periodsof time, and during great vicissitudes in the physical conditionof the globe ? His growing incertitude is at first checked bythe reflection, that nature has forbidden the intermixture of thedescendants of distinct original stocks, or has, at least, entailedsterility on their offspring, thereby preventing their beingconfounded together, and pointing out that a multitude of distincttypes must have been created in the beginning, and musthave remained pure and uncorrupted to this day.Relying on this general law, he endeavours to solve each difficultproblem by direct experiment, until he is again astounded bythe phenomenon of a prolific hybrid, and still more by an exampleof a hybrid perpetuating itself throughout several generationsin the vegetable world. He then feels himself reduced to thedilemma of choosing between two alternatives, either to rejectthe test, or to declare that the two species, from the union ofBul Smitbf s Introduction to Bonny.so PERM ANESCB OF THE SPECIFIC CHARACTER. [Oh. II.which the fruitful progeny has sprung, were mere varieties.If he prefer the latter, he is compelled to question the realityof the distinctness of all other supposed species which differ nomore than the parents of such prolific hybrids ; for althoughhe may not be enabled immediately to procure, in all suchinstances, a fruitful offspring, yet experiments show, that afterrepeated failures the union of two recognized species may atlast, under very favourable circumstances give birth to a fertileprogeny. Such circumstances, therefore, the naturalist mayconceive to have occurred again and again, iu the course of agreat lapse of ages.His first opinions are now fairly unsettled, and every stayat which he has caught has given way one after another ; heis in danger of falling into any new and visionary doctrinewhich may be presented to him ; for he now regards every partof the animate creation as void of stability, and in a state ofcontinual flux. In this mood he encounters the Geologist, whorelates to him how there have been endless vicissitudes in theshape and structure of organic beings in former ages — ^liow theapproach to the present system of things has been gradual —that there has been a progressive development of organizationsubservient to the purposes of life, from the most simple to themost complex state — that the appearance of man is the lastphenomenon in a long succession of events — and, finally, that aseries of physical revolutions can be traced in the inorganicworld, coeval and coextensive with those of organic nature.These views seem immediately to confirm all his preconceiveddoubts as to the stability of the specific character, and hethinks he can discern an inseparable connexion between a seriesof changes in the inanimate world, and the capability of speciesto be indefinitely modified by the influence of external circumstances.Henceforth his speculations know no definite bounds ;he gives the rein to conjecture, and fancies that the outwardform, internal structure, instinctive faculties, nay, that reasonitself, may have been gradually developed from some of thesimplest states of existence, — that all animals, that man him*Ch. II.] PERMANENCE OP THE SPECIFIC CHARACTER. 21self and the irrational beings, may have had one commonorigin ; that all may be part? of one continuous and progressivescheme of development from the most imperfect to themore complex ; in fine, he renounces his belief in the highgenealogy of his species, and looks forward, as if in compensation,to the future perfectibility of man in his physical, intellectual,and moral attributes.Let us now proceed to consider what is defective in evidence,and what fallacious in reasoning, in the grounds of thesestrange conclusions. Blumenbach judiciously observes, " thatno general rule can be laid down for determining the distinctnessof species, as there is no particular class of characterswhich can serve as a criterion. In each case we must beguided by analogy and probability .'** The multitude, in fact,and complexity of the proofs to be weighed, is so great, thatwe can only hope to obtain presumptive evidence, and wemust, therefore, be the more careful to derive our generalviews as much as possible from those observations where thechances of deception are least. We must be on our guardnot to tread in the footsteps of the naturalists of the middleages, who believed the doctrine of spontaneous generation tobe applicable to all those parts of the animal and vegetableKingdoms which they least understood, in direct contradictionto the analogy of all the parts best known to them ; and who,when at length they found that insects and cryptogamous plantswere also propagated from eggs and seeds, still persisted inretaining their old prejudices respecting the industry animalculesand other minute beings, the generation of which hadnot then been demonstrated by the microscope to be governedby the same laws.Lamarck has indeed attempted to raise an argument in favourof his system, out of the very confusion which has arisen in thestudy of some orders of animals and plants, in consequence ofthe slight shades of difference which separate the new speciesdiscovered within the last half century. That the embarrassmentof those who attempt to classify and distinguish the newCAUSES OP THB Difficulty [Ch. II.acquisitions poured in sadi multitudes into our museums,should increase with the augmentation of their numb* is quitenatural ; for to obviate this it is not enough that our powers ofdiscrimination should keep pace with the increase of the objects,but we ought to possess greats opportunities of studying eachanimal and fdant in aU stages of its growth, and to know profoundlytheir history, their habits and physiological characters,throughout several generations. For, in proportion as the seriesof known animals grows OKire complete, none can doubt thatthere is a nearer approximation to a graduated scale of being ;and thus the most dowdy allied species will possess a greaternumber of characters in common.But, in point of fact, our new accusations consist, moreand more as we advance, of specimens brought from foreignand often very distant and barbarous countries. A largeproportion laye never even been seen alive by scientificinquirers. Instead of haying specimens of the young, theadult, and the aged individuals of each sex, and possessingmeans of investigating the anatomical structure, the peculiarhabits and instincts of each, what is usually the state of ourinformation ? A ogle specimen, pa4iaps, of a dried plant) orastuffed bird or quadruped ; a shell without the soft parts ofthe animal ; an insect in one stage of its numerous transformations;these are the scanty and imperfect data, which thenaturalist possesses. Such information may enable us toseparate species which stand at a considerable distance fromeach other; but we laye no right to expect anything but difficultand ambiguity, if we attempt, from sadi imperfect opportunities,to obtain distinctive marks f<»r dining the charactersof species, which are closely related.If Lamarck could introduce so much ctftain^ and precisioninto the deification of several thousand species of recent andfossil shdls, notwithstanding the extreme remoteness of theorganisation <if these animals from the type of those vertAratBdspecies which are best known, and in the absence of so manycf tfe flying inhafaitaiils of didb» wie are led to firm an cxal^Gh. n.] OF DISCRIillNATINa SPECIES.conception of the degree of exactness to which specific distinctionsare capable of being carried, rather than to call inquestion their reality.When our data are so defective, the most acute naturalistmust expect to be sometimes at fault, and, like the novice, tooverlook essential points of difference, passing unconsciouslyfrom one species to another, until, like one who is borne alongin a current, he is astonished, on looking back, at observingthat he has reached a point so remote from that whence he setout.It is by no means improbable that when the series of speciesof certain genera is very full, they may be found to differ lesswidely from each other, than do the mere varieties or races ofcertain species. If such a fact could be established it wouldby no means overthrow our confidence in the realty of species,although it would certainly diminish the chance of our obtainingcertainty in our results.It is almost necessary indeed, to suppose, that varieties willdiffer in some cases, more decidedly than some species, if weadmit that there is a graduated scale of being, and assume thatthe following laws prevail in the economy of the animate creation: — first, that the organization of individuals is capable ofbeing modified to a limited extent by the force of externalcauses ; secondly that these modifications are, to a certain extent,transmissible to their offspring ; thirdly, that there arefixed limits beyond which the descendants from commonparents can never deviate from a certain type; fourthly, thateach species springs from one original stock, and can never -be permanently confounded, by intermixing with the progenyof any other stock 5 fifthly, that each species shall endure foraconsiderable period of time. Now if we assume, for the present,these rules hypothetically, let us see what consequencesmay naturally be expected to result.We must suppose, that when the Author of Nature createsan animal or plant, all the possible circumstances in which itsdescendants are destined to live are foreseen* and that an24 CAUSES OF VARIABILITY [Ch. II.organization is conferred upon it which will enable the speciesto perpetuate itself and survive under all the varying circumstancesto which it must be inevitably exposed. Now therange of variation of circumstances will differ essentially inalmost every case. Let us take for example any one of themost influential conditions of existence, such as temperatureIn some extensive districts near the equator , the thermometermight never vary throughout several thousand centuriesfor more than ZO^ Fahrenheit ; so that if a plant or animalbe provided with an organization fitting it to endure sucha range, it may continue on the globe for that immenseperiod, although every individual might be liable at once to becut ofi* by the least possible excess of heat or cold beyond thedeterminate quantity. But if a species be placed in one of thetemperate zones, and have a constitution conferred on itcapable of supporting a similar range of temperature only, itwill inevitably perish before a single year has passed away.The same remark might be applied to any other condition,as food for example; it may be foreseen that thesupply will be regular throughout indefinite periods in onepart of the world, and in another very precarious and fluctuatingboth in kind and quantity. Different qualificationsmay be required for enabling species to live for a considerabletime under circumstances so changeable. If, then, temperatureand food be among those external causes, which according tocertain laws of animal and vegetable physiology modify theorganization, forti, or faculties of individuals, we instantlyperceive that the degrees of variability from a commonstandard must differ widely in the two cases above supposed,since there is a necessity of accommodating a species in one caseto a much greater latitude of circumstances than in the other.If it be a law, for instance, that scanty sustenance shouldcheck those individuals in their growth which are enabledto accommodate themselves to privations of this kind, andthat a parent prevented in this manner from attaining thesize proper to its species should produce a dwarfish offspring,Ch. 11.} IN THE SAME SPECIES. 35a stunted race will arise, as is remarkably exemplified in somevarieties of the horse and dog. The difference of stature insome races of dogs in comparison to others, is as one to five inlinear dimensions, making a difference of a hundred-fold involume*. Now there is good reason to believe that species in'general are by no means susceptible of existing under a diversityof circumstances, which may give rise to such a disparity insize, and consequently, there will be a multitude of distinct species,of which no two adult individuals can ever depart so widelyfrom a certain standard of dimensions as the mere varieties ofcertain other species, — the dog for instance. Now we have onlyto suppose that what is true of size, may also hold in regard tocolour and many other attributes, and it will at once followthat the degree of possible discordance between varieties of thesame species, may in certain cases exceed the utmost disparitywhich can even arise between two individuals of manydistinct species.The same remarks may hold true in regard to instincts; forif it be foreseen that one species will have to encounter a greatvariety of foes, it may be necessary to arm it with greatcunning and circumspection, or with courage or other qualitiescapable of developing themselves on certain occasions; suchfor example as those migratory instincts which are so remarkablyexhibited at particular periods, after they have remaineddormant for many generations. The history and habitsof one variety of such a species may often differ more considerablyfrom some other than those of many distinct specieswhich have no such latitude of accommodation to circumstances.Lamarck has somewhat misstated the idea commonly entertainedof a species, for it is not true that naturalists in generalassume that the organization of an animal or plant remainsabsolutely constant, and that it can never vary in any ofits parts. All must be aware that circumstances influence thehabits and that the habits may alter the state of the parts andCuvier, iso. Ftelim.^ p. 128^ sixth edition.t6 BXTBMT OP KNOWN [Ch. U.organs '*'. But the difference of opinion relates to the extentto which these modifications of the habits and organs of aparticular species may be carried.Now let us first inquire what positive facts can be adducedin the history of known species, to establish a great and permanentamount of change in the form, structure, or instinctof individuals descending from some common stock. Thebest authenticated examples of the extent to which species canbe made to vary, may be looked for in the history of domesticatedanimals and cultivated plants. It usually happens thatthose species, both of the animal and vegetable kingdom, whichhave the greatest pliability of organization, those which aremost capable of accommodating themselves to a great varietyof new circumstances, are most serviceable to man. Theseonly can be carried by him into different climates, and can havetheir properties or instincts variously diversified by differencesof nourishment and habits. If the resources of a species be solimited, and its habits and faculties be of such a confined andlocal character, that it can only flourish in a few particularspots, it can rarely be of great utility.We may consider, therefore, that in perfecting the arts ofdomesticating animals and cultivating plants, mankind have firstselected those species which have the most flexible frames andconstitutions, and have then been engaged for ages in conductinga series of experiments, with much patience and at great costto ascertain what may be the greatest possible deviation from acommon type which can be elicited in these extreme cases.The modifications produced in the different races of dogs,exhibit the influence of man in the most striking point of view.These animals have been transported into every climate, andplaced in every variety of circumstances; they have been made,as a modern naturalist observes, the servant, the companionthe guardian, and the intimate friend of man, and the power ofa superior genius has had a wonderful influence, not only on« Phil Zool tom i p. 866*Gh. Hi] TARIABlLtn IN it>ECI«fl. 27their finns) but on their manners and intelligence *. Differentraces have undergone remarkable changes in the quantityand colour of their clothing: the dogs of Guinea arealmost naked, while those of the Arctic circle are covered with,a warm coat both of hair and wool, which enables them tobear the most intense cold without inconvenience. There aredifferences also of another kind no less remarkable, as in size,the length of their muzzles, and the convexity of their foreheads.But if we look for some of those essential changes whichwould be required to lend even the semblance of a foundationfor the theory of Lamarck, respecting the growth ofnew organs and the gradual obliteration of others, we findnothing of the kind. For in all these varieties of the dog,says Cuvier, the relation of the bones with each other remainessentially the same; the form of the teeth never changes inany perceptible degree, except that in some individuals, oneadditional false grinder occasionally appears, sometimes onthe one side and sometimes on the other *|-. The greatestdeparture from a common type, and it constitutes the maximumof variation as yet known in the animal kingdom, isexemplified ih those races of dogs which have a supernumerarytoe on the hind foot with the corresponding tarsalbones, a variety analogous to one presented by six-fingeredfamilies of the human race j;.Lamarck has thrown out as a conjecture, that the wolf mayhave been the original of the dog, but he has adduced nodata to bear out such an hypothesis. *^ The wolf'* observesDr. Prichard, " and the dog differ, not only with respect totheir habits and instincts, which in the brute creation are veryuniform within the limits of one species ; but some differenceshave also been pointed out in their internal organization,Dureau de la Malle, Ann. des. Sci. Nat. torn. xxi. p; 63. Sept. 1830.t Disc. PreL,p. 129, sixth edition. t ibid.S8 EGYPTIAN MUMMIES IDENTICAL [Ch. ILparticularly in the structure of a part of the intestinalcanal."It is well known that the horse, the ox the boar and otherdomestic animals, which have been introduced into SouthAmerica, and have run wild in many parts, have entirely lostall marks' of domesticity, and have reverted to the originalcharacters of their species. But the dog has also become wild inCuba, Hayti, and in all the Caribbean islands. In the courseof the seventeenth century they hunted in packs from twelveto fifty, or more in number, and fearlessly attacked herds ofwild-boars and other animals. It is natural, therefore toenquire to what form they reverted ? Now they are said bymany travellers to have resembled very nearly the shepherd'sdog ; but it is certain that they were never turned into wolves*They were extremely savage, and their ravages appear to havebeen as much dreaded as those of wolves, but when any oftheir whelps were caught, and brought from the woods to thetowns, they grew up in the most perfect submission to man.As the advocates of the theory of transmutation trust muchto the slow and insensible changes which time may work, theyare accustomed to lament the absence of accurate descriptionsand figures of particular animals and plants, handed downfrom the earliest periods of history, such as might have affordeddata for comparing the condition of species at two periodsconsiderably remote. But fortunately, we are in some measureindependent of such evidence, for by a singular accident, thepriests of Egypt have bequeathed to us, in their cemeteries,that information, which the museums and works of the Greekphilosophers have failed to transmit.For the careful investigation of these documents, we aregreatly indebted to the skill and diligence of those naturalistswho accompanied the French armies during their brief occupationof Egypt ; that conquest of four years, from which wemay date the improvement of the modem Egyptians in the artsPrichard, Phys. Hist, of Mankind, vol i. p. 96, who cites Professor GiildenstSldt.Ch. II.l WITH SPECIES STILL LIVING. 29and sciences, and the rapid progress which has been made oflate in our knowledge of the arts and sciences of their remotepredecessors. Instead of wasting their whole time as somany preceding travellers had done in exclusively collectinghuman mummies, M. Geoffrey and his associates examineddiligently, and sent home great numbers of embalmed bodiesof consecrated animals, such as the bull, the dog, the cat, theape, the ichneumon, the crocodile, and the ibis.To those who have never been accustomed to connect thefacts of Natural History with philosophical speculations, whohave never raised their conceptions of the end and importof such studies beyond the mere admiration of isolated andbeautiful objects, or the exertion of skill in detecting specificdifferences, it will seem incredible that amidst the din of arms,and the stirring excitement of political movements, so muchenthusiasm could have been felt in regard to these preciousremains.In the official report drawn up by the Professors of theMuseum at Paris, on the value of these objects, there aresome eloquent passages which may appear extravagant, unlesswe reflect how fully these naturalists could appreciate the bearingof the facts thus brought to light on the past history of theglobe,*' It seems'* say they, " as if the superstition of the ancientEgyptians had been inspired by Nature, with a view of transmittingto after ages a monument of her history. That extraordinaryand whimsical people, by embalming with so much carethe brutes which were the objects of their stupid adoration, haveleft us, in their sacred grottoes, cabinets of zoology almost complete.The climate has conspired with the art of embalming topreserve the bodies from corruption, and we can now assureourselves by our own eyes what was the state of a great numberof species three thousand years ago. We can scarcely restrainthe transports of our imagination, on beholding thus preservedwith their minutest bones, with the smallest portions of theirskin, and in every particular most perfectly recognizable, many80 BeTPTIAN UVUUJMB lOBMTIOAL {CSi. n.an animal which at Thebes or Memphis, two dr three thousandyears ago, had its own priests and altars *."Among the Egyptian mummies thus procured were not onlythose of numerous wild quadrupeds, birds, and reptiles, but,what was perhaps of still greater importance in deciding thegreat question under discussion, there were the mutinies ofdomestic animals, among which those above mentioned, thebull the dog, and the cat, were frequent. Now such was theconformity of the whole of these species to those now living,that there Was no more difference, says Cuvier, between themthan between the human mummies and the embalmed bodiesof men of the present day. Yet some of these animals havesince that period been transported by man to almost everyvariety of climate, and forced to accommodate their habits tonew circumstances, as far as their nature would permit. Thecat, for example, has been carried over the whole earth, and,within the last three centuries, has been naturalized in everypart of the new worlds from the cold regions of Canada to thetropical plains of Guiana ; yet it has scarcely undergone anyperceptible mutation, and is still the same animal which washeld sacred by the Egyptians.Of the ox, undoubtedly there are many very distinct races ;but the bull Apis, which was led in solemn processions by theEgyptian priests, did not differ from some of those now living.The black cattle that have run wild in America, where therewere many peculiarities in the climate not to be found, perhaps,in any part of the old world, and where scarcely a single plantonwhich they fed was of precisely the same species, instead ofaltering their form and habits, have actually reverted to theexact likeness of the aboriginal wild cattle of Europe.In answer to the arguments drawn from the Egyptian mummies,Lamarck said that they were identical with their livingdescendants in the same country, because the climate andAnn. du Museum, desist. Nat., torn. i. p. 234. 1802. The reptalt&u wereMM. Cuvier, Lac^pede, and Lamarck.Ch. II.] WITH species STILL LIVING. 81physician geography of the banks of the Nile have remainedunaltered for the last thirty centuries. But why, we ask,have other individuals of these species retained the same charactersin so many different quarters of the globe, where theclimate and many other conditions are so varied ?The evidence derived from the Egyptian monuments wasnot confined to the animal kingdom ; the fruits, seeds, andother portions of twenty different plants, were faithfully preservedin the same manner ; and among these the commonwheat was procured by Neville, from closed vessels in thesepulchres of the kings, the grains of which retained not onlytheir form, but even their colour, so effectual has proved theprocess of embalming with bitumen in a dry and equableclimate. No difference could be detected between this wheatand that which now grows in the East and elsewhere, andsimilar identification were made in regard to all the otherplants.And here we may observe, that there is an obvious answerto Lamarck's objection *, that the botanist cannot point outa country where the common wheat grows wild, unless inplaces where it may have been derived from neighbouringcultivation. All naturalists are well aware that the geographicaldistribution of a great number of species is extremelylimited, and that it was to be expected that every useful plantshould first be cultivated successfully in the country where itwas indigenous, and that, probably, every station which it partiallyoccupied, when growing wild, would be selected by theagriculturist as best suited to it when artificially increased.Palestine has been conjectured, by a late writer on the Cereals,to have been the original habitation of wheat and barley, asupposition which appears confirmed by Hebrew and Egyptiantraditions, and by tracing the migrations of the worship ofCeres, as indicative of the migrations of the plant f.If we are to infer that some one of the wild grasses hies been• Phil. Zool, torn, i., p. 227.f L'Oxigm«etlaPatriedMG6r6ale8,&c.A]ia.dMSci,Nat.^tom.ix,,p.61f82 VARIETIES IN PLANTS [Qi. II.transformed into the common wheat, and that some animal ofthe genus canis still unreclaimed, has been metamorphosedinto the dog, merely because we cannot find the domestic dog,or the cultivated wheat, in a state of nature, we may be nextcalled upon to make similar admissions in regard to the camel ;for it seems very doubtful whether any race of this species ofquadruped is now wild.But if agriculture, it will be said, does not supply examplesof extraordinary changes of form and organization, the horticulturistcan, at least, appeal to facts which may confoundthe preceding train of reasoning. The crab has been transformedinto the apple ; the sloe into the plum : flowers havechanged their colour and become double ; and these new characterscan be perpetuated by seed, — a bitter plant with wavysea-green leaves has been taken from the sea-side where it grewlike wild charlock, has been transplanted into the garden, lost itssaltness, and has been metamorphosed into two distinct vegetablesas unlike each other as is each to the parent plant — thered cabbage and the cauliflower. These, and a multitude ofanalogous facts, are undoubtedly among the wonders of nature,and attest more strongly perhaps, the extent to which speciesmay be modified, than any examples derived from the animalkingdom. But in these cases we find, that we soon reach certainlimits, beyond which we are unable to cause the individuals,descending from the same stock, to vary ; while, on theother hand, it is easy to show that these extraordinary varietiescould seldom arise, and could never be perpetuated in a wildstate for many generations, under any imaginable combinationof accidents. They may be regarded as extreme cases broughtabout by human interference, and not as phenomena whichindicate a capability of indefinite modification in the naturalworld.The propagation of a plant by buds or grafts, and by cuttings,is obviously a mode which nature does not employ ; andthis multiplication, as well as that produced by roots and layers,seems merely to operate as an extension of the life of anindivi-Ch. til] PRODUCED BV HORTICULTURE. 33dual, and not as a reproduction of the species, as happens byseed. All plants increased by the former means retain preciselythe peculiar qualities of the individual to which theyowe their origin, and, like an individual, they have only adeterminate existence ; in some cases longer and in othersshorter *. It seems now admitted by horticulturists, thatnone of our garden varieties of fruit are entitled to be consideredstrictly permanent, but that they wear out after atime f ; and we are thus compelled to resort again to seeds ;in which case, there is so decided a tendency in the seedlingsto revert to the original type, that our utmost skill is sometimesbaffled in attempting to recover the desired variety.The different races of cabbages afford, as we have admitted,an astonishing example of deviation from a common type ; butwe can scarcely conceive them to have originated, much less tohave lasted for several generations, without the intervention ofman. It is only by strong manures that these varieties havebeen obtained, and. in poorer soils they instantly degenerate.If, therefore, we suppose in a state of nature the seed of thewild Brassica oleracea to have been wafted from the sea-sideto some spot enriched by the dung of animals, and to have therebecome a cauliflower, it would soon diffuse its seed to somecomparatively steril soils around, and the offspring wouldrelapse to the likeness of the parent stock, like some individualswhich may now be seen growing on the cornice of oldLondon bridge.But if we go so far as to imagine the soil, in the spotfirst occupied, to be constantly manured by herds of wildanimals, so as to continue as rich as that of a garden, still thevariety could not be maintained, because we know that each ofthese races is prone to fecundate others, and gardeners arecompelled to exert the utmost diligence to prevent cross-breeds.The intermixture of the pollen of varieties growing in thepoorer soil around, would soon destroy the peculiar charactersSmith's introduction to Botany, p. 138. Edit. 1807.t See Mr. Knight's Observations, Hort. Trans.; vol. ii., p. 160.Vol. II. D84 VARIETIES IN PLANTS [Ch. II.of the race which occupied the highly-manured tract ; for, ifthese accidents so continually happen in spite of us, amongthe culinary varieties, it is easy to see how soon this causemight obliterate every marked singularity in a wild state.Besides, it is well-known that although the pampered raceswhich we rear in our gardens for use or ornament, mayoften be perpetuated by seed, yet they rarely produce seedin such abundance, or so prolific in quality, as wild individuals ;BO that, if the care of man were withdrawn, the most fertilevariety would always, in the end, prevail over the more steril.Similar remarks may be applied to the double flowers whichpresent such strange anomalies to the botanist. The ovarium,in such cases, is frequently abortive, and the seeds, when prolific,are generally much fewer than where the flowers aresingle.Some curious experiments recently made on the productionof blue instead of red flowers in the Hydrangea hortensia,illustrate the immediate effect of certain soils on the colours ofthe petals. In garden-mould or compost, the flowers are invariablyred ; in some kinds of bog-earth they are blue ; andthe same change is always produced by a particular sort ofyellow loam.Linnaeus was of opinion that the primrose, oxlip, cowslip,and polyanthus, were only varieties of the same species. Themajority of modern botanists, on the contrary, consider themto be distinct, although some conceived that the oxlip mightbe a cross between the cowslip and the primrose. Mr. Herberthas lately recorded the following experiment : — " I raisedfrom the natural seed of one umbel of a highly-manured redcowslip, a primrose, a cowslip, oxlips of the usual and othercolours, a black polyanthus, a hose-inclose cowslip, and a naturalprimrose bearing its flower on a polyanthus stalk. Fromthe seed of that very hose-inclose cowslip I have since raised ahose-inclose primrose. I therefore consider all these to beonly local varieties depending upon soil and situation ♦." Pro-sortTrans., vol. iv., p. 19.Ch. II.] PRODUCED BY Horticulture. 35lessor Henslowe, of Cambridge, has since confirmed this experimentof Mr. Herbert, so that we have an example, not onlyof the remarkable varieties which the florist can obtain from acommon stock, but of the distinctness of analogous races foundin a wild state*.On what particular ingredient, or quality in the earth, thesechanges depend has not yet been ascertained f. But gardenersare well aware that particular plants, when placed underthe influence of certain circumstances, are changed in variousways according to the species ; and as often as the experimentsare repeated similar results are obtained. The nature of theseresults, however, depends upon the species, and they are, therefore,part of the specific character ; they exhibit the samephenomena again and again, and indicate certain fixed andinvariable relations between the physiological peculiarities ofthe plant, and the influence of certain external agents. Theyafibrd no ground for questioning the instability of species butrather the contrary ; they present us with a class of phenomenawhich, when they are more thoroughly understoodmay afibrd some of the best tests for identifying species, andproving that the attributes originally conferred, endure so longas any issue of the original stock remains upon the earth.London's Mag. of Nat. Hist., Sept. 1830, vol. iii., p. 408.f Hort. Trans., vol. iii., p. 173.1) 2CHAPTER III.Variability of a species compared to that of aa individual — Species wkieh aresusceptible of modification may be altered greatly in a short time, and in afew generations ; after which ^^They remain stationary — ^^The animals now subjectto man had originally an aptitude to domesticity — Acquired peculiaritieswhich become hereditary have a close connexion with the habits or instincts ofthe species in a wild state — Some qualities in certain animals have beenconferred with a view of their relation to man — Wild elephant domesticatedin a few years, but its faculties incapable of further development.We endeavoured in the last chapter to show , that a belief inthe reality of species is not inconsistent with the idea of aconsiderable degree of variability in the specific character.This opinion, indeed, is little more than an extension of theidea which we must entertain of the identity of an individual,throughout the changes which it is capable of undergoing.If a quadruped, inhabiting a cold northern latitude, andcovered with a warm coat of hair or wool, be transported to asouthern climate, it will often, in the course of a few years, sheda considerable portion of its coat, which it gradually recoverson being again restored to its native country. Even there thesame changes are, perhaps, superinduced to a certain extentby the returns of winter and summer. We know that theAlpine hare* and the ermine f become white during winter, andagain obtain their full colour during the warmer season ; thatthe plumage of the ptarmigan undergoes a like metamorphosisin colour and quantity, and that the change is equally temporary.We are aware that, if we reclaim some wild animal,and modify its habits and instincts by domestication, it may,if it escapes, become in a few years nearly as wild and untractableas ever ; and if the same individual be again retaken, itmay be reduced to its former tame state. A plant is placed[■• in a prepared soil in order that the petals of its flowers may^ multiply, and their colour be heightened or changed ; if we^^^1^* I<epii8 variables. — pallas. f Muster ermine. — Linn.Ch. III.] EXTENT OF CHANGE IN SPECIES. 87then withhold our care, the flowers of this same individualbecome again single. In these and innumerable other instanceswe must suppose that the individual was produced with acertain number of qualities; and, in the case of animals, with avariety of instincts, some of which may or may not bedeveloped according to circumstances, or which, after havingbeen called forth, may again become latent when the excitingcauses are removed.Now the formation of races seems the necessary consequenceof such a capability in individuals to vary, if it be a generallaw that the offspring should very closely resemble theparent. But, before we can infer that there are no limits tothe deviation from an original type which may be broughtabout in the course of an indefinite number of generations, weought to have some proof that, in each successive generation,individuals may go on acquiring an equal amount of newpeculiarities, under the influence of equal changes of circumstances.The balance of evidence, however, inclines mostdecidedly on the opposite side, for in all cases we find that thequantity of divergence diminishes from the first in a veryrapid ratio.It cannot be objected, that it is out of our power to go onvarying the circumstances in the same manner as might happenin the natural course of events during some great geologicalcycle. For in the first place, where a capacity is given toindividuals to adapt themselves to new circumstances, it doesnot generally require a very long period for its development ;if, indeed, such were the case, it is not easy to see how themodification would answer the ends proposed, for all theindividuals would die before new qualities, habits, or instincts,were conferred.When we have succeeded in naturalizing some tropical plantin a temperate climate, nothing prevents us from attempting graduallyto extend its distribution to higher latitudes, or to greaterelevations above the level of the sea, allowing equal quantitiespf time, or an equal number of generations for habitude88 Extent OF CHANGE IN Spices. [Ch. 111.acting the species to successive increments of cold. But everyhusbandman and gardener is aware that such experiments willfail ; and we are more likely to succeed in making some plants,in the course of the first two generations, support a considerabledegree of difference of temperature than a very small diflPSsrenceafterwards, though we persevere for many centuries.It is the same if we take any other cause instead of temperaturessuch as the quality of the food; or the kind otdangers to which an animal is exposed, or the soil in which aplant lives. The alteration in habits, form, or organization, isoften rapid during a short period ; but when the circumstancesare made to vary further, though in ever so slight a degree, allmodification ceases and the individual perishes. Thus someherbivorous quadrupeds may be made to feed partially on fishor flesh, but even these can never be taught to live on some herbswhich they reject, and which would even poison them, althoughthe same may be very nutritious to other species of the samenatural order. So when man uses force or stratagem againstwild animals, the persecuted race soon becomes more cautious,watchful, and cunning; new instincts seem often to be developed,and to become hereditary in the first two or threegenerations; but let the skill and address of man increase,however gradually, no further variation can take place, no newqualities are elicited by the increasing dangers. The alterationof the habits of the species has reached a point beyondwhich no ulterior modification is possible, however indefinitethe lapse of ages during which the new circumstances operate.Extirpation then follows, rather than such a transformation ascould alone enable the species to perpetuate itself under thnew state of things.It has been well observed by M. F. Cuvier and M. Dureaude la Malle, that unless some animals had manifested in a wildstate an aptitude to second the efforts of man, their domesticationwould never have been attempted. If they had allresembled the wolf, the fox, and the hyaena, the patience ofthe experimentalist would have been exhausted by innumer-Gh. III.] Acquired INSTINCTS HEREDITARY. 89able failures before he at last succeeded in obtaining someimperfect results ; so, if the first advantages derived from thecultivation of plants had been elicited by as tedious and costlya process as that by which we now make some slight additionalimprovement in certain races, we should have remainedto this day in ignorance of the greater number of their usefulqualities.It is undoubtedly true, that many new habits and qualitieshave not only been acquired in recent times by certain races ofdogs, but have been transmitted to their offspring. But in thesecases it will be observed, that the new peculiarities have an intimaterelation to the habits of the animal in a wild state, andtherefore do not attest any tendency to departure to an indefiniteextent from the original type of the species. A race ofdogs employed for hunting deer in the platform of Santa FinMexico, affords a beautiful illustration of a view hereditaryinstinct. The mode of attack, observes M. Moulin, whichthey employ, consists in seizing the animal by the belly andoverturning it by a sudden efibrt, taking advantage of themoment when the body of the deer rests only upon the forelegs.The weight of the animal thus thrown over, is often sixtimes that of its antagonist. The dog of pure breed inherits adisposition to this kind of chase, and never attacks a deer frombefore while running. Even should the latter, not perceivinghim, come directly upon him, the dog steps aside and makes hisassault on the flank, whereas other hunting dogs, though ofsuperior strength and general sagacity, which are brought fromEurope, are destitute of this instinct. For want of similarprecautions, they are often killed by the deer on the spot, thevertebra? of their neck being dislocated by the violence of theshock *.A new instinct also has become hereditary in a mongrel raceof dogs employed by the inhabitants of the banks of the Magdalena,almost exclusively in hunting the white-lipped pecari.The address of these dogs consists in restraining their ardourM, Roufin, Ann. de Sci. Nat., torn. xvi. p. 16, 1829.40 ACQUIRED INSTINCTS HEREDITARY. [Ch. III.and attaching themselves to no animal in particular but keepingthe whole herd in check. Now, among these dogs someare found, which, the very first time they are taken to thewoods, are acquainted with this mode of attack ; whereas, adog of another breed starts forward at once, is surroundedby the pecari, and whatever may be his strength is destroyedin a moment.Some of our countrymen, engaged of late in conducting theprincipal mining association in Mexico *, carried out with themsome English greyhounds of the best breed, to hunt the hareswhich abound in that country. The great platform which is thescene of sport is at an elevation of about nine thousand feetabove the level of the sea, and the mercury in the barometerstands habitually at the height of about nineteen inches. Itwas found that the greyhounds could not support the fatiguesof a long chase in this attenuated atmosphere and before theycould come up with their prey, they lay down gasping forbreath ; but these same animals have produced whelps whichhave grown up, and are not in the least degree incommoded bythe want of density in the air, but run down the hares with asniuch ease as the fleetest of their race in this country.The fixed and deliberate stand of the pointer has withpropriety been regarded as a mere modification of a habit,which may have been useful to a wild race accustomed towind game, and steal upon it by surprise, first pausing foran instant in order to spring with unerring aim. The facultyof the Retriever, however, may justly be regarded as moreinexplicable and less easily referable to the instinctive passionsof the species. M. Majestie, says a French writer in arecently-published memoir, having learnt that there was a raceof dogs in England, which stopped and brought back game oftheir own accord, procured a pair, and having obtained a whelpfrom them kept it constantly under his eyes, until he had anopportunity ofassuringhimselfthat,without having received anyinstruction and on the very first day that it was carried to theJ}\^ Real del Monte Company.Ch. HI.] INFLUENCE OF DOMESTICATION. 41chase, it brought back game with as much steadiness as dogswhich had been schooled into the same manoeuvre by meansof the whip and collar.Such attainments, as well as the habits and dispositionswhich the shepherd's dog and many others inherit, seem to beof a nature and extent which we can hardly explain by supposingthem to be modifications of instincts necessary for thepreservation of the species in a wild state. When such remarkablehabits appear in races of this species, we may reasonablyconjecture that they were given with no other view than forthe use of man and the preservation of the dog which thusobtains protection.As a general rule, we fully agree with M. F. Cuvier that, instudying the habits of animals, we must attempt, as far as possible,to refer their domestic qualities to modifications of instinctswhich are implanted in them in a state of nature ; and that writerhas successfully pointed out, in an admirable essay on thedomestication of the mammalia, the true origin of many dispositionswhich are vulgarly attributed to the influence of educationalone*. But we should go too far if we did not admit that someof the qualities of particular animals and plants may have beengiven solely with a view to the connexion which it was foreseenwould exist between them and man — especially when we seethat connexion to be in many cases so intimate, that thegreater number, and sometimes all the individuals of thespecies which exist on the earth are in subjection to the humanrace.We can perceive in a multitude of animals, especially insome of the parasitic tribes, that certain instincts and organsare conferred for the purpose of defence or attack against someother species. Now if we are reluctant to suppose the existenceof similar relations between man and the instincts of manyof the inferior animals, we adopt an hypothesis no less violent,though in the opposite extreme to that which has led some toimagine the whole animate and inanimate creation to have beenMem. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. — Jameson Ed. New Phil. Joum., Nos. 6^ 7, 8.42 ACQUIRED INSTINCTS Hereditary. [Ch. III.made solely for the support, gratification, and instruction ofmankind.Many species most hostile to our persons or property multiplyin spite of our efforts to repress them ; others, on the contrary,are intentionally augmented many hundred-fold innumber by dur exertions. In such instances we must imaginethe relative resources of man and of species, friendly orinimical to him, to have been prospectively calculated andadjusted. To withhold assent to this supposition would be torefuse what we must grant in respect to the economy of Naturein every other part of the organic creation ; for the variousspecies of contemporary plants and animals have obviouslytheir relative forces nicely balanced, and their respective tastes,passions, and instincts, so contrived, that they are all in perfectharmony with each other. In no other manner could ithappen, that each species surrounded as it is by countlessdangers should be enabled to maintain its ground for periodsof considerable duration.The docility of the individuals of some of our domesticspecies extending, as it does, to attainments foreign to theirnatural habits and faculties, may perhaps have been conferredwith a view to their association with man. But lest speciesshould be thereby made to vary indefinitely, we find that suchhabits are never transmissible by generation.A pig has been trained to hunt and point game with greatactivity and steadiness * ; and other learned individuals, of thesame species, have been taught to spell ; but such fortuitousacquirements never become hereditary, for they have no relationwhatever to the exigencies of the animal in a wild state,and cannot therefore be developments of any instinctive propensities.An animal in domesticity, says M. F. Cuvier, is not essentiallyin a different situation in regard to the feeling ofrestraint from one left to itself. It lives in society without111 the New Forest, near Riugwood, Hands, by Mr. Sooner, keeper of BroomyLodge.Chili.] iMFLUBNCfi OF DOM B Sic ATI ON. 48constraint, because without doubt it was a social animal, and itconforms itself to the will of man, because it had a chief towhich in a wild state it would have yielded obedience. Thereis nothing in its new situation that is not conformable to itspropensities ; it is satisfying its wants by submission to amaster, and makes no sacrifice of its natural inclinations. Allthe social animals when left to themselves form herds more orless numerous and all the individuals of the same herd knoweach other are mutually attached, and will not allow a strangeindividual to join them. In a wild state, moreover, they obeysome individual, which by its superiority has become the chiefof the herd. Our domestic species had originally this sociabilityof disposition, and no solitary species, however easy itmay be to tame it has yet afforded true domestic races. Wemerely, therefore, developed to our own advantage, propensitieswhich propel the individuals of certain species to draw near totheir fellows.The sheep which we have reared is induced to follow us, asit would be led to follow the flock among which it wasbrought up ; and when individuals of gregarious species havebeen accustomed to one master, it is he alone whom theyacknowledge as their chief, he only whom they obey. — ** Theelephant only allows himself to be led by the carnal whom hehas adopted; the dog itself, reared in solitude with its master,manifests a hostile disposition towards all others ; and everybodyknows how dangerous it is to be in the midst of a herd ofcows, in pasturage that are little frequented, when they havenot at their head the keeper who takes care of themes'*' Everything, therefore, tends to convince us, that formerlymen were only, with regard to the domestic animals what thosewho are particularly charged with the care of them still are,namely, members of the society, which these animals form amongthemselves, and that they are only distinguished in the generalmass by the authority which they have been enabled to assumefrom their superiority of intellect. Thus, every social animalwhich recognizes man as a member, and as the chief of its44 MODIFICATIONS OF INSTINCTS [CK HI.herd is a domestic animal. It might even be said that fromthe moment when such an animal admits man as a member ofits society 9 it is domesticated, as man could not enter into sucha society without becoming the chief of it *.**But the ingenious author whose observations we have herecited, admits that the obedience which the individuals of manydomestic species yield indifferently to every person is withoutanalogy in any state of things which could exist previouslyto their subjugation by man. Each troop of wild horses, it istrue has some stallion for its chief, who draws after him allthe individuals of which the herd is composed ; but when adomesticated horse has passed from hand to hand and hasserved several masters, he becomes equally docile towards anyperson, and is subjected to the whole human race. It seemsfair to presume, that the capability in the instinct of the horseto be thus modified, was given to enable the species to rendergreater services to man ; and, perhaps, the facility with whichmany other acquired characters become hereditary in variousraces of the horse, may be explicable only on a like supposition.The amble, for examples a pace to which the domestic racesin Spanish America are exclusively trained, has, in the courseof several generations, become hereditary, and is assumed byall the young colts before they are broken in *.It seems also reasonable to conclude, that the power bestowedon the horse, the dog, the ox, the sheep, the cat, andmany species of domestic fowls, of supporting almost everyclimate, was given expressly to enable them to follow manthroughout all parts of the globe — in order that we mightobtain their services, and they our protection. If it be objectedthat the elephant, which, by the union of strength, intelligence,and docility, can render the greatest services to mankind, isincapable of living in any but the warmest latitudes, we mayobserve, that the quantity of vegetable food required by this■Mem. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat.f Dureau de la Malle, Ann. des Sci. Nat, torn, xxl p. 58.Ck ni.3 PRODUCED BV Domestication. i6quadruped would render its maintenance, in tie temperatezone, too costly, and in the arctic impossible*Among the changes superinduced by man, none appear, atfirst sight, more remarkable than the perfect tameness of certaindomestic races. It is well known, that at however earlyan age we obtain possession of the young of many unreclaimedraces, they will retain, throughout life, a considerable timidityand apprehensiveness of danger; whereas, after one or twogenerations, the descendants of the same will habitually placethe most implicit confidence in man. There is good reason,however, to suspect that such changes are not without analogyin a state of nature, or, to speak more correctly, in situationswhere man has not interfered.Thus Dr. Richardson informs us, in his able history of thehabits of North American animals, that " in the retired partsof the mountains, where the hunters had seldom penetrated,there is no difficulty in approaching the Rocky Mountain sheep,which there exhibit the simplicity of character so remarkablein the domestic species ; but where they have been often firedat, they are exceedingly wild, alarm their companions, on theapproach of danger, by a hissing noise, and scale the rockswith a speed and agility that baffles pursuit *.''It is probable, therefore, that as man, in diffusing himselfover the globe, has tamed many wild races, so also he has mademany tame races wild. Had some of the larger carnivorousbeasts, capable of scaling the rocks, made their way into theNorth American mountains before our hunters, a similar alterationin the instincts of the sheep would doubtless have beenbrought about.No animal affords a more striking illustration of the principalpoints we have been endeavouring to establish than theelephant. For in the first place, the wonderful sagacity withwhich he accommodates himself to the society of man, and thenew habits which he contracts are not the result of time norof modifications produced in the course of many generations-faunaBorealis-Americana; page 273.46 MODIFICATIONS OF INSTINCTS [du m.These animals will breed in captivity, as is now ascertained inopposition to the vulgar opinion of many modem naturalists,and in conformity to that of the ancients delian and CoLumella*.Yet it has always been the custom, as the least expensive modeof obtaining them, to capture wild individuals in the forests,usually when full grown, and in a few years after they aretaken, sometimes, it is said, in the space of a few months theireducation is completed.Had the whole species been domesticated from an earlyperiod in the history of man, like the camel, their superiorintelligence would doubtless have been attributed to theirlong and familiar intercourse with the lord of the creation :but we know that a few years is sufficient to bring about thiswonderful change of habits ; and, although the same individualmay continue to receive tuition for a century afterwards, yetit makes no further progress in the general development ofits faculties. Were it otherwise, indeed, the animal wouldsoon deserve more than the poet's epithet of ** half-reasoning.From the authority of our countrymen employed in thelate Burmese war, it appears, in corroboration of older accounts,that when elephants are required to execute extraordinarytasks, they may be made to understand that they willreceive unusual rewards. Some favourite dainty is shownto them, in the hope of acquiring which, the work is done.And so perfectly does the nature of the contract appear to beunderstood, that the breach of it, on the part of the master, isoften attended with danger. In this case, a power has beengiven to the species to adapt their social instincts to new circumstanceswith surprising rapidity ; but the extent of thischange is defined by strict and arbitrary limits. There is noindication of a tendency to continued divergence from certainattributes with which the elephant was originally endued, noground whatever for anticipating, that in thousands of centuriesany material alteration could ever be effected. All thatMr, Corse on the Habits, &e. of the Elephant, PhiL Trans. 1799.Ch, III.] PRODUCED BY DOMESTICATION, 47we can infer from analogy is that some useful and peculiarraces might probably be formed if the experiment were fairlytried, and that some individual characteristic, now only casualand temporary, might be perpetuated by generation.In all cases, therefore, where the domestic qualities exist inanimals, they seem to require no lengthened process for theirdevelopment, and they appear to have been wholly denied tosome classes, which from their strength and social nature mighthave rendered great services to man ; as, for example, the greaterpart of the quadrant. The orang-outang, indeed, which forits resemblance in form to man , and apparently for no other goodreason, has been assumed, by Lamarck to be the most perfectof the inferior animals, has been tamed by the savages of Borneo,and made to climb lofty trees, and to bring down thefruit. But he is said to yield to his masters an unwillingobedience, and to be held in subjection only by severe discipline.We know nothing of the faculties of this animalwhich can suggest the idea that it rivals the elephant in intelligence,much less anything which can countenance the dreams ofthose who have fancied that it might have been transmuted intothe dominant race." One of the baboons of Sumatra simiacarpolegus) appears to be more docile, and is frequently trainedby the inhabitants to ascend trees for the purpose of gatheringcocoa-nuts, a service in which the animal i§ very expert. Heselects, says Sir Stamford Raffles, the ripe nuts with great judgment,and pulls no more than he is ordered *. The capuchin andcacao monkeys are, according to Humboldt, taught to ascendtrees in the same manner, and to throw down fruit on thebanks of the lower Orinoco +•We leave it to the Lamarckians to explain, how it happensthat those same savages of Borneo have not themselves acquired,by dint of longing for many generations for the power of climbingtrees, the elongated arms of the orang, or even the presentLinn. Trans, vol. xiii. p. 244.f Pers. Narr. of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, inthe years 1799-1804.48 nECAPtTtJLATIOX. [Ch. III.side tails of some American monkeys. Instead of beingreduced to the necessity of subjugating stubborn and un tractablebrutes, we should naturally have anticipated *^ that theirwants would have excited them to efforts, and that continuedefforts would have given rise to new organs ;" or, rather, to there-acquisition of organs which, in a manner irreconcilablewith the principle of the progressive system, have grownobsolete in tribes of men which have such constant need ofthem.It follows, then, from the different facts which we have consideredin this chapter, that a short period of time is generallysufficient to effect nearly the whole change which an alterationof external circumstances can bring about in the habits of aspecies, and that such capacity of accommodation to new circumstancesis enjoyed in very different degrees by differentspecies.Certain qualities appear to be bestowed exclusively with aview to the relations which are destined to exist between differentspecies, and, among others, between certain species andman ; but these latter are always so nearly connected with theoriginal habits and propensities of each species in a wild state,that they imply no indefinite capacity of varying from the originaltype. The acquired habits, derived from human tuition,are rarely transmitted to the offspring ; and when this happens,it is almost universally the case with those merely which havesome obvious connexion with the attributes of the specieswhen in a state of independence.CHAPTER IV.mConsideration of the question whether species have a real existence in nature,continued — phenomena of hybrids — hunter's opinions as to mule animals-mulesnot strictly intermediate between the parent species — Hybrid plants-experimentsof Kdlreuter — The same repeated by Wiegmann — vegetablehybrids prolific throughout several generations — Why so rare in a wild state—DecandoUe's opinion respecting hybrid plants — ^^The phenomena of hybridsconfirms the doctrine of the permanent distinctness of species — Theory of thegradation in the intelligence of animals as indicated by the facial angle — Discoveryof Tieddemann that the brain of the foetus in mammalia assumes successivelythe form of the brain of a fish reptile, and bird — Bearing of this discoveryon the theory of progressive development and transmutation-recapitulation.We have yet to consider another class of phenomena, thoserelating to the production of hybrids, which have been regardedin a very different light with reference to their bearing on thequestion of the permanent distinctness of species ;' some naturalistsconsidering them as affording the strongest of all proofsin favour of the reality of species ; others, on the contrary,appealing to them as countenancing the opposite doctrine, thatall the varieties of organization and instinct now exhibited inthe animal and vegetable kingdoms, may have been propagatedfrom a small number of original types.In regard to the mammifers and birds, it is found that nosexual ilion will take place between races which are remotefrom each other in their habits and organization ; and it is onlyin species that are very nearly allied that such unions produceoffspring. It may be laid down as a general rule, admittingof very few exceptions among quadrupeds, that the hybridprogeny is steril, and there seem to be no well-authenticatedexamples of the continuance of the mule race beyond one generation.The principal number of observations and experimentsrelate to the mixed offspring of the horse and the ass ; and inthis case it is well established, that the male-mule can generateand the female-mule produce. Such cases occur in Spain andVol. II. -B.50 EXPERIMENTS ON [Cll. IV.Italy, and much more frequently in the West Iiiidies and NewHolland ; but these mules have never bred in cold climatesseldom in warm regions, and still more rarely in temporecountries.The hybrid offspring of the female-ass and the stallion, theymof of Aristotle, and the hindus of Pliny, differs from themule or the offspring of the ass and mare. In both cases,says Buffon, these animals retain more of the mother than ofthe father, not only in the magnitude but in the figure of thebody ; whereas, in the form of the head, limbs, and tail, thbear a greater resemblance to the father. The same naturalistinfers, from various experiments respecting cross-breeds betweenthe he-goat and ewe, the dog and she-wolfe the goldfinchand canary-bird, that the male transmits his sex to the greatestnumber, and that the preponderance of males over femalesexceeds that which prevails where the parents are of the samespecies.The celebrated John Hunter has observed, that the true distinctionof species must ultimately be gathered from theirincapacity of propagating with each other, and producingoffspring capable of again continuing itself. He was unwilling,however, to admit, that the horse and the ass were of the samespecies, because some rare instances had been adduced of thebreeding of mules, which he attributed to a degree of monstrosityin the organs of the mule, for these he suggested mightnot have been those of a mixed animal, but those of the mareor female-ass. ** This, he argues, is not a far-fetched idea, fortrue species produce monsters, and many animals of distinctsex are incapable of breeding at all ; and as we find nature,in its greatest perfection, deviating from general principles,why may it not happen likewise in the production of mules, sothat sometimes a mule shall breed from the circumstance of itsbeing a monster respecting mules ?''Yet, in the same memoir, this great anatomist inferred thatthe wolf, the dog, and the jackal, were all of one species,because he had found, by two experiments, that the dog wouldC)i« IV.] HVBRtD AKtICAtS. 51breed, both with the wolf and the jackal ; and that the mule,in each case, would breed again with the dog. In these cases,however, we may observe, that there was always one parent atleast of pure breed, and no proof was obtained that a truehybrid race could be perpetuated ; a fact of which we believeno examples are yet recorded, either in regard to mixtures ofthe horse and ass, or any other of the mammalia*Should the fact be hereafter ascertained, that two mulescan propagate their kind, we must still inquire whether theoffering may not be regarded in the light of a monstrousbirth, proceeding from some accidental cause, or rather, tospeak more philosophically, from some general law not yetunderstood, but which may not be permitted permanently tointerfere with those laws of generation, whereby species may, ingeneral, be prevented from becoming blended. If, for example,we discovered that the progeny of a mule race degeneratedgreatly in the first generation, in force, sagacity, or any attributenecessary for its preservation in a state of nature, wemight infer that, like a monster, it is a mere temporary andfortuitous variety. Nor does it seem probable that the greaternumber of such monsters could ever occur unless obtained byart ; for in Hunter's experiments, stratagem or force was, inmostinstances, employed to bring about the irregular connexion*.It seems rarely to happen that the mule offspring is trulyintermediate in character between the two parents. ThusHunter mentions, that, in his experiments, one of the hybridpups resembled the wolf much more than the rest of the litter;and we are informed by Wiegmann, that in a litter latelyobtained in the Royal Menagerie at Berlin, from a whitepointer and a she wolf, two of the cubs resembled the commonwolf-dog, but the third was like a pointer with hanging ears.There is, undoubtedly, a very close analogy between thesephenomena and those presented by the intermixture of distinctraces of the same species, both in the inferior animals and in4* Phil, frank. 1787. Additional Remarks, PhiL Ttttoa. Vl%^ .1^^5S EXPERIMENTS ON [Oi. IV.man. Dr. Prichard, in his " Physical History of Mankindcites examples where the peculiarities of the parents have beentransmitted very unequally to the offspring ; as where children,entirely white, or perfectly black, have sprung from theunion of the European and the negro. Sometimes the colour,or other peculiarities of one parent, after having failed to showthemselves in the immediate progeny, reappear in a subsequentgeneration, as where a white child is born of two black parents,the grandfather having been a white *.The same author judiciously observes, that if differentspecies mixed their breed, and hybrid races were ofteti propagated,the animal world would soon present a scene of confusion; its tribes would be everywhere blended together, andwe should, perhaps, find more hybrid creatures than genuineand uncorrupted races f .The history of the vegetable kingdom has been thought toafford more decisive evidence in favour of the theory of the formationof new and permanent species from hybrid stocks. Thefirst accurate experiments in illustration of this curious subjectappear to have been made by Kolreuter, who obtained a hybridfrom two species of Tobacco, Nicotiana rustica and N, panic*lata, which differ greatly in the shape of their leaves, the colour ofthe corolla, and the height of the stem. The stigma of a femaleplant of N. rustica was impregnated with the pollen of a maleplant otN. paniculata. The seed ripened and produced a hybridwhich was intermediate between the two parents, and which,like all the hybrids which this botanist brought up, had imperfectstamens. He afterwards impregnated this hybrid withthe pollen of N. paniculata^ and obtained plants which muchmore resembled the last. This he continued through severalgenerations, until, by due perseverance, he actually changedthe Nicotiana rustica into the Nicotiana paniculata.The plan of impregnation adopted, was the cutting off of theanthers of the plant intended for fructification before they hadVol. i., p. 217. t Ibid., vol. i., p. 97.Ch. IV.] HYBRID PLANTS. 63shed pollen, and then laying on foreign pollen upon the stigma.The same experiment has since been repeated with success,by Wiegmann, who found that he could bring back the hybridsto the exact likeness of either parent, by crossing them a sufficientnumber of times.The blending of the characters of the parent stocks, in manyother of Weigmann's experiments, was complete ; the colourand shape of the leaves and flowers, and even the scent, beingintermediate, as in the offspring of the two species of verbascum.An intermarriage, also, between the common onion and the leek(pallium cela and A.porrum) gave a mule plant, which, in thecharacter of its leaves and flowers, approached most nearly tothe garden onion, but had the elongated bulbous root and smellof the leek.The same botanist remarks, that vegetable hybrids, when notstrictly intermediate, more frequently approach the female thanthe male parent species, but they never exhibit charactersforeign to both, A re-cross with one of the original stocks,generally causes the mule plant to revert towards that stock ;but this is not always the case, the offspring societies continuingto exhibit the character of a full hybrid.In general, the success attending the production and perpetuityof hybrids among plants, depends, as in the animal kingdom,on the degree of proximity between the species intermarried.If their organization be very remote, impregnation never takesplace ; if somewhat less distant, seeds are formed, but alwaysimperfect and steril. The next degree of relationship yieldshybrid seedlings, but these are barren ; and it is only when theparent species are very nearly allied, that the hybrid race maybeperpetuated for several generations. Even in this case thebest authenticated examples seem confined to the crossing ofhybrids with individuals of pure breed. In none of the experimentsmost accurately detailed does it appear that both theparents were mules.Wiegmann diversified, as much as possible, his mode ofbringing about these irregular unions among plants. He oftenM Rarity OF HYBRIDS AMONG [Q^ fV.sowed parallel rows* near to each other, of the sp8eiea]fromwhich he desired to breed and instead of mutilating, afterKolreuter's fashion the plants of one of the parent stock, hemerely washed the pollen off their anthers. The branches ofthe plants, in each row, were then gently bent towards eachother and intertwined, so that the wind, and numerous insectsas they passed from the flowers of one to those of the otherspecies, carried the pollen and produced fecundation.The same observer saw a good exemplification of the mannerin which hybrids may be formed in a state of nature. Somewallflowers and pinks had been growing in a garden, in a drysunny situation, and their stigmas had been ripened so as to bemoist, and to absorb pollen with avidity, although their antherswere not yet developed. These stigmas became impregnatedby pollen, blown from some other adjacent plants of the samespecies, but had they been of different species, and not tooremote in their organization, mule races must have resulted.When, indeed , we consider how busily some insects have beenshown to be engaged in conveying anther^dust from flower toflower, especially bees, flower-eating beetles, and the like, itseems a most enigmatical problem how it can happen, that promiscuousalliances between distinct species are not perpetuallyoccurring.How continually do we observe the bees diligently employedin collecting the red and yellow powder by which the stamens offlowers are covered, loading it on their hind legs, and carryingit to their hive for the purpose of feeding their young ! In thusproviding for their own progeny these insects assist materiallythe process of fructification *. Few of our readers need bereminded, that the stamens in certain plants grow on differentblossoms from the pistils, and unless the summit of the pistilbe touched with the fertilizing dust, the fruit does not swell,nor the seed arrive at maturity. It is by the help of beeschiefly, that the development of the fruit of many such speciesSee Barton on the Geography of Plants, p. 67.Ok. IV.0 Kant IN A YfltD %TA.n4 &$is secured, th powder which they have collected from testamentbeitig unconsciously left by them in Visiting the pistils.How often, during the heat of a summer's day, do we sethe males of dioecious plants, such as the yew-tree, standingseparate from the females, and sending off into the air, uponth slightest breath of wind, clouds of buoyant pollen 1 Thatthe zephyr should so rarely intervene to fecundate the plantsof one species with the anther-dust of others, seems almost torealize the converse of the miracle believed by the credulousherdsmen of the Lusitania mares —Ore omnes vers in Zephyrus, stand rupibug altis^Exceptantque lewes auras : et see sine ellisConjugiis, vent gravis, mirabile dicte *.But, in the first place, it appears that there is a naturalaversion in plants, as well as in animals, to irregular sexualunions ; and in most of the successful experiments in the animaland vegetable world, some violence has been used, in order toprocure impregnation. The stigma imbibes, slowly and reluctantly,the granules of the pollen of another species, even whenit is abundantly covered with it ; and if it happen that, duringthis period, ever so slight a quantity of the anther-dust of itsown species alight upon it this is instantly absorbed, and theeffect of the foreign pollen destroyed. Besides, it does not oftenhappen that the male and female organs of fructification, indifferentspecies, arrive at a state of maturity at precisely thesame time. Even where such synchronism does prevail, so thata cross impregnation is effected, the chances are very numerousagainst the establishment of a hybrid race.If we consider the vegetable kingdom generally, it must berecollected, that even of the seeds which are well ripened, thegreater part are either eaten by insects, birds, and other animals,or decay for want of room and opportunity to germinate. Unhealthyplants are the first which are cut off by causes prejudicialto the species, being usually stifled by more vigorous individualsof their own kind. If, therefore, the relative fecundity orGmxg. lib, m 973.56 HARITT OP HTBRIBB AMONG [^^ ^*hardiness of hybrids be in the least degree inferior, they cannotmaintain their footing for many generations, even if they wereever produced beyond one generation in a wild state. In theuniversal struggle for existence, the right of the strongesteventually prevails ; and the strength and durability of a racedepends mainly on its prolificness, in which hybrids areacknowledged to be deficient.Centaurea hyhridaf a plant which never bears seed, and issupposed to be produced by the frequent intermixture of twowell-known species of Centaurea, grows wild upon a hill nearTurin. Ranunculus lacerusy also steril, has been producedaccidentally at Grenoble, and near Paris, by the union of twoRanunculi ; but this occurred in gardens ♦•Mr. Herbert, in one of his ingenious papers on mule plants,endeavours to account for their non-occurrence in a state ofnature, from the circumstance that all the combinations thatwere likely to occur, have already been made many centuriesago, and have formed the various species of botanists ; but inour gardens, he says, whenever species, having a certain degree ofaffinity to each other, are transported from different countries,and brought for the first time into contact, they give rise tohybrid species f . But we have no data, as yet, to warrant theconclusion, that a single permanent hybrid race has ever beenformed, even in gardens, by the intermarriage of two alliedspecies brought from distant habitations. Until some fact ofthis kind is fairly established, and a new species, capable ofperpetuating itself in a state of perfect independence of man,can be pointed out, we think it reasonable to call in questionentirely this hypothetical source of new species. That varietiesdo sometimes spring up from cross breeds, in a natural way,can hardly be doubted, but they probably die out even morerapidly than races propagated by grafts or layers.DecandoIIe, whose opinion on a philosophical question of thiskind deserves the greatest attention, has observed, in his EssayHon. and Rev. W. Herbert, Hort. Trans., vol. iv., p. 41. f Ibid.Ch; IVJ PLANTS IN A WILD STATED 57on Botanical Geography, that the varieties of plants rangethemselves under two general heads : those produced by externalcircumstances, and those formed by hybridity. Afteradducing various arguments to show that neither of thesecauses can explain the permanent diversity of plants indigenousin different regions, he says, in regard to the crossing of races,I can perfectly comprehend, without altogether sharing theopinion, that where many species of the same genera occur neartogether, hybrid species may be formed, and I am aware thatthe great number of species of certain genera which are foundin particular regions, may be explained in this manner ; butI am unable to conceive how any one can regard the sameexplanation as applicable to species which live naturally at greatdistances. If the three larches, for example, now known in theworld, lived in the same localities, I might then believe thatone of them was the produce of the crossing of the two others;but I never could admit that the Siberian species has beenproduced by the crossing of those of Europe and America. Isee, then, that there exist, in organized beings, permanent differenceswhich cannot be referred to any one of the actualcauses of variation, and these differences are what constitutespecies *.''The most decisive arguments, perhaps, amongst many others,against the probability of the derivation of permanent speciesfrom cross breeds, are to be drawn from the fact alluded to byDecandoUe, of species having a close affinity to each otheroccurring in distinct botanical provinces, or countries inhabitedby groups of distinct species of indigenous plants. Forin this case naturalists, who are not prepared tp go the wholelength of the transmutationists, are under the necessity ofadmitting, that in some cases species which approach very nearto each other in their characters, were so created from theirorigin ; an admission fatal to the idea of its being a generallaw of nature, that a few original types only should be formedEssai £:i6mentaire, &c. 3me. partie*and that all intermediAte races should spring final thfintcfwix-ture of those stocks.This notion, indeed, is wholly at variance with all that waknow of hybrid generation } for the phenomena little us toaiBrnii that had the types been at first somewhat distant, nocrott'breedM would ever have been produced much less thoseprolific races which we now recognise as distinct pieces.In regard, moreover, to the permanent propagation of hybridraces among animals, insuperable difficulties present themselveswhen we endeavour to conceive the blending together of thedifferent instincts and propensities of two species, so as tQinsure the preservation of the intermediate race. The commonmule, when obtained by human art, may be protected by thepower of man ; but in a wild state, it would neither have prwisely the same wants as the horse or the ass : and if, in consequenceof some difference of this kind, it strayed from thherd, it would soon be hunted down by beasts of prey anddestroyed.If we take some genus of insects, such as the bee, wefind that each of the numerous species has some difference in itshabits, its mode of collecting honey, or constructing its dwelling,or providing for its young, and other particulars. Inthe case of the common hive-bee, the workers are described, byKirby and Spence, as being endowed with no less than thirtydistinct instincts*. So also we find that amongst a mostnumerous class of spiders, there are nearly as many differentmodes of spinning their webs as there are species. When werecollect how complicated are the relations of these instinctswith co-existing species, both of the animal and vegetable kingdoms,it is scarcely possible to imagine that a bastard race couldspring from the union of two of these species, and retain justso much of the qualities of each parent-stock as to preserve itsground in spite of the dangers which surround it.We should also ask, if a few generic' types alone have beencreated among insects and the intermediate species have pro-into.to Entomb., vol. ii.; p. S04. Ed. IS17.needed from hylmdity» where are those original types combiningas they ought to do, the elements of all the instinctswhich have made their appearance in the numerous derivativeraces ? So also in regard to animals of all classes and of plants ;if species in general are of hybrid origin, where are the stockswhich combine in themselves the habits properties, and organs,of which all the intervening species ought to afford us meremodifications ?We shall now conclude* this subject by summing up, in afew words, the results to which the consideration of the phenomenaof hybrids has led us. It appears that the aversion ofindividuals of distinct , species to the sexual union is commonto animals and plants, and that it is only when the speciesapproach near to each other in their organization and habits,that any offspring are produced from their connexion. Mulesare of extremely rare occurrence in a state of nature, and noexamples are yet known of their having procreated in a wildstate. But it has been proved, that hybrids are not universallysteril, provided the parent stocks have a near affinity toeach other, although the continuation of the mixed race, forseveral generations, appears hitherto to have been obtainedonly by crossing the hybrids with individuals of pure species,an experiment which by no means bears out the hypothesisthat a true hybrid race could ever be permanently established.Hence we may infer, that aversion to sexual intercourse isjin general, a good test of the distinctness of original stocks, orof species J and the procreation of hybrids is a proof of the verynear affinity of species. Perhaps, hereafter, the number ofgenerations for which hybrids may be continued, before therace dies out (for it seems usually to degenerate rapidly), mayafford the zoologist and botanist an experimental test of thedifference in the degree of affinity of allied species.We may also remark, that if it could have been shown thata single permanent species had ever been produced by hybriddity (of which there is no satisfactory proof), it might certainlyhave lent some countenance to the notions of the ancients60 GRADATION IX Intellect AS Shewn [Cb. IV.respecting the gradual detenamtkn of created things, bat nonewhatever to Lamarck's theory of their progressive perfectibility ;for observations have hitherto shown that there is a tendency,in mule animals and plants, to degenerate in organization.We have already remarked, that the theory of progressivedevelopment arose from an attempt to ingraft the doctrines ofthe transmutationists upon one of the most popular generalizationsin geology. But modem geological researches have almostdestroyed every appearance of that gradation in the successivegroups of animate bangs, which was supposed to indicate theslow progress of the organic woM from the more ample to themore compound structure. In the more modem formations,we find clear indications that the highest orders of the terrestrialmammalia were fully represented during several successiveepochs ; but, in the monuments which we have hitherto examinedof more remote eras, in which there are as yet discoveredfew fluviatile, and perhaps no lacustrine formations, and, therefore,scarcely any means of obtaining an imdght into the zoologyof the then existing continents, we have only as yet found oneexample of a mammiferous quadruped. The recent origin ofman, and the absence of all ages of any rational bang holdingan analogous relation to former states of the animate world,affords one, and the only reasonable argument, in support of thehypotheses of a progressive scheme, but none whatever in favourof the fancied evolution of one species out of another.When the celebrated anatomist. Camper, first attempted toestimate the degrees of sagacity of different animals, and of theraces of man, by the measurement of the facial angle, somespeculators were bold enough to afiSrm, that certain simile differedas little from the more savage races of men, as do thesefrom the human race in general ; and that a scale might betraced from " apes with foreheads villanous low," to theAfrican variety of the human species, and from that to theEuropean. The facial angle was measured by drawing a linefrom the prominent centre of the forehead to the most advancedpart of the lower jaw-bone, and observing the angle which itCh. IV.] BY THE FACIAL ANGLE. 61,made with the horizontal line ; and it was affirmed, that therewas a regular series from birds to the mammalia.The gradation from the dog to the monkey was said to be perfect,and from that again to man. One of the ape tribe has a facialangle of 42°, and another, which approximated nearest to manin figure, an angle of 50^. To this succeeds (long sed proxiesintervals) the head of the African negro, which, as well as that ofthe Kalmuck, forms an angle of 70°, while that of the Europeancontains 80°. The Roman painters preferred the angle of 95°,and the character of beauty and sublimity, so striking in someworks of Grecian sculpture, as in the head of Apollo, and inthe Medusa of Sisocles, is given by an angle which amounts to100°*.A great number of valuable facts and curious analogiesin comparative anatomy, were brought to light during theinvestigations which were made by Camper, John Hunter, andothers, to illustrate this scale of organization ; and their factsand generalizations must not be confounded with the fancifulsystems which White and others deduced from them f .That there is some connexion between an elevated and capaciousforehead in certain races of men, and a large developmentof the intellectual faculties, seems highly probable ; and that alow facial angle is frequently accompanied with inferiority ofmental powers, is certain ; but the attempt to trace a graduatedscale of intelligence through the different species of animalsaccompanying the modifications of the form of the skull, is amere visionary speculation. It has been found necessary toexaggerate the sagacity of the ape tribe at the expense of thedog, and strange contradictions have arisen in the conclusionsdeduced from the structure of the elephant, someanatomists being disposed to deny the quadruped the intelligencewhich he really possesses, because they found that thevolume of his brain was small in comparison to that of the othermammalia, while others were inclined to magnify extravagantlyPrichard, Phys. Hist of Mankind, vol. i., p. 159.f Ch. White on the regular Gradation in Man, Sec, 1799.cit TIEDDBllAim OK tttl AftAlK OF THE [CJL Pf.the superiority of its intellect, because the vertical height of itsskull is so great when compared to its horizontal length.It would be irrelevant to our subject if we were to enter intoa farther discussion on these topics, because, even if a graduatedscale of organization and intelligence could have beenestablished, it would prove nothing in favour of a tendency, ineach species, to attain a higher state of perfection. We mayrefer the reader to the writings of Blumenbach, Prichard,Lawrence, and others, for convincing proofs that the varietiesof form, colour, and organization of different races of men, areperfectly consent with the generally received opinion, that allthe individuals of the species have originated from a singlepair ; and while they exhibit in man as many diversities of aphysiological nature, as appear in any other species, they confirmalso the opinion of the slight deviation from a commonstandard of which a species is capable.The power of existing and multiplying in every latitude, andin every variety of situation and climate, which has enabledthe great human family to extend itself over the habitable globe,is partly, says Lawrence, the result of physical constitution,and partly of the mental prerogative of man. If he did notpossess the most enduring and flexible corporeal frame, hisarts would not enable him to be the inhabitant of all climates,and to brave the extremes of heat and cold, and the otherdestructive influences of local situation *. Yet, notwithstandingthis flexibility of bodily frame, we find no signs of indefinitedeparture from a common standard, and the intermarriages ofindividuals of the most remote varieties are not less fruitfulthan between those of the same tribe.There is yet another department of anatomical discovery, towhich we must not omit some allusion, because it has appearedto some persons to afford a distant analogy, at least, to thatprogressive development by which some of the inferior speciesmay have been gradually perfected into those of more complexorganization. Tieddemann found, and his discoveries have beenLawrence; Lectures on Phys. Zool and Nat Hist, of Kan, p. 192. Ed. 1823.Ch. IV.] Foetus IN VfiRTBlElltAt£t) ANIMALS. 68most fully confirmed attd elucidated by M. Serres, that thebrain of the foetus, in the highest class of vertebrated animals,assumes, in succession, the various forms which belong to fishes,reptiles, and birds, before it acquires those additions and modificationswhich are peculiar to the mammiferous tribe. So thatin the passage from the embryo to the perfect mammifer, thereis a typical representation, as it were, of all those transformationswhich the primitive species are supposed to have under-^gone, during a long series of generations, between the presentperiod and the remotest geological era.If you examine the brain of the mammalia, says M. Serres,at an early stage of uterine life, you perceive the cerebralhemispheres consolidated, as in fish in two vesicles isolated onefrom the other ; at a later period, you see them affect the configurationof the cerebral hemispheres of reptiles ; still lateragain, they present you with the forms of those of birds ; finally,they acquire, at the era of birth, and sometimes later, the permanentforms which the adult mammalia present.The cerebral hemispheres, then, only arrive at the statewhich we observe in the higher animals by a series of successivemetamorphoses. If we reduce the whole of these evolutionsto four periods, we shall see that in the first are born theCerebral lobes of fishes and this takes place homogeneous inall classes. The second period will give us the organizationof reptiles ; the third the brain of birds ; and the fourth thecomplex hemispheres of mammalia.If we could develop the different parts of the brain of theinferior classes, we should make in succession a reptile out of afish, a bird out of a reptile, and a mammiferous quadruped outof a bird. If, on the contrary, we could starve this organ inthe mammalia, we might reduce it successively to the conditionof the brain of the three inferior classes.Nature often presents us with this last phenomenon in monsters,but never exhibits the first. Among the various deformitieswhich organized beings may experience, they never passthe limits of their own classes to put on the forms of the class64 RECAPITULATION. [Civ.above them. Never does a fish elevate itself so as to assume'the form of the brain of a reptile ; nor does the latter ever *attain that of birds ; nor the bird that of the mammifer. Itmay happen that a monster may have two heads, but the conformationof the brain always remains circumscribed narrowlywithin the limits of its class*.It will be observed, that these curious phenomena disclose,in a highly interesting manner, the unity of plan that runsthrough the organization of the whole series of vertebratedanimals ; but they lend no support whatever to the notion of agradual transmutation of one species into another, least of all ofthe passage, in the course of many generations, from an animalof a more simple, to one of a more complex structure. On thecontrary, were it not for the sterility imposed on monsters, aswell as on hybrids in general, the argument to be derived fromTieddemann's discovery, like that deducible from experimentsrespecting hybridity, would be in favour of the successivedegeneracy J rather than the perfectibility, in the course of ages,of certain classes of organic beings.For the reasons, therefore, detailed in this and the two precedingchapters, we draw the following inferences, in regard tothe reality of species in nature.First, That there is a capacity in all species to accommodatethemselves, to a certain extent, to a change of external circumstances,this extent varying greatly according to the species.2dly. When the change of situation which they can endure isgreat, it is usually attended by some modifications of the form,colour, size, structure, or other particulars ; but the mutationsthus superinduced are governed by constant laws, and the capabilityof so varying forms part of the permanent specific character.3dly. Some acquired peculiarities of form, structure, andinstinct, are transmissible to the offspring ; but these consistmE. R. A. Serres, Anatomise Comprise du Cerveau, illustrated by numerousplates, torn, i., 1824,Cii. ivy ilECAPlTULATION, 65of such qualities and attributes only as are intimately relatedto the natural wants and propensities of the species.4thly. The entire variation from the original type, whichany given kind of change can produce, may usually be effectedin a brief period of time after which no farther deviation canbe obtained by continuing to alter the circumstances, thoughever so gradually, — indefinite divergence, either in the way ofimprovement or deterioration, being prevented, and the leastpossible excess beyond the defined limits being fatal to theexistence of the individual.5thly • The intermixture of distinct species is guarded againstby the aversion of the individuals composing them to sexualunion, or by the sterility of the mule offspring. It does notappear that true hybrid races have ever been perpetuated forseveral generations, even by the assistance of man ; for thecases usually cited relate to the crossing of mules with individualsof pure species, and not to the intermixture of hybridwith hybrid.6thly. From the above considerations, it appears that specieshave a real existence in nature, and that each was endowed, atthe time of its creation with the attributes and organization bywhich it is now distinguished.Vol. II.CHAPTER V.tLaws which reg^ilato the geographical distribution of species — analogy of di^natfnot attended with identity of species — Botanical geography — Stations — Habitations— Distinct provinces of indigenous plants — vegetation of island—Marine vegetation — In what manner plants become diffused — effects of wind,riven, marine currents — Agency of animals—Many seeds pass fhnmg^ thsstomachs of animals and birds undigested — Agency of man in the dispcrii«i|of plants, both voluntary and involuntary — Its analogy to that of the inferioranimals.Next to determining the question whether species have a realexistence, the consideration of the laws which regulate theirgeographical distribution is a subject of primary importanceto the geologist. It is only by studying these laws with attention,by observing the position which groups of species occupyat present, and inquiring how these may be varied in the courseof time by migrations, by changes in physical geography, andother causes, that we can hope to learn whether the duration ofspecies be limited, or in what manner the state of the animateworld is affected by the endless vicissitudes of the inanimate.That different regions of the globe are inhabited by entirelydistinct animals and plants is a fact which has been familiar toall naturalists since Buffon first pointed out the want oi specificidentity between the land quadrupeds of America and those ofthe Old World. The same phenomenon has, in later times,been forced, in a striking manner, upon our attention by theexamination of New Holland, where the indigenous species ofanimals and plants were found to be, almost without exception,distinct from those known in other parts of the world.But the extent of this parcelling out of the globe amongstdifferent nations as they have been termed, of plants and animals,— the universality of a phenomenon so extraordinary andunexpected, may be considered as one of the most interestingfacts clearly established by the advance of modem science.Ch. v.] Botanical QEOaRAlPHY. 67Scarcely fourteen hundred species of plants appear to havebeen known and described by the Greeks, Romans, andArabians, At present, more than three thousand species areenumerated, as natives of our own island *. In other parts ofthe world there have been collected, perhaps, upwards of seventythousand species. It was not to be supposed, therefore, thatthe ancients should have acquired any correct notions respectingwhat may be called the geography of plants, although theinfluence of climate on the character of the vegetation couldhardly have escaped their observation.Antecedently to investigation, there was no reason for presumingthat the vegetable productions, growing wild in theeastern hemisphere, should be unlike those of the western,in the same latitude ; nor that the plants of the Cape of GoodHope should be unlike those of the South of Europe ; situationswhere the climate is little dissimilar. The contrary suppositionwould have seemed more probable, and we might haveanticipated an almost perfect identity in the animals and plantswhich inhabit corresponding parallels of latitude. The discovery,therefore, that each separate region of the globe, bothof the land and water, is occupied by distinct groups ofspecies, and that most of the exceptions to this general r^Iemay be referred to disseminating causes now in operation, iseminently calculated to excite curiosity, and to stimulate us toseek some hypothesis respecting the first introduction of specieswhich may be reconcilable with such phenomena.A comparison of the plants of different regions of the globeaffords results more to be depended upon in the present statepf our knowledge, than those relating to the animal kingdom,because the science of botany is more advanced, and probablycomprehends a great proportion of the total number of thevegetable productions of the whole earth.Humboldt, in several eloquent passages of his PersonalNarrative, was among the first to promulgate philosophicalviews on this subject. Every hemisphere, says this traveller,• Barton's L«etai«8 im the Geography of Plants, p. 2.1%68 Botanical GCOGRAPllT. [Ch. V.produces plants of different species; and it is not by thediversity of climates that we can attempt to explain why equinoctialAfrica has no laurina, and the New World no heaths ;why the cancellaria are found only in the southern hemisphere ;why the birds of the continent of India glow with colours lesssplendid than the birds of the hot parts of America ; finally,why the tiger is peculiar to Asia, and the omithorhynchus toNew Holland *.We can conceive, he adds, that a small number of the familiesof plants, for instance the musacesB and the pains cannot belongto very cold regions, on account of their internal structure andthe importance of certain organs ; but we cannot explain whyno one of the family of melastomas vegetates north of theparallel of thirty degrees ; or why no rose-tree belongs to thesouthern hemisphere. Analogy of climates is often found inthe two continents without identity of productions f ."^^The luminous essay of Decandolle on " Botanical Geography"presents us with the fruits of his own researches andthose of Humboldt, Brown, and other eminent botanists, soarranged that the principal phenomena of the distribution ofplants are exhibited in connexion with the causes to whichthey are chiefly referable. ** It might not, perhaps, bedifficult," observes this writer, *^ to find two points, in theUnited States and in Europe, or in equinoctial America andAfrica, which present all the same circumstances : as for example,the same temperature, the same height above the sea, asimilar soil, an equal dose of humidity, yet nearly all, perhapsall 9 the plants in these two similar localities shall be distinct.A certain degree of analogy, indeed, of aspect, and even ofstructure, might very possibly be discoverable between theplants of the two localities in question, but the species wouldin general be different. Circumstances, therefore, differentfrom those which now determine the stations have had aninfluence on the habitations of plants."Pers. Narr., vol. v. p. 180. • f Ibid.X Essai Elementary de Geographie Botanique. Extrait da se vol. du Diet*des Sci. Nat.Ch. V.J STATIONS AND HABITATIONS OF PLANTS. 69As we shall frequently have occasion to speak of the stationsand habitations of plants in the technical sense in which the termsare used in the above passage, we may remind the geologicalreader that station indicates the peculiar nature of the localitywhere each species is accustomed to grow, and has reference toclimate, soil, humidity, light, elevation above the sea, and otheranalogous circumstances ; whereas by habitation is meant ageneral indication of the country where a plant grows wild.Thus the station of a plant may be a salt-marsh, in a temperateclimate, a hill side, the bed of the sea, or a stagnant pool. Itshabitation may be Europe, North America or New Hollandbetween the tropics. The study of stations has been styledthe topography, that of habitations the geography of botany.The terms thus defined express each a distinct class of ideas,which have been often .confounded together, and which areequally applicable in zoology.In further illustration of the principle above alluded to, thatdifference of longitude, independently of any influence of temperature,is accompanied by a great, and sometimes a completediversity in the species of plants, DecandoUe observes, thatout of two thousand eight hundred and ninety-one species ofphanerogamic plants described by Purse, in the United States,there are only three hundred and eighty-five which are foundin northern or temperate Europe. MM. Humboldt andCopland, in all their travels through equinoctial America,found only twenty-four species (these being all cyperacea andgraminea) common to America and any part of the 014 World.On comparing New Holland with Europe, Mr. Brown ascertainedthat out of four thousand one hundred species, discoveredin Australia, there were only one hundred and sixty-sixcommon to Europe, and of this small number there weresome which may have been transported thither by man. Mostof the others belong to those classes which are provided withthe most ample means of dispersion to vast distances.But it is still more remarkable, that in the more widelyseparated parts of the ancient continent notwithstanding \he70 VEOfitAtlON OF islands. [Oh.Tiexistence of an uninterrupted land communication the diversityin the specific character of the respective Vegetation italmost as striking. Thus there is found one assemblage ofspecies in China, another in the countries bordering the BlackSea and the Caspian a third in those surrounding the Mediterranean,a fourth in the sat platforms of Siberia andTartary, and so forth.The distinctness of the groups of indigenous plants, in thesame parallel of latitude, is greatest where continents are disjoinedby a wide expanse of ocean. In the northern hemisphere,near the Pole, where the extremities of Europe, Asiaand America unite or approach near to one another, a considerablenumber of the same species of plants are foundscommon to the three continents. But it has been remarkedthat these plants, which are thus so widely diffused in theArctic regions, are also found in the chain of the Aleutianislands. Which stretch almost across from America to Asia, andwhich may probably have served as the channel of communicationfor the partial blending of the Floras of the adjoiningregions. It has, indeed, been found to be a general rule, thatplants found at two points very remote from each other, occuralso in places intermediate.In islands very distant from continents, the total number ofplants is comparatively small 3 but a large proportion of thespecies are such as occur nowhere else. In so far as the Floraof such islands is not peculiar to them, it contains, in general,species common to the nearest main lands ♦.The islands of the great southern ocean exemplify theserules ; the easternmost containing more American, and thewestern more Indian plants f. Madeira and Teneriffe containmany species, and even entire genera, peculiar to them ; butthey have also plants in common with Portugal, Spain, theAzores, and the north-west coast of Africa J.Prichard, vol. i. p. 36. Brown, Appendix to Flinders.t Forster Observations, &c.X Humboldt, Pers. Narr., vol. i. p, 270 of the translation. Prichard, ftiys.Syst of Mankind, vol 1. p. 37.Cftl, V.J DI8*mCT BOTANICAL REGIONS. tlIn the Canaries, out of five hundred and thirty-three specieof phanerogamous plants, it is said that three hundred and teAare peculiar to these isles, and the rest identical with those oithe African continent ; but in the Flora of St. Helena, whichh fk) far distant, even from the western shores of Africa, therehave been found, out of sixty-one native species, only two oV"three which are to be found in any other part of the globe.Decandolle has enumerated twenty great botanical provincesinhabited by indigenous or aboriginal plants ; and althoughmany of these contain a variety of species which are commonto several others, and sometimes to places very remote, yet thelines of demarcation are upon the whole, astonishingly welldefined*. Nos is it likely that the bearing of the evidence ohwhich these general views are founded will ever be materiallyaffected, since they are already confirmed by the examinationof seventy or eighty thousand species of plants.The entire change of opinion which the contemplation ofthese phenomena has brought about is worthy of remark. Thefirst travellers were persuaded that they should find, in distantregions, the plants of their own country, and they took a pleasurein giving them the same names. It was some time beforethis illusion was dissipated ; but so fully sensible did botanistsat last become of the extreme smallness of the number ofphsenogamous plants common to different continents, that theancient Floras fell into disrepute. All grew diffident of thepretended identification, and we now find that every naturalistis inclined to examine each supposed exception with scrupulousseverity t* If they admit the fact, they begin to speculate on themode whereby the seeds may have been transported from onecountry into the other, or inquire on which of two continentsthe plant was indigenous, assuming that a species, like anindividual, cannot have two birth-places.The marine vegetation is less known, but we learn fromSee a farther subdivision bjr which twenty-seven provinces are made, bjr ICRalph. DecandollC; son of DecandoUe. Monogr. des Gampanul^es. Paris, 1830.f DecandoUe, Essai £semen. de Geog. Botan. p. 45.7S MARINE VEGETATION. [QuV.Lamourouxi that it is divisible into different systems, apparentlyas distinct as those on the land, notwithstanding that the uniformityof temperature is so much greater in the ocean. Foron that ground we might have expected the phenomenon ofpartial distribution to have been far less striking, since climateis, in general so influential a cause in checking the dispersionof species from one zone to another.The number of hydrophytes, as they are termed is veryconsiderable, and their stations are found to be infinitelymore varied than could have been anticipated ; for while someplants are covered and uncovered daily by the tide, others livein abysses of the ocean, at the extraordinary depth of one thousandweet ; and although in such situations there must reigndarkness more profound than night, at least to our organs,many of these vegetables are highly coloured. From theanalogy of terrestrial plants we should have inferred that thecolouring of the algae was derived from the influence of thesolar rays ; yet we are compelled to doubt when we reflecthow feeble must be the rays which penetrate to these greatdepths.The subaqueous vegetation of the Mediterranean is, uponthe whole, distinct from that of the Atlantic on the west, andthat part of the Arabian gulf which is immediately contiguouson the south. Other botanical provinces are found inthe West-indian seas, including the gulf of Mexico ; in theocean which washes the shores of South America, in the Indianocean and its gulfs, in the seas of Australia, and in the Atlanticbasin, from the 40° of north lat. to the pole. There are veryfew species common to the coast of Europe and the UnitedStates of North America, and none common to the Straits ofMagellan and the shores of Van Diemen's Land.It must not be overlooked, that the distinctness alluded tobetween the vegetation of these several countries relates strictlyto species and not to forms. In regard to the numerical preponderanceof certain forms, and many peculiarities of internalstructure, there is a marked agreement in the vegetable pro*Ch V.] DISPERSION OF SEEDS. 73d actions of districts placed in corresponding latitudes, andunder similar physical circumstances however remote theirposition. Thus there are innumerable points of analogy betweenthe vegetation of the Brazils, equinoctial Africa, and India ;and there are also points of difference wherein the plants ofthese regions are distinguishable from all extra-tropical groups.But there are very few species common to the three continents.The same may be said, if we compare the plants of the Straitsof Magellan with those of Van Diemen'*s Land, or the vegetationof the United States with that of the middle of Europe:the species are distinct, but the forms are in a great degreeanalogous.Let us now consider what means of diffusion, independentlyof the agency of man, are possessed by plants, whereby, in thecourse of ages, they may be enabled to stray from one of thebotanical provinces above mentioned to another, and to establishnew colonies at a great distance from their birth-place.The principal of the inanimate agents, provided by naturefor scattering the seeds of plants over the globe, are the movementsof the atmosphere and of the ocean, and the constantflow of water from the mountains to the sea. To beginwith the winds : a great number of seeds are furnished withdowny and feathery appendages, enabling them, when ripe, tofloat in the air, and to be wafted easily to great distances bythe most gentle breeze. Other plants are fitted for dispersionby means of an attached wing, as in the case of the fir-tree, sothat they are caught up by the wind as they fall from the cone,and are carried to a distance. Amongst the comparativelysmall number of plants known to Linnaeus, no less than onehundred and thirty-eight genera are enumerated as havingwinged seeds.As winds often prevail for days, weeks, or even monthstogether, in the same direction, these means of transportationmay sometimes be without limits ; and even the heavier grainsmay be borne through considerable spaces, in a very shorttime, during ordinary tempests ; for strong gales, which can74 AGENCY OF THB WINDS IN THE [(%• V.sweep dong grains of sand, often move at the rate ol aboutforty miles an hour, and if the storm be very violent, At therate of fifty-six miles ♦. The hurricanes of tropical regions*which root up trees and throw down buildings, sweep along atthe rate of ninety miles an hour, so that, for however shcHt Atime they prevail, they may carry even the heavier fruits andseeds over faiths and seas of considerable widths and, doubtsless, are often the means of introducing ito islands thevegetation of adjoining continents. Whirlwinds are also in*sentimental in bearing along heavy vegetable substances toconsiderable distances. Slight ones may frequently be obaen^in our fields, in summer, carrying up haycocks into the air$and then letting fall small tufts of hay far and wide over thecountry; but they are sometimes so powerful as to dry uplakes and ponds, and to break off the boughs of trees, andcarry them up in a whirling column of air.Franklin tells us, in one of his letters, that he saw, ihMaryland, a whirlwind which began by taking up the dustwhich lay in the road, in the form of a sugar-loaf with thepointed end downwards, and soon after grew to the heightof forty or fifty feet, being twenty or thirty in diameter. Itadvanced in a direction contrary to the wind, and althoughthe rotatory motion of the column was surprisingly rapid, itsonward progress was sufficiently slow to allow a man to keeppace with it on foot. Franklin followed it on horseback,accompanied by his son, for three-quarters of a mile, and sawit enter a wood, where it twisted and turned round largetrees with surprising force. These were carried up in a spiralline, and were seen flying in the air, together with boughsand innumerable leaves, which, from their height, appearedreduced to the apparent size of flies. As this cause operatesat different intervals of time throughout a great portion of theearth's surface, it may be the means of bearing not only plantsbut insects, land-testacea and their eggs, with many otherspecies of animals, to points which they could never otherwiseAxmuaire du Bureau des Longitudes.Ch. v.] DISPERSION O? Plants. Whave reached and from which they may then begin to propA-^gate themselves again as from a new centre.The seeds of some aquatic fresh water plants are of the formof shells or small canoes, and on this account they swim on thsurface, and are carried along by the wind and stream. Othersare furnished with fibres, which serve the purpose of masts andsails, so that they are impelled along by the winds, even whelnethere is no current. They cannot take root until the watersstagnates, or till they reach some sheltered corners where theymay live without being exposed to too much agitation frcm.winds and currents *. The above-mentioned contrivances mayenable aquatic plants to diffuse themselves gradually to cm*miserable distances wherever there is a great chain of lakes, oia river which traverses a large continent.It has been found that a great numerical proportion of theexceptions to the limitation of species to certain quarters of theglobe, occur in the various tribes of cryptogamia plants. Linnaeusobserved that as the germs of plants of this class, suchas mosses, fungi, and lichens, consist of an impalpable powder ^the particles of which are scarcely visible to the naked eyethere is no difficulty to account for their being dispersedthroughout the atmosphere, and carried to every point of theglobe, where there is .a station fitted for them. Lichens inparticular ascend to great elevations, sometimes growing twothousand feet above the line of perpetual snow, at the utmostlimits of vegetation, and where the mean temperature is nearlyat the freezing point. This elevated position must contributegreatly to facilitate the dispersion of those buoyant particles ofwhich their fructification consists f .Some have inferred, from the springing up of mushroomswhenever particular soils and decomposed organic matter aremixed together, that the production of fungi is accidental, indnot analogous to that of perfect plants |. But Fries, whoseauthority on these questions is entitled to the highest respect)Rev. Dr. Jennie, Essays on the Nat. Hist, of Peat Moss, p. 248.f latin., Tour in Lapland, vol. ii. p. 282.} Lindsey; I^trod. ie Net. Bpk, rf My » tiu ^dXi^^'Sxu^*76 DISPERSION OF PLANTS [Ch.V.has shown the fallacy of this argument in favour of the olddoctrine of equivocal generation. •' The sparkles of fungi'says this naturalist " are so infinite that in a single individualof Beticularia maxima, I have counted above ten millions, andso subtile as to be scarcely visible often resembling thin smoke;so light that they may be raised perhaps by evaporation intothe atmosphere and dispersed in so many ways by the attractionof the sun, by insects, wind, elasticity, adhesion, &c., thatit is difficult to conceive a place from which they may be exeluded."In turning our attention, in the next place, to the instrumentalityof the aqueous agents of dispersion, we cannot dobetter than cite the words of one of our ablest botanical writers.** The mountain-stream or torrent," observes Keith, " washesdown to the valley the seeds which may accidentally fall intoit, or which it may happen to sweep from its banks when itsuddenly overflows them. The broad and majestic river,winding along the extensive plain, and traversing the continentsof the world, conveys to the distance of many hundreds of milesthe seeds that may have vegetated at its source. Thus thesouthern shores of the Baltic are visited by seeds which grewin the interior of Germany ; and the western shores of theAtlantic by seeds that have been generated in the interior ofAmerica *." Fruits, moreover, indigenous to America andthe West Indies, such as that of the Mimosa sanders, thecashew-nut, and others, have been known to be drifted acrossthe Atlantic by the Gulf-stream, on the western coasts ofEurope, in such a state that they might have vegetated hadthe climate and soil been favourable. Among these the Gui-landingBonduc, a leguminous plant, is particularly mentioned,as having been raised from a seed found on the west coast ofIreland t- Sir Hans Sloane informs us that the lenticulamarina, or sargasso, a bean which is frequently cast ashore onthe Orkney isles, and coast of Ireland, grows on the rocksabout Jamaica, where the surface of the sea is sometimesSystem of Physiological Botany, vol. il p. 405.t Prowl; Append, to Tucksj, No. V. p. 481,Ch. v.] BY WINDS AND CURRENTS. 77Strewed with it, and from whence it is known to be carried bythe winds and currents towards the coast of Florida *.The absence of liquid matter in the composition of seedsrenders them comparatively insensible to heat and cold, sothat they may be carried without detriment, through climateswhere the plants themselves would instantly perish. Suchis their power of resisting the effects of heat, that Spallanzanimentions some seeds that germinated after having been boiledin water f. When, therefore, a strong gale, after blowingviolently off the land for a time, dies away, and the seedsalight upon the surface of the waters, or wherever the ocean,by eating away the sea-cliffs, throws down into its waves plantswhich would never otherwise approach the shores, the tidesand currents become active instruments in assisting the disseminationof almost all classes of the vegetable kingdom.In a collection of six hundred plants from the neighbourhoodof the river Zaire, in Africa, Mr. Brown found thatthirteen species were also met with on the opposite shores ofGuiana and Brazil. He remarked, that most of these plantswere only found on the lower parts of the river Zaire, andwere chiefly such as produced seeds capable of retaining theirvitality a long time in the currents of the ocean.Islands, moreover, and even the smallest rocks play an iraportant part in aiding such migrations, for when seeds alightupon them from the atmosphere, or are thrown up by the surf,they often vegetate and supply the winds and waves with arepetition of new and uninjured crops of fruits and seeds, whichmay afterwards pursue their course through the atmosphere,or along the surface of the sea, in the same direction. Thenumber of plants found at any given time on an islet affordsno test whatever of the extent to which it may have co-operatedtowards this end, since a variety of species may first thrivethere and then perish, and be followed by other chance-comerslike themselves.Currents and winds, in the arctic regions, drift along ice*Phil Trans, 1696. f System of Philosophical Botany, vol. ii. p. 403,78 AOIMCT OP Animals [si, y.bergs covered with an alluvial soil on which herod and pinsaplings are seen growing, which often continue to vegetateon some distant shore where the ice-island is stranded.With respect to marine vegetation the seeds being in theirnative element, may remain immersed in watt without injuryfor indefinite periods, so that there is no difficulty in conceivingthe diffusion of species wherever uncongenial climates contrarycurrents, and other causes, do not interfere. All are familiarwith the sight of the floating sea* weed*' Flung from the rock on ocean's foam to sail,Where'er the surge may sweep, the tempest's breath pie?aU.*'Remarkable accumulations of drift weed occur cm each sideof the equator in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans.Columbus and other navigators who first encountered thesebanks of algae in the Northern Atlantic compared them tovast inundated meadows, and state that they retarded theprogress of their vessels. The most extensive bank is ^ littlewest of the meridian of Fayal, one of the Azores, betweenlatitude 25° and 36°; violent north winds sometimes prevailin this space, and drive the seaweed to low latitudes, as far asthe 24th or even the 20th degree*.The hollow pod-like receptacles in which the seeds of manyalgae are lodged, and the filaments attached to the seed-vesselsof others, seem intended to give buoyancy, and we may observethat these hydrophytes are in general proliferous so that thesmallest fragment of a branch can be developed into a perfectplant. The seeds moreover, of the greater number of speciesare enveloped with a mucous matter like that which surroundsthe eggs of some fish, and which not only protects them frominjury, but serves to attach them to floating bodies or to rocks.But we have as yet considered part only of the fertile resourcesof nature for conveying seeds to a distance from theirplace of growth. The various tribes of animals are busilyengaged in furthering an object whence they derive such importantadvantages. Sometimes an express provision is foundGreville; JntrQ4uctioii to Alg» Biitaimicse, p. 12,Cli.V,] IN Diffusing PLANTS. 99m the structure of seeds to enable them to adhere ^rmly byprickles hooks and hairs, to the coats of animals, or featherof the winged tribe, to which they remain attached for weeks,er even months, and are borne along into every region whitherbirds or quadrupeds may migrate. Linnaeus enumerates fiftygenera of plants, and the number now known to botanists ismuch greater, which are armed with hooks by which, whengripe, they adhere to the coats of animals. Most of thesevegetables, he remarks, require a soil enriched with dutlg*.Few have failed to mark the locks of wool hanging on ththorn-bushes, wherever the sheep pass, and it is probable thatthe wolf or lion never give chace to herbivorous animals withoutbeing unconsciously subservient to this part of the vegetableeconomy.A deer has strayed from the herd, when browsing on somerich pasture, when he is suddenly alarmed by the approachof his foe. He instantly plunges through many a thicketand swims through many a river and lake. The seeds of theherbs and shrubs adhere to his smoking flanks, and are washed&ff again by the streams. The thorny spray is torn ofl^ andfixes itself in his hairy coat, until brushed off again in otherthickets and copses. Even on the spot where the victim isdevoured, many of the seeds which he had swallowed immediatelybefore the pursuit may be left on the ground uninjured.The passage, indeed, of undigested seeds through the stomachsof animals is one. of the most efficient causes of the disseminationof plants, and is of all others, perhaps, the mostlikely to be overlooked. Few are ignorant that a portion ofthe oats eaten by a horse preserve their germinating faculty iiithe dung. The fiict of their being still nutritious is not lostoh the sagacious rook. To many, says Linnaeus, it seemsextraordinary, and something of a prodigy, that when a fieldis well tilled and sown with the best wheat, it frequently producesdarnel or the wild oat, especially if it be manured withnew dung : they do not consider that the fertility of the smallerseeds is not destroyed in the ventricles of animals *•« Litanies Amoen, Acad., vol. ii. "^^ ^^%80 AGENCY OF BIRDS [Ck V.Some of the order of the Passers says Lamarck *, devourthe seeds of pants in great quantities, which they eject againin very distant places, without destroying its faculty of vegetation; thus a flight of larlcs will fill the cleanest field with agreat quantity of various kinds of plants, as the melilot trefoil{Medicago lupulina)^ and others whose seeds are so heavy thatthe wind is not able to scatter them to any distance. In likemanner, the blackbird and missel-thrush, when they devourberries in too great quantities, are known to consign them tothe earth undigested in their excrement f.Pulpy fruits serve quadrupeds and birds as food, while theirseeds often hard and indigestible, pass uninjured through theintestines, and are deposited far from their original place ofgrowth in a condition peculiarly fit for vegetation |. So wellare our farmers, in some parts of England, aware of this fact,that when they desire to raise a quick-set hedge in the shortestpossible time, they feed turkeys with the haws of the commonwhite-thorn {Cratcegus oxyacantha), and then sow thestones which are ejected in their excrement, whereby theygain an entire year in the growth of the plant §. Birdswhen they pluck cherries, shoes, and haws, fly away withthem to some convenient place, and when they have devouredthe fruit drop the stone into the ground. Captain Cook, inhis account of the volcanic island of Tanna, one of the NewHebrides, which he visited in his second voyage, makes thefollowing interesting observation. '^ Mr. Forster, in his botanicalexcursion this day, shot a pigeon in the craw of whichwas a wild nutmeg. He took some pains to find the tree onthis island, but his endeavours were without success ||." It iseasy therefore, to perceive, that birds in their migrations togreat distances, and even across seas, may transport seeds tonew isles and continents.♦ Amen. Acad., vol. iv., Essay 75, § 8.t Wilcke, Araoen. Acad., vol. vi. § 22,I Smith's Intro. to Phys. and Syst. Botany, p. 304, 1807.This information was communicated to me by Professor Henslowe, •£Cambridge. || Book iii, ch. 4.Ch. v.] IN DIFFUSING PLANTS. 81The sudden deaths to which great numbers of frugivorousbirds are annually exposed, must not be omitted as auxiliaryto the transportation of seeds to new habitations. When thesea retires from the shore, and leaves fruits and seeds on thebeachy or in the mud of estuaries, it might, by the returningtide, wash them away again, or destroy them by longimmersion ; but when they are gathered by land birds whichfrequent the sea-side, or by waders and water-fowl, they areoften borne inland, and if the bird to whose crop they have beenconsigned is killed, they may be left to grow up far from thesea. Let such an accident happen but once in a century, or athousand years, it will be sufficient to spread many of theplants from one continent to another ; for, in estimating theactivity of these causes, we must not consider whether they actslowly in relation to the period of our observation, but in referenceto the duration of species in general.Let us trace the operation of this cause in connexion withothers. A tempestuous wind bears the seeds of a plant manymiles through the air, and then delivers them to the ocean ;the oceanic current drifts them to a distant continent; by thefall of the tide they become the food of numerous birds, andone of these is seized by a hawk or eagle, which, soaring acrosshill and dale to a place of retreat, leaves, after devouring itsprey, the unpalatable seeds to spring up and flourish in a newsoil*The machinery before adverted to is so capable of disseminatingseeds over almost unbounded spaces, that were wemore intimately acquainted with the economy of nature, wemight probably explain all the instances which occur of theaberration of plants to great distances from their native countries.The real difficulty which must present itself to everyonewho contemplates the present geographical distribution ofspecies, is the small number of exceptions to the rule of the non-intermixtureof different groups of plants. Why have they not,supposing them to have been ever so distinct originally, becomemore blended and confounded together in the lapse of ages ?Vol. II. ^M AQEHClf d1^ MAW IN fate [ftu V.But in addition to all the ag^tits already tmam^Med asInstrumental in difFusing plants over the globe We have still toconsider man-sone of the most important of all. He transportwith him, into every region, the vegetables which he cultivatesfor his wants, and is the involuntary means of spreading a stillgreater number which are useless to him, or even ttostioas.** When the introduction of cultivated plants is of recent date,there is no difficulty in tracing their origin ; but when it is ofhigh antiquity, we are often ignorant of the true country of theplants on which we feed. No one contests the American originalof the maize or the potato, nor the origin, in the old worlds ofthe cofFee-tree and of wheat. But there are certain objectsof culture, of very ancient date, between the tropics, such, forexample, as the banana, of which the origin cannot be verified.Armies, in modem times, have been known to carry, in alldirections, grain and cultivated vegetables from one extremityof Europe to the other, and thus have shown us how, in storeancient times, the conquests of Alexander, the distant expeditionsof the Romans, and afterwards the Crusades, may havetransported many plants from one part of the world to theother *.*'But besides the plants used in agriculture, the number whichhave been naturalized by accident, or which man has spreadunintentionally, is considerable. One of our old authors, Jos*selwyn, gives a catalogue of such plants as had, in his time,sprung up in the colony since the English planted and keptcattle in New England, They were two and twenty In number.The common nettle was the first which the settlers noticed,and the plantain was called by the Indians, *' English man'sfoot** as if it sprung from their footsteps f .** We have introduced everywhere," observes DecandoIIe,'^ some weeds which grow among our Various kinds of wheat,and which have been received, perhaps, originally fran Asiawith them . Thus, together with the Barbary wheats the inhabitEssai Eleven. &c. p. 50,t Qu^*®'ly Review, vol XXX., p. 8.Oh. v.] DISPERSION &*■ PLANTS. instantsof the sotith of Europe have sown, foi* tunny ages,the plantsof Algiers and Tunis. With the wools and cottons of theEast, or of Barbary, there are often brought into France, thegrains of exotic plants, sonne of which naturalize themselves.Of this 1 will cite a striking exdtnple. There is dt the gate ofMontpelier a meadow set apart for drying foreign Wool afterit has bean toothed. There hardly passes a year without someforeign plants being foUiid naturalized in this drying groUiid.I have gathered there Centaurea patviflora^ Psordea palsestiiia^and Hypericum crispus*" This fact is not only illustrativeof the aid which man lends inadvertently to the propagation ofplants, but it also demonstrates the multiplicity of seeds whichare borne about in the woolly and hairy coats of wild animals.The same botanist mentions instances of plants naturalizedin sea-sports by the ballast of ships, and several examples ofothers which have spread through Europe from botanical gardens,so his to have become more common than many indigenousspecies.It is Scarcely a century, says Litmus *f since the Canadiangridiron, or flea-bane, was brought from America to the botanicalgarden at Paris, and already the seeds have been carriedby the winds, so that it is diffused over France, the Britishislands, Italy, Sicily, Holland, and Germany. Several othersare mentioned by the Swedish naturalist, as having been dispersedby similar means. The common thorn-apple, Daturastramonium, observes Willdenow, now grows aS a noxious weedthroughout all Europe, with the exception of Sweden, Lapland,and Russia. It came from the East Indies and Abyssinia tous,and was so universally spread by certain quacks who usedits seed as an emetic t«tn hot and ill-cultivated countries, Such naturalization takeplace more easily. Thus the Chenopodium ambrosioideS,sown by Mr. Purcell on a point of St. Helena, multiplied soiBssay on the Habitable Earth, Amoen. Acad. rol. li. p. 409.t Principles of Botany p. 389. . .84 ;iOENCV OF MAN IN THE [CJh. V.in four years as to become one of the commonest weeds in theisland *. ,The most remarkable proof, says DecandoUe, of the extentto which man is unconsciously the instrument of dispersingand naturalizing species is found in the fact that in New Holland,America, and the Cape of Good Hope, the aboriginalEuropean species exceed in number all the others which havecome from any distant regions, so that, in this instance, theinfluence of man has surpassed that of all the other causeswhich tend to disseminate plants to remote districts.Although we are but slightly acquainted, as yet, with theextent of our instrumentality in naturalizing species yet thefacts ascertained afford no small reason to suspect that thenumber which we introduce unintentionally, exceeds all thosetransported by design. Nor is it unnatural to suppose that thefunctions, which the inferior beings extirpated by man once dischargedin the economy of nature, should devolve upon thehuman race. If we drive many birds of passage from differentcountries, we are probably required to fulfil their office of carryingseeds, eggs of fish, insects, molluscs, and other creatures,to distant regions ; if we destroy quadrupeds, we must replacethem, not merely as consumers of the animal and vegetablesubstances which they devoured, but as disseminators of plants,and of the inferior classes of the animal kingdom. We do notmean to insinuate that the same changes which man bringsabout, would have taken place by means of the agency of otherspecies, but merely that he supersedes a certain number ofagents, and so far as he disperses plants unintentionally, oragainst his willy his intervention is strictly analogous to that ofthe species so extirpated.We may observe, moreover, that if, at former periods, theanimals inhabiting any given district have been partially alteredby the extinction of some species, and the introduction ofothers, whether by new creations or by immigration, a changemust have taken place in regard to the particular plants con-principlesof Botany, p. 389.Ch. v.] DISPERSION OF PLANTS. BSvexed about with them to foreign countries. As for example,when one set of migratory birds is substituted for another, thecountries from and to which seeds are transported are imme-^lately changed. Vicissitudes, therefore, analogous to thosewhich man has occasioned, may have previously attended thespringing up of new relations between species in the vegetableand animal worlds.It may also be remarked, that if man is the most active agentin enlarging, so also is he in circumscribing the geographicalboundaries of particular plants. He promotes the migrationof some, he retards that of other species, so that while in manyrespects he" appears to be exerting his power to blend andconfound the various provinces of indigenous species, he is,in other ways, instrumental in obstructing the fusion into onegroup of the inhabitants of contiguous provinces.Thus, for example, when two botanical regions exist in thesame great continent, such as the European region, comprehendingthe central parts of Europe and those surroundingthe Mediterranean, and the Oriental region as it has beentermed, embracing the countries adjoining the Black Sea andthe Caspian, the interposition between these of thousands ofsquares miles of cultivated lands, opposes a new and powerfulbarrier against the mutual interchange of indigenous plants.Botanists are well aware that garden plants naturalize and diffusethemselves with great facility in comparatively unreclaimedcountries, but spread themselves slowly and with difficulty indistricts highly cultivated. There are many obvious causesfor this difference ; by drainage and culture the natural varietyof stations is diminished, and those stray individuals by whichthe passage of a species from one fit station to another iseffected, are no sooner detected by the agriculturist, than theyare uprooted as weeds. The larger shrubs and trees, in particular,can scarcely ever escape observation, when they haveattained a certain size, and will rarely fail to be cut down ifunprofitable.The same observations are applicable to the interchange of86 Dinrusioif of Plants. [o^ V.the insects, birds, and quadrupeds of two regis situated likethose above alluded to No beasts of prey ar permitted tomake their way across the intervening arable tracts. Manybirds, and hundreds of insects, which would have found somepalatable food amongst the various herbs and trees of the pairmeal wilderness, are unable to subsist on the olive the vinethe wheat, and a few trees and grasses favoured by mat Inaddition, therefore, to his direct intervention, man, in this case,operates indirectly to impede the dissemination of tanta, byintercepting the migrations of animals, many of which wouldotherwise have been active in transporting seeds from one provinceto another.Whether in the vegetable kingdom the influence of man willtend, after a considerable lapse of ages, to render the geographicalrange of «pecje» in general more extended, as Deoandolleseems to anticipate, or whether the compensating agency abovealluded to will not counterbalance the exceptions caused by ournaturalization, admits at least of some doubt. In the attemptto form an estimate on this subject, we must be careful not tounderrate, or almost overlook, as some appear to have done,the influence of man in checking the diffusion of plants, andrestricting their distribution to narrower limits.CHAPTER VI.Geographical Distribution of Animals — ^BuflR)n on the specific distinctness ofthe quadrupeds of the old and new world-^Di^RBfeni regions of indigenousmammalia — Quadrupeds in islauds^-^-Sapge of the Cetafiep^^PissePWitioi^ ofquadrupeds — their powers of swimming — Migratory Instincts — Printing pfquadrupeds on ice-floes — On floating islands of drift timber — emigrations ofGetacea — Habitations of Birds — ^^Their migrations and facilities of difl^bsion-*-Distribution of Reptiles and their powers of dissemination.Although in speculating on ^^ philosophical possibilities*'said Bufibn, the same temperature might have been expected,all other circumstances being equal, to produce the same beingsin different parts of the globe, both in the animal and vegetablekingdoms, yet it is an undoubted fact that when America wasdiscovered, its indigenous quadrupeds were all dissimilar fromthose previously known in the old world. The elephant, therhinoceros, the hippopotamus, the came leopard, the came],the dromedary, the buffalo, the horse, the ass, the lion, thtiger, the apes, the baboons, and a number of otho mammalia,where nowhere to be met with on the new continent ; whilein the old, thq American species, of the same great class, werenowhere to be seen — the tapir, the lama, thepecari, the jaguar,the couguar, the agouti, the paca, the coati, and the sloth.These phenomena, although few in number relatively to thewhole animate creation, were so striking and so positive in theirnature, that the French naturalist caught sight at once of ageneral law in the geographical distribution of organic beings,namely, the limitation of groups of distinct species to regionsseparated from the rest of the globe by certain natural barriers.It was, therefore, in a truly philosophical spirit that, relyingon the clearness of the evidence obtained respecting the largerquadrupeds, he ventured to call in question the identificationannounced by some contemporary naturalists, of species of88 DISTRIBUTION OP [Ch. VI.animals said to be common to the southern extremities ofAmerica and Africa *.The migration of quadrupeds from one part of the globe tothe other, observes one of our ablest writers, is prevented byuncongenial climates and the branches of the ocean whichintersect continents. '^ Hence by a reference to the geographicalsite of countries, we may divide the earth into a certainnumber of regions fitted to become the abodes of particulargroups of animals, and we shall find on inquiry that eachof these provinces, thus conjecturally marked out, is actuallyinhabited by a distinct nation of quadrupeds f .'^Where the continents of the old and new world approximateto each other towards the norths the narrow straitswhich separate them are frozen over in winter, and the distanceis further lessened by intervening islands. Thus apassage from one' continent to another becomes practicable tosuch quadrupeds as are fitted to endure the intense cold of thearctic circle. Accordingly the whole arctic region has becomeone of the provinces of the animal kingdom, and contains manyspecies common to both the great continents. But the temperateregions of America, which are separated by a wideextent of ocean from those of Europe and Asia, contain eacha distinct nation of indigenous quadrupeds. There are threegroups of tropical mammalia belonging severally to America,Africa, and continental India, each inhabiting lands separatedfrom each other by the ocean.In Peru and Chili, says Humboldt, the region of the grasses,which is at an elevation of from twelve thousand three hundredto fifteen thousand four hundred feet, is inhabited bycrowds of lama, guanaco, and alpaca. These quadrupeds,which here represent the genus camel of the ancient continentBuffon, vol. V. — On the Virginian Opossum.t Prichard's Phys. Hist, of Mankind, vol. i. p. 54. In some of the preliminarychapters will be found a sketch of the leading facts illustrative of the geographicaldistribution of animal, drawn up with the authors usual clearness aiability.Ch. VI.] MAMMlFEROUS QUADRUPEDS. 89have not extended themselves either to Brazil or Mexicobecause, during their journey, they must necessarily havedescended into regions that were too hot for them *.New Holland is well known to contain a most singular andcharacteristic assemblage of mammiferous animals, consistingof more than forty species of the marsupial family, of which nocongeners even occur elsewhere, with the exception of a fewAmerican opossums. This exclusive occupation of the Australiancontinent by the kangaroos and other tribes of pouchedanimals, although it has justly excited great attention, is a fact,nevertheless in strict accordance with the general laws of thedistribution of species ; since, in other parts of the globe wefind peculiarities of form, structure, and habit, in birds, reptiles,insects, or plants, confined entirely to one hemisphere, orone continent, and sometimes to much narrower limits.The southern region of Africa, where that continent extendsinto the temperate zone, constitutes another separate zoologicalprovince, surrounded as it is on three sides by the ocean, andcut off from the countries of milder climate, in the northernhemisphere, by the intervening torrid zone. In many instances,this region contains the same genera which are found in temperateclimates to the northward of the line ; but then thesouthern are different from the northern species. Thus inthe south we find the quagga and the zebra : in the north, thehorse, the ass, and the jiggetai of Asia.The south of Africa is spread out into fine level plains fromthe tropic to the Cape ; in this region, says Pennant besides thehorse genus, of which five species have been found, there arealso peculiar species of rhinoceros, the hog, and the hyrax,among pachydermatous races ; and amongst the ruminating,the giraffe, the Cape buffalo, and a variety of remarkable antelopes,as the springbok, the oryx, the gnou> the leucophoe, thepygarga, and several others f .Description of the Equatorial Regions.t Pennant's Hist, of Quadrupeds cited by Richard, Phys. Hist, of Man](ind|Vol. i. p. 66.90 DifT^iBimpii Of IQkYh.The Indian archipelago praMiU peculiar ph i nn iii n a inregard to iu indigenous mammalian which, m their ga^emcharacter, recede in some reapeeta finom that of the wimalaofthe Indian continents and approximate to the Afrioiil* TheSunday hales obtain a hippopotamus, which is wanting in therivers of Asia; Sumatra, a peculiar spedes of tapir and arhinoceros resembling the African more than tb Indian spedeijbut specifically distinguishable from both *,Beyond the Indian archipelago is an extensive regions DeludingNew Guinea New Britain, and New Ireland togetherwith the an^pelago of Solomon islands the New B^md^and Louisiana, and the more remote gn>upi of ialea in the greatsouthern ocean, which may be considered as forming ope zoologicalprovince. Although these remarkable countries areextremely fertile in their vegetable productions thor are almostwholly destitute of native warm-blooded quadrupeds exc^ afew species of bats, and some domesticated animals in the poi*session of the natives f*Quadrupeds found on islands situate near the eminent,generally form a part of the stock of animals belonging to theadjacent main land ; ** but small islands remote from continentsare in general altogether destitute of land quadrupeds, acceptsuch as appear to have been conveyed to them by men. Kasguelen's Land, Juan Fernando, the GallapagoB, and the Islesde Lobos, are examples pf this fact. Among all the groups offertile islands in the Pacific ocean, no quadrupeds have beenfound, except dogs, hogs, rats and a few bats The bats havebeen found in New Zealand and the mote westerly groups ;they may probably have made their way along the chain ofislands which extend from the shores of New Guinea far intothe southern Pacific The hogs and the dogs appear to havebeen conveyed by the natives from New Guinea. The Indianisles, near New Guinea, abound in oxen, buffaloes, goats, deer,.hogs, dogs, cats, and rats ; but none of them are said to havePrichard, Pbyt. Hist* of Mankind, p. 66 ; Cuvier, Ann. du Multum. torn. tu.■ • ■f Prichard, ibid., p. 56.Ch. VI*] MAMMIFEB0U8 Quadrupeds. g|reached New Guioefi, ^oept th bog and the dqg« The Ni^WGuinea bog is c^f the Cbineaie variety, and wivb probably broughtfrom nom Gf the neighbouring isles bang th? Mimal most iarequest among savages. It ba rpQ wild in New Guinea?Thence it ha been conveyed tQ the New ^ebrideBJr the Togaand Society isle, and tp the Marquesas ; but it is still wantingin the more easterly islands, and, tp the southward, in NewCaledonia.^^ J)pg9 may be traced from New Guinea to the New Hebridesand Fiji isles; but they are wanting in the Tonga isles,though found among the Society and Sandwich islanders,by some of whom they are used for food ; to the southwardthey have been conveyed to New Caledonia and New ZealandIn Easter Island, the most remotely situated in this ocean, thereare no domestic animals except fowls and rats, which are eatenby the natives i these animals are found in most of the islands ;the fowls are probably fr(Hn New Guinea. Rats are to befound even on some desert islands, whither they may havebeen conveyed by canoes which have occasionally approachedthe shores. It is known, also, that rats occasionally swim inlargenumbers to considerable distances *.-^It is natural to suppose that the geographical range of thedifferent pedes of cetacea should be less correctly ascertainedthan that pf the terrestrial mammifers. It is however, wellknown, that the whales which are obtained by our fishers in theBoth Seas, are distinct from those c^ the North; and thesame dissimilarity has been found in all the other marine animalsof the same class, so far as they have yet been studied bynaturalists.Let us now inquire what faculties the various land quadrupedsenjoy €i spreading themselves over the surface of the earth.In the first place, as their numbers multiply, all of them,whether they feed on plants, or prey on other animals, arediqx>sed to scatter themselves gradually over as wide an areaas is accessible to them. eut before they have extended theirrichards Phys* Hist* of Mankind, v^^^^^^l'b^ .93 DISPERSION OP [Ch.VI.migrations over a large space they are usually arrested eitherby the seat or a zone of uncongenial climate or some lofty andunbroken chain of mountains, or a tract already occupied by ahostile and more powerful species.Rivers and narrow faiths can seldom interfere with theirprogress, for the greater part of them swim well, and few arewithout this power when urged by danger and pressing want*Thus, amongst beasts of prey, the tiger is seen swimming aboutamong the islands and creeks in the delta of the Ganges, andthe jaguar traverses with ease the largest streams in SouthAmerica *. The bear, also, and the bison, stem the current ofthe Mississippi. The popular error, that the common swinecannot escape by swimming when thrown into the water, hasbeen contradicted by several curious and well-authenticatedinstances during the recent floods in Scotland. One pig* onlysix months old, after having been carried down from Yarmouthto the bar at the mouth of the Spey, a distance of a quarter ofa mile, swam four miles eastward to Fort Gordon and landedsafe. Three others, of the same age and litter, swam at thesame time five miles to the west, and landed at Blackwell f*In an adult and wild state, these animals would doubtlesshave been more strong and active, and might, when hardpressed, have performed a much longer voyage. Hence islandsremote from the continent may obtain inhabitants by casualtieswhich, like the late storms in Yorkshire, may only occur oncein many centuries, or thousands of years, under all the samecircumstances. It is obvious that powerful tides, winds, andcurrents, may sometimes carry along quadrupeds capable, inlike manner, of preserving themselves for hours in the sea tovery considerable distances, and in this way, perhaps, the tapirtapir Indices) may have become common to Sumatra andthe Malayan peninsula.To the elephant in particular, the power of crossing rivers isessential in a wild state, for the quantity of food which a herdBuffon, vol. V. p. 204.f Sir T. D. Lauder, part. on the Floods in Yorkshire, August, 1829, p. 302,second edition.Ch. VL] MAMMIFEROUS QUADRUPEDS. 93^of these animals consumes renders it necessary that they shouldbe constantly moving from place to place. The elephantcrosses the stream in two ways. If the bed of the river be hard,and the water not of too great a depth, he fords it. But whenhe crosses great rivers, such as the Ganges and the Niger, theelephant swims deep, so deep that the end of his trunk only isout of the water * ; for it is a matter of indifference to himwhether his body be completely immersed provided he canbring the tip of his trunk to the surface, so as to breathe theexternal air.Animals of the deer kind frequently take to the water,especially in the rutting season, when the stags are seen swimmingfor several leagues at a time, from island to island, insearch of the does, especially in the Canadian lakes ; and insome countries where there are islands near the sea-shore, theyfearlessly enter the sea and swim to them. In hunting excursions,in North America, the elk of that country is frequentlypursued for great distances through the water.The large herbivorous animals, which are gregarious, cannever remain long in a confined region, as they consume somuch vegetable food. The immense herds of bisons whichoften, in the great valley of the Mississippi, blacken the surfacenear the banks of that river and its tributaries, are continuallyshifting their quarters, followed by wolves which prowl aboutin their rear, *' It is no exaggeration," says Mr, James, " toassert, that in one place, on the banks of the Platte, at least tenthousand bisons burst on our sight in an instant. In themorning we again sought the living picture, but upon all theplain, which last evening was so teeming with noble animals,not one remained f ."Besides the disposition common to the individuals of everyspecies slowly to extend their range in search of food, in proportionas their numbers augment, a migratory instinct oftendevelops itself in an extraordinary manner, when after anlib. Enter. Know., Quadrupeds, vol. ii. p. 63.f Expedition from Pittsburgh to the Rodi^ Mountains, vol. ii. p. 153.94 BttORATlOHi OF risk. VI.unusually prolific season or Upon a sudden seardtjr of provisions,great multitudes are threatened by famine. We shallenumerate several illustrations of these migrations, becausethey may put us upon our guard against attributing a highantiquity to a particular species merely because it is dlffiisedover a great space ; they show clearly how soon, in a state ofnature, a newly-created spedes might spread itself, in everydirection, from a single point.In very severe winters, great numbers of the black bears ofAmerica migrate from Canada into the United States ; butinmilder seasons, when they have been Well fed, they remainand hybemate in the north *• The rein-deer, which in Scandinaviacan scarcely exist to the south of the sixty-fifth parallel,descends, in consequence of the greater coldness of the climateto the fiftieth degree in Chinese Tartary, and ofteil rovesinto a country of more southern latitude than any part ofEngland.In Lapland, and other high latitudes, the coUitiloU squirrels,whenever they are compelled, by want of provisions, to quittheir usual abodes, migrate in amazing numbers, and traveldirectly forwards, allowing neither rocks, forests, nor thebroadest waters, to turn them from their course. Great numbersare often drowned in attempting to pass faiths and rivers.In like manner the small Norway rat sometimes pursues ifsmigrations in a straight line across rivers and lakes ; and Pennantinforms Ud, that when, in Kamtschatka, the rats becometoo numerous, they gather together in the £spring, and proceedin great bodies westward, swimming over rivers, lakes, andarms of the sea. Many are drowned or destroyed by waterfowlor fish. As soon as they have crossed the river Pencil,at the head of the gulf of the same name, they turn southwardand reach the rivers Judoma and Ochot by the middle of July,a district surprisingly, distant from their point of departure.The flemings, also, of Scandinavia, often pour down inmyriads from the northern mountains and devastate the countFauna Borealis-Americana, p. 16.tty* They generally more in lines which at abcwt thfe^ feetfrom each other, and exactly parallel j and they direct theiihinarch fit^nl the northwest td the fitouth-'east, going directlyforward through river and lakes and wheii they meet Withstacks of hay ol* corn, gnawing their way through them insteadof passing round *.Vast troops of the wild ass or onager of the ancients, whichinhabit the mountainous deserts of Great Tartary feed, duringthe summer, in the tracts east and north of Lake Aral. In theautumn they collect in herds of hundreds, and even thousandsand direct their course towards the north of India and often toPersia, to enjoy a warm retreat during winter f . Bands of twoor three hundred quaggas, a species of wild ass, are sometimesseen to migrate from the tropical plains of southern Africato the vicinity of the Malaleveeti river. During their migrationsthey ate followed by lions, who slaughter them night byiiight+.The migratory swarms of the springbok, or Cape antelope,afford another illustration of the rapidity with which a spedes,under certain circumstances may be diffused over a continent.When the stagnant pools of the immense deserts south of theOrange river dry up, which ofl:en happens after intervals ofthree or foui* years, myriads of these animals desert the parchedsoil, and pour down like a deluge oti the cultivated regionsnearer the Cape. The havoc committed by them resemblesthat of the African locusts ; and so crowded are the herds, that*' the lion has been seen to walk in the midst of the compressedphalanx with only as much room between him and his victimsas the fears of those immediately around Could procure bypressing outwards ^.'^Dr. Cornfield mentions a singular fact in regard to the ged-• Phil. TraM., toL it. p. 872, f W<»a's ZoogMlAy, tol. L p- 1 1 .t ^ ^^ authority of Mv. Campbell Library of Enteii. Taw*, MenagnieB,Tol. i. p. 152.§ Cuvier's Animal Kingdom, by Griffiths, vol. li. p. 109, Library of Enteit.Know.; Menageries, ^Tolti* p. 366*96 DRIFTING OF QUADRUPEDS ON [topographicaldistribution of the Mjdaus melioeps, a kind of polecatinhabiting Java. Thisanimal is ^^ confined exclusively tothose mountains which have an elevation of more than seventhousand feet above the level of the ocean : on these it occurswith the same regularity as many plants. The long-extendedsurface of Java, abounding with conical points which exceedthis elevation, affords many places favourable for its resort.On ascending these mountains, the traveller scarcely fails tomeet with this animal, which, from its peculiarities, is universallyknown to the inhabitants of these elevated tracts while tothose of the plains it is as strange as an animal from a foreigncountry. In my visits to the mountainous districts, I uniformlymet with it, and as far as the information of the nativescan be relied on, it is found on all the mountains *.''Now if we were asked to conjecture how the Mydaus arrivedat the elevated regions of each of these isolated mountains, weshould say that before the isle was peopled by man, by whomtheir numbers are now thinned, they may occasionally havemultiplied so as to be forced to collect together and migrate ; inwhich case, notwithstanding the slowness of their motionssome few would succeed in reaching another mountain sometwenty, or even, perhaps, fifty miles distant: for althoughthe climate of the hot intervening plains would be unfavourableto them, they might support it for a time, and would findthere abundance of insects on which they feed. Volcanic eruptions,which at different times have covered the summits ofsome of these lofty cones with steril sand and ashes, may haveoccasionally contributed to force on these migrations.The power of the terrestrial mammalia to cross the sea isvery limited, and we have already stated that the same speciesis scarcely ever common to districts widely separated by theocean. If there be some exceptions to this rule they generallyadmit of explanation, for there are natural means whereby someanimals may be floated across the water, and the sea sometimeswears a passage through a neck of land, leaving individualsZoological Researches in Java, No. 2.Ch. VI.] ICE-FLOES AND FLOATING ISLANDS. 97of a spedes on each side of the new channel. Polar bears areknown to have been frequently drifted on the ice from Greenlandto Iceland ; they can also swim to considerable distances,for Captain Parry, on the return of his ships through Barrow'sStrait, met with a bear swimming in the water about midwaybetween the shores, which were about forty miles apart, andwhere no ice was in sight*. •* Near the east coast of greenlandobserves Scores, ^* they have been seen onost interesting account of the arrival of one at theisland of St. Vincent. It is worthy of being recorded, says theRev. L. Building J, «* that a noble specimen of the Boa constrictorwas lately conveyed to us by the currents, twistedround the trunk of a large sound cedar tree, which had probablybeen washed out of the bank by the floods of some greatSouth American river, while its huge folds hung on thebranches, as it waited for its prey. The monster was fortunatelydestroyed after killing a few sheep, and life skeletonnow hangs before me in my study, putting me in mind howmuch reason I might have had to fear in my future ramblesthrough the forests of St. Vincent, had this formidable reptilebeen a pregnant female, and escaped to a safe retreat."Malte-Brun says (Syst.of Geog. vol. viii. p. 193), that a crocodile is still preservedat Lyons that was taken from the Shone, about two centuries ago ; but noparticulars are given. f Brit. Animals, p. 149 ; who cites Piebald.X Zool. Joum. vol. iii. p. 406. Dec. 1827.CHAPTER VII.Geographical distribution and migrations of fish-^f testacea— Causes whichlimit the extension of many species — ^^Their mode of diffusion — Geographicalrange of zoophytes — ^^Their powers of dissemination — Distribution of insectsMigratory instincts of some species — Certain types characterize particularcountries — Their means of dissemination — Geographical distribution anddivision of man — Speculations as to the birth-place of the human species—Progress of human population — Drifting of canoes to vast distances— On theinvoluntary influence of man in extending the range of many other species.Geographical Distribution and Migrations of Fish.Although we are less acquainted with the habitations ofmarine animals than with the grouping of the terrestrial speciesbefore described, yet it is well ascertained that their distributionis governed by the same general laws. The testimonyborne by MM. P6ron and Lesueur to this important fact isremarkably strong. These eminent naturalists, after collectingand describing many thousand species which they broughtto Europe from the southern hemisphere, insist most emphaticallyon their distinctness from those north of the equator ; andthis remark they extend to animals of all classes from those of amore simple to those of a more complex organization, from thesponges and medusae to the cetacea. *^ Among all those whichwe have been able to examine," say they, *^ with our owneyes, or with regard to which it has appeared to us possible topronounce with certainty, there is not a single animal of thesouthern regions which is not distinguished by essential charactersfrom the analogous species in the northern seas *•The fish of the Arabian gulf are said to differ entirely fromSur les Habitations des Animaux Marins. Ann. du Mus. torn. X7., cited hyRichard, Phys. Hist, of Mankind; toI. i. p. 51.106 MIGRATIONS OF FISH. [Gb. VII.those of the Mediterranean, notwithstanding the proximity ofthese seas. The flying-fish are found (some stragglers excepted)only between the tropics, — in receding from the linethey never approach a higher latitude than the fortieth parallel.Those inhabiting the Atlantic are said to be different speciesfrom those of the eastern ocean*. The electric gymnotusbelongs exclusively to America the trembler, or Suum clericusto the rivers of Africa | but the torpedo, or crawfish,is said to be dispersed over all tropical and many temperateseas.All are aware that there are certain fish of passage whichhave thcdr periodical migrations like some tribes of birds. Thesalmon, towards the season of spawning, ascends the rivers forhundreds of miles leaping up the cataracts which it meets inits course, and then retreats again into the depths of the ocean.The herring and the haddock, after frequenting certain shoresin vast shoals for a series of years, desert them again and resortto other stations followed by the species which prey on them.Beds are said to descend into the sea for the purpose of producingtheir young, which are seen returning into the freshwaterby myriads, extremely small in size, but possessing thepower of surmounting every obstacle which occurs in the courseof a river, by applying their slimy and glutinous bodies to thesurface of rocks, or the gates of a lock, even when dry and soclimbing over it J.Gmelin says that the answered subsist in their migrations onthe spawn of fish, and that oftentimes when they void thespa wn^ two or three days afterwards, the eggs retain their vitalityunimpaired §. When there are many disconnected freshwater-lakesin a mountainous region, at various elevations eachremote from the other, it has often been deemed inconceivablehow they could all become stocked with fish from one commonsource; but it has been suggested, that the minute ^gs ofMalte-5nin, vol.i. p. 507. t IWd.I Phil. Trans. 1747, p. 395« ( Axncon. Acad., Ssiay 75.CHI. YK'} MIQBATIQNf DF Fibs, lOYthese ftnimul^ may Mantinea be entangled In the feathm ofwater-fowls These wb^n they alight to wash and plumeth^nofelvei in the water may often uneonsdougly contributeto propagate swarms of fish, which, in due season, will supplythem with food. Some of the water-beetles, also as the dyticidse» are amphibious and in the evening quit their lakesand pools, and flying in the air transport the minute ova offishes to distant waters. In this manner some naturalistsaccount for the fry of fish appearing occasionally in small poolscaused by heavy rains.OeographtocU Distribution and Migrations of Testacea.The testaceous of which iso great a variety of species occurs inthe sea, are a class of animals of peculiar importance to thegeologist, because their remains are found in strata of all agesand generally in a higher state of preservation than those ofother organic beings. Curate has a decided influence on thegeographical distribution of species in this class ; but as thereis much greater Uniformity of temperature in the Fosters of theocean, than in the atmosphere which invests] the land thedifiiisio]^ of ipany marine mollusca is extensive,Sophie fprmss as those of the nautili, volume, and cypress,attain their fullest development in warm latitudes ; and mostof their species are extensively confined to them. Person andLesueur remark, that the Haliotis gigantic, of Van Dieman'sland, and the FhattaneUa» diminish in size as they follow thecoasts of New I^oUapd to king George-s straits, and entirelydisappear beyqiiid them ^t Almost all the species of SouthAmerican shells differ from those of the Indian archipelago inthe same latitudes ; and on the shores of many of the isles ofthe South Pacific, peculiar species have been obtained. Butwe are as yet by no means able to sketch out the submarineprovinces of shells as the botanist has done those of the terretrial, and even of the subaqueous plants. There can be littlef Ann. du Mus. 4'Hjst. Nat., torn. zy«108 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION AND (Ch VJI.doubt however, that the boundaries in this case, Ibotli of latinstide and longitude, will be found in general well defined Thecontinuous lines of continents stretching from north to southsprevent a particular species from belting the globe, and follow-^ing the direction of the isothermal lines. The inhabitants ofthe West Indian seas, for example, cannot enter the Pacificwithout passing round through the inclement climate of CapeHorn.Currents also flowing permanently in certain directions, andthe influx at certain points of great bodies of fresh-water, limitthe extension of many species. Those which love deep waterare arrested by shoals ; others, fitted for shallow seas, cannotmigrate across unfathomable abysses. Some few species, howeverhave an immense range, as the Bulla aperta for example,which is found in almost all zones. The habitation of thBulla striata extends from the shores of Egypt to the coasts ofEngland and France, and it recurs again in the seas of Sensual,Brazil, and the West Indies. The Turbo petrteua inhabits theseas of England, Guadaloupe, and the Cape of Good Hope *,and many instances of a similar kind might be enumerated.The latina francis has wandered into almost every seaboth tropical and temperate. This ** common oceanic snail"derives its buoyancy from an admirably contrived float, whichhas enabled it not only to disperse itself so universally, but tobecome an active agent in disseminating other species whichattach themselves or their ova to its shell f.It is evident that among the testacea, as in plants and thehigher orders of animals, there are species which have a powerof enduring a wide range of temperature, whereas others cannotresist a considerable change of climate. Among the freshTit. Art Geog. Phys. Diet. Class. d'Hist. Nat.f Mr. Broderip possesses specimens of JantMna fragile bearing more than onespecies of barnacle (^Pentetasmi»)y presented to him by Captain King and lieutenantGraves. One of these specimens, taken ave by Captain King far at sea,and a little north of the equator, is so loaded with those cirrhipeds^ and withnumerous ova, that all the uppeifpait of its shell is invisible.Ch.VIX.] MIGRATIONS tOP TB8TACEA. 109water molluscs, and those which breathe air, F^rrussaomentions a few instances of species of almost universal diffusion.The Helix patris {Sucdnea purity Lam.) so common inEurope, where it reaches from Norway to Italy, is also foundin Egypt, in the United States, in Newfoundland, Jamaica,Tranquebar, and, it is even said, in the Marianne Isles. Asthis animal inhabits constantly the borders of pools and streamswhere there is much moisture, it is not impossible that differentwater-fowl have been the agents of spreading some of itsminute eggs, which may have been entangled in their feathers.Helix asperse, one of the commonest of our larger land^shells,is found in South America at the foot of Chimborazo, as alsoin Cayenne. Some conchologists have conjectured, that it wasaccidentally imported in some ship ; for it is an eatable speciesand these animals are capable of retaining life, during longvoyages, without air or nourishment '*.Mr. Lowe in a memoir just published in the CambridgeTransactions, enumerates seven tyrone species of land mollusca,collected by him in the islands of Madeira and Porto Santo,sixty, of which belonged to the genus Helix alone, includingas subgenera Bulim us and Achatina, and excluding Vitrioland Clausilia ; — forty-four of these are new. It is remarkable,that very few of the above-mentioned species are commonto the neighbouring archipelago of the Canaries; but it is astill . more striking fact, that of the sixty species of the threegenera above-mentioned, thirty-one are natives of Porto Santo;whereas, in Madeira, which contains ten times the superficies,were found but twenty-nine. Of these only four were commonFour individuals of a large species of Julius, from Valparaiso, werebrought to England by Lieutenant Graves who accompanied Captain King inhis late expedition to the Straits of Magellan. They had been packed up in abox and enveloped in cotton, two for a space of thirteen, one for seventeen, anda fourth for upwards of twenty months; but on being exposed, by Mr. Broderip;to the warmth of a fire in London, and provided with tepid water and leaves,they revived, and are now living in Mr. Lodges* palm-house.110 Geographical DlfTAtflimOll Of tSBTACBA. {ttt Vlt.to the two Island which ara only a^pamted hf i dicititidftof twelve leagues I and two even of these fous (tuttneljr^Helix rhodosioma and H. ventrosa) are species of general dif^^fusion, comnKm to Madeira the Canaries, and the South ofEurope*.The confined range of these molluftcs may easily be extdalfied^if we admit that spedei have only one bitth^pla^ ^ and theonly problem to be solved would relate to the exoeptionS'^tdaccount for the dissemination of some spedeii throughoutseveral isles and the European continent* May Hot the ^ggB,when washed into the sea by the undermining of &it^ floatuninjured to a distant shore ?Notwithstanding the proverbially slow motion of sninlA tmdmolluscs in general and although many aquatic species adhereconstantly to the same rock for their whole Hires, they are byno means destitute of ptorifldon for disseminating themselvesrapidly over a wide area. Some lay their ^gs in a sponge^likenidus wherein the young remain enveloped for a time aftertheir birth, and this buoyant substance floats for and wide asreadily as sea-weed. The young of other viviparous tribes areoften borne along, entangled in sea-weed. Sometimes they areso light that like grains of sand they can be easily moved bycurrents. Balani and repulse are sometimes found adhering tofloating cocoa-nuts, and even to fragments of pumice. In riversand lakes, oh the other hand, aquatic univalves usually attachtheir eggs to leaves and sticks which have fallen into the waterand which are liable to be swept away, during floods, fromtributaries to the train streams, and from thence to all partsof the same basins. Particular species may thus migrateduring one season from the head waters of the Mississippi,or any other great river, to countries bordering the sea, at thedistance of many thousand miles.An illustration of the mode of attachment of these eggs wiltbe se in the annexed diagram. (No. 1.)• Camb. Phil. Trans, vol iv. I83hch.vii.] fitsniiacTtoif OP BoofftYtciii litfig. 1. Egg*of AiiipuIlaiiaoTita(a€uviatileq>eaeB),fiie(ltoaniiallsprigHhichbad Men Into the waler.Fig. 2. E^* of HanorUi oltms, climbed to ft dead IWf lying node harrier.Fig. 3. Eggs oC the common Limner (L. vulgaris, adbtiii^ to » dry tttdiimdfrThe habit of some testacea to adhere to floating wood isproved by their fixing themselves to the bottoms of ships. Bythis mode of conveyance Myiihis polymorphua has beenbrought from northern Europe to the Commercial Docks inthe Thames where the species is now domiciled.Oeogra^ietd Distribution and Stigratiotu of Zoophyte.Zoophytes are very imperfectly known, but there can belittledoubt that each maritime region possesses species peculiarto itself. The madrepores, or umbelliferous polypsria, arefound in their fullest development only in the tropical seas ofPolynesia and the East and West Indies, and this family isrepresented only by a few species in our seas. Those even ofthe Mediterranean are inferior in size, and, for the most part,different from such as inhabit the tropics. Heron and Lesueur,112 Geographical Distribution AND JCb. VH./ • • r •after studying the Holothurise, Meuse, and other oongoiersof delicate and changeable forms, came to the conclusion thateach kind has its place of residence determined by the temperaturenecessary to support its existence. Thus, for example,they found the abode of Pyrosoma Atlantica to beconfined to one particular r^on of the Atlantic ocean *.Let us now inquire how the transportation of polyps fromone part of the globe to another is effected. Many of them,as in the families Frustra and Sertularia^ attach themselves tosea-weedy and are occasionally drifted along with it. Manyfix themselves to the shells of gasteropods, and are thus bornealong by them to short distances. Some polyps, like the heavens,swim freely about in the sea. But the most frequentmode of transportation, probably, consists in the buoyancy ofweir eggs, or certain small vesicles which are detached andare capable of becoming the foundation of a new colony. Thesegems, as they have been called may be swept along by a wavethat breaks upon a coral-reef, and may then be borne by acurrent to a distance.That some zoophytes adhere to floating bodies is proved bytheir being found attached to the bottoms of ships as in thecase of testacea before alluded to.Geographical Distribution and Migrations of Insects.Before we conclude our sketch of the manner in which thehabitable parts of the earth are shared out among particularassemblages of organic beings, we must offer a few remarkson insects, which by their numbers, and the variety of theirpowers and instincts, exert a prodigious influence in the economyof animate nature. As a large portion of these minutecreatures are strictly dependent for their subsistence on certainspecies of vegetables, the entomological provinces must coincidein a considerable degree with the botanical.All the insects, says Latreille, brought from the eastern partsVoy. auz Teres Australes; tome i. p. 492.Ch* VIL] MIGRATIONS OF Insects 113of Asia and China, whatever be their latitude and temperature,are distinct from those of Europe and of Africa. Theinsects of the United States, although often they approachvery close to our own, are nevertheless specifically distinguishableby some characters. In South America, the equinoctiallands of New Grenada and Peru on the one side, and of Guianaon the other, contain for the most part distinct groups ; theAndes forming the division, and interposing a narrow lineof severe cold between climates otherwise very similar *,The insects of the United States, even those of the northernprovinces as far as Canada, differ specifically from the European,while those of Greenland appear to be in a great measureidentical with our own. Some insects are very local, whilea few, on the contrary, are common to remote countries, betweenwhich the torrid zone and the ocean intervene. Thusour painted lady butterfly ( Vanessa Cardui) reappears in NewHolland and Japan with scarcely a varying streak f . Thesame species is said to be one of the few insects which areuniversally dispersed over the earth, being found in EuropeAsia, Africa, and America ; and its wide range is the moreinteresting because it seems explained by its migratory instinct,seconded, no doubt, by a capacity enjoyed by few species, ofenduring a great diversity of temperature.A vast swarm of this species, forming a column from ten tofifteen feet broad, was, a few years since, observed in theCanton de Vaud ; they traversed the country with greatrapidity from north to south, all flying onwards in regularorder, close together, and not turning from their course onthe approach of other objects. Professor Corelli, of Turin,observed, in March of the same year, a similar swarm of thesame species, also directing their flight from north to south, inPiedmont, in such immense numbers, that at night the flowerswere literally covered with them. They had been traced fromGeographic Generale des Insectes et des Archives. Mem. du Mus. d'HistNat. tome iii.f Kirby and Spence, vol. vr* p* 487.Vol. II. 1114 Geographical Distribution AND [CauVII.Goni^ Laconia Susa &c. A similar flight at the end of thelast century is recorded by M. Touch, in the MenuHrs of theAcademy of Turin. The fact is the more worthy of notice,because the caterpillars of this butterfly are not gregarious, butsolitary from the moment that they are hatched; and thisinstinct remains dormant, while generation after generationpasses away, till it suddenly displays itself in full energy whentheir numbers happen to be in excess.Not only peculiar species but certain types distinguishparticular countries ; and there are groups, observes Kirby,which represent each other in distant regions, whether in theirform, their functions or in both. Thus the honey and wax ofEurope, Asia, and Africa, are in each case prepared by beescongenerous with our common hive-bee (tapis, Late.) ; while inAmerica this genus is nowhere indigenous, but is replacedby Melipona and Trigona ; and in New Holland by a stilldifferent, but described type *.As almost all insects are winged, they can readily spreadthemselves wherever their progress is not opposed by uncongenialclimates, or by seas, mountains, and other physicalimpediments ; and these barriers they can sometimes surmountby abandoning themselves to violent winds, which, aswe before stated, when speaking of floating seeds, may in afew hours carry them to very considerable distances. On theAndes some sphinxes and flies have been observed by Humboldt,at the height of nineteen thousand one hundred andeighty feet above the sea, and which appeared to him to havebeen involuntarily carried into these regions by ascendingcurrents of air f.White mentions a remarkable shower of aphides whichseem to have emigrated, with an east wind, from the great hopplantations of Kent and Sussex, and blackened the shrubs andvegetables where they alighted at Selboume, spreading at thesame time in great clouds all along the vale from Farnham toKirby and Spence, vol. iv. p. 497.t Description of til Equatorial Kegiowb»Malt©-Bnm, vol v. p. 379.Cb. VII.] Migrations OF H^SECTST. thsAlton. These aphides are sometimes accompanied by vastnumbers of the common lady-bird {Cocdnella semptem^puno-iata)j which feed upon them *.It is remarkable, says Kirby, that many of the insects whichare occasionally observed to emigrate, as, for instance, toldlibellulae, cocdnellse, carabi, cicada, &c., ar not usually sodftlinsects, but seem to congregate, like swallows, merely for thepurpose of emigration f. Here, therefore, we have an exampleof an instinct developing itself on certain rare emergenciescausing unsocial species to become gregarious, and to venturesometimes even to cross the ocean.To the armies of locusts darkening the air in Africa, andtraversing the globe frcMn Turkey to our southern counties hiEngland, we need not here allude. When the western galessweep over the Pampas, they bear along with them myriadsof insects of various kinds. As a proof of the manner in whichspecies may be thus diffused, we may mention that when theCreole frigate was lying in the outer roads off Bueno* Ayres,in 18199 At the distance of six miles from the land, her decksand rigging were suddenly covered with thousands of flies andgrains of sand. The sides of the vessel had just received afresh coat of paint, to which the insects adhered in such numbersas to spot and disfigure the vessel, and to render it necessarypartially to renew the paint %. Captain W. H. Smithwas obBged to repaint his vessel, the Adventure, in the Mediterranean,frcHU the same cause. He was on his way fromMalta to Tripoli, when hei southern wind blowing from thecoast of Africa, then one hundred miles distant, drove suchmyriads of flies upon the fresh paint, that not the smallest portwas left unoccupied by insects.To the southward of the river Plate, off Cape St. Antonio,and at the distance of fifty miles from land, severallarge dragon-flies alighted on the Adventure frigate, during'Captain King's late expedition to the Straits of Magellan. If• Derby and Spence, vol. ii. p. 9, 1817. f Vol. ii. p. 12.t I am indebted to lieutenant Gswros, BJS« for tria infimnaiioB.I 2116 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION AND [Ch. VII.the wind abates when insects are thus crossing the sea, themost delicate species are not necessarily drowned, for manycan repose without sinking on the unruffled surface of thedeep. The slender, long-legged impulse have been seen standingon the surface of the sea, when driven out far from ourcoasts and took wing immediately on bring approached*.Exotic beetles are sometimes thrown on our shore, which reviveafter having been long drenched in salt-water; and the periodicalappearance of some conspicuous butterflies amongst us,after being unseen for five or fifty years, has been ascribed, notwithout probability, to the agency of the winds.Inundations of rivers, observes Kirby, if they happen at anyseason except in the depth of winter, always carry down anumber of insects, floating on the surface of bits of stick,weeds, &c., so that when the waters subside, the entomologistmay generally reap a plentiful harvest. In the dissemination,moreover, of these minute beings, as in that of plants, thelarger animals play their part. Insects are, in numberlessinstances, borne along in the coats of animals, or the feathers ofbirds ; and the eggs of some species are capable, like seeds, ofresisting the digestive powers of the stomach, and after theyare swallowed with herbage, may be ejected again unharmed inthe dung.Geographical Distribution and Diffusion of Man.We have reserved for the last our observations on the rangeand diffusion of the human species over the earth, and the influenceof man, in spreading other animals and plants, especiallythe terrestrial.Many naturalists have amused themselves in speculating onthe probable birth-place of mankind, the point from which,if we assume the whole human race to have descended from asingle pair, the tide of emigration must originally have proceeded.It has been always a favourite conjecture, that thisbirth-place was situated within or near the tropics, where per-I state this fact on the authority of my friend, Mr. Curtis.Ch. VII.] DIFFUSION OF MAN. 117petal summer reigns, and where fruits, herbs, and roots areplentifully supplied throughout the year. The climate ofthese regions, it has been said, is suited to a being born withoutany covering, and who had not yet acquired the arts of buildinghabitations or providing clothes.*• The hunter state' it has been argued, *^ which Montesquieuplaced the first, was probably only the second stage towhich mankind arrived, since so many arts must have beeninvented to catch a salmon or a deer, that society could nolonger have been in its infancy when they came into use,"When reasons where the spontaneous fruits of the earth aboundbecame overpeopled, men would naturally diffuse themselvesover the neighbouring parts of the temperate zone ; but a considerabletime would probably elapse before this event tookplace ; hand it is possible, as a writer before cited observes, thatin the interval before the multiplication of their numbers andtheir increasing wants had compelled them to emigrate, somearts to take animals were invented but far inferior to what wesee practised at this day among savages. As their habitationsgradually advanced into the temperate zone, the new difficultiesthey had to encounter would call forth by degrees thespirit of invention, and the probability of such inventionsalways rises with the number of people involved in the samenecessity f.A distinguished modern writer, who coincides for the mostpart in the views of Aphonin above mentioned has introducedone of the persons in his second dialogue as objecting to thetheory of the human race having gradually advanced from asavage to a civilized state, on the ground that '^ the first manmust have inevitably been destroyed by the elements or devouredby savage beasts, so infinitely his superiors in physicalforce l^ He then contends against the difficulty here startedRey. J. F. Brand,' commenting on Aphonin, Amceu. Acad. yoL tiL p. 409.Brand's Select Dissert, from the Amen. Acad. vol. i. p. 118.-f- Idem., lb.X Sir H. Davy, Consolations in Travel, p. 74.^118 GEOGRAPHICAL Distention AND [Cai.VD.■ by various arguments, all of which ware, perhaps, superfluousfor if a philosopher is pleased to indulge in conjectures on thissubject, why should he not assign, as the original seat of man,-some one of those large islands within the tropics, which are asfree from wild beasts as Van Siemens Land or Australia ? Hareman may have remained for a period peculiar to a single isle,just as some of the large anthropomorphous species are nowlimited to one island within the tropics. In such a situation,the new-bon race might have lived in security, thoughfar more helpless than the New Holland savages, and mighthave found abundance of vegetable food. Colonies may afterwardshave been sent forth from this mother country, and thaithe peopling of the earth may have proceeded according tothe hypothesis before alluded to.In an early stage of society the necessity of hunting actsas a principle of repulsion, causing men to spread with thegreatest rapidity over a country, until the whole is coveredwith scattered settlements. It has been calculated that eighthundred acres of hunting-ground only produce as much foodus half an acre of arable land. When the game has been in agreat measure exhausted, and a state of pasturage succeeds,.the several hunter tribes, being already scattered, may multiplyin a short time into the greatest number which the pastoralstate is capable of sustaining. The necessity, says Brand,thus imposed upon the two savage states, of dispersing themselvesfar and wide over the country, affords a reason why, at,a very early period, the worst parts of the earth may haveBecome inhabited.But this reason it may be said is only applicable in as far asregards the peopling of a continuous continent ; whereas thesmallest islands, however remote from continents, have almostinvariably been found inhabited by man. St. Helena, it istrue, afforded an exception; for when that island was discoveredin 1501, it was only inhabited by sea-fowl, and occasionallyby seals and turtles, and was covered with a forest oftrees and shrubs, all of species peculiar, as we before observed,Gh« VIL] DIFFUSION OF Can. 119with one or two exceptions and which seem to have beenexpressly created for this remote and insulated spot.But very few of the numerous coral islets and volcanos ofthe vast Pacific capable of sustaining a few families of men,have been found untenanted, and we have therefore, to inquirewhence and by what means, if all the members of thegreat human family have had one common source, could thosesavages have migrated. Cook, Forster, and others have remarkedthat parties of savages in their canoes must oftenhave lost their way and must have been driven on distantshores, where they were forced to remain, deprived bothof the means and of the requisite intelligence for returningto their own country. Thus Captain Cook found on theisland Wateoo^ three inhabitants of Otaheite, who had beendrifted thither in a canoe, although the distance between thetwo isles is five hundred and fifty miles. In 1696, twocanoes containing thirty persons who had left Anchors,were thrown by contrary winds and storms on the island ofSamar, one of the Philippines at a distance of eight hundredmiles. In 17^1^ two canoes one of which contained twenty*four, and the other six persons men, women, and children,were drifted from an island called Broiled, to the island ofGuam one of the Marian ^.Kotzebue, when investigating the Coral isles of Radack^ atthe eastern extremity of the Caroline isles, became acquaintedwith a person of the name of Kadu^ who was a native of Plea,an isle fifteen hundred miles distant, from which he had beendrifted with a party. Kadu and three of his countrymen, oneday, left Plea in a sailing, boat, when a violent storm arose, anddrove them out of their course 3 they drifted aboift the opensea for eight months, according to their reckoning by the moonmaking a knot on a cord at every new moon. Being expertfishermen they subsisted entirely on the produce of the sea;and when the rain fell, laid in as much fresh water as they hadvessels to contain it. *^ Kadu," says Ko'tzebue, ** who was the• Malte-Bnui'8 Geography, vol. iii. p. 419.120 DISTRIBUTION OF MAN. [Ch.VII.best diver, frequently went down to the bottcnn of the sea, whereit is well known that the water is not so salt, with a cocoa nutshell,with only a small openings' When these unfortunatemen reached the isles of Radack, every hope and almost everyfeeling had died within them ; their sail had long been destroyed,their canoe had long been the sport of winds and waves,and they were picked up by the inhabitants of Aur, in a stateof insensibility * ; but by the hospitable care of those islandersthey soon recovered , and were restored to perfect health.Captain Beeches, in his late voyage to the Pacific, fell inwith some natives of the Coral Islands, who had in a similarmanner been carried to a great distance from their nativecountry. They had embarked to the number of one hundredand fifty souls, in three double canoes, from Anna, or ChainIsland, situate about three hundred miles to the eastward ofOtaheite. They were overtaken by the monsoon, which dispersedthe canoes, and after driving them about the ocean, leftthem becalmed, so that a great number of persons perished. Twoof the canoes were never heard of, but the other was driftedfrom one uninhabited island to another, at each of which thevoyagers obtained a few provisions; and at length, afterhaving wandered for a distance of six hundred miles, theywere found and carried to their home in the Blossom f»The space traversed in some of these instances was so great,that similar accidents might suffice to transport canoes fromvarious parts of Africa to the shores of South America, orfrom Spain to the Azores, and thence to North America. Sothat man even in a rude state of society, is liable to be scatteredinvoluntarily by the winds and waves over the globe, in amanner singularly analogous to that in which many plants andanimals are diffused. We ought not then to wonder thatduring the ages required for some tribes of the human race toattain that advanced stage of civilization which empowers theKotzebue's Voyage, 1815—1818. Quarterly Review, vol. xxvi. p. 361.t Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific, &c., in the years 1825, 1826, 1827,1828, p. 170.Ch. VII.] DISPERSION OP ANIMALS BY MAN, 121navigator to cross the ocean in all directions with security, thewhole earth should have become the abode of rude tribes ofhunters and fishers. Were the whole of mankind now cut off,with the exception of one family, inhabiting the old or newcontinent, or Australia, or even some coral islet of the Pacific,we should expect their descendants, though they should neverbecome more enlightened than the South Sea Islanders or theEsquimaux, to spread in the course of ages over the wholeearthy diffused partly by the tendency of population to increasebeyond the means of subsistence, in a limited district, andpartly by the accidental drifting of canoes by tides and currentsto distant shores.Involuntary influence of Man in diffusing Animals andPlants.Many of the general remarks which we made^respecting theinfluence of man in spreading or in checking the diffusion ofplants, apply equally to his relations with the animal kingdom.We shall be led on a future occasion to speak of the instrumentalityof our species in naturalizing useful animals andplants in new regions, when we explain our views of the effectswhich the spreading and increase of certain species exert in theextirpation of others. At present we shall confine ourselvesto a few remarks on the involuntary aid which man lends tothe dissemination of species.In the mammiferous class our influence is chiefly displayedin increasing the number of quadrupeds which are serviceableto us, and in exterminating or reducing the number of thosewhich are noxious.Sometimes, however, we unintentionally promote the multiplicationof inimical species, as when we introduced the rat,which was not indigenous in the New World, into all parts ofAmerica. They have been conveyed over in ships and nowinfest a great multitude of islands and parts of that continent.In like manner the Norway rat has been imported into Englandwhere it plunders our property ia ships and houses.ISBit DISPERSION OF ANIMALS BT Can. [Oh. ViiThe great viper, fer de lance, a species no less venomousthan the rattle-snake, which now ravages Martinique and St*Lucia, was accidentally introduced by man and exists in noother part of the West Indies.Many parasitic insects, which attack our persons, and someof which are supposed to be peculiar to our species, have beencarried into all parts of the earth, and have as high a claim asman to an universal geographical distribution.A great variety of insects have been transported in shipsfrom one country to another, especially in warmer latitudes.Notwithstanding the coldness of our climate, we have beenunable to prevent the cockroach {Blatta oriental), fromentering and diffusing itself in our ovens and kneading troughs,and availing itself of the artificial warmth which we afford. Itis well known also that beetles, and many other kinds of ignisinsects, have been introduced into Great Britain intimber ; especially several North American species. ** Thecommercial relationship says Malte-Brun *, ^^ between Franceand India, have transported from the latter country the aphis,which destroys the apple-tree, and two sorts of Neuropterathe lucifuga and flavicola, mostly confined to Provence andthe neighbourhood of Bordeaux, where they devour the timberin the houses and naval arsenals."Among molluscs we may mention the teredo navcUis^ whichis a native of equatorial seas, but which, by adhering to thebottom of ships, was transported to Holland, where it has beenmost destructive to vessels and piles. The same species hasalso become naturalized in England, and other countries enjoyingan extensive commerce.In all these and innumerable other instances, we may regardthe involuntary agency of man as strictly analogous to that ofthe inferior animals. Like them we unconsciously contributeto extend or limit the geographical range and numbers of certainspecies, in obedience to general rules, in the economy ofnature which are for the most part beyond our control.♦ Syst. of Geog.,vol. viii., p. 169,CHAPTER VIII.Theories respecting the original introduction of species — proposal of an hypothesison this subject — Supposed centres or foci of creation — Why the distinctprovinces of animals and plants have not become more blended together—Brocchi's speculations on the loss of species — Stations of plants and animalscomplication of causes on which they depend — Stations of plants, howfitted by animals — Equilibrium in the number of species, how preserved—Peculiar efficacy of insects in this task — rapidity with which certain insectsmultiply, or decrease in numbers — Effect of omnivorous animals in preservingthe equilibrium of species — reciprocal influence of aquatic and terrestrialspecies on each other.It would be superfluous to examine the various attemptswhich were made to explain the phenomena of the distributionof species alluded to in the preceding chapters, in theinfancy of the sciences of botany, zoology, and physical geography.The theories or rather conjectures then indulged,now stand refuted by a simple statement of facts ; and if Linnaeuswere living, he would be the first to renounce the notionswhich he promulgated. For he imagined the habitable worldto have been for a certain time limited to one small tract, theonly portion of the earth's surface that was as yet laid bare bythe subsidence of the primaeval ocean. In this fertile spot hesupposed the originals of all the species of plants which existon this globe to have been congregated, together with the firstancestors of all animals and of the human race. '^ In qua commodehabitaverint animals omnia, et vegetable late germinateIn order to accommodate the various habitudes of somany creatures, and to provide a diversity of climate suited totheir several natures, the tract in which the creation tookplace was supposed to have been situated in some warm regionof the earth, but to have contained a lofty mountain range, onthe heights and in the declivities of which were to be found124 THEORIES RESPECTING THE [Gh.VIII.all temperatures and every clime, from the torrid to the frozenzone *.That there never was a universal ocean since the planet wasinhabited, or rather since the oldest groups of strata yetknown to contain organic remains were formed, is proved bythe presence of terrestrial plants in all the older formations ;and if this conclusion was not established, yet no geologistcould deny that since the first small portion of the earth waslaid dry, there have been many entire changes in the spedesof plants and animals inhabiting the land.But without dwelling on the above and other refuted theories,let us inquire whether we can substitute some hypothesis assimple as that of Linnaeus, to which the phenomena nowascertained in regard to the distribution both of aquatic andterrestrial species may be referred. The following may, perhaps,be reconcilable with known facts: — Each species mayhave had its origin in a single pair, or individual where an individualwas sufficient, and species may have been created insuccession at such times and in such places as to enable themto multiply and endure for an appointed period, and occupyan appointed space on the globe.In order to explain this theory, let us suppose every livingthing to be destroyed in the western hemisphere, both on theland and in the ocean, and permission to be given to man topeople this great desert, by transporting into it animals andplants from the eastern hemisphere, a strict prohibition beingenforced against introducing two original stocks of the sapaespecies.Now the result we conceive of such a mode of colonisingwould correspond exactly, so far as regards the grouping ofanimals and plants, with that now observed throughout theglobe. It would be necessary for naturalists, before they importedspecies into particular localities, to study attentively theclimate and other physical conditions of each spot. It wouldDe terra habitable increments; also Richards Phys. Hist, of Mankind, Tol. i.p. 17, where the hypothesis of different naturalists are enumerated.Ch. YIIL] INTRODUCTION OF SPECIES. ^ 125be no less requisite to introduce the different species in succession,so that each plant and animal might have time andopportunity to multiply before the species destined to preyupon it was admitted. Many herbs and shrubs, for example,must spread far and wide before the sheep, the deer and thegoat could be allowed to enter, lest they should devour andannihilate the original stocks of many plants, and then perishthemselves for want of food. The above-mentioned herbivorousanimals in their turn must be permitted to makeconsiderable progress before the entrance of the first pair ofwolves or lions. . Insects must be allowed to swarm before theswallow could be permitted to skim through the air and feaston thousands at one repast. . >It is evident that, however equally in this case our originalstocks were distributed over the whole surface of land andwater, there would nevertheless arise distinct botanical andzoological provinces, for there are a great many natural barrierswhich oppose common obstacles to the advance of a varietyof species. Thus, for example, almost all the animals andplants naturalized by us towards the extremity of SouthAmerica, would be unable to spread beyond a certain limit,towards the east, west and south, because they would bestopped by the ocean, and a few of them only would succeed inreaching the cooler latitudes of the northern hemisphere becausethey would be incapable of bearing the heat of thetropics, through which they must pass. In the course of ages,undoubtedly, exceptions would arise, and some species mightbecome common to the temperate and polar regions, or bothsides of the equator ; for we have before shown that thepowers of diffusion conferred on some classes are very great.But we should confidently predict that these exceptions wouldnever become so numerous as to invalidate the general rule.Some of the plants and animals transplanted by us to thecoast of Chili or Peru would never be able to cross the Andes,so as to reach the Eastern plains; nor, for a similar reason,would those first established in the Pampas, or the valleys of196 Suffused CBMTRBSy OE 1001^ [Ck VHtthe Amazon and the Orinoco, ever arrive at the ahona ofthe Pacific.In the ocean an analogous state of things would prevail ; ibr-there also, climate would exert a great influence in limitingthe range of species and the land would stop the migrationsof aquatic tribes as effectually as the sea arrests the disperami^of the terrestrial. As certain birds, insects, and the aeeda ctplants, can never cross the direction of prevailing winds, socurrents form natund barriers to the dissemination of manyoceanic races. A line of shoals may be as impassable to paganspecies, as are the Alps and the Andes to plants and animalspeculiar to plains, while deep abysses may prove insuperable-obstaclesto the migrations of the inhabitants of shallow waters.It is worthy of observation, that one effect of the introductionof single pairs of each species must be the confined rangeof certain groups in spots which ^ like small islands, or solitaryinland lakes, have few means of interchanging their inhabitantswith adjoining regions. Now this congregating, in a smallspace, of many peculiar species, would give an appearance ofcentres or foci of creation, as they have been termed, as if therewere favourite points where the creative ena*gy has been ingreater action than in others, and where the numbers of peculiarorganic beings have consequently become more considerate.We do not mean to call in question the soundness of theinferences of some botanists, as to the former existence of certainlimited spots whence species of plants have been propagated,radiating, as it were, in all directions from a commoncentre. On the contrary we conceive these phenomena to bethenecessary consequences of the plan of nature before suggested,operating during the successive mutations of the surface, -some of which the geologist can prove to have taken placesubsequently to the period when many species now existingwere created. In order to exemplify how this arrangement ofplants may have been produced, let us imagine that, aboutthree centuries before the discovery of St. Helena (itself of:submarine volcanic origin), a multitude of new isle bad betC31l Vm.] OF CREATION. 12Tthrown up in the surrounding sea, and that these had eachbecome clothed with plants emigrating from St. Helena, inthe same manner as the wild plants of Campania have diffusedthemselves over Monte Nuovo. Whenever the firstbotanist investigated the new archipelago he woiild^ in all probability,find a different assemblage of plants in each of theisles of recent formation ; but in St. Helena itself he wouldmeet with individuals of every species belonging to all parts ofthe archipelago, and some, in addition, peculiar to itself, viz.,those which had not been able to obtain a passage into any oneof the surrounding new-formed lands. In this case it mightbe truly said that the original isle was the primitive focus orcentre, of a certain type of vegetation, whereas, in the surroundingisles there would be a smaller number of species yet-allbelonging to the same group.But this peculiar distribution of plants would not warrantthe conclusion that, in the space occupied by St. Helena, therehad been a greater exertion of creative power than in the spacesof equal area occupied by the new adjacent lands, because.within the period in which St. Helena had acquired its peculiarvegetation, each of the spots supposed to be subsequently convertedinto land, may have been the birth-places of a greatnumber of marine animals and plants which may have hadtime to scatter themselves far and wide over the southernAtlantic.Perhaps it may be objected to some part of the foregoingtrain of reasoning, that during the lapse of past ages, especiallyduring many partial revolutions of the globe of comparativelymodem date, different zoological and botanical provinces oughtto have become more confounded and blended together — thatthe distribution of species approaches too nearly to what mighthave been expected, if animals and plants had been introducedinto the globe when its physical geography had already assumedthe features which it now wears; whereas we know that, incertaindistricts, considerable geographical changes have taken128 Bronchi ON THE LOSS OF SPBCIBS. [OuYIII.place since species identical with those now in being werecreated.These, and many kindred topics, cannot be fully discusseduntil we have considered, not merely the general laws whichmay regulate the first introduction of species but those whichmay limit their duration on the earth. Brocchi, whose untimelydeath in Egypt is deplored by all who have the progressof geology at heart, has remarked, when hazarding someinteresting conjectures respecting ^^ the loss of spedes,^ thata modern naturalist had no small assurance, who declared ^^ thatindividuals alone were capable of destruction, and that specieswere so perpetuated that nature could not annihilate them solong as the planet lasted or at least that nothing less than theshock of a comet, or some similar disaster, could put an end totheir existence." The Italian geologist, on the contrary, hadsatisfied himself, that many species of testacea, which formerlyinhabited the Mediterranean, had become extinct, although agreat number of others, which had been the contemporaries ofthose lost races, still survived. He came to the opinion, thatabout half the species which peopled the waters when the Sub-apenninestrata were deposited, had gone out of existence ; andin this inference he does not appear to have been far wrong.But instead of seeking a solution of this problem like someother geologists of his time, in a violent and general catastropheBrocchi endeavoured to imagine some regular and constant lawby which species might be made to disappear from the earthgradually and in succession. The death, he suggested, of aspecies might depend, like that of individuals, on certain peculiaritiesof constitution conferred upon them at their birth, andas the longevity of the one depends on a certain force of vitality,which, after a period, grows weaker and weaker, so the durationof the other may be governed by the quantity of prolific powerbestowed upon the species, which, after a season, maydecline in energy, so that the fecundity and multiplication ofNecker, Phytozool. Philosophe p. 21, Bronchi Conch. Foss. Subap^ tomeL, p. 229.Ch.VIII.] Broach ON THE LOSS OF SPECIES. 129individuals may be gradually lessened from century to century,*^ until that fatal term arrives, when the embryo, incapable ofextending and developing itself, abandons, almost at the instantof its formation, the slender principle of life by which it wasscarcely animated, — and so all dies with it'Now we might coincide in opinion with the Italian naturalist,as to the gradual extinction of species one after another, bythe operation of regular and constant causes, without admittingan inherent principle of deterioration in their physiologicalattributes. We might concede " that many species are on thedecline, and that the day is not far distant when they will ceaseto exist ;'• yet deem it consistent with what we know of thenature of organic beings, to believe that the last individuals ofeach species retain their prolific powers in their full intensity.Brocchi has himself speculated on the share which a changeof climate may have had in rendering the Mediterranean unfitfor the habitation of certain testaceous which still continued tothrive in the Indian ocean, and of others which were now onlyrepresented by analogous forms within the tropics. He mustalso have been aware that other extrinsic causes such as theprogress of human population, or the increase of some one ofthe inferior animals, might gradually lead to the extirpation ofa particular species, although its fecundity might remain tothe last unimpaired. If, therefore, amid the vicissitudes of theanimate and inanimate world, there are known causes capable ofbringing about the decline and extirpation of species, it becamehim thoroughly to investigate the full extent to whichthese might operate, before he speculated on any cause of sopurely hypothetical a kind, as ^^the diminution of the prolificvirtue."If it could have been shown that some wild plant hadinsensibly .dwindled away and died out, as sometimes happensto cultivated varieties propagated by cuttings, even thoughclimate, soil, and every other circumstance should continueidentically the same — if any animal had perished while thephysical condition of the earthy and the number ad force ofVol. II. Y.130 CAUSES WHICH DBTBRMINB THB [Ch. VIII.its foes, with every other extrinsic cause, remained unalt^^,then might we have some ground for suspecting that theinfirmities of age creep on as naturally on species as upcai.individuals. But in the absence of such observations, let usturn to another class of facts, and examine attentively the circumstanceswhich determine the stations of particular animalsand plants and perhaps we shall discover, in the vicissitudesto which these stations are exposed, a cause fully adequate toexplain the phenomena under consideration.Stations comprehend all the circumstances, whether relatingto the animate or inanimate world, which determine whether agiven plant or animal can exist in a given locality so that if itbe shown that stations can become essentially modified by theinfluence of known causes, it will follow that species, as well aaindividuals, are mortal.Every naturalist is familiar with the fact, that although in aparticular country, such as Great Britain, there may be morethan three thousand species of plants ten thousand insects, anda great variety in each of the other classes, yet there will notbe more than a hundred, perhaps not half that number inhabitingany given locality. There may be no want of space in thesupposed tract ;Jt may be a large mountain, or an extensivemoor, or a great river-plain, containing room enough forindividuals of every species in our island; yet the spot willbe occupied by a few to the exclusion of many, and thesefew are enabled, throughout long periods, to midQtain theirground successfully against every intruder, notwithstandingthe facilities which species enjoy, by virtue of their powers ofdiffusion, of invading adjacent territories.The principal causes which enable a certain assemblage ofplants thus to maintain their ground against all others dependas is well known, on the relations between the physiologicalnature of each species, and the climate, exposure, soil, andother physical conditions of the locality. Some plants liveonly on rocks, others in meadows, a third class in marchesOf the latter, some delight in a fresh-water paorasft,—- others inGh. VIII.] Stations OF ANIMALS AND PLANTS. 131salt marshes, where their roots may copiously absorb salineparticles. Some prefer an alpine region in a warm latitudewhere* during the heat of surameri they are constantly irrigateby the cool waters of melting snows. To others loosesand, so fatal to the generality of species, affords the mostproper station* The Carex arenaria and the Elymua arenariuB acquire their full vigour on a sandy dune, obtaining aAascendency over the very plants which in a stiff clay wouldimmediately stifle them.Where the soil of a district is of so peculiar a nature that itis extremely favourable to certain species, and agrees ill withevery other the former get exclusive possession of the groundand, as in the case of heaths, live in societies. In like mannerthe Bog moss {Hypnum palustre) is fully developed in peatyswamps, and becomes like the heath, in the language ofbotanists, a social plant. Such monopolies would be very frequent,if the powers of a great number of species were notequally balanced, and if animals did not interfere most activelyto preserve an equilibrium in the vegetable kingdom.*^ All the plants of a given country says DecandoUe in hiiusual spirited style *^ are at war one with another. The firstwhich establish themselves by chance in a particular spot, tendby the mere occupancy of space, to exclude other species-*-thegreater choke the smaller, the longest livers replace thosevehioh last for a shorter period, the more prolific graduallymake themselves masters of the ground, which species multiplyingmore slowly would otherwise fill'In this continual strife, it is not always the resources of thtplant itself which enable it to maintain or extend its ground.Its success depends, in a great measure, on the number of itsfoes or allies among the animals and plants inhabiting the sameregion* Thus for example, a herb which loves the shade maymultiply, if some tree with spreading boughs aid dense foliageflourish in the neighbourhoods Another, which, if unassistedwould be overpowered by the rank growth of some hardy com-petitori is secure because its leaves are unpalatable to cattle,132 CAUSES WHICH DETERMINE THE [Ch. VIII.which, on the other hand, annually crop down its antagonist,and rarely suffer it to ripen its seed.Oftentimes we see some herb which has flowered in themidst of a thorny shrub, when all the other individuals of thesame species, in the sunny fields around, are eaten down, andcannot bring their seed to maturity. In this case, the shrubhas lent his armour of spines and prickles to protect the defencelessherb against the mouths of the cattle, and thus a fewindividuals which occupied, perhaps, the most unfavourableStation in regard to exposure, soil, and other circumstances,may nevertheless, by the aid of an ally become the principalsource whereby the winds are supplied with seeds which perpetuatethe species throughout the surrounding tract.In the above example we see one plant shielding anotherfrom the attacks of animals ; but instances are, perhaps, stillmore numerous, where some animal defends a plant against theenmity of some other subject of the vegetable kingdom.Scarcely any beast, observes a Swedish naturalist*, willtouch the nettle, but fifty different kinds of insects are fed byit. Some of these seize upon the root, others upon the stem ;some eat the leaves, others devour the seeds and flowers : butfor this multitude of enemies, the nettle would annihilate agreat number of plants. Linnaeus tells us, in his Tour inScania, that goats were turned into an island which aboundedwith the Acrostic arundinacea, where they perished by famine ;but horses, which followed them, grew fat on the same plant.The goat, also, he says, thrives on the meadow-sweet and waterhemlock, plants which are injurious to cattle |.Every plant, observes Wilcke, has its proper insect allottedto it to curb its luxuriance, and to prevent it from multiplyingto the exclusion of others. " Thus grass in meadows sometimesflourishes so as to exclude all other plants : here the Phalaenagrains bombyx gram.)^ with her numerous progeny, find awell-spread table ; they multiply in immense numbers, and theWUcke; Amoen, Acad., von vi.^ P> l^? } 12, f Ibid., vol. vil, 409.Ch. VIII.] STATIONS OF ANIMALS AND PLANTS. 133farmer for some years laments the failure of his hay crop ; butthe grass being consumed, the moths die with hunger, or removeto another place. Now the quantity of grass being greatlydiminished, the other plants, which were before choked by it,spring up and the ground becomes variegated with a multitudeof different species of flowers. Had not nature given acommission to this minister for that purpose the grass woulddestroy a great number of species of vegetables, of which theequilibrium is now kept up *."In the above passage allusion is made to the ravages committedin 1740, and the two following years, in many provincesof Sweden, by a most destructive insect. The same moth issaid never to touch the fox-tail grass f , so that it may beclassed as a most active ally and benefactor of that species, andas peculiarly instrumental in preserving it in its present abundance.A discovery of Solander, cited in the treatise ofWilcke above-mentioned, affords a good illustration of thechecks and counterchecks which nature has appointed to preservethe balance of power amongst species. ^^ The Phalaenastrobilella has the fir cone assigned to it to deposit its eggsupon ; the young caterpillars coming out of the shell consumethe cone and superfluous seed ; but lest the destruction shouldbe too general, the Ichneumon strobilellae lays its eggs in thecaterpillar, inserting its long tail in the openings of the conetill it touches the included insect, for its body is too large toenter. Thus it fixes its minute egg upon the caterpillar, whichbeing hatched destroys it J.''Entomologists enumerate many parallel cases where insects,appropriated to certain plants, are kept down by other insects,and these again by parasites expressly appointed to prey onthem §. Few, perhaps, are in the habit of duly appreciatingthe extent to which insects are active in preserving the balanceWilcke, Amen. Acad., vol. vi., p. 17, § 11 and 12.f Kirby and Spence, vol. i., p. 178.X Wilcke, ibid., ( 14. $ Kirby and Spence, vol. iv., p. *218.184 BQUILtBElUM OF BPBCIB9 [OIl Vlll.of spedefl among plants and thus regulating indirectly therelative numbers of many of the higher orders of terrestrialanimals.The peculiarity of their agency consists in their powdi* ofSuddenly multiplying their numbers, to a degree which couldonly be accomplished in a considerable lapse of time in any ofthe larger animals, and then as instantaneously relapsing, with->out the intervention of any violent disturbing cause into theirformer insignificance.If for the sake of employing, on different but rare occasions,a power of many hundred horses we were under the necessityof feeding all these animals at great cost in the intervals whentheir services were not required, we should greatly admire theinvention of a machine, such as the steam-engine, which wascapable, at any moment, of exerting the same degree of strengthwithout any consumption of food during periods ot inaction.The same kind of admiration is strongly excited when we contemplatethe powers of insect life, in the creation of whichnature has been so prodigal. A scanty number of minuteindividuals, only to be detected by careful research, are readyin a few days, weeks, or months, to give birth to myriadswhich may repress any degree of monopoly in another species,or remove nuisances, such as dead carcasses, which might taintthe air. But no sooner has the destroying commission beenexecuted, than the gigantic power becomes dormant — each ofthe mighty host soon reaches the term of its transient existence,and the season arrives when the whole species passes naturallyinto the egg, and thence into the larva and pupa state. Inthis defenceless condition it may be destroyed either by theelements, or by the augmentation of some of its numerous foeswhich may prey upon it in these stages of its transformation ;or it often happens that, in the following year, the season provesunfavourable to the hatching of the eggs or the developmentof the pupae.Thus the swarming myriads depart which may have coveredthe vegetation like the aphides, ot darkened the air like locusts.Ch. VIII.] PRESERVED BY INSECTS. l85In almost every season there are some species which in thismanner put forth their strength, and then, like Milton's spiritswhich thronged the spacious hall ^* reduce to smallest formstheir shapes immense' —So thick the aery crowdSwarm and were straitened ; till, the signal given,Behold a wonder ! they but now who seemedIn bigness to surpass earth's giant sons,Now less than smallest dwarfs.A few examples will illustrate the mode in which this forceoperates. It is well known that among the countless specieof the insect creation, some feed on animal others on vegetablematter, and, upon considering a catalogue of eight thousandBritish insects andarachnidse, Mr. Kirby found that these twodivisions were nearly a counterpoise to each other, the carnivorousbeing somewhat preponderant. There are also distinctspecies, some appointed to consume living, others dead or putridanimal and vegetable substances. One female, of Musca car-maria,will give birth to twenty thousand young ; and the larvaof many flesh-flies devour so much food in twenty-four hours,and grow so quickly, as to increase their weight two hundredfold! . In five days after being hatched they arrive at their fullgrowth and size, so that there was ground, says Kirby, for theassertion of Linnaeus, that three flies of M. victoria could devoura dead horse as quickly as a lion * ; and another Swedishnaturalist remarks, that so great are the powers of propagationof a single species, even of the smallest insects, that each cancommit, when required, more ravages than the elephant t»Next to locusts, the aphides, perhaps, exert the greatestpower over the vegetable world, and, like them, are sometimesso numerous as to darken the air. The multiplication of theselittle creatures is without parallel, and almost every plant hasits peculiar species. Reaumur has proved, that in five generationsone aphis may be the progenitor of 6,904,900,000 descendants; and it is supposed that in one year there may beKirby and Spence,voI. i., p. 250.f Wilkes Amos. Acad., chap ii.136 EFFECT OF INSECTS ON [CJh. Viltwenty generations*. Mr. Curtis f observes that as amongcaterpillars we find some that aYe constantly and unalterablyattached to one or more particular species of plants, and othersthat feed indiscriminately on most sorts of herbage, so it is preciselywith the aphides; some are particular, others moregeneral feeders; and as they resemble other insects in thisrespect, so they do also in being more abundant in some yearsthan others. In 1793 they were the chief, and in 1798 thesole cause of the failure of the hops. In 1794, a season almostunparalleled for drought, the hop was perfectly free from them,while peas and beans especially the former, suffered verymuch from their depredations.The ravages of the caterpillars of some of our small mothsafford a good illustration of the temporary increase of a species.The oak-trees of a considerable wood have been stripped oftheir leaves as bare as in winter, by the caterpillars of a smallgreen moth {Tortrh irritant,) which has been observed theyear following not to abound |. The Gamma moth {Plusiagamma) J although one of our common species, is not dreadedby us for its devastations, but legions of their caterpillars haveat times, created alarm in France, as in 1735. Reaumur observes,that the female moth lays about four hundred eggs ; sothat if twenty caterpillars were distributed in a garden, and aillived through the winter and became moths in the succeedingMay, the eggs laid by these, if all fertile, would produce eighthundred thousand §. A modern writer, therefore, justly observes,that did not Providence put causes in operation to keepthem in due bounds, the caterpillars of this moth alone, leavingout of consideration the two thousand other British specieswould soon destroy more than half of our vegetation ||.In the latter part of the last century an ant most destructiveKirby and Spence, vol. i., p. 174.f Trans. Linn. Soc, vol. vi.X Lib. Eut. Know., Insect Trans p. 203. See Haworth Lep.§ Reaumur, ii. 237.II Lib* £nt. Know.; Insect Trans., p. 212.Ch. VIII.] THE NUMBER OF SPECIES, 137to the sugar-cane (Formica saccharivord)^ appeared in suchinfinite hosts, in the island of Grenada, as to put a stop to thecultivation of that vegetable. Their numbers were incredible.The plantations and roads were filled with them ; many domesticquadrupeds, together with rats, mice, and reptiles, and evenbirds, perished in consequence of this plague. It was not till1780 that they were al length annihilated by torrents of rain,which accompanied a dreadful hurricane *.We may conclude by mentioning some instances of thedevastations of locusts in various countries. Among otherparts of Africa, Cyrenaica has been at different periods infestedby myriads of these creatures, which have consumed nearlyevery green thing. The effect of the havoc committed bythem may be estimated by the famine they occasioned. St,Augustin mentions a plague of this kind in Africa whichdestroyed no less than eight hundred thousand men in thekingdom of Masinissa alone, and many more upon the territoriesbordering upon the sea. It is also related, that in theyear 591 an infinite army of locusts migrated from Africa intoItaly, and, after grievously ravaging the country, were cast intothe sea, when there arose a pestilence from their stench whichcarried ofi* nearly a million of men and beasts.In the Venetian territory also, in 1478, more than thirtythousand persons are said to have perished in a famine occasionedby this scourge ; and other instances are recorded oftheir devastations in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, &c. Indifferent parts of Russia also, Hungary, and Poland, — in Arabiaand India, and other countries, their visitations have beenperiodically experienced. Although they have a preferencefor certain plants, yet, when these are consumed, they willattack almost all the remainder. In the accounts of the invasionsof locusts the statements which appear most marvellousrelate to the prodigious mass of matter which encumbers thesea wherever they are blown into it, and the pestilence arisingfrom its putrefaction. Their dead bodies are said to have been,Kirby and Spence, vol. i^ p. 193, Castle, PhilTrapSi, zzx., 346.188 Reciprocal nfFLUENCB OF £Chi. VIII.In some places heaped one upon another to the depth of foui"feet, in Russia, Poland, and Lithuania ; and when in southernAfrica they were driven into the sea by a north-west windthey formed, says Barrow, along the shore for fifty miles, abank three or four feet high *• But when we consider thatforests are stripped of their foliage, and the earth of its greengarment, for thousands of square miles, it may well be supposedthat the volume of dninud matter produced may equal that ofgreat herds of quadrupeds and flights of large birds suddenlyprecipitated into the sea*The occurrence of such events at certain intervals, in hotcountries, like the severe winters and damp summers returningafter a series of years in the temperate zone, affect the proportionalnumbers of almost all classes of animals and plants,and are probably fatal to the existence of many which wouldotherwise thrive there, while, on the contrary, they must befavourable to certain species which if deprived of such aid,might not maintain their ground.Although it may usually be remarked that the extraordinaryincrease of some one species is immediately followed andchecked by the multiplication of another yet this is notalways the case, partly because many species feed in commonon the same kinds of food, and partly because many kinds offood are often consumed indifferently by one and the samespecies. In the former case, where a variety of different animalshave precisely the same taste, as, for example, when manyinsectivorous birds and reptiles devour alike some particularfly or beetle, the unusual numbers of the latter may only causea slight and almost imperceptible augmentation of each of thosespecies of bird and reptile. In the other instance, where oneanimal preys on others of almost every class, as, for example,where our English buzzards devour not only small quadrupeds,as rabbits and field-mice, but also birds, frogs, lizards,and insects, the profusion of any one of these last may cause*sall such general feeders to subsist more exclusively upon♦ Travels iu Africa, p, 25?. Kirby cwd spence, Volet; p.^ 15.Ch, VIII.] AQUATIC AND TERRESTRIAL SPECIES. 189the species thus in excess and the balance may thus berestored.The numbers of species which are nearly omnivorous is considerable; and although every animal has, perhaps, a predilectionfor some one description of food rather than another*,yet some are not even confined to one of the great kingdomsof the organic world. Thus when the racoon of the WestIndies can neither procure fowls, fish, snails, nor insects, it willattack the sugar-canes, and devour various kinds of grain.The civets, when animal food is scarce, maintain themselveson fruits and roots.Numerous birds, which feed indiscriminately on insects andplants, are perhaps more instrumental than any other of theterrestrial tribes in preserving a constant equilibrium betweenthe relative numbers of different classes of animals and vegetables.If the insects become very numerous and devour theplants, these birds will immediately derive a larger portion oftheir subsistence from insects, just as the Arabians, Syrians,and Hottentots feed on locusts when the locusts devour theircrops.The intimate relation of the inhabitants of the water tothose of the land, and the influence exerted by each on theRelative number of species, must not be overlooked amongstthe complicated causes which determine the existence of animalsand plants in certain regions. A large proportion of theamphibious quadrupeds and reptiles prey partly on aquaticplants and animals, and in part on terrestrial ; and a deficiencyof one kind of prey causes them to have immediate recourse tothe other. The voracity of certain insects, as the dragon-fly, forexample, is confined to the water during one stage of their transformations,and in their perfect state to the air. Innumerablewater-birds both of rivers and seas derive in like manner theirfood indifferently from either element ; so that the abundanceor scarcity of prey in one induces them either to forsake ormore constantly to haunt the other. Thus an intimate connexionbetween the state of the animate creation in a lake or140 CAUSES OF STATIONS. [Ch.VIILriver and in the adjoining dry land is maintained ; or betweena continent, with its lakes and rivers, and the ocean. It iswell known that many birds migrate, during stormy seasons,from the sea-shore into the interior, in search of food ; whileothers, on the contrary, urged by like wants, forsake theirinland haunts, and live on substances rejected by the tide.The migrations of fish into rivers during the spawningseason supplies another link of the same kind. Suppose thesalmon to be reduced in numbers by some marine foes, as byseals and grampuses, the consequence must often be, that inthe course of a few years the otters at the distance of severalhundred miles inland will be lessened in number from thescarcity of fish. On the other hand if there be a dearth offood for the young fry of the salmon in rivers and estuariesso that few return to the sea, the sand-eels and other marinespecies, which are usually kept down by the salmon, willswarm in greater profusion.It is unnecessary to accumulate a greater number of illustrationsin order to prove that the stations of different plantsand animals depend on a great complication of circumstances, —on an immense variety of relations in the state of the animateand inanimate worlds. Every plant requires a certain climate,soil, and other conditions, and often the aid of many animals,in order to maintain its ground. Many animals feed on certainplants, being often restricted to a small number, and sometimesto one only ; other members of the animal kingdom feedon plant-eating species, and thus become dependent on theconditions of the stations not only of their prey, but of theplants consumed by them.Having duly reflected on the nature and extent of thesmutual relations in the different parts of the organic and inorganicworlds, we may next proceed to examine the resultswhich may be anticipated from the fluctuations now continuallyin progress in the state of the earth's surface, and in the geographicaldistribution of its living productions.CHAPTER IX.The circumstances which constitute the Siatioru of Animals are changeable-extensionof the range of one species alters the condition of others — Supposedeffects which may [have followed the first entrance of the Polar Bears intoIceland — ^^The first appearance of a new species in a region causes ^^The chiefdisturbance— Changes known to have resulted from the advance of humanpopulation — ^^Whether man increases the productive powers of the earth — IndigenousQuadrupeds and Birds of Great Britain known to have been extirpatedextinction of the Dodo — Rapid propagation of the domestic Quadrupedsover the American Continent — power of exterminating species no prerogative ofMan — Concluding Remarks.We have seen that the stations of animals and plants dependnot merely on the influence of external agents in the inanimateworld, and the relations of that influence to the structure andhabits of each species, but also on the state of the contemporaryliving beings which inhabit the same part of theglobe. In other words, the possibility of the existence of acertain species in a given locality, or of its thriving more orless therein, is determined not merely by temperature, humidity,soil, elevation, and other circumstances of the like kind,but also by the existence or non-existence, the abundance orscarcity, of a particular assemblage of other plants and animalsin the same region.If we show that both these classes of circumstances, whetherrelating to the animate or inanimate creation, are perpetuallychanging, it will follow that species are subject to incessantvicissitudes ; and if the result of these mutations, in the courseof ages, be so great as materially to affect the general conditionof stations, it will follow that the successive destruction ofspecies must now be part of the regular and constant order ofNature,It will be desirable, first, to consider the effects which everyextension of the numbers or geographical range of one species142 EFFECT OF THE EXTENSION [Ch. IX,must produce on the condition of others inhabiting the sameregions. When the necessary consequences of such extensions'have been fully explained, the reader will be prepared toappreciate the important influence which slight modificationsin the physical geography of the globe may exert on the conditionof organic bangs.In the first place it is dear, that when any region is stockedwith as great a variety of animals and plants as the productivepowers of that region will enable it to support, the addition ofany new species or the permanent numerical increase of onepreviously established, must always be attended either by thelocal extermination or the numerical decrease of some otherspecies.There may undoubtedly be considerable fluctuations fromyear to year, and the equilibrium may be again restoredwithout any permanent alteration; for in particular seasons agreater supply of heat, humidity, or other causes may augmentthe total quantity of vegetable produce, in which case all theanimals subsisting on vegetable food, and others which preyon them, may multiply without any one species giving way ;but whenever the aggregate quantity of vegetable produceremains unaltered, the progressive increase of one animalor plant implies the decline of another.All agriculturists and gardeners are familiar with the factsthat when weeds intrude themselves into the space appropriatedto cultivated species, the latter are starved in theirgrowth or stifled. If we abandon for a short time a field orgarden, a host of indigenous plants,1h$ darnel heialockj and rank fumitory,pour in and obtain the mastery, extirpating the exotics, orputting an end to the monopoly of some native plants.If we inclose a park, and stock it with as many deer as theherbage will support, we cannot add sheep without lesseningthe number of the deer; nor can other herbivorous species besubsequently introduced, unless the individuals of each spedesIn the park beccnnci fewer In proportionsGh. IX.] OF THB RANGE OF SPBCIBS, 149^So if there be an island where leopards are the only beastsof prey, and the lion, tiger, and hyaena afterwards enter, thleopards, if they stand their ground, will be reduced in number.If the locusts then arrive and swarm greatly^it maydeprive a large number of phytophagous animals of their foodsand thereby cause a famine, not only among them, but amongthe beasts of prey ; — certain species, perhaps, which had thaweakest footing in the island will thus be annihilated.We have seen how many distinct geographical provinces thereare of aquatic and terrestrial species, and how great are thepowers of migration conferred on different classes, whereby theinhabitants of one region may be enabled from time to time toinvade another, and do actually 9P itiigrate and diffuse them-»selves over new countries. Now, although our knowledge ofthe history of the animate creation dates from so recent aperiod, that we can scarcely trace the advance or decline ofany animal or plants except in those cases where the influence ofman has intervened, yet we can easily conceive what musthappen when some new colony of wild animals or plantsenters a region for the first time, and succeeds in establishingitself.Let us consider how great are the devastations committedat certain periods by the Greenland bears, when they aredrifted to the shores of Iceland in considerable numbers on theice. These periodical Invasions are formidable even to man ;so that when the bears arrive, the inhabitants collect togetherand go in pursuit of them with fire-arms — each native who slaysone being rewarded by the king of Denmark. The Danes ofold, when they landed in their marauding expeditions uponour coast, hardly excited more alarm ; nor did our islandersmuster more promptly for the defence of their lives andproperty against a common enemy, than the modem Icelandersagainst these formidable brutes. It frequently happens,says Henderson, that the natives are pursued by thebear when he has been long at sea, and when his naturalferocity has been strengthened hy tb kens of hunger ; if144 Effect OP THE EXTENSION {Ql IX.unarmed, it is frequently by stratagem only that they maketheir escape *•Let lis cast our thoughts back to the period when the firstpolar bears reached Iceland, before it was colonized by theNorwegians in 874 ; — we may imagine the breaking up of animmense barrier of ice like that which in 1816 and the followingyear disappeared from the east coast of Greenland, whichit had surrounded for four centuries. By the aid of suchmeans of transportation, a great number of these quadrupedsmight effect a landing at the same time, and the havoc whichthey would make among the species previously settled in theisland would be terrific. The deer, foxes, seals, and evenbirds on which these animals sometimes prey, would be soonthinned down.But this would be a part only, and probably an insignificantportion, of the aggregate amount of change brought about bythe new invader. The plants on which the deer fed beingless consumed in consequence of the lessened numbers of thatherbivorous species, would soon supply more food to severalinsects, and probably to some terrestrial testacea, so that thelatter would gain ground. ' The increase of these would furnishother insects and birds with food, so that the numbers ofthese last would be augmented. The diminution of the sealswould afford a respite to some fish which they had persecuted;and these fish, in their turn, would then multiply and pressupon their peculiar prey. Many water-fowls, the eggs andyoung of which are devoured by foxes, would increase whenthe foxes were thinned down by the bears ; and the fish onwhich the water-fowls subsisted would then, in their turn, beless numerous. Thus the numerical proportions of a greatnumber of the inhabitants, both of the land and sea, might bepermanently altered by the settling of one new species in theregion; and the changes caused indirectly might ramifythrough all classes of the living creation and be almost endless.Jonah of a Residence in Iceland, p. 276.Ch. IX.] OF THE RANGE OF SPECIES. IiAn actual illustration of what we have here only proposedhypothetically, is in some degree afforded by the selection ofsmall islands by the eider duck for its residence during thseason of incubation ; its nests being seldom, if ever, foundon the shores of the main land, or even of a large island.The Icelanders are so well aware of this, that they haveexpended a great deal of labour in forming artificial islands,by separating from the main-land certain promontories, joinedto it by narrow isthmuses. This insular position is necessaryto guard against the destruction of the eggs and youngbirds, by foxes, dogs, and other animal. One year, saysHooker*, it happened that, in the small island of Vidoc,adjoining the coast of Iceland, a fox got over upon the ice,and caused great alarm, as an immense number of ducks werethen sitting on their eggs or young ones. It was long beforehe was taken, which was at last, however, effected by bringinganother fox to the island, and fastening it by a string nearthe haunt of the former, by which he was allured within shotof the hunter.It is usually the first appearance of an animal or plant, inaregion to which it was previously a stranger, that gives riseto the chief alteration ; since, after a time, an equilibrium isagain established. But it must require ages before such a newadjustment of the relative forces of so many conflicting agentscan be definitively settled. The causes in simultaneous actionare so numerous, that they admit of an almost infinite numberof combinations ; and it is necessary that all these shouldhave occurred once before the total amount of change, capableof flowing from any new disturbing force, can be estimated.Thus, for example, suppose that once in two centuries a frostof unusual intensity, or a volcanic eruption of immense violence,accompanied by floods from the melting of glaciers, shouldoccur in Iceland ; or an epidemic disease, fatal to the largernumber of individuals of some one species, and not affectingothers, — these, and a variety of other contingencies, all of whichTour in Iceland, vol. i., p. 64, second edition.Vol. II. 1*146 CHANQKB CAMtD BY Tuft MOO^BIBSS (Ch. it.may occur at once, or at periods separated by diflbrefit entersof time, ought to happen before it would be possible forus to declare what ultimate alteration the presence of any newcorner, such as the bear before mentioned, txa^i occasion inthe animal population of the isle.Every new condition in the state of the organic of inorganiccreation a new animal or plant, an additional snowndadmountain, any permanent change, however slight in comparisonto the whole, gives rise to a new order of things, ai)may make a material change in regard to some one of morespecies. Yet a swarm of locusts, or a host of extrraie intensity,may pass away without any great apparent derangement; no spedes may be lost, and all may soi recover theirformer relative numbers because the same scourges may havevisited the region again ind again, at some former periods.Every plant that was incapable of resisting such a di^ree ofcold, every animal which was exposed to be entirety cut off byfamine in consequence of the consumption of vegetation by thelocusts, may have perished already, so that the subsequentrecurrence of similar catastrophes is attended only by a temporarychange.We are best acquainted with the mutations brought aboutby the progress of human population, and the growth of plantsand animals favoured by man. To these, therefore, we should,in the first instance, turn our attention. If we conclude fromthe concurrent testimony of history and of the evidence yieldedby geological data, that man is, comparatively speaking, ofvery modem origin, we must at once perceive how great arevolution in the state of the animate world the increase of thehuman race, considered merely as consumers of a certain quantityof organic matter, must necessarily cause.It may, perhaps, be said, that man has, In some degree,compensated for the appropriation to himself of So mui^fa food,by artificially improving the natural productiveness of soils,by irrigation, manure, and a judicious intermixture of mineralingredients conveyed from different localities. But it admitsof irfeWttftalMe dttttblj vlieth^f j SXptm te whose. We fertilised btiftipbv^rfsh lh<B lAttds Which Wist dfceupy. This asserted tayseeth tattling td tony, because they ai sb watch Itt Ifeh^bil df tegardtrtg the sterility tE^i* pttoduetlveti^ss of tad ini^dfttk)!! to the Want of titott, And not as regards the dt^nicworld generally. It is difficult, at first, to conceive, if atooWiiss is contented into arable land, and made to yield a cropof grain, even of moderate abundance, that we have not improvedthe capabilities* of the habitable surface^that We havenot empowered it to support a larger quantity of organic life.In such eased, a tract, before of no utility to man, may bereclaimed and become of high agricultural importance, but !tmay yield, at the same time, a scantier vegetation. If a lakebe drained and turned into a meadow, the spate will providesustenance to man and many terrestrial animals serviceable tohim, but not perhaps so much food ad it previously yielded tothe aquatic racei!;.If the pestiferous Pontine Marshes were drained ad toweredwith corn, like the plains of the Po, they might, perhaps,feed a smaller number of animals than they do now ; fbr thesemorasses are filled with of herds of bufikloeil and I^WiUe, audthey swarm with birds, reptiles, and insects.The felling rf dense and lofty forests which covered, stenwithin the records of history, a considerable space on theglobe, now tenanted by civilised man, must usually havelessened the amount of vegetable food throughout the spacewhere these woods grew. We must also take Into our accountthe area covered by toils, and a still larger surface occupiedby roads.If we force the soil to bear extraordinary drops one year, weare,perhaps, compelled to let it lie fallow the next. Butnothing so much counterbalances the fertilising e9k;ts of humanart as the extensive cultivation of foreign herbs and shrubs,which, although they are often more nutritious to man, seldomthrive with the same rank luxuriance as the native plants of adistrict. Man is) in truths continually striving to diminish148 Changes CAUSED BY THE PROGRESS [CSi. IX.the natural diversity of the stations of animals and plants inevery country, and to reduce them all to a small number fittedfor species of economical use. He may succeed perfectly in attaininghis object, even though the vegetation be comparativelymeagre, and the total amount of animal life be greatly lessened.Six and Martins have given a lively description of theincredible number of insects which lay waste the crops inBrazil, besides swarms of monkeys, flocks of parrots andother birds, as well as the paca, agouti, and wild swine.They describe the torment which the planter and the naturalistsuffer from the mosquitoes, and the devastation ofthe ants and battle ; they speak of the dangers to which theywere exposed from the jaguar, the poisonous serpents, lizards,scorpions, centipedes, and spiders. But with the increasingpopulation and cultivation of the country, observe these naturalists,these evils will gradually diminish ; when the inhabitantshave cut down the woods, drained the marshes, maderoads in all directions, and founded villages and towns, manwill by degrees triumph over the rank vegetation and thenoxious animals, and all the elements will second and amplyrecompense his activity ♦.The number of human beings now peopling the earth issupposed to amount to eight hundred millions, so that we mayeasily understand how great a number of beasts of prey birds,and animals of every class, this prodigious population musthave displaced, independently of the still more important consequenceswhich have followed from the derangement broughtabout by man in the relative numerical strength of particularspecies.Let us make some inquiries into the extent of the influencewhich the progress of society has exerted, during the last sevenor eight centuries, in altering the distribution of our indigenousBritish animals. Dr. Fleming has prosecuted this inquiry withhis usual zeal and ability, and in a memoir f on the subjectTravels in Brazil, vol. i., p. 260.t Ed Phi. Joom^ No. »ii., p. 287. Oct. 1824.Ch. IX.] OF HUMAN POPULATION. 149has enumerated the best-authenticated examples of the decreaseor extirpation of certain species during a period whenour population has made the most rapid advances. Weshall offer a brief outline of his results.The stag, as well as the fallow deer and the roe, were formerlyso abundant that, according to Wesley, from, five hundredto a thousand were sometimes slain at a hunting-match ; butthe native races would already have been extinguished, hadthey not been carefully preserved in certain forests. The otter,the marten, and the polecat, were also in sufficient numbers tobe pursued for the sake of their fur ; but they have now beenreduced within very narrow bounds. The wild cat and foxhave also been sacrificed throughout the greater part of thecountry, for the security of the poultry-yard or the fold.Badgers have been expelled from nearly every district whichat former periods they inhabited.Besides these, which have been driven out from some haunts,and everywhere reduced in number, there are some whichhave been wholly extirpated ; such as the ancient breed of indigenoushorses, the wild boar, and the wild oxen, of which last,however, a few remains are still preserved in the parks of someof our nobility. The beaver, which was eagerly sought afterfor its fur, had become scarce at the close of the ninth century,and, by the twelfth century, was only to be met with, accordingto Giraldus de Barri, in one river in Wales, and another inScotland. The wolf, once so much dreaded by our ancestors,is said to have maintained its ground in Ireland so late as thebeginning of the eighteenth century (1710), though it hadbeen extirpated in Scotland thirty years before, and in Englandat a much earlier period. The bear, which in Wales wasregarded as a beast of the chace equal to the hare or the boar *,only perished as a native of Scotland in the year 1057 f ;Many native birds of prey have also been the subjects ofunremitting persecution. The eagles, larger hawks, and ravens,have disappeared from the more cultivated districts. The♦ Ray, Syn. Quad., p. 214. t Ibid., p 295.)|f CHANOM 94^VnJh BY T9« BIIQORES8 (^G^ P^<ihdyiiti of Xh^ lI(^dl«l4» the smpei, the re4sJbaQV9 end tb bittersb^^f^. heed drained ?q\i«Uy with th 9umoA«jr dw^Uiog^ of thelapwing ais th curlew But these «pe«ie« «til^ Mi\gQC i^ ranportion of the British Uses \ wb€»r9a& th IdfffGt ciqpwWMllieijior w(h4 grasses formerly natives of th pioe^fpr^aMl of prelateand Seotlapd^ have h^eo destroyed within the last ^f^y«vs* The ^pei and the (sran^ i?hieh ft^piev tA h»Ye hf^^fwaie% y^ ^ommvp ip Sootlmdj ^9^ IKlw eplj oooasioi udYMtamii^.Thf^ huitaird ((Mi« (cmla)^ obs^FY^A Ckayeaip bit S9tii)iGNn^holc^ t » ^^ was formerly seen in the downs ap h^nthf ofaroma parts of our islands m flopki^ of forty w fifty |iU4l2whereas H. is »qw a weumstmee of rare oowrfei^ec^ to ii^e^with a single indiyidwl-" Bewick also r^wtrl^ ^ that ^jfwev^ formerly oiore o(mm>n in tria island than at pimeiftt ithey are now found only in the open entries of the seiudl andeast in the plains of Wiltshh^ Dorsetshire, and some parts ofYorkshire," In the few years that have elapsed since Bewickwrote, tins hid has entirely disappeared from Wiltshire andXVorsetahirel^These changes, we may observe, are derived born Y&ty imperfectmemoriae aiKi relate only to the larger and moreconspicuous animals inhabiting a small spot oa tha globe ^ butthey cannot jeu to exalt our conception of the enormous r^vekItttiona which, ia the course of several thousand years, theMfhole human species must have effected.The kangaroo and the emu are retreating rapidly brie theprogress of colonization in Australia } and it scarcely admitof donbt^that tic: general cultivation of that couAti^ mush leadto. the extirpation of both. The most striking example of theloss, even within the last twa centuries, of a remarkable specieis that of the doctor— a bird first seen by the Dutch when theylanded on the Isle of France at that time uninhabited, immediatelyafter the discay^ry of the passage to the East India byFleming, Syn. Quad., p. 295. f Vol. iii. Londoii> 1821.I Land Birds, vol. i., p. 316,,^ Ed. 1821,•the Cape of Good Hope . It wna of a Inrge iH^ee und singularform \ it wings shorty like those al w ofitrichj and whollyinctqpid)!^ cis sustaining its heavy hod eye for a short flight*In its general appearance, it differed from the Ostrich Q9sm>^wary or any Icnown bird.Many naturalists gave figures of the dodo after the commencementof the seventeenth century and there is a painlii^gof it in the British Museum, which is said to have been takenfrom a Using individual. Beneath the painting is a 1^> in afinesta^of preservation, which ornithologists are agreed cannotbekmg to any other known bird* In the museum at Oxford,also, there is a foot and a head, iq an imperfect state, but M«Cuvier doubts ^e ideiitily of this spedes with that of whichthe painting is preserved in London ^.In spite oi the most active sears during the last centuryno information resenting the dodo was obtained, and someauthors have gone so far as to p«^end that it never existed ;hut amongst a greet mass of satisfactory evidence in favourof the recent existence of this species we may mention that anassemblage of fossil bones were recently discovered undera bed of lava in the Isle of France and went to the Parismuseum by M« Qesjardins They ed'most all belonged to alarge living species of land tortoise* ogled Tes^cia India, butamongst then were the head st€mum> and humerus ef thedodo M. Cuvier showed me these valuable remains in Panisand assured me that they left no doubt in his mind that thehuge bird was one of the gallinaceous tribof^sociis have complained that UMcriptioos on t^mb-etonef e«BV«]f 90 generalinformation except teat individual wee born and died accidents yihick niusthappen alike to all men. But the death of a species is so remarkable an eventin natural history, that it desires commemoration, and it is with no small hitercstthat we learn, hwKk the ardirres of the University of OxA»d, the exact day bmAyear when the remains of the ^4 specnpea of the do^?^ nhid^ had retted i»the Ashmolean museum, were cast away* The relics we are told, were '' SkMussBO subducta, annette Vice-cancellaria aliisque curatoribus^ ad ea lustrandaconvocation, die January, 8'**., Ad., It'd." Zool. Joum., No. 12, p. 559. 1828.f Sur ^uel^u$9 Osfem^ns* &c. Ann* des Sp.; tome hal, ^. 103t Se^U 1830.152 RAPID PROPAGATION O** [Ch. IX,Next to the direct agency of man, his indirect influence inmultiplying the numbers of large herbivorous quadrupeds ofdomesticated races, may be regarded as one of the most obviouscauses of the extermination of species. On this, and on severalother grounds, the introduction of the horse, ox, and othermammalia, into America, and their rapid propagation over thatcontinent within the' last three centuries, is a fact of greatimportance in natural history. The extraordinary herds of wildcattle and horses which overran the plains of South America,sprung from a very few pairs first carried over by the Spaniards ;and they prove that the wide geographical range of large speciesin great continents does not necessarily imply that they haveexisted there from remote periods. Humboldt observes, in hisTravels *, on the authority of Azzara, that it is believed thereexist, in the Pampas of Buenos Ayres, twelve million cows andthree million horses, without comprising in this enumerationthe cattle that have no acknowledged proprietor. In theLlanos of Caracas, the rich haters, or proprietors of pastoralfarms are entirely ignorant of the number of cattle they possess.The young are branded with a mark peculiar to eachherd and some of the most wealthy owners mark as many asfourteen thousand a year. In the northern plains, from theOrinoco to the lake of Maracaybo, M. Demons reckoned thatone million two hundred thousand oxen, one hundred andeighty thousand horses, and ninety thousand mules, wanderedat large f. In some parts of the valley of the Mississippi,especially in the country of the Osage Indians, wild horses areimmensely numerous.The establishment of black cattle in America dates fromColumbus's second voyage to St. Domingo. They there multipliedrapidly ; and that island presently became a kind ofnursery from which these animals were successively transportedto various parts of the continental coast, and fromthence into the interior. Notwithstanding these numerousexportations, in twenty-seven years after the discovery of the• Pers. Nar., vol. jy. f Quarterly Review, vol. xxi., p. 335.€h. IX.] DOMESTIC Quadruped IN AMERICA. 153island, herds of four thousand head, as we learn from Oviedo,were not uncommon, and there were even some that amountedto eight thousand. In 1587, the number of hides exportedfrom St. Domingo alone, according to Costa's report, wasthirty-five thousand four hundred and forty-four ; and in thesame year there were exported sixty-four thousand three hundredand fifty from the ports of New Spain. This was in thesixty-fifth year after the taking of Mexico, previous to whichevent the Spaniards, who came into that country, had not beenable to engage in anything else than war *.All our readers are aware that these animals are now establishedthroughout the American continent, from Canada toParaguay.The ass has thriven very generally in the New World ; andwe learn from Alloa, that in Quito they ran wild, and multipliedin amazing numbers, so as to become a nuisance. Theygrazed together in herds, and, when attacked, defended themselveswith their mouths. If a horse happened to strayinto the places where they fed, they all fell upon him, and didnot cease biting and kicking till they left him dead f .The first hogs were carried to America by Columbus, andestablished in the island of St. Domingo the year following itsdiscovery in November, 1493. In succeeding years they wereintroduced into other places where the Spaniards settled ; and,in the space of half a century, they were found established inthe New World, from the latitude of ^ north, to the 40thdegree of south latitude. Sheep, also, and goats have multipliedenormously in the New World, as have also the catand the rat, which last, as we before stated, has been importedunintentionally in ships. The dogs introduced byman, which have at different periods become wild in America,hunted in packs like the wolf and the jackal, destroying notonly hogs, but the calves and foals of the wild cattle andhorses.• Quarterly Review, vol. xxi., p. 335.f UUoa's Voyage. Wood's Zool., vol. i., p. 9.im IMPOM^TIOli OF PBIN^PlSa INTO ICI^UND. |Gh,■•*^5UUoii in bi yoy^ge» a^d Quffw on th authority <^ oUwriter inlaw a fact which illustrate Try dearly the principletMcm dxplahi^d by mi oC that cbonk whkh the i^^ipeasf^ of oqqanimal necessarily offer to that of another, Th Sp^iiardaba introduced goats into the island of Juan {'eirnandea^ vheapathey becaWQ io prolific aa to furnish the curate who infestedthose sea with provisions. In ord to qut off this resourceffooi the buQcan^rs^ a number of toga were turned loose inkthe island \ and so numerous did they become in their turn thatthey destroyed the goats in every accessible part aftesc ifbioktli^ number ^ tly^ wild d^^ regain decreased ^,All an example of the rapidly with which a large tract maybecome peopled by the offspring of a single pair of quadrupedswe may mention that in the year 1773 thirteen rein-deer wereexported from Norway only three of which reached Iceland*These were turned loose into the mountains of Q^uldbringeSyssel) where they multiplied so greatly, in the oouraeof fortyyearly that it was not uncommon to meet with herds consistingof |r<Hn fpr^y to one hundred in vapours districts.In Laplander obs^vefif a modem writer therein^deer ia a loserhy his connexion with man, but Iceland will be thii^^ creature'sparadise Thcf e is;^ in the interiors i^ tract which Sir Gr% Maa^kenaie computes at not less thai forty thousand square piles,without a single huiaan habitation and almost entirety unknownto the natives themselves . There ire no wolves ; the Icelanderswill keep out the bears; and the reu^e^i being alnvoat unmolestedby man will have no enemy wherein wle^a it habrought with it its own tormenting gad-fly f,Besides the quadrupeds before enumerated by us our don^is*tie fowls have also ascended in the West Indies and America*where they have the eoi^nKm fowl the goo the. duck, thepeacocks the pigeon aid the guinee^fo wK A^ these w^o oftentaken suddenly from the temperate to very hot regions* theywere not reared at first without much difficulty ; but after a• Buffon, vol. v.> p. 1 Oa. U41o**8 Voyage, V9l.;ii., p. 220.f^W gt^erdtiona they became f«mUi^ri%e4 to the climate, i^bichiii^ piano caa^^ 4i{^c#^bed much nearer than that of £iurQ{^tQ th?^ temperature of their piri^nal native countries.The fact of so many mUhonaof wild and tameindividual& ofOur domestic species, almost all of then the largest quadrupedsand birds, having ben propagate throughout the new eon-^tient within the short period that has. elapsed since the discoversof Ammca^ while bo appreciable improvement can have beenmade in the productive powers of that vast continent affords£abundant evidence of the extraordinary change which accompanythe diffusion and progressive advancement of the humanrac Over the globe?. That it should have remained for us towitness soh mighty revolutions is a proof, even if there wm n^other evidence, that the entrance of man into the planet is, comparativelyspeaking, q£ extremely modern detest and that theeffects of his agency are only beginning to be felt. -A mod^n writer has estimated that there are in Americaupwards of four million square miles of useful soi\]^ each capableof supporting two hundred persona \ and nearly six nullum, eachmile capable of supporting four hundred and ninety persona "^^If this conjecture b^ true it will follow as that author observesthat if the natural resources of America sere fully developedit would afford sustenance to five tinea a^ great a number ofinhabitants a^ the entire mass of human beings assisting at presentupon the sobs. Th nev continents he thinks thoughless than half th si of thei ^4,^ ^ontajma an e^al quantity ^useful aeil^k and utueh move that tok equal amomt of productivepow^% Be tWs as it mi, vre may sandy conclude that theamei^t of human po^latiw sow existing constitutes but asmall prqiportH»i of that which the globe is capable of supportering, or which it is destin to Sustain at Wi distant p^iodi^ bythe rapid progr^Ki of so^ety> esfieeiaHy in America Australia,and certain parts of the old eimtin^t^But if we reflect that already many impious of squsyce micaof i);^ most f^til? lanky ocouivk^d original by a boundlim|llaclareB.Axi Aafterica. yn^yf. britannica.156 POWER OF EXTERMINATING SPECIES [Ch. IX.variety of animal and vegetable forms, have been alreadybrought under the dominion of man, and compelled, in a greatmeasure, to yield nourishment to him, and to a limited numberof plants and animals which he has caused to increase, we mustat once be convinced, that the annihilation of a multitude ofspecies has already been effected, and will continue to go onhereafter, in certain regions, in a still more rapid ratio, as thecolonies of highly-civilized nations spread themselves over unoccupiedlands.Yet, if we wield the sword of extermination as we advance,we have no reason to repine at the havoc committed, nor tofancy, with the Scotch poet, that " we violate the social unionof nature ;" or complain, with the melancholy Jaques, that weAre mere usurpers, tyrants, and, what's worse.To fright the animals, and to kill them upIn their assigned and native dwelling-place.We have only to reflect, that in thus obtaining possessionof the earth by conquest, and defending our acquisitions byforce, we exercise no exclusive prerogative. Every specieswhich has spread itself from a small point over a wide area,must, in like manner, have marked its progress by the diminution,or the entire extirpation, of some other, and must maintainits ground by a successful struggle against the encroachmentsof other plants and animals. That minute parasiticplant, called '^ the rust ** in wheat, has, like the Hessian fly,the locust, and the aphis, caused famines ere now amongst the*^ lords of the creation." The most insignificant and diminutivespecies, whether in the animal or vegetable kingdom, haveeach slaughtered their thousands, as they disseminated themselvesover the globe, as well as the lion, when first it spreaditself over the tropical regions of Africa.We cannot conclude this division of our subject without observing,that although we have as yet considered one class onlyof the causes (the organic) whereby species may, become exterminated,yet the continued action of these alone, throughoutmyriads of future ages, must work an entire change in theCh. IX.] NO PREROGATIVE OF MAN. 157state of the organic creation, not merely on the continents andislands, where the power of man is chiefly exerted, but in thegreat ocean, where his control is almost unknown. The mindis prepared by the contemplation of such future revolutionsto look for the signs of others of an analogous nature, in themonuments of the past. Instead of being astonished at theproofs there manifested of endless mutations in the animateworld, they will appear to one who has thought profoundly onthe fluctuations now in progress, to afford evidence in favour ofthe uniformity of the system, unless, indeed, we are precludedfrom speaking of uniformity when we characterize a principleof endless variation.CHAPTER X.Influence of inorganic causes in changing the habitations of speeds— "Powersof diffusion indispensable, that each species may maintain its ground— fioirchanges in this physical geography affect tht disbibutiOki of ipedet-^Halv t>fUm ehaagtt of tpedei cannot be uniftHMi, however Mgttltt that mUmi «€ Ittinoqipuiic causes— lUnsiratioii derived from tubttdences by earthquakMH-firemthe devotion of land by the same — from the formation of new islands — ^firomthe wearing through of an isthmus — each change in the physical geographyof large regions must occasion the extinction of species— £flbetd of a geiienlalteration of climate on the migration of species — Gradual refrigeration causesspecies in the northern and southern hemispheres to become distinct — elevationof temperature the reverse— Effects in the distribution of species which mustresult from vicissitudes in climate inconsistent with the theory of transmutation.Having shown in the last chapter how considerably thenumerical increase or the extension of the geographical rangeof any one species must derange the numbers and distributionof others, let us now direct our attention to the influence whichthe inorganic causes described in our first volume are continuallyexerting on the habitations of species.So great is the instability of the earth's surface that ifNature were not continually engaged in the task of sowingseeds and colonizing animals, the depopulation of a certainportion of the habitable sea and land would in a few years beconsiderable. Whenever a river transports sediment into alake or sea the aquatic animals and plants which delight indeep water are expelled : the tract, however, is not allowed toremain useless, but is soon peopled by species which requiremore light and heat, and thrive where the water is shallow.Every addition made to the land by the encroachment of thedelta of a river banishes many subaqueous species from theirnative abodes ; but the new-formed plain is not permitted tolie unoccupied, being instantly covered with terrestrial vegetation.The ocean devours continuous lines of sea-coast, andprecipitates iorMii ^ rich {Mti^ture^aml into ih^ waves ; butthis space is not lost to the animate creation for shells and iseft<-weed tooth adhere to the new-made clii&^ and numerous fishpeople the channel which the current has scooped out for itsdif.No sooner has a volcanic isle been thrown Up than some lichensben to grow upon it and it is sometimes clothed with erewhilesmoke and ashes are still occasionally thrown from thecrater. The cocoa pandanus and mangrove take it)ot uponthe coral reef before it has fairly risen above the waves. Theburning stream of lava that descends from Etna rolls throughthe stately forest, and converts to ashes every tree and herbwhich stand in its way ; but the black strip of land thus desolated,is covered again, in the course of time, with oaks, pine)and chestnuts, as luxuriant as those which the fiery ^ torrentswept away.Every flood and landslip, every wave which a hurricaneor earthquake throws upon the shore, every shower of volcanicdust and ashes which buries a country far and wide to thedepth of many feet, every advance of the sand-flood, everyconversion of salt-water into fresh when rivers alter theirmain channel of discharge, every permanent variadoU in therise or fall of tides in an estuary-these and countless othercauses displace in the course of a few centuries certain plantsand animals from stations which they previously occupied. If,therefore, the Author of Nature had not been prodigal of thosenumerous contrivances before alluded to for spreading allclasses of organic beings over the earth — if he had not ordainedthat the fluctuations of the animate and inanimate creationshould be in perfect harmony with each other, it is evident thatconsiderable spaces, now the most habitable on the globe, wouldsoon be as devoid of life as are the Alpine snows, or the darkabysses of the ocean, or the moving sands of the Sahara.The powers then of migration and diffusion conferred onanimals and plants, are indispensable to enable them to maintaintheir ground, and would be necessary even though it werenever intended that a species should gradually extend its geog160 EFFECT OF CHANGES IN PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY [Cil.graphical range. But a facility of shifting their quartersbeing once given, it cannot fail to happen that the inhabitantsof one province should occasionally penetrate into some other,since the strongest of those barriers which we before describedas separating distinct regions, are all liable to be thrown downone after the other, during the vicissitudes of the earth'ssurface.The numbers and distribution of particular species areaffected in two ways, by changes in the physical geography ofthe earth. First, these changes promote or retard the migrationsof species ; secondly, they alter the physical conditionsof the localities which species inhabit. If the ocean shouldgradually wear its way through an isthmus, like that of Suezit would open a passage for the intermixture of the aquatictribes of two seas previously disjoined, and would, at. the sametime, close a free communication which the terrestrial plantsand animals of two continents had before enjoyed. Thesewould be, perhaps, the most important consequences in r^ardto the distribution of species, which would result from thebreach made by the sea in such a spot ; but there would beothers of a distinct nature, such as the conversion of a certaintract of land which formed the isthmus into sea. This spacepreviously occupied by terrestrial plants and animals would beimmediately delivered over to the aquatic, a local revolutionwhich might have happened in innumerable other parts of theglobe, without being attended by any alteration in the blendingtogether of species of two distinct provinces.This observation leads us to point out one of the mostinteresting conclusions to which we are led by the contemplationof the vicissitudes of the inanimate world in relation tothose of the animate. It is clear that if the agency of inorganiccauses be uniform as we have supposed they must operatevery irregularly on the state of organic beings, so that therate according to which these will change in particular regionswill not be equal in equal periods of time.We are not about to advocate the doctrine of general cates'C11.X.] ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES* 161trophies recurring at certain intervals, as in the ancient orientalcosmogonies nor do we doubt that if very considerable periodsof equal duration could be taken into our consideration andcompared one with another, the rate of change in the living,as well as in the inorganic world, would be nearly uniform ;but if we regard each of the causes separately, which we knowto be at present the most instrumental in remodelling the stateof the surface, we shall find that we must expect each to be inactionfor thousands of years, without producing any extensivealterations in the habitable surface, and then to give rise,during a very brief period, to important revolutions.We shall illustrate this principle by a few of the mostremarkable examples which present themselves. In the courseof the last century, as we have before pointed out, a considerablenumber of instances are recorded of the solid surface, whethercovered by water or not, having been permanently sunk orupraised by the power of earthquakes. Most of these convulsionsare only accompanied by temporary fluctuations inthe state of limited districts, and a continued repetition ofthese events for thousands of years might not produce anydecisive change in the state of many of those great zoological orbotanical provinces of which we have sketched the boundaries.When, for example, large parts of the ocean and even of inlandseas are a thousand fathoms or upwards in depth it is amatter of no moment to the animate creation that vast tractsshould be heaved up many fathoms at certain intervals, orshould subside to the same amount. Neither can any materialrevolution be produced in South America either in the terrestrialor the marine plants or animals by a series of shocks onthe coast of Chili, each of which, like that of Pence, in 1750,should uplift the coast about twenty five feet. Nor if theground sinks fifty feet at a time, as in the harbour of PortRoyal, in Jamaica, in 1692, will such alterations of level workany general fluctuations in the state of organic beings inhabitingthe West India islands, or the Caribbean Sea.It is only when these subterranean powers, by shiftingVol, II, M162 EFFECT OF CHANGES IN PHYSICAL Geography [Glue.gradually the points where their principal force is developedhappen to strike upon some particular region where a slightchange of level immediately affects the distribution of landand water, or the state of the climate or the barriers betweendistinct groups of, species over extensive areas, that the rate serffluctuation becomes accelerated, and may, in the course of ftfew years or centuries, work mightier changes than had beenexperienced in myriads of antecedent years.Thus, for examples a repetition of subsidence causing thenarrow, isthmus of Panama to sink down a few hundred feet,might in a few centuries bring about a great revolution inthe state of the animate creation in the western hemisphere.Thousands of aquatic species would pass for the first timidfrom the Caribbean Sea into the Pacific ; and thousands ciothers, before peculiar to the Pacific ocean, would make theirway into the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico and theAtlantic. A considerable modification would probably be occasionedby the same event in the direction or volume of theGulf-stream, and thereby the temperature of the sea and thecontiguous lands would be altered as far as the influence ofthat current extends. A change of climate might thus beproduced in the ocean from Florida to Spitsbergen, and inmany countries of North America, Europe, and Greenland.Not merely the heat, but the quantity of rain which falls wouldbe altered in certain districts, so that many species would beexcluded from tracts where they before flourished; otherswould be reduced in number ; and some would thrive moreand multiply. The seeds also and the fruits of plants would nolonger be drifted in precisely the same directions, nor the egg*of aquatic animals ; neither would species be any longer impededin their migrations towards particular statics beforeshut out from them by their inability to cross the mightycurrent.Let us take another example from a part of the globe whichis at present liable to suffer by earthquakes, viz., the lowsandy tract which intervenes between the sea of Azof and theCh. X.] ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 168Caspian. If there should occur a sinking down to a triflingamount, and such ravines should be formed as might be producedby a few earthquakes not more considerable than havefallen within our limited observation during the last one hundredand forty years, the waters of the sea of Azof would pourrapidly into the Caspian, which, according to the lowest estimate,is fifty feet lower than the level of the Black Sea, andwhich, according to some writers of considerable authority ionehundred and fifty feet, — according to others, three hundredfeet below the level of the Sea of Azof *. The lattersea would immediately borrow from the Euxine, the Euxinefrom the Mediterranean and the Mediterranean from theAtlantic, so that an inexhaustible current would pour downinto the low tracts of Asia bordering the Caspian, by whichall the sandy salt steppes adjacent to that sea would be inundated.The diluvial waters would reach the salt lake of Aral, norstop until their eastern shores were bounded by the high landwhich in the steppe of the Kirghis connects the Altar withthe Himalaya mountains. A few years, perhaps a few monthsmight suffice for the accomplishment of this great revolutionin the geography of the interior of Asia ; and it is impossiblefor those who believe in the permanence of the energy withwhich existing causes now act, not to anticipate such eventsagain and again in the course of future ages.Let us next imagine a few cases of the elevation of land ofsmall extent at certain critical points, as for example, in theshallowest parts of the Straits of Gibraltar, where the soundingsfrom the African to the European side give only twohundred and twenty fathoms. In proportion as this submarinebarrier of rock was upheaved, to effect which wouldmerely require the shocks of partial and confined earthquakes,the volume of water which pours in from the Atlantic into theMediterranean would be lessened. But the loss of the inlandsea by evaporation would remain the same, so that being noMalte-Brun; vol. vi. p. 405.164 EFFECT OF CHANGES IN PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY [Gh. Z*longer able to draw on the ocean for a supply sufficient torestore its equilibrium, it must sink, and leave dry a certainportion of land around its borders. The current which nowflows constantly out of the Black Sea into the Mediterraneanwould then rush in more rapidly, and the level of the Mediterraneanwould be thereby prevented from falling so low ; butthe level of the Black Sea would, for the same reason, sink, sothat when, by a continued series of elevator movements, theStraits of Gibraltar had become completely closed up, wemight expect large and level sandy steppes to surround boththe Euxine and Mediterranean, like those occurring at presenton the skirts of the Caspian, and the sea of Aral. The geographicalrange of hundreds of aquatic species would bethereby circumscribed, and that of hundreds of terrestrialplants and animals extended.A line of submarine volcanos crossing the channel of somestrait, and gradually choking it up with ashes and lava, mightproduce a new barrier as effectually as a series of earthquakes; especially if thermal springs, plentifully charged withcarbonate of lime, silica, and other mineral ingredients, shouldpromote the rapid multiplication of corals and shells, andcement them together with solid matter precipitated duringthe intervals between eruptions. Suppose in this manner astoppage to be caused of the Bahama Channel between thebank of that name and the coast of Florida. This insignificantrevolution, confined to a mere spot in the bottom of the ocean,would, by diverting the main current of the Gulf-stream, giverise more effectually than the opening of the Straits of Panamabefore supposed, to extensive changes in the climate anddistribution of animals and plants inhabiting the northernhemisphere.A repetition of elevator movements of earthquakes mightcontinue over an area as extensive as Europe, for thousandsof ages, at the bottom of the ocean in certain regions, andproduce no visible effects ; whereas, if they should operate insome shallow parts of the Pacific, amid the coral archipelagos.Ch. X.] ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 165they would soon give birth to a new continent. Hundredsof volcanic islands may be thrown up and become coveredwith vegetation without causing more than local fluctuationsin the animate world ; but if a chain like the Aleutian archipelagoor the Kurile isles run for a distance of many hundredmiles, so as to form an almost uninterrupted communicationbetween two continents, or two distant islands, the migrationsof plants, birds, insects, and even of some quadrupeds, maycause in a short time an extraordinary series of revolutions,tending to augment the range of some animals and plants, andto limit that of others. A new archipelago might be formedin the Mediterranean, the Bay of Biscay, and a thousandother localities, and might produce less important events thanone rock which should rise up between Australia and Javaso placed that winds and currents might cause an interchangeof the plants, insects, and birds, of the latter countries.If we turn from the igneous to the aqueous agents, we findthe same tendency to an irregular rate of change, naturallyconnected with the strictest uniformity in the energy of thosecauses. When the sea, for example, gradually encroachesupon both sides of a narrow isthmus, as that of Keswick,separating the North idea from the Baltic, where, as we stated,the cliffs on both the opposite coasts are wasting away *, nointernal alteration results for thousands of years, save only thatthere is a progressive conversion of a small strip of land intowater. A few feet only, or a few yards, are annually removed ;but when at last the partition shall be broken down, and thetides of the ocean shall enter by a direct passage into the inlandsea, instead of going by a circuitous route through theCattegat, a body of salt-water will sweep up as far as theGulfs of Bothnia and Finland, the waters of which are nowbrackish, or almost fresh ; and this revolution will be attendedby the local annihilation of many species.Similar consequences must have resulted, on a small scale,when the sea opened its way through the isthmus of TavernVol. i. p. 289.166 EFFECT OF CHANGES IN PHYSICAL geography [Cheminthe thirteenth century, forming an union between an inlandlake and the ocean, and opening, in the course of one century,a shallow strait more than half as wide as the narrowest partof that which divides England from France.It will almost seem superfluous, after we have thus tracedthe important modifications in the condition of living beingswhich flow from changes of trifling extent, to argue that entirerevolutions might be brought about, if the climate and physicalgeography of the whole globe were greatly altered. Species wehave stated are, in general, local, some being confined to extremelysmall spots, and depending for their existence on a combinationof causes which, if they are to be met with elsewhere,occur only in some very remote region. Hence it must happenthat when the nature of these localities is changed the specieswill perish ; for it will rarely happen that the cause whichalters the character of the district will afford new facilities tothe species to establish itself elsewhere.If we attribute the origin of a great part of the desert ofAfrica to the gradual progress of moving sands, driven eastwardby the westerly winds, we may safely infer that a varietyof species must have been annihilated by this cause alone. Thesand-flood has been inundating, from time immemorial, therich lands on the west of the Nile, and we have only to multiplythis effect a sufficient number of times, in order to understandhow, in the lapse of ages, a whole group. of terrestrialanimals and plants may become extinct.This desert, without including fiornou and Parlour, extends,according to the calculation of Humboldt, over one hundredand ninety-four thousand square leagues, an area far more thandouble that of the Mediterranean, which occupies only seventy-ninethousand eight hundred square leagues. In a small portionof so vast a space, we may infer, from analogy, that therewere many peculiar species of plants and animals which musthave been banished by the sand, and their habitations invadedby the camel and by birds and insects formed for the aridsands.Qh.lL} ON TH£ DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 16YThere is evidently nothing in the nature of the catastropheto favour the escape of the former inhabitants to some adjoiningprovince ; nothing to weaken, in the bordering lands, thatpowerful barrier against emigration — pre-occupancy. Nor,even if the exclusion of a certain group of species from a giventract were compensated by an extension of their range over anew country would that circumstance tend to the conservationof species in general ; for the extirpation would merely then betransferred to the region so invaded. If it be imagined, forexample, that the aboriginal quadrupeds, birds, and other animalsof Africa emigrated in consequence of the advance ofdrift-sand, and colonized Arabia, the indigenous Arabianspecies must have given way before them and have beenreduced in number or destroyed.Let us next suppose that, in some central and more elevatedparts of the great African desert, the upheaving power ofearthquakes should be exerted throughout an immense seriesof ages, accompanied, at certain intervals by volcanic eruptionssuch as gave rise at once, in 1755, to a mountain onethousand seven hundred feet high, on the Mexican plateau*When the continued repetition of these events had caused amountain-chain, it is obvious that a complete transformationin the state of the climate would be brought about throughouta vast area.We will imagine the summits of the new chain to rise so asto be covered, like Mount Atlas for several thousand feetwith snow during a great part of the year. The melting ofthese snows, during the greatest heat, would cause the riversto swell in the season when the greatest drought now prevails;the waters, moreover, derived from this source, would alwaysbe of lower temperature than the surrounding atmosphere, andwould thus contribute to cool the climate. During the numerousearthquakes and volcanic eruptions which would attendthe gradual formation of the chain, there would be many floodscaused by the bursting of temporary lakes and by the meltingof snows by lava. These inundations would deposit alluvialles EFFECT OF CHANGES IN Physical GEOGRAPHY [Ch.Xmatter far and wide over the original sands at all levels, as thecountry assumed various shapes, and was modified again andagain by the moving power from below, and the aqueouserosion of the surface above. At length the Sahara would befertilized, irrigated by rivers and streamlets intersecting it inevery direction, and covered by jungle and morasses, so thatthe animals and plants which now people northern Africawould disappear, and the region would gradually become fittedfor the reception of a population of species perfectly dissimilarin their forms, habits, and organization.There are always some peculiar and characteristic featuresin the physical geography of each large division of the globe ;and on these peculiarities the state of animal and vegetable lifeis dependent. If, therefore, we admit incessant fluctuations inthe physical geography, we must, at the same time, concedethe successive extinction of terrestrial and aquatic species to bepart of the economy of our system. When some great class ofstations is in excess in certain latitudes, as, for examples inwide savannahs, arid sands, lofty mountains, or inland seas, wefind a corresponding development of species adapted for suchcircumstances. In North America, where there is a chainof vast inland lakes of fresh-water, we find an extraordinaryabundance and variety of aquatic birds, fresh water fish, ,and small amphibious reptiles, fitted for such a climate*The greater part of these would perish if the lakes were destroyed,— an event that might be brought about by some ofthe least of those important revolutions contemplated in geology.It might happen that no fresh-water lakes of correspondingmagnitude might then exist on the globe ; but if theyoccurred elsewhere, they might be situated in New Holland,Southern Africa, Eastern Asia, or some region so distant as tobe quite inaccessible to the North American species ; or theymight be situated within the tropics, in a climate uninhabitableby species fitted for a temperate zone ; or, finally, we maypresume that they would be pre-occupied by indigenous tribes.To pursue this train of reasoning farther is unnecessary ; theCh. X.] ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 169reader has only to reflect on what we have said of the habitatons and the stations of organic beings in general, and toconsider them in relation to those effects which we have contemplatedin our first volume as resulting from the igneousand aqueous causes now in action, and he will immediatelyperceive that, amidst the vicissitudes of the earth's surface,species cannot be immortal, but must perish one after the other,like the individuals which compose them. There is no possibilityof escaping from this conclusion, without resorting tosome hypothesis as violent as that of Lamarck, who imagined,as we have before seen, that species are each of them endowedwith indefinite powers of modifying their organization, in conformityto the endless changes of circumstances to which theyare exposed.Some of the effects which must attend every general alterationof climate are sufficiently peculiar to claim a separateconsideration before concluding the present chapter.We have before stated that, during seasons of extraordinaryseverity, many northern birds, and, in some countries, manyquadrupeds, migrate southwards. If these cold seasons wereto become frequent, in consequence of a gradual and generalrefrigeration of the atmosphere, such migrations would be moreand more regular, until, at length, many animals, now confinedto the arctic regions, would become the tenants of thetemperate zone ; while the inhabitants of the latter wouldapproach nearer to the equator. At the same time, manyspecies previously established on high mountains, would beento descend, in every latitude, towards the middle regions, andthose which were confined to the flanks of mountains wouldmake their way into the plains. Analogous changes wouldalso take place in the vegetable kingdom.If, on the contrary, the heat of the atmosphere be on theincrease, the plants and animals of low grounds would ascendto higher levels, the equatorial species would migrate into thetemperate zone, and those of the temperate into the arctic circle*But although some species might thus be preserved, everyITO SFFBCTf OF CHANGES OF Cliff Hats sob. X.great change of climate must be fatal to many which can findno place of retreat, when their original habitations becomeunfit for them. For if the general temperature be on therise then is there no cooler region whither the • polar speciescan take refuge ; if it be on the decline, then the animals andplants previously established between the tropics have noresource. Suppose the general heat of the atmosphere to increase,so that even the arctic region became too warm for themusk-ox and rein-deer, it is clear that they must perish ; soifthe torrid one should lose so much of its heat by the progressiverefrigeration of the earth's surface, as to be an unfithabitation for apes, boas bamboos, and palms, these tribes eianimals and plants, or at least most of the species now belongsing to them, would become extinct, for there would be newarmer latitudes for their reception.It will follow, therefore, that as often as the climates of theglobe are passing from the extreme of heat to that of coldfrom the summer to the winter of the great year before alludedto by us*-»the migratory movement will be directed constantlyfrom the poles towards the equator ; and for this reason thespecies inhabiting parallel latitudes, in the northern andsouthern hemispheres, must become widely different. Forwe assume, on grounds before stated f, that the original stockof each species is introduced into one spot of the earth cmly,and, consequently, no species can be at once indigenous in thearctic and antarctic circles.But when, on the contrary, a series of changes in the physicalgeography of the globe, or any other supposed cause,occasions an elevation of the general temperature, — when thereis a passage from the winter to one of the vernal or summerseasons of the great cycle of climates, then the order of themigratory movement is inverted. The different species ofanimals and plants direct their course from the equator towardsthe poles ; and the northern and southern hemispheres maybecome peopled, to a great degree, by identical species. Such• VoL i, ^ US. t Chap. VIII.Ch* X.] ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPBCIBS. 171is not the actual state of the inhabited earth, as we have alreadyshown in our sketch of the geographical distribution of itsliving productions ; and this fact adds one more additionalproof to a great body of evidence, derived from independentsources, that the general temperature has been cooling downduring the epochs which immediately preceded our own.We do not mean to speculate on the entire transposition ofa group of animals and plants from tropical to polar latitudes,or the reverse, as a probable, or even possible, event; foralthough we believe the mean annual temperature of one zoneto be transferable to another we know that the same climatecannot be so transferred. Whatever be the general temperatureof the earth's surface, comparative equability of heat willcharacterize the tropical regions, while great periodical variationswill belong to the temperate, and still more to the polar latitudes.These, and many other peculiarities connected withheat and light, depend on fixed astronomical causes, such asthe motion of the earth and its position in relation to the sun,and not on those fluctuations of its surface, which may influencethe general temperature.Among many obstacles to such extensive transference ofhabitations, we must not forget the immense lapse of time required,according to any hypothesis yet suggested, especiallythat which has appeared to us most feasible, to bring about aconsiderable change in climate. During a period so vast, theother causes of extirpation, before enumerated by us, wouldexert so powerful an influence as to prevent all, save a very fewhardy species, from passing from equatorial to polar regions,or from the tropics to the pole.But the power of accommodation to new circumstances isgreat in certain species, and might enable many to pass fromone zone to another, if the mean annual heat of the atmosphereand the ocean were greatly altered. To the marine tribes,especially, such a passage would be possible, for they are lessimpeded in their migrations, by barriers of land, than are theterrestrial by the ocean. Add to this, that the temperature of172 EFFECTS OF CHANGES OF CLIMATE [C1l3Lthe ocean is much more uniform than that of the atmosphere investingthe land, so that we may easily suppose that most of thetestacea, fish, and other classes, might pass from the equatorialinto the temperate regions, if the mean temperature of thoseregions were transposed, although a second expatriation ofthese species of tropical origin into the arctic and antarcticcircles would probably be impossible.On the principles above explained, if we found that at someformer period, as when, for example, our carboniferous stratawere deposited, the same tree-ferns and other plants inhabitedthe regions now occupied by Europe and Van Dieman's Land,we should suspect that the species in question had, at someantecedent period, inhabited lands within the tropics, and thatan increase of the mean annual heat had caused them to emigrateinto both the temperate zones. There are no geologicaldata, however as yet obtained, to warrant the opinion thatsuch identity of species existed in the two hemispheres in theera in question.Let us now consider more particularly the effect of vicissitudesof climate in causing one species to give way before theincreasing numbers of some other.When temperature forms the barrier which arrests the progressof an animal or plant in a particular direction, theindividuals are fewer and less vigorous as they approach theextreme confines of the geographical range of the species*But these stragglers are ready to multiply rapidly on theslightest increase or diminution of heat that may be favourableto them, just as particular insects increase during a hot summer,and certain plants and animals gain ground after a seriesof congenial seasons.In almost every district, especially if it be mountainous, thereare a variety of species the limits of whose habitations are conterminous,some being unable to proceed farther withoutencountering too much heat, others too much cold. Individuals,which are thus on the borders of the regions proper to theirrespective species, are like the out-posts of hostile armiesCh. X.] ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 178ready to profit by every slight change of circumstances in theirfavour, and to advance upon the ground occupied by theirneighbours and opponents.The proximity of distinct climates, produced by the inequalitiesof the earth's surface, brings species possessing very differentconstitutions into such immediate contact, that theirnaturalization are very speedy whenever opportunities ofadvancing present themselves. Many insects and plants, forexample, are common to low plains within the arctic circle,and to lofty mountains in Scotland and other parts of Europe.If the climate, therefore, of the polar regions were transferredto our own latitudes, the species in question would immediatelydescend from these elevated stations to overrun the lowgrounds. Invasions of this kind, attended by the expulsionof the pre-occupants, are almost instantaneous, because thechange of temperature not only places the one species in a morefavourable position, but renders the others sickly and almostincapable of defence.Lamarck appears to have speculated on the modifications towhich every variation of external circumstances might give risein the form and organization of species, as if he had indefiniteperiods of time at his command, not sufficiently reflecting thatrevolutions in the state of the habitable earth, whether bychanges of climate or any other condition, are attended by stillgreater fluctuations in the relative condition of contemporaryspecies. They can avail themselves of these alterations in theirfavour instantly, and augment their numbers to the injury ofsome other species ; whereas the supposed transmutations areonly assumed to be brought about by slow and insensible degrees,and in a lapse of ages, the duration of which is beyondthe reach of human conception Even if we thought it possiblethat the palm or the elephant, which now flourish in equatorialregions, could ever learn to bear the variable seasons of ourtemperate zone, or the rigours of an arctic winter, we should,with no less confidence, affirm, that they must perish beforethey had time to become habituated to such new circumstances.174 Effects OF CHANGES OF CLIMATE [Ch. X.That they would be supplanted by other species at each varia-^tion of climate, may be inferred from what we have before saidof the known local exterminations of species which have resultedfrom the multiplication of others. Some minute insect per-happy might be the cause of destruction to the huge andpowerful elephant.Suppose the climate of the highest part of the woody noneof Etna to be transferred to the sea-shore at the base of themountain, no botanist would anticipate that the olive lemcm-tree, and prickly pear cactus opuntia)^ would be able to ccHi-tend with the oak and chestnut, which would been forthwithto descend to a lower level, or that these last would be able tostand their ground against the pine which would also, in thospace of a few years, begin to occupy a lower position* Wimight form some kind of estimate of the time which might berequired for the migrations of these plants ; whereas we haveno data for concluding that any number of thousands of yearswould be sufficient for one step in the pretended metamorphosisof one species into another possessing distinct attributesand qualities.This argument is applicable not merely to climate, but toany other cause of mutation. However slowly a lake may beconverted into a marshy or a marsh into a meadow, it is evidentthat before the lacustrine plants can acquire the power of livingin marshes, or the marsh-plants of living in a less humid soil,other species, already existing in the region, and fitted forthese several stations, will intrude and keep possession of theground. So if a tract of salt-water becomes fresh by passingthrough every intermediate degree of brackishness, still themarine molluscs will never be permitted to be gradually metamorphosedinto fluviatile species; because long before any suchtransformation can take place by slow and insensible degrees,other tribes, which delight in brackish or fresh-water, will availthemselves of the change in the fluid, and will, each in theirturn, monopolize the space.It id idle to dispute about the abstract possibility of the oM**Ch. X.] ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 175version of one species into another, when there are known causesso much more active in their nature, which must always interveneand prevent the actual accomplishment of such conversions.A faint image of the certain doom of a species less fitted tostruggle with some new condition in a region which it previouslyinhabited, and where it has to contend with a morevigorous species, is presented by the extirpation of savage tribesof men by the advancing colony of some civilized nation. Inthis case the contest is merely between two different races eachgifted with equal capacities of improvement — between twovarieties, moreover, of a species which exceeds all others in itsaptitude to accommodate its habits to the most extraordinaryvariations of circumstances. Yet few future events are morecertain than the speedy extermination of the Indians of NorthAmerica and the savages of New Holland in the course of afew centuries, when these tribes will be remembered only inpoetry and tradition.CHAPTER XI.Theory of the successive extinction of species consistent with their limited geographicaldistribution — ^^The discordance in ^^The opinions of botanists respectingthe centres from which plants have been diffused may arise from changes inphysical geography subsequent to the origin of living species — ^^Whether thereare grounds for inferring that the loss from time to time of certain animals andplants is compensated by the Introduction of new species? — ^^Whether anyevidence of such new creations could be expected within the historical era, evenif ^^They had been as frequent as cases of extinction ? — ^^The question whe^^Therthe existing species have been created in succession can only be decided byreference to geological monuments.We have pointed out in the preceding chapters the strictdependence of each species of animal and plant on certainphysical conditions in the state of the earth's surface, and onthe number and attributes of other organic beings inhabitingthe same region. We have also endeavoured to show that allthese conditions are in a state of continual fluctuation, theigneous and aqueous agents remodelling, from time to time,the physical geography of the globe, and the migrations ofspecies causing new relations to spring up successively betweendifferent organic beings. We have deduced as a corollary,that the species existing at any particular period must, in thecourse of ages, become extinct one after the other. " Theymust die out'* to borrow an emphatically expression from Buffon,** because Time fights against them*If the views which we have taken are just, there will be nodifficulty in explaining why the habitations of so many speciesare now restrained within exceedingly narrow limits. Everylocal revolution, such as those contemplated in the precedingchapter, tends to circumscribe the range of some species, whileit enlarges that of others ; and as we have been led to inferthat new species originate in one spot only, each must requiretime to diffuse itself over a wide area. The recent origin,Ch. XI.] CENTRES OP VEGETATION. 177therefore, of some species, and the high antiquity of others, maybeequally consistent with the general fact of their limited distribution,some being local, because they have not existed longenough to admit of their wide dissemination ; others, becausecircumstances in the animate or inanimate world have occurredto restrict the range which they may once have obtained.• As considerable modifications in the relative levels of landand sea have taken place, in certain regions, since the existingspecies were in being, we can feel no surprise that the zoologistand botanist have hitherto found it difficult to refer the geographicaldistribution of species to any clear and determinateprinciples, since they have usually speculated on the phenomena,upon the assumption that the physical geography of theglobe had undergone no material alteration since the introductionof the species now living. So long as this assumption wasmade, the facts relating to the geography of plants and animalsappeared capricious in the extreme, and by many the subjectwas pronounced to be so full of mystery and anomalies, thatthe establishment of a satisfactory theory was hopeless.Some botanists conceived in accordance with the hypothesisof Willdenow, that mountains were the centres of creation fromwhich the plants now inhabiting large continents have radiated,to which DecandoUe and others, with much reason, objected,that mountains, on the contrary, are often the barriers betweentwo provinces of distinct vegetation. The geologist who isacquainted with the extensive modifications which the surfaceof the earth has undergone in very recent geological epochs,may be able, perhaps, to reconcile both these theories in theirapplication to different regions.A lofty range of mountains, which is so ancient as todate from a period when the species of animals and plantsdiffered from those now living, will naturally form a barrierbetween contiguous provinces 5 but a chain which has beenraised, in great part, within the epoch of existing species, andaround which new lands have arisen from the sea within thatperiod will be a centre of peculiar vegetation.Vol. II. N178 CENTRES OF VEGETATION. [Ch. XI.** In France'* observes Decandolle*, " the Alps and Cevennesprevent a great number of the plants of the south fromspreading themselves to the northward ; but it has been remarkedthat some species have made their way through thegorges of these chains, and are found on their northern sides,principally in those places where they are lower and moreinterrupted*' Now the chains here alluded to have probablybeen of considerable height, even since the era when the existingvegetation began to appear, and were it not for the deepfissures which divide them, they might have caused much moreabrupt terminations to the extension of distinct assemblages ofspecies.Parts of the Italian peninsula, on the other hand, havegained a considerable portion of their present height since amajority of the marine species now inhabiting the Mediterranean,and probably, also, since the terrestrial plants of the sameregion, were in being. Large tracts of land have been added,both on the Adriatic and Mediterranean side, to what originallyconstituted a much narrower range of mountains, if notachain of islands running nearly north and south, like Corsicaand Sardinia. It may, therefore, be presumed, that theApennines have been a centre whence species have diffusedthemselves over the contiguous lower and newer regions. Inthis and all analogous situations, the doctrine of Willdenow,that species have radiated from the mountains as from centres,may be well founded.It appears from Mr. Brown's remarks on the vegetation ofNew Holland, that there are two groups of plants occurringbetween the thirty third and thirty-fifth degrees of southernlatitude, and principally at the two opposite extremities of thistract, that is, near the eastern and western coasts. These pointshave been termed the two principal ybci of Australian vegetation,each of them possessing certain genera which are almostpeculiar to it f. If, when this continent has been more tho-essaiElementary, &c., p. 46.t Brown's Appendix to Flinders's Voyage and Fkicbaid, Phys. first. of Ui»Jdnd/ yol»i;p.31*Ch.XI.] Appearance OP NEW SPECIES. 179roughly investigated, we do not discover some physical barriers,such as a great marsh, or a desert, or a lofty mountain-chain,now intervening between these districts, there may, perhaps,be geological evidence hereafter discovered, that a sea wasinterposed up to a modern period separating two largeislands. Sufficient time may not have elapsed since the unionof such isles, to allow of a complete intermixture by mutualimmigrations.If the reader should infer, from the facts laid before him inthe preceding chapters, that the successive extinction of animalsand plants may be part of the constant and regular course ofnature, he will naturally inquire whether there are any meansprovided for the repair of these losses? Is it part of theeconomy of our system that the habitable globe should, to acertain extent, become depopulated both in the ocean and onthe land ; or that the variety of species should diminish untilsome new era arrives when a new and extraordinary effort ofcreative energy is displayed ? Or is it possible that new speciescan be called into being from time to time, and yet that soastonishing a phenomenon can escape the observation of naturalists?Humboldt has characterized these subjects as among themysteries which natural science cannot reach ; and he observes,that the investigation of the origin of beings does n(4belong to zoological or botanical geography. To geology,however, these topics do strictly appertain ; and this science isonly interested in inquiries into the state of the animate creationas it now exists, with a view of pointing out its relationsto antecedent periods when its condition was different.Before offering any hypothesis towards the solution of sodifficult a problem, let us consider what kind of evidence weought to expect, in the present state of science, of the firstappearance of new animals or plants, if we could imagine thesuccessive creation of species to constitute, like their gradualextinction, a regular part of the economy of nature.In the first pace it i§ obvious: more easy to prove that a180 Speculations oU tnfi [Ch. XI.species once numerously represented in a given district, hasceased to be, than that some other which did not pre-exist hasmade its appearance — assuming always, for reasons beforestated, that single stocks only of each animal and plant areoriginally created, and that individuals of new species do notsuddenly start up in many different places at once.So imperfect has the science of Natural History remaineddown to our own times, that within the memory of personsnow living, the numbers of known animals and plants havebeen doubled, or even quadrupled, in many classes. New andoften conspicuous species are annually discovered in parts ofthe old continent, long inhabited by the most civilized nations.Conscious, therefore of the limited extent of, our information,we always infer, when such discoveries are made, that thebeings in question had previously eluded our research ; or hadat least existed elsewhere, and only migrated at a recent periodinto the territories where we now find them. It is difficulteven in contemplation to anticipate the time when we shall beentitled to make any other hypothesis in regard to all themarine tribes, and to by far the greater number of the terrestrial; — such as birds, which possess such unlimited powers ofmigration j insects which, besides their numbers, are also socapable of being diffused to vast distances; and cryptogamousplants, to which, as to many other classes, both of the animaland vegetable kingdom, similar observations are applicable.What kind of proofs, therefore, could we reasonably expectto find of the origin at a particular period of a new species ?Perhaps it may be said in reply, that within the last two orthree centuries some forest tree or new quadruped might havebeen observed to appear suddenly in those parts of Englandor France which had been most thoroughly investigated;that naturalists might have been able to shew that no suchbeing inhabited any other region of the globe, and that therewas no tradition of anything similar having before been observedin the district where it had made its appearance.Now although this objection may seem plausible, yet itsCh. XI.] APPEARANCE OP NEW SPECIES, 181force will be found to depend entirely on the rate of fluctuatetion which we suppose to prevail in the animate world, and onthe