THELAST DAYSOFPOMPEII.BY THE AUTHOR OF " PELHAM,"'• EUGENE ARAM," " ENGLAND, AND THE ENGLISH."&c. &c.Such is Vesuvius! and these things take place in it ever' year. But alleruptions which have happened since would he trifling, even if all summed intoone, compared to what occurred at the period we refer to. • * • * *Day was turned into night, and night into darkness — an inexpressible quantityof dust and ashes was poured out, deluging land, sea, and air, and burying twoentire cities, Herculaneum and Pompeii, while the people were sitting in thetheatre '." , Dion Cassius, lib. Lxvi.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET ;SUCCESSOR TO HENRY Colour.1834.1,'J11'V73London :PRINT EI) Iv SAMUEL IIENTI.EY,Doit Stiiif. Flick Slii'tt.DEDICATIONTO SIR WILLIAM GELL,&c. &c.Dear Sir,In publishing a work, of which Pompeii furnishesthe subject, I can think of no one to whomit can so fitly be dedicated as yourself. Yourcharming volumes upon the Antiquities of thatCity have indissolubly connected your name withits earlier — (as your residence in the vicinity hasidentified you with its more recent) — associations.I trust that these pages will find you in betterhealth than when we parted at Naples ; and that,whatever example your friends may derive fromyour philosophy, will be drawn from an industryin intellectual acquisitions, never to be wearied,rather than from a patience under suffering, neverto be excelled.Ere you receive these volumes, I hope to bedeep in the perusal of your forthcoming workuix)n " the Topography of Rome and its Vicinity."DEDICATION.The glance at its contents which yon permittedme at Naples, sufficed to convince me of its interestand value ; and as an Englishman, and as onewho has loitered under the portico, I rejoice tothink, that in adding largely to your own reputation,you will also renovate our Country's claimto eminence in those departments of learning, inwhich of late years we have but feebly supportedour ancient reputation. Venturing thus a predictionof the success of your work, it would be alittle superfluous to express a wish for the accomplishmentof the prophecy ! But I may add amore general hope, that you will long have leisureand inclination for those literary pursuits, to whichyou bring an erudition so extensive ; — and thatthey may continue, as now, sometimes to beguileyou from yom-self, and never to divert you fromyour friends.I have the honour to be,Dear Sir,Very faithfully yours,THE AUTHOR.Leamington, September 21, 1834.PREFACE.On visiting those disinterred remains of an ancientCity, which, more perhaps than either the deliciousbreeze or the cloudless sun, the violet valleys andorange groves, of the South, attract the travellerto the neighbourhood of Naples ; on Leaving, stillfresh and vivid, the houses, the streets, the temples,the theatres of a place existing in the haughtiestage of the Roman empire, — it was not unnatural,perhaps, that a writer who had before laboured, Iioaa-ever unworthily, in the art to revive and to create,should feel a keen desire to people once more thosedeserted streets, to repair those graceful ruins, toreanimate the bones which were yet spared tohis survey; to traverse the gaulish of eighteencenturies, and to wake to a second existence —the City of the Dead !And the reader will easily imagine how sensiblythis desire grew upon one who felt he could per-bVI PREFACE.form his undertaking, with Pompeii itself at thedistance of a few miles — the sea that once bore hercommerce, and received her fugitives, at his feet —and the fatal mountain of Vesuvius, still breathingforth smoke and fire, constantly before his eyes !*I was aware, however, from the first, of thegreat difficulties with which I had to contend.To paint the manners and exhibit the life of themiddle ages, required the hand of a master genius ;yet, perhaps, the task is slight and easy, in comparisonwith that which aspires to portray a farearlier and more unfamiliar period. With the menand customs of the feudal time we have a naturalsympathy and bond of alliance ; those men wereour own ancestors — from those customs we receivedour own — the creed of our chivalric fathersis still ours — their .tombs yet consecrate our churchesthe ruins of their castles yet frown over our val-nearlythe whole of this work was written at Naples lastwinter. On ray return to England, I was indeed too muchoccupied with political matters, to have a great deal ofsuperfluous leisure for works purely literary, except iu those,not unwelcome, intervals when the Parliament going to sleepallows the other objects of life to awake — dismissing its weariedlegislators, some to hunt, some to shoot, some to fatten oxen,and others — to cultivate literature !Preface. VUless. We trace in their struggles for liberty andfor justice, our present institutions ; and in theelements of their social state we behold the originof our own.But with the classical age we have no householdand familiar associations. The creed of that departedreligion, the customs of that past civilization, presentlittle that is sacred or attractive to our northernimagination ; they are rendered yet more triteto us by the scholastic pedantries which first acquaintedus with their nature, and are linked Withthe recollection of studies, which were imposed asalabour, and not cultivated as a delight.Yet the task, though arduous, seemed to meworth attempting; and in the time and the sceneI have chosen, much may be found to arouse thecuriosity of the reader, and enlist his interest inthe descriptions of the author. It was the firstcentmy of our religion — it was the most civilizedperiod of Rome — the conduct of the story liesamidst places whose relics we yet trace — thecatastrophe is among the most awful which thetragedies of Ancient History present to our survey.From the ample materials before me, my endeavourhas been to select those which would be mostVlll PREFACE.attractive to a modern reader ; — the customs and.superstitions least unfamiliar to him — the shadowsthat, when reanimated, would present to himsuch images as, while they represented the past,might be least uninteresting to the speculations ofthe present. It did, indeed, require a greater self-controlthan the reader may at first imagine, toreject much that was most inviting in itself; butwhich, ^\]n\e it might have added attraction toparts of the work, Avould have been injurious tothe symmetry of the whole. Thus, for instance,the date of my story is that of the short reignof Titus, when Rome was at its proudest andmost gigantic eminence of unbridled luxury andunrivalled power. It was, therefore, a most invitingtemptation to the author, to conduct thecharacters of his tale, during the progress of itsincidents, from Pompeii to Rome. What couldaflbrd such materials for description, or such fieldfor the vanity of display, as that gorgeous Cityof the ^^■orld, whose grandeur could lord so brightan inspiration to fancy, — so favourable and sosolemn a dignity to research? But, in choosing formy subject — my catastrophe, The Destruction ofPompeii, it repaired but little unii^ht into thePREFACE. [xhigher principles of art to perceive that to Pompeiithe story should be rigidly confined.Placed in contrast with the mighty pomp ofRome, the luxuries and gaud of the vivid Campanianncity would have sunk into insignificance.Her awful fate would have seemed but a pettyand isolated wreck in the vast seas of the imperialsway; and the auxiliary I should have summonedto the interest of my story, would only have destroyedand overpowered the cause it was invokedto support. I was therefore compelled to relinquishan episodical excursion so alluring in itself,and, confining my story strictly to Pompeii, toleave to others the honour of delineations hollowbut majestic civilization of Rome.The city, whose fate supplied me with so superband awful a catastrophe, supplied easily from thefirst survey of its remains, the characters mostsuited to the subject and the scene; the half Greciancolony of Hercules, mingling with the manners ofItaly so much of the costumes of Hellas, suggestedof itself the characters of Glaucus and lone. Theworship of Isis, its existent fane, with its falseoracles unveiled ; the trade of Pompeii with AlexisX Preface.andrea ; the associations of the Sarnus with theNile, called forth the Egyptian Arbaces — the baseCalenus — and tli£ fervent Apa^cides. The earlystruggles of Christianity With the Heathen supersti-timif^ggested the creation of Olinthus ; and theBurnt Fields of Campania, long celebrated for thespells of the Sorceress, naturally produced theSaga of Vesuvius. For the existence of the BlindGirl I am indebted to a casual conversation with agentleman, well known amongst the English atNaples for his general knowledge of the manypaths of life. Speaking of the utter davloiessAvhicli accompanied the first recorded eruption ofVesuvius, and the additional obstacle it presentedto the escape of the inhabitants, he observed, thatthe blind would be the most favoured in such amoment, and find the easiest deliverance. Thisremark originated the creation of Lydia.The characters, therefore, are the natural offspringof the scene and time — the incidentsof the tale are equally consonant, perhaps, to thethen existent society : for it is not only the ordinaryhabits of life, the feasts and the forum,the baths and the amphitheatre, the commonplaceroutine of the classic luxury, which wePREFACE. XIrecall the Past to behold ; equally important andmore deeply interesting are the passions, thecrimes, the misfortunes, and reverses that mighthave chanced to the shades we thus summon tolife. We understand any epoch of the world butill, if we do not examine its romance ; — there is asmuch truth in the poetry of life as in its ]prose.As the greatest difficulty in treating of an unfamiliarand distant period, is to make the charactersintroduced ' live and move*' before the eyeof the reader, so such should doubtless be the firstobject of a work of the present description : — andall attempts at the display of learning should beconsidered but as means subservient to this, themain, requisite of fiction. The first art of thePoet (the Creator) is to breathe the breath of lifeinto his creatures — the next is to make theirwords and actions appropriate to the era in whichthey are to speak and act. This last art is perhapsthe better effected by not bringing the artitself constantly before the reader — by not crowdingthe page with quotations, and the margin withnotes. Perpetual references to learned authoritieshave, in fiction, something at once wearisome andarrogant." They appear like the author's eulogiesXU PREFACE.on his own accuracy and his own learning — theydo not serve to elucidate his meaning, hut toparade his erudition. The intuitive spirit whichinfuses antiquity into ancient images is, perhaps,the true learning which a work of this naturerequires — without it, pedantry is offensive ; withit, useless. No man who is thoroughly aware ofwhat Prose Fiction has now become, of its dignityof its influence — of the manner in which it hasgradually absorbed all similar departments of literature— of its power in teaching as well as amusingcan so far forget its connection with History —with Philosophy — with Politics — its utter harmonywith Poetry, and obedience to Truth, as to debaseits nature to the level of scholastic frivolities ;he raises scholarship to the creative, and does notbow the creative to the scholastic.With respect to the language used by thecharacters introduced, I have studied carefullyto avoid what has always seemed to me a fatalerror in those who have attempted, in moderntimes, to introduce the beings of a classical age.*• What the strong common sense of Sir Walter Scott hasexpressed so well in his Preface to Ivanhoe (1st edition), appearsto me, at least, as aj)i)liral)le to one, a writer who draws fromclassical, — as to one who borrows from feudal— Antiquity. I^etPREFACE. NiAuthors have mostly given to them the stiltedsentences — the cold and didactic solemnities ofme avail myself of the words I refer to, and humbly and reverentlyappropriate them for the moment. " It is true, that Ineither can, nor do pretend, to the observation [observance ?] ofcomplete accuracy even in matters of outward costume, much lessin the more important points of language and manners. But thesame motive which prevents my writing the dialogue of thepiece in Anglo-saxon, or in Norman-french, [in Latin or inGreek'] and which prohibits my sending forth this essay printedwith the types of Caxton or Wynken de Worde [writleii with areed upon Jive rolls of parchment^astened to a cylinder, andadorned with a boss], prevents my attempting to confine myselfwithin the limits of the period in which my story is laid. It isnecessary for exciting interest of any kind, that the subjectassumed should be, as it were, translated into the manners aswell as the language of the age we live in."In point of justice therefore to the multitudes, who will, Itrust, devour this book with avidity [liem!], I have so far explainedancient manners in modern language, and so far detailedthe characters and sentiments of my persons, that the modernreader will not find himself, I should hope, much trammelled bythe repulsive dryness of mere antiquity. In this, I respectfullycontend, I have in no respect exceeded the fair licence due to theauthor of a fictitious composition."It is true," proceeds my authority, " that this licence is confinedwithin legitimate bounds; the author must introducenothing inconsistent with the manners of the z.gs:'— Prefaceto Ivanhoe.I can add nothing to these judicious and discriminating remarks—they form the true canons of criticism, by which allFiction that portrays the Past should be judged.XIV PREFACE.language which they find in the more admired ofthe classical writers ; it is an error as absurd tomake Romans in common life talk in the periodsof Cicero, as it would be in a novelist to endoAVhis English personages with the long-drawn sentencesof Johnson or Burke. The fault is thegreater, because, while it pretends to learning, itbetrays in reality the ignorance of just criticismit fatigues — it wearies — it revolts — and wehave not the satisfaction, in yawning, to thinkthat we yawn eruditely. To impart anything likefidelity to the dialogues of classic actors, we mustbeware (to use a university phrase) how wecram'' for the occasion ! — Nothing can give to awriter a more stiff and uneasy gait, than the suddenand hasty adoption of the toga. Ave mustbring to our task the familiarized knowledge ofmany years : — the allusions, the phraseology —the language generally — must flow from a streamthat has long been full ; the flowers must be transplantedfrom a living soil, and not bought secondhandat the nearest market-place. This advantage,which is, in fact, only that of familiarity A\ithour subject, is one derived rather from accidentthan merit, and depends upon the degree in whichPreface. XVthe classics have entered into the education of ouryouth, and the studies of our maturity. Yet evendid a writer possess the utmost advantage of thisnature which education and study can bestow, itmight be scarcely possible so entirely to transporthimself to an age so different from his own, butthat he would incur some inaccuracies, some errorsof inadvertence or forgetfulness. And when, inworks upon the Manners of the Ancients, workseven of the gravest character composed by the profoundestscholars, some such imperfections willoften be discovered even by a critic, in comparison,but superficially informed, it would be far too presumptuousin me to hope that I have been morefortunate than men infinitely more learned, in awork in which learning is infinitely less required.It is for this reason, that I venture to believe, thatscholars themselves will be the most lenient of myjudges. Enough, if this book, whatever its imperfections,should be found a portrait — unskilfulperhaps in colouring — faulty in drawing —but, not altogether an unfaithful likeness of thefeatures and the costume of the aofe which Ihave attempted to paint: — may it be (what isfar more important) a just representation of theXVI PREFACE.human passions and the human heart, whoseelements in all ages are the same! Oneword more, — let me be permitted to remind thereader, that if I have succeeded in giving some interestand vitality to a description of classic mannersand to a tale of a classic age, I have succeededwhere all hitherto have failed :* a necessary corollaryfrom this proposition is one equally consolatorythough less triumphant, viz. if I have failedin the attempt, I fail where no one has succeeded.After this sentence, I can hut conclude at once. —Can I say anything more effectually to prove,that an author never shows half so much ingenuityas in making out the Lest possible case for his ownperformance .''• I must be pardoned for not excepting even Bartli^lemy,His Anabasis is a work of wonderful ability, labour, elegance,and research. But there is no life in it ! It docs not, to be sure,profess to be actually a romance, but even as a book of Imaginarytravels, it is formal and tedious. The external erudition isabundant, but the inward spirit is wanting. He has not beenexhilarated by the wine of antiquity, but he has accumulated aprodigious quantity of labels. " Anabasis," says Schlegel,well and wittily, " views things, in his travels, not as a youngScythian, but as an old Parisian !" Yes, and as a Parisian whonever gives you the notion that he has travelled at all — exceptin an arm-chair !THELAST DAYS OF POMPEIIBOOK I.Quid sit futurum eras, huge quaere ;Qiiem sors dierum cinque habit, lucreAppone ; nee dulce adoresSterne puer, neque tu chorea.Hob. lib. I. Od. ix.VOL. 1.THE LAST DAYSOFPOMPEII.CHAPTER I.THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF rOMPEII.'sho, Diomed, well met — do you sup withGlaucus to-night ?" said a young man of smallstature, who wore his timid in those loose andeffeminate folds which proved him to be a gentlemanand a coxcomb.Alas, no ! dear Clodius ; he has not invited me,"(replied Diomed, a man of a portly frame and ofmiddle age :) " by Pollux, a scurvy trick ! for theysay his suppers are the best in Pompeii."Pretty well — though there is never enough ofwine for me. It is not the old Greek blood thatflows in his veins, for he pretends that wine makeshim dull the next morning."B ^4 THE LAST DAYS OFThere may be another reason for that thrift,"said Denied, raining his brows, " with all his conceitand extravagance he is not so rich, I fancy, asheaffects to be, and perhaps loves to save his better than his wit."An additional reason for supping with himwhile the sesterces last. Next year, Diomed, wemust find another Glaucus."He is fond of the dice too, I hear."He is fond of every pleasure, and awhile helikes the pleasure of giving suppers, we are allfond of Ann."Ha, ha, Clodius, that is well said. Have youever seen my wine-cellars, by the by .''"I think not, my good Diomed."Well, you must sup with me some evening ;I have tolerable Urania** in my reservoir, and Iwill ask Pansa the stile to meet you.""Oh, no state with mv ! — Persians odi apparatus,I am easily contented. AVell, the day wanes ; Iam for the baths — and you ?" —To the Questor — business of state — afterwardsto the temple of Isis. Vale .'"Murseiia — lampreys.Pompeii. 5An ostentatious, bustling, ill-bred fellow," mutteredClodius to himself, as he sauntered slowlyaway. " He thinks with his feasts and his wine-cellarsto make us forget that he is the son of afreedman ; — and so we will, when we do him thehonour of winning his money : these rich plebeiansare a harvest for us spendthrift nobles."Thus soliloquizing, Clodius arrived in the ViaDomitian, which was crowded 'with passengersand chariots, and exhibited all that gay and animatedexuberance of life and motion which wefind at this day in the streets of Naples.The bells of the cars as they rapidly glided byeach other, jingled merrily on the ear, and Clodiuswith smiles or nods claimed familiar acquaintancewith whatever equipage was most elegant or fantastic— in fact, no young man was better knownabout Pompeii.What, Clodius ! and how have you slept onyour good fortune ? " cried, in a pleasant and musicalvoice, a young man, in a chariot of the mostfastidious and graceful fashion. Upon its surfaceof bronze were elaborately wrought, in the stillexquisite workmanship of Greece, reliefs of theb THE LAST DAYS OFOlympian games: the two horses that dream thecar were of the rarest breed of Parthia ; theirslender limbs seemed to disdain the ground andcomet the air, and yet at the slightest touch ofthe charioteer, who stood behind the young ownerof the equipage, they paused motionless, as ifsuddenly transformed into stone, — lifeless, butlifelike, as one of the breathing wonders ofPraxiteles. The owner himself was of thatslender and beautiful symmetry from Whichthe sculptors of Athens drew their models ; hisGrecian origin betrayed itself in his light butclustering locks, and the perfect harmony of hisfeatures. He wore no toga, which in the time ofthe emperors had indeed ceased to be the generaldistinction of the Romans, and was especially ridiculedby the pretenders to fashion; but his tunicglowed in the richest hues of the Tyrian dye, andthe fibulae, or buckles, by which it was fastenedsparkled with emeralds : around his neck he worea chain of gold, which in the middle of his breasttwisted itself into the form of a serpent's head,from the mouth of which hung pendant a largesignet ring of elaborate and most exquisite work-pompeii.7manship ; the sleeves of the tunic were loose, andfringed at the hand with gold ; and across thewaist a girdle wrought in arabesque designs, andof the same material as the fringe, served in lieuof pockets for the receptacle of the handkerchiefand the purse, the stylus and the tablets."My dear Glaucus!" said Clodius, " I rejoiceto see that yom* losses have so little affected yourmien. Why you seem as if you had been inspiredby Apollo, and your face shines with happinesslike a glory ; any one might take you for the winnerand me for the loser."And what is there in the loss or gain of thosedull pieces of metal that should change our spirit, myClodius ? Per Jove ! while, yet young, we can coverour full locks with chaplets — while yet the citharasounds on unsated ears — while yet the smile ofLydia or of Chloe flashes over our veins in whichthe blood runs so swiftly, so long shall we finddelight in the sunny air, and make bald Time itselfbut the treasurer of our joys. You sup with meto-night, you know."Who ever forgets the invitation of Glaucus ! "But which way go you now ?"8 THE LAST DAYS OF'' Why I tlionglit of visiting the baths, but itSavants yet an hour to the usual time."Well, I will dismiss my chariot, and go withyou. So so, my Philips," stroking the horsenearest to him, which by a low neigh and withbackward ears, playfully acknowledged the courtesy; " Ji holiday for you to-day. Is he nothandsome, Clodius?"Worthy of Phoebus," returned the noble parasite,— " or of Glaucus."POMPEII.CHAPTER 11.THE BLIND FLOWER-GIRL, And THE Beauty OF FASHION.THE ATHENIAN'S CONFESSION. — THE READER'S IntroductionTO Graces OF EGYPT.Talking lightly on a tlioiisand matters, the twoyoung men sauntered through the streets : theywere now in that quarter Which was filled ^^■iththe gayest shops, their open interiors all and eachradiant with the gaudy yet harmonious colours offrescos, inconceivably varied in fancy and design.The sparkling fountains, that at every vista threwupwards their grateful spray in the summer air ;the crowd of passengers, or rather loiterers, mostlyclad in robes of the Tyrian dye ; the gay groupscollected round each more attractive shop ; theslaves passing to and fro with buckets of bronze,cast in the most graceful shapes, and borne upontheir heads ; the country girls stationed at free510 THE LAST DAYS OFquest intervals with baskets of blushing fniit, andflowers more alluring to the antient Italians thanto their descendants, (with whom, indeed, " lateayigids in herbage'' a disease seems lurking in everyviolet and rose) — (a) — the numerous haunts whichfulfilled with that idle people the office of cafes andclubs at this day ; the shops where on shelvesof marble were ranged the vases of wine and oil,and before whose thresholds, seats, protected fromthe sun by a purple awning, invited the weary torest and the indolent to lounge, — made a scene ofsuch glowing and vivacious excitement, as mightwell give the Athenian spirit of Glaucus an excusefor its susceptibility to joy.Talk to me no more of Rome,*''' said he toClodius. " Pleasure is too stately and ponderousin those mighty walls : even in the precincts of thecourt — even in the golden house of Nero, and theincipient glories of the palace of Titus, there is acertain dulness of magnificence — the eye aches —the spirit is wearied ; besides, my Clodius, we arediscontented when we see the enormous luxuryand wealth of others, with the mediocrity of ourown state. But here we surrender ourselvesPOMPEII. 11easily to pleasure, and we have the brilliancy ofluxury without the lassitude of its pomp*"It was from that feeling that you chose yoursummer retreat at Pompeii."It was. I prefer it to Baiae : I gi-ant thecharms of the latter, but I love not the pedantswho resort there, and who seem to weigh outtheir pleasures by the drachm""Yet you are fond of the learned, too ; and asfor poetry, why your house is literally eloquentwith aeschylus and Homer, the epic and thedrama"'Yes, but those Romans who mimic my Athenianancestors, do everything so heavily. Even inthe chase they make their slaves carry Platowith them; and whenever the boar is lost, outthey take their books and their papjTUS, inorder not to lose their time too. When thedancing girls swim before them in all the blandishmentof Persian manners, some drone of a freedman,with a face of stone, reads them a section ofCicero de Ojjidis. Unskilful pharmacists ! pleasureand study are not elements to be thus mixedtogether — they must be enjoyed separately; the12 THE LAST DAYS OFRomans lose both by this pragmatical affectation ofrefinement, and prove that they have no soulsfor either. Oh, my Clodius, how little your countrymenknow of the true versatility of a Pericles,of the true witcheries of an Aspasia ! — It was butthe other day that I paid a visit to Pliny. Hewas sitting in his summer-house writing, whilean unfortunate slave played on the tibia. Hisnephew, (oh ! whip me such philosophical coxcombs!) was reading Thucydides*' description ofthe plague, and nodding his conceited littlehead in time to the music, while his lips wererepeating all the loathsome details of that terribledelineation. The puppy saw nothing incongruousin learning at the same time a ditty oflove, and a description of the plague."Why they arc much the same thing," saidClodius.So I told him, in excuse for his coxcombry ;but my youth stared me rebukingly in the face,without taking the jest, and answered, that it wasonly the insensate ear that the music pleased,whereas the book (the description of the plague,niiiid you!) elevated the heart. 'Ah!' (quothPOMPEII. 13the fat uncle, wheezing, ' my boy is quite an Athenian,always mixing the xitih with the diilct'.'' OMinerva, how I laughed in my sleeve ! WhileI was there, they came to tell the boy-sophist thathis favourite freedman was just dead of a fever.' Inexorable Death !"* cried he ; — ' get me myHorace. How beautifully the sweet poet consolesus for these misfortunes !' Oh ! can these menlove, my Clodius ? Scarcely even with the senses.How rarely a Roman has a heart ! — He is butthe mechanism of genius — he wants its bones, andflesh."Though Clodius was secretly a little sore atthese invectives on his countrymen, he affected tosympathise With his friend, partly because he wasby nature a parasite, and partly because it was thefashion among the dissolute young Romans toaffect a little contempt for the very birth which, inreality, made them so arrogant ; it was the modeto imitate the Greeks, and yet to laugh at theirown clumsy imitation.Thus conversing, their steps were arrested by acrowd gathered round an open space where threestreets met ; and just where the porticos of a light14 THE LAST DAYS OFand graceful temple threw their shade, there stooda young girl, With a flower-basket on her rightarm, and a small three-stringed instrument ofmusic in the left hand, to whose low and soft tonesshe was modulating a wild and half barbaric air.At every pause in the music she gracefully wavedher flower-basket round, inviting the loiterers tobuy ; and many a sesterce was showered into thebasket, either in compliment to the music, or incompassion to the songstress — for she was blind.It is my poor Thessalian," said Glaucus, stopping;" I have not seen her since my return toPompeii. Hush ! her voice is sweet ; let uslisten."1.Buy my flowers — O buy — I pray,The Blind Girl comes from afar :If the Earth be as fair as I hear them say,These Flowers her children are !Do they her beauty keep ?They are fresh from her lap, I know ;For I caught them fast asleepla her arms an hour ago,P03IPEII. 15With the air which is her breath —Her soft and delicate breath —Over them murmuring low !On their lips her sweet kiss lingers yet,And their cheeks with her tender tears are wet.For she weeps, — that gentle mother weeps, —(As morn and night her watch she keeps,With a yearning heart and a passionate care)To see the young things grow so fair ; —She weeps — for love she weeps -And the dews are the tears she weeps,From the well of a mother's love I2.Ye have a world of light,Where Love in the lov'd rejoices ;But the Blind Girl's home is the House of Night,And its Beings are empty voices.As one in the realm below,I stand by the streams of woe;I hear the vain shadows glide,I feel their soft breath at my side,THE LAST DAYS OFAnd I thirst the lov'd forms to see,And I stretch my fond arms around,And I catch but a shapeless sound,For the Having are ghosts to me.Come buy — come bus' I —Hark ! how the sweet things sigh,(For they have a voice Hke ours)The breath of the Bind Girl closesThe leaves of the saddening roses —We are tender, we sons of Light,We shrink from this child of Night ;From the grasp of the Blind Girl free us ;We yearn for the eyes that see usWe are for Night too gay,Jn your eyes we behold the day —O buy — O buy the flowers !"I must have yon bunch of violets, sweetNydia," said Glaucus, pressing through the croAvd,and di-epping a handful of small coins into thebasket ; " your voice is more charming than ever""Tic blind girl started forward as she heard theAthenian's voice — then as suddenly paused, whilePOMPEII. 17the blood rushed violently over neck, cheek, andtemples.So you are returned !"" said she in a lowvoice ; and then repeated, half to herself, " Glaucusis returned !""Yes, child, I have not been at Pompeii abovea few days. My garden wants your care as beforeyou will visit it, I trust, tomorrow. And mind,no garlands at my house shall be woven by anyhands but those of the pretty Nydia."Nydia smiled joyously, but did not answer ; andGlaucus, placing the violets he had selected inhis breast, turned gaily and carelessly from thecrowd.So, she is a sort of client of yours, this child""said Clodius.Ay — does she not sing prettily ? She interestsme, the poor slave ! — besides, she is fromthe land of the Gods' hill — Olympus frowned uponher cradle — she is of Thessaly."The witches' country."True ; but for my part I find every woman awitch ; and at Pompeii, by Venus ' the very airseems to have taken a love philtre, so handsome18 THE LAST DAYS OFdoes every face without a beard seem in myeyes."And, lo ! one of the handsomest in Pompeii,old Diomed's daughter, the rich Juba," said Claudius,as a yomig lady, her face covered by her veil,and attended by two female slaves, approachedthem, in her way to the baths.Fair Julia, we salute thee," said Clodius.Julia partially raised her veil, so as with somecoquetry to display a bold Roman profile, a fulldark bright eye, and a cheek over whose naturalolive, art shed a fairer and softer rose.And Glaucus, too, is returned !" said she,glancing meaningly at the Athenian. " Has heforgotten," she added in a half whisper, " hisfriends of the last year ?''''Beautiful Julia ! even Lethe itself, if it disappearin one part of the earth, rises again inanother. Jupiter does not allow us ever to forgetfor more than a moment ; but Venus, more harshstill, vouchsafes not even a moments oblivion."Glaucus is never at a loss for ftiir words."Who is, when the object of them is so fair ?"We shall see you both at my father's villasoon," said Julia turning to Clodius.POMPEII. 19We will mark the day in which we visit youwith a white stone," answered the gamester.Julia dropped her veil, but slowly, so that herlast glance rested on the Athenian with affectedtimidity and real boldness ; the glance bespoketenderness and reproach.The friends passed on.Julia is certainly handsome," said Glaucus.And last year you would have made thatconfession in a warmer tone."True : I was dazzled at the first sight, andmistook for a gem that Mliich was but an artfulimitation."Nay," returned Clodius, " all women are thesame at heart. Happy he who weds a handsomeface and a large dower. What more can hedesire ?"Glaucus sighed.They were now in a street less crowded thanthe rest, at the end of which they beheld thatbroad and most lovely sea, which upon those deliciouscoasts seems to have renounced its prerogativeof terror, — so soft are the crispin windsthat hover around its bosom, so glowing and sovarious are the hues which it takes from the rosy20 THE LAST DAYS OFclouds, so fragrant are the perfumes \\liicli thebreezes from the land scatter over its depths.From such a sea might you-well believe thatAnadyomene rose to take the empire of the earth.It is still early for the bath," said the Greek,who was the creature of every poetical impulse ;"let us wander from the crowded city, and lookupon the sea while the Noon yet laughs along itsbillows."With all my heart," said Clodius ; " and thebay, too, is always the most animated part ofthe city."Pompeii was the miniature of the civilization ofthat age. Within the narrow compass of itswalls was contained, as it were, a specimen ofevery gift Which luxury offered to power. In itsminute but glittering shops, its tiny palaces, itsbaths, its forum, its theatre, its circus — in the energyyet corruption — in the refinement yet the vice —of its people, you beheld a model of the Avholeempire. It was a toy, a plaything, a showbox, inwhich the Gods seemed pleased to keep the representationof the Great Monarchy of Earth, andwhich they afterwards hid from Time, to giveto the wonder of Posterity ; — the moral of thePOMPEII. 21maxim, that under the sun there is nothing-new.Crowded in the glassy bay were the vessels ofcommerce and the gilded galleys for the pleasuresof the rich citizens. The boats of the fishermenglided rapidly to and fro ; and afar off you sav thetall masts of the fleet under the command of Pliny.Upon the shore sate a Sicilian, who, with vehementgestures and flexile features, was narrating to agroup of fishermen and peasants a strange tale ofshipwrecked mariners and friendly dolphins, —-justas at this day, in the modern neighbourhood, youmay hear upon the Mole of Naples,Drawing his comrade from the crowd, the Greekbent his steps towards a solitary part of the beach,and the two friends, seated on a small crag whichrose amidst the smooth pebbles, inhaled the voluptuousand cooling breeze which, dancing over thewaters, kept music with its invisible feet. Therewas perhaps something in the scene that invitedthem to silence and reverie. Clodius, shading hiseyes from the burning sky, was calculating thegains of the last week ; and the Greek, leaningupon his hand, and shrinking not from that sun, —his nation s tutelary deity, — with whose fluent22 THE LAST DAYS OFlight of poesy, and joy, and love, his own veinswere filled, gazed upon the broad expanse, andenvied, perhaps, every wind that bent its pinionstowards the shores of Greece.Tell me, Clodius," said the Greek at last,hast thou ever been iu love ?"Yes, very often."He who has loved often," answered Glaucus,has loved never. There is but one Eros, thoughthere are many counterfeits of him."*' The counterfeits are not bad little gods, uponthe whole," answered Clodius.I agree with you," returned the Greek. " Iadore even the shadow of Love ; but I adore himselfyet more."Art thou then in sober and earnest love ?Hast thou that feeling the poets describe — a feelingthat makes us neglect our suppers, forswearthe theatre, and write elegies ? I should neverhave thouiifht it. You dissemble well."I am not far gone enough for that," returnedGlaucus, smiling ; "or rather I say with Tibullus,Whom soft love rules, where'er his path,walks safe and sacred.*P03IPEII. 23In fact, I am not in love ; but I could be if there werebut occasion to see the object. Eros would lighthis torch, but the priests have given him no oil."Shall I guess the object ? — Is it not Diomed'sdaughter ? She adores you, and does not affect toconceal it ; and by Hercules ! I say again andagain, she is both handsome and rich. She willbind the door-posts of her husband with goldenmeets."No, I do not desire to sell myself. Diomed'sdaughter is handsome, I grant ; and at one time,had she not been the grandchild of a freedman, Imight have Yet no — she carries all her beautyon her face ; her manners are not maidenlike, andher mind knows no culture save that of pleasure !"You are ungrateful. Tell me, then, who isthe fortunate virgin ?''"'You shall hear, my Clodius. Several monthsago, I was sojourning at Neapolis, a city utterly tomy own heart, for it still retains the manners andstamp of its. Grecian origin, — and it yet merits thename of Parthenope, from its delicious air, and itsbeautiful shores. One day I entered the temple ofMinerva, to offer up my prayers, not for myself24 THE LAST DAYS OFmore than for the city on which Pachas smiles nolonger. The temple was empty and deserted. Therecollections of Athens crowded fast and meltinglyupon me : imagining myself still alone in thetemple, and absorbed in the earnestness of mydevotion, my prayer gushed from my heart to mylips, and I wept as I prayed. I was startled inthe midst of my devotions, however, by a deepsigh ; I turned suddenly round, and just behind meAlas a female. She had raised her veil also inprayer ; and when our eyes met, methought acelestial ray shot from those dark and shining orbsat once into my soul. Never, my Clodius, haveI seen mortal face more exquisitely moulded : acertain melancholy softened and yet elevatedits expression ; that unutterable something whichsprings from the soul, and AAhich our sculptorshave imparted to the aspect of Psyche, gave herbeauty I know not what of divine and noble ;tears were rolling down her eyes. I guessed atonce that she was also of Athenian lineage ; andthat in my prayer for Athens her heart had respondedto mine. I spoke to her, though with afaltering voice — ' Art thou not, too, Athenian .'' 'POMPEII. 25said I, ' O beautiful virgin ? ' At the sound of myvoice she blushed, and half drew her veil acrossher face. — ' My forefathers'* ashes'' said she, 'reposeby the waters of Ulysses : my birth is ofNeapolis ; but my heart, as my lineage, is Athenians''— 'Let us, then,' said I, 'make our offeringstogether ;'' and, as the priest now appeared,we stood side by side, while we followed the priestin his ceremonial prayer ; together we touchedthe knees of the goddess — together we laid ourolive garlands on the altar. I felt a strangeemotion of almost sacred tenderness at this companionship.We, strangers from a far and fallenland, stood together and alone in that templeof our country's deity : was it not natural thatmy heart should yearn to my countrywoman, forso I might surely call her ? I felt as if I hadknown her for years, and that simple rite seemed,as by a miracle, to operate on the sympathies andties of time. Silently we left the temple, and Iwas about to ask her where she dwelt, and if Imight be permitted to visit her, when a youth, inwhose features there was some kindred resemblanceto her own, and who stood upon the stepsVOL. I. c26 THE LAST DAYS OFof the fane, took her by the hand. She turnedround and bade me farewell. The crowd separatedus ; I saw her no more. On reaching myhome I found letters, which obliged me to set outfor Athens, for my relations threatened me withlitigation concerning my inheritance. When thatsuit was happily over, I repaired once more toNeapolis ; I instituted inquiries throughout thewhole city, I could discover no clue of my lostcountrywoman, and hoping to lose in gaietyall remembrance of that beautiful apparition, Ihastened to plunge myself amidst the luxuries ofPompeii. This is all my history. I do not love ;but I remember and regret."As Clodius was about to reply, a slow andstately step approached them, and, at the soundit made amongst the pebbles, each turned, andeach recognised the new-comer.It was a man Who had scarcely reached hisfortieth year, of tall stature, and of a thin butnervous and sinewy frame. His skin, dark andbronzed, betrayed his eastern origin ; and hisfeatures had something Greek in their outline,(especially in the chin, the lip, the brow, and thethroat,) save that the nose was somewhat raised andPOMPEII. 25aquiline ; and the bones, hard and visible, forbadethat fleshy and wa-song contour which on the Grecianphysiognomy preserved even in manhood the roundand beautiful curves of youth. His eyes, large andblack as the deepest night, shone with no varyingand uncertain lustre. A deep, thoughtful, andhalf melancholy calm seemed unalterably fixedin their majestic and commanding gaze. Hisstep and mien were peculiarly sedate and lofty,and something foreign in the fashion and the soberhues of his sweeping garments added to the impressiveeffect of his quiet countenance and statelyform. Each of the young men, in saluting thenew-comer, made mechanically, and with care toconceal it from him, a slight gesture or sign withtheir fingers ; for Arbaces, the Egyptian, was supposedto possess the fatal gift of the evil eye.The scene must indeed be beautiful," saidArbaces, with a cold though courteous smile,which draws the gay Clodius, and Glaucus theall-admired, from the crowded thoroughfares ofthe city."Is Nature ordinarily so unattractive ?" askedthe Greek.To the dissipated — yes."c 228 THE LAST DAYS OFAn austere rej)!}', but scarcely a wise one.Pleasure delights in contrasts ; it is from dissipationthat we learn to enjoy solitude, and from solitude,dissipation."So think the young philosophers of the garden,"replied the Egyptian ; " they mistake lassitudefor meditation, and imagine that, becausethey are sated with others, they know the delightof loneliness. But not in such jaded bosoms canNature awaken that enthusiasm which alone drawsfrom her chaste reserve all her unspeakable beauty ;she demands from you, not the exhaustion of passion,but all that fervour from which you only seek,in adoring her, a release. When, young Athenian,the Moon revealed herself in visions of light toEndymion, it was after a day passed not amongstthe feverish haunts of men, but on the still mountainsand in the solitary valleys of the hunter""Beautiful simile !" cried Glaucus; " most unjustapplication ! Exhausted ! ah ! youth is neverexhausted ; and by me, at least, one moment ofsatiety has never been known ! "Again the Egyptian smiled, but his smile wascold and blighting, and even the unimaginative Clogdies froze beneath its light. He did not, however,reply to the passionate exclamation of Glaucus ;but, after a pause, he said in a soft and melancholyvoice,After all, you do right to enjoy the hour whileit smiles for you ; the rose soon withers, the perfumesoon exhales — and we, O Glaucus ! strangersin the land, and far from our fathers' ashes, whatis there left for us, but Pleasure or Regret ? — foryou the first, perhaps for me the last."The bright eyes of the Greek were suddenlysuffused with tears. " Ah, speak not, Arbaces,'" hecried — " speak not of om ancestors. Let us forgetthat there were ever other liberties than those ofRome ! — and Glory! — oh, vainly, would we callher ghost from the fields of Marathon and Thermopylae!"Thy heart rebukes thee while thou speaketh'"said the Egyptian ; " and in thy gaieties thisnight thou wilt be more mindful of Lea?na * thanof Lais. Vale rLeaena, the heroic mistress of Aristogeiton, when put to thetorture, she bit out her tongue that the pain might not induceher to betray the conspiracy against the sons of Pisistratus. Thestatue of a lioness, erected in her honour, was to be seen atAthens in the time of Pausanias.30 THE LAST DAYS OFThus sang, he gathered his robe around him,and slowly swept away.I breathe more freely," said Clodius. " Imitatingthe Egyptians, we sometimes introduce a skeletonat our feasts. In truth, the presence of suchan Egyptian as yon gliding shadow were spectreenough to sour the richest grape of the Valerian."Strange man I" said Glaucus, musingly ; " yet,dead though he seem to pleasure, and cold to theobjects of the world, scandal belies him, or hishouse and his heart could tell a different tale.''''Ah ! there are whispers of other orgies thanthose of Osiris in his gloomy mansion. He is rich,too, they say. Can we not get him amongst us,and teach him the charms of dice ? Pleasure ofpleasures ! hot fever of hope and fear ! inexpressibleunsated passion ! how fiercely beautiful thou art,Gaming !"Inspired — inspired"" cried Glaucus, laughing ;the oracle speaks poetry in Clodius. Whatmiracle next !" .POMPEII. 31CHAPTER III.Parentage OF GLAUCUS. — Description OF THE HOUSESOF POMPEII. — A CLASSIC REVEL.Heaven had given to Glaucus every blessingbut one : it had given him beauty, health, fortune,genius, illustrious descent, a heart of fire, a mindof poetry ; but it had denied him the heritage offreedom. He was born in Athens, the subject ofRome. Succeeding early to an ample inheritance,he had indulged that inclination for travel so naturalto the young, and had drunk" deep of the intoxicatingdraught of pleasure, amidst the gorgeousluxuries of the Imperial Comet.He was an Alcibiades without ambition. Hewas what a man of imagination, youth, fortune,and talents, readily becomes when you deprivehim of the inspiration of glory. His house atRome was the theme of the debauchees, but also of32 THE LAST DAYS OFthe lovers of art; and the sculptors of Greece delightedto task their skill in adorning the porticosand exedra of an Athenian. His retreat in Pompeii— alas ! the colours are faded now, the wallsstripped of their paintings ! — its main hcauty, itselaborate finish of grace and ornament, is gone ; —yet when first given once more to the day, whateulogies, what wonder did its minute and glowingdecorations create — its paintings — its mosaics!Passionately enamoured of poetry and the drama,which recalled to Glaucus the wit and the heroismof his race, that fairy mansion was adorned with representationsof aeschylus and Homer, And antiquaries,who resolve taste to a trade, have turnedthe patron to the professor, and still, (though theerror is now acknowledged,) they style in custom,as they first named in mistake, the disbursedhouse of the Athenian Glaucus, " the house ofTHE DRAMATIC POET."Previous to our description of this house, it may1)0 as well to convey to the reader a general notionof the houses of Pompeii, which he Mill find to resemblestrongly the plans of Vitruvius ; but withallthose differences in detail, of caprice and taste.POMPEII. 33which, being natural to mankind, have alwayspuzzled antiquaries. We shall endeavour to makethis description as clear and pedantic as possible.You enter then, usually, by a small entrancepassage, (called vestibule,) into a hall, sometimeswith (but more frequently without) the ornamentof columns ; around three sides of this hall aredoors communicating with several bed-chambers,(among which is the porter's,) the best of thesebeing usually appropriated to country visitors. Atthe extremity of the hall, on either side to theright and left, if the house is large, there are twosmall recesses, rather than chambers, generally devotedto the ladies of the mansion ; and in thecentre of the tesselated pavement of the hall is invariablya square shallow reservoir for rain-water,(classically termed impluvium,) which was admittedby a hole in the roof above ; the saidaperture being covered at will by an awning. Nearthis impluvium, which had a peculiar sanctity inthe eyes of the ancients, were sometimes (but atPompeii more rarely than at Rome) placed imagesof the household gods ; — the hospitable hearth,often mentioned by the Roman poets, and conesO34 'i;he last days ofcrated to the Lares, was at Pompeii almost invariablyformed by a moveable rasher ; while in somecorner, often the most ostentatious place, was depositeda hug-c Avoodcn chest, ornamented andstrengthened by bands of bronze or iron, andsecured by strong hooks upon a stone pedestal sofirmly as to defy the attempts of any robber todetach it from its position. This chest was supposedto be the money-box, or coffer of the masterof the house ; though, as no money has been foundin any of the chests discovered at Pompeii, it isprobable that it was sometimes rather designed forornament than use.In this hall (or atrium, to speak classically) theclients and visitors of inferior rank were usuallyreceived. In the houses of the more ' respectable""an atriensis, or slave peculiarly devoted to theservice of the hall, was invariably retained, and hisrank among his fellow-slaves was high and important.The reservoir in the centre must havebeen rather a dangerous ornament, but the centreof the hall was like the grass-plat of a college, andinterdicted to the passers to and fi-o, who foundample space in the margin. Right opposite thePOMPEII. 35entrance, at the other end of the hall, was anapartment stabling), in wliieh the pavement wasusually adorned with rich mosaics, and the wallscovered with elaborate paintings. Here were usuallykept the records of the family, or those of anypublic office that had been filled by the owner :on one side of this saloon, if we may so call it,was often a dining-room, or triclinium, ; on the otherside, perhaps, what we should now term a cabinet ofgems, containing whatever curiosities were deemedmost rare and costly ; and invariably a small passagefor the slaves to cross to the farther parts ofthe house, without passing the apartments thusmentioned. These rooms all opened on a squareor oblong colonnade, technically termed peristyle.If the house was small, its boundary ceased withthis colonnade, and in that case its centre, howeverdiminutive, was ordinarily appropriated to thepurpose of a garden, and adorned with vases offlowers placed upon pedestals, while under thecolonnade, to the right and left, were doors, admittingto bed-rooms *, to a second triclinium, orThe Romans had bed-rooms appropriated not only to thesleep of night, but also to the day siesta {cubicula diurnal).36 THE LAST DAYS OFeating room (for the ancients generally appropriatedtwo rooms at least to that purpose, one for ,and one for winter, or perhaps, one for ordinary,the other for festive, occasions) ; and if theowner affected letters, a cabinet, dignified by thename of hilary, — for a very small room Alas sufficientto contain the few rolls of papyrus which theancients deemed a notable collection of books.At the end of the peristyle was generally thekitchen. Supposing the house was large, it did notend with the peristyle, and the centre thereofwas not in that case a garden, but might be perhapsadorned with a fountain, or basin for fish,and at its cud, exactly opposite to the tablinum, wasgenerally another eating room, on either side ofwhich were bed-rooms, and perhaps a picture-saloonor pinatheca.* These apartments communicatedagain with a square or oblong space, usuallyadorned on three sides with a colonnade like theperistyle, and very much resembling the peristyle,only longer. This was the proper viridariion orgarden, being usually adorned a\ with a fountain, or• In the stately palaces of Rome, the pinatheca usually communicatedwith the atrium.POMPEII. 37statues, and a profusion of gay flowers : at its extremeend was the gardener's house ; on either side,beneath the colonnade, were sometimes, if the sizeof the family required it, additional rooms.At Pompeii, a second or third story was rarelyof importance, being built only above a small partof the house, and containing rooms for the slaves;differing in this respect from the more magnificentedifices of Rome, which generally contained theprincipal eating-room (or coenaculum) on the secondfloor. The apartments themselves were ordinarilyof small size ; for in those delightful climes they receivedany extraordinary number of visitors in theperistyle (or portico), the hall, or the garden ; —and even their banquet rooms, however elaboratelyadorned and carefully selected in point of aspect,were of diminutive proportions ; for the intellectualancients, being fond of society not of crowds, rarelyfeasted more than nine at a time, so that large were not so necessary with them as withus.* But the suite of rooms seen at once fromthe entrance, must have had a very imposing♦ When they entertained very large parties, the feast wasusually served in the hall.38 THE LAST DAYS OFeffect ; you beheld at once the hall richly pavedand painted — the tablinum — the graceful peristyle,and (if the house extended farther) the oppositebanquet-room and the garden, which closed theview with some gushing fount, or marble statue.The reader will now have a tolerable notion ofthe Pompeian houses, which resembled in some respectsthe Grecian, but mostly the Roman fashionof domestic architecture. In almost every housethere is some difference in detail from the rest, butthe principal outline is the same in all. In all youfind the hall, the tablinum, and the peristyle, communicatingwith each other ; in all you find the wallsrichly painted, and in all the evidence of a peoplefond of the refining elegances of life. The purity ofthe taste of the Pompeians in decoration is howeverquestionable : they were fond of the gaudiest colours,of fantastic designs ; they often painted the lowerhalf of their columns a bright red, leaving the restuncoloured ; and where the garden was small, itswall was frequently tinted to deceive the eye asto its extent, imitating trees, birds, temples, &:c.in ]perspective — a meretricious delusion which thePOMPEII. 39graceful pedantry of Pliny himself adopted, Witha complacent pride in its ingenuity.But the house of Glaucus was at once one of thesmallest, and yet of the most adorned and finishedof all the private mansions of Pompeii : it wouldbe a model at this day for the house of " a singleman in Mayfair" — the envy and despair of thecoelibian purchasers of buhl and marquette.You enter by a long and narrow vestibule, onthe floor of which is the image of a dog in mosaic,with the well-known " Cave Cane," — or " bewarethe dog." On either side, is a chamber of somesize ; for the interior house not being large enoughto contain the two gi-eat divisions of private andpublic apartments, these two rooms were set apartfor the reception of visitors who neither by ranknor familiarity were entitled to admission in thepenetralia of the mansion.Advancing up the vestibule, you enter an atrium,that when first discovered was rich in paintings,which in point of expression would scarcelydisgrace a Raphael. You may see them nowtransplanted to the Neapolitan Museum ; they are40 THE LAST DAYS OFstill the admiration of connoisseurs — they depictthe parting of Achilles and Arises. Who doesnot acknowledge the force, the vigour, the beauty,employed in delineating the forms and faces ofAchilles and the immortal slave !On one side the atrium, a small staircase admittedto the apartments for the slaves on thesecond floor ; there too were two or three smallbed-rooms, the walls of which pourtrayed the rapeof Europa, the battle of the Amazons, &c.You now enter the tablinum, across which ateither end hung rich draperies of Tyrian purple,half withdrawn.* On the walls was depicteda poet reading his verses to his friends, and in thepavement was inserted a small and most exquisitemosaic, typical of the instructions given by thedirector of the stage to his comedians.You passed through this saloon, and entered theperistyle ; and here (as I have said before was usuallythe case w ili the smaller houses of Pompeii)the mansion ended. From each of the seven that adorned this court huns festoons ofgarlands ; the centre, supplying the place of a• The tablinum waa also secured at pleasure by sliding doors.POMPEII. 41garden, bloomed with the rarest flowers placed invases of white marble, that were supported onpedestals. At the left end of this small gardenwas a diminutive fane, resembling one of thosesmall chapels placed at the side of roads in Catholiccountries, and dedicated to the Penates ; before itstood a bronze tripod : to the left of the colonnadewere two small cubical or bedrooms ; to the rightwas the triclinium, in which the guests were nowassembled.This room is usually termed by the antiquariesof ' Naples the chamber of Leda ;' and in thebeautiful work of Sir William Gell the readerwill find an engraving from that most delicate andgraceful painting of Leda, presenting her new-bornto her husband, from which the room derivesits name. This beautiful apartment opened uponthe fragrant garden. Round the table of citron *wood, highly polished and delicately wroughtwith silver arabesques, were placed the threecouches, which were yet more common at PompeiiThe most valued wood — not the modern citron tree. Some,amongst whom is my learned friend, Mr. W. S. Landor, conjectureit with much plausibility to have been mahogany.42 THE LAST DAYS OFthan the semicircular seat that had grown latelyinto fashion at Rome ; and on these couches ofbronze studded with richer metals, were laid thickbuildings covered with elaborate broidery, andyielding luxuriously to the pressure.Well, I must own," said the aedile Pansa,that your house, though scarcely larger than acase for one's fibula?, is a gem of its kind. Howbeautifully painted is that parting of Achilles andArises ! — Avhat a style ! — wdiat heads! — what a—hem !"Praise from Pansa is indeed valuable onsuch subjects," said Clodius gravely. " Why, thepaintings on his walls — Ah ! there is, indeed, thehand of a Zeuxis !"You flatter me, my Clodius ; indeed you do,"quoth the a?dilc, who was celebrated through Pompeiifor having the worst paintings in the Avorld ;for he was patriotic, and patronized none butPompeians — " you flatter me : but there is somethingpretty — yEdepol, yes — in the colours, to saynothing of the design ; — and then for the kitchen,my friends — ah ! that Mas all my fancy."What is the design ?" said Glaucus. " IPOMPEII. 43have not yet seen your kitchen, though I haveoften witnessed the excellence of its cheer."A cook, my Athenian — a cook sacrificing thetrophies of his skill on the altar of Vesta, with abeautiful muraena (taken from the life) on a spit ata distance : — there is some invention there !"At that instant the slaves appeared, bearing atray covered with the first preparative initia ofthe feast. Amidst delicious figs, fresh herbs strewedwith snow, anchovies, and eggs, were rangedsmall cups of diluted wine sparingly mixed withhoney. As these were placed on the table, youngslaves bore round to each of the five guests (forthere were no more) the silver basin of perfumedwater and napkins edged with a purple fringe.But the aedile ostentatiously drew forth his ownnapkin, which was not, indeed, of so fine a linen,but in which the fringe was twice as broad, andwiped his hands with the parade of a man whofelt he was calling for admiration.A splendid kappa that of yours," saidClodius; " why, the fringe is as broad as agirdle."A trifle, my Clodius, a trifle ! They tell me44 THE LAST DAYS OFtills stripe is the latest fashion at Rome : hutGlaucus attends to these things more than I."Be propitious, O Bacchus r said Glaucus,inclining reverentially to a beautiful image of thegod placed in the centre of the table, at the cornersof which stood the Lares and the shareholders.The guests followed the prayer, and then, sprinklingthe wine on the table, they performed thewonted libation.This over, the Conviviality reclined themselveson the couches, and the business of the hourcommenced.May this cup be my last !" said the youngSallust, as the table, cleared of its first stimulants,was now loaded with the substantial ]part of theentertainment, and the ministering slave pouredforth to him a brimming cyathus — " May thiscup be my last, but it is the best wine I havedrunk at Pompeii !"Bring hither the ami)hora," said Glaucus,and read its date and its character."The slave hastened to inform the party that thescroll fastened to the cork betokened its birth fromChios, and its age a ripe fifty years.POMPEII. 45How deliciously the snow has cooled it !"said Pansa ; " it is just enough.""It is like the experience of a man who hascooled his pleasures sufficiently to give them adouble zest," exclaimed Sallust.It is like a woman's No," added Glaucus ; " itcools, but to inflame the more."When is our next wild-beast fight .^" saidClodius to Pansa.It stands fixed for the ninth ide of August,"answered Pansa, " on the day after the Vulcan; we have a most lovely young lion for theoccasion."AVhom shall we get for him to eat ?" askedClodius. " Alas ! there is a great scarcity of criminals.You must positively find some innocentor other to condemn to the lion, Pansa !"Indeed I have thought very seriously about itof late," replied the senile gravely. " It was amost infamous law that which forbade us to sendour o^vn slaves to the wild beasts. Not to let usdo what we like sith our own, that \s what T chillan infringement on property itself"46 THE LAST DAYS OFNot SO in the good old days of the Repuhhe,'''sighed Sallust.And then this pretended mercy to the slavesis such a disappointment to the poor people. Howthey do love to see a good tough battle between aman and a lion ; and all this innocent pleasurethey may lose (if the gods don't send us a goodcriminal soon) from this cursed law."*' What can be worse policy," said Clodiussententiously, " than to interfere with the manlyamusements of the people ?"Well, thank Jupiter and the Fates ! we haveno Nero at present'' said Sallust.He was, indeed, a tyrant ; he shut up ouramphitheatre for ten years."I wonder it did not create a rebellions"' saidSallust.It very nearly did"" returned Pansa, with hismouth full of wild boar.Here the conversation was interrupted for amoment by a fluuri«li of flutes, and two slavesentered with a single dish.Ah ! what delicacy hast thou in store for usPOMPEII. 47now, my Glaucus ?" cried the young Sallust, withsparkling eyes.Sallust was only twenty-four, but he had nopleasure in life like eating — perhaps he had exhaustedall the others ; yet had he some talent,and an excellent heart — as far as it went.I know its face, by Pollux !" cried Pansa ;it is an Astrachan kid. Ho !"" (snapping hisfingers, an usual signal to the slaves,) " we mustprepare anew libation in honour to the new-comer."I had hoped," said Glaucus, in a melancholytone, " to have procured you some oysters fromBritain ; but the winds that were so cruel toCaesar have forbid us the oysters."Are they in truth so delicious ?" asked Lepidus,loosening to a yet more luxurious ease, hisgirdled tunic.Why, in truth, I suspect it is the distancethat gives the flavour ; they want the richnessof the Brundusium oyster. But at Rome no supperis complete without them."The poor Britons ! There is some good in themafter all," said Sallust ; " they produce an oyster !"48 THE LAST DAYS OFI wish tlioy would produce us a gladiator"'said the aedile, whose provident mind \^'as stillmusing over the wants of the amphitheatre.By Pallas !" cried Glaucus, as his favouriteslave crowned his steaming locks M'ith a newchaplet, " I love these wild spectacles well enoughwhen least fights least ; but when a man, onewith bones and blood like ours, is coldly put onthe arena, and torn limb from limb, the interestis too horrid : I sicken — I gasp for breath — Ilonof to rush and defend him. The yells of thepopulace seem to me more dire than the voices ofthe Furies chacing Orestes. I rejoice that there isso little chance of that bloody exhibition for ournext show !"The a^dile shrugged his shoulders ; the youngSallust, who was thought the best-natured manin Pompeii, stared in surprise. The graceful Lepidus,who rarely spoke for fear of disturbing hisfeatures, cried " Per Ilercle !" The parasite Claudius,muttered " iEdepol ;" and the sixth banqueter,who was the umbra of Clodius, (b) andwhose duty it was to echo his richer friend, whenPOMPEII. 49he could not praise him, — the parasite of a parasite,— muttered also "-^depol."Well, you Italians are used to these spectacles;we Greeks are more merciful. Ah, shade of Pindar! — the rapture of a true Grecian game — theemulation of man against man — the generousstrife — the half-mournful triumph — so proud tocontend with a noble foe, so sad to see him overcome! But ye understand me not."The kid is excellent," said Sallust.The slave, whose duty it was to carve, and whovalued himself on his science, had just performedthat office on the kid to the sound of music, hisknife keeping time, beginning with a Ioav tenor,and accomplishing the arduous feat amidst a magnificentdiapason."Your cook is of course from Sicily?" saidPansa.Yes, of Syracuse."I will play you for him," said Clodius ; '' wewill have a game between the courses."Better that sort of game certainly, than abeast fight ; but I cannot stake my Sicilian —VOL. I. D50 THE LAST DAYS OFyou have nothing so precious to stake me in re-tune;'Mj Phillips ^— my beautiful dancing girl !"I never buy women," said the Greek, carelesslyre-arranging his chaplet.The musicians, who were stationed in the porticowithout, had commenced their office with thekid ; they now directed the melody into a moresoft, a more gay, yet it may be a more intellectualstrain ; and they chaunted that song of Horace,beginning " Persians odi," &c, so impossible totranslate, and which they imagined applicable toa feast that, effeminate as it seems to us, wassimple enough for the gorgeous revelry of thetime. We are witnessing the domestic and notthe princely feast — the entertainment of a gentleman,not an emperor or a senator.Ah, good old Horace," said Sallust compassionately," he sang well of feasts and girls, butnot like our modern poets."The immortal Fulvius, for instance," said Claudius."Ah, Fulvius the immortal !" said the umbra.And Spura?na, and Caius Xuthus Who wrotePOMPEII. 51three epics in a year — could Horace do that, orVirgil either ?" said Lepidus. " Those old poets allfell into the mistake of copying sculpture insteadof painting. Simplicity and repose — that was theirnotion ; but we moderns have fire and passion andenergy — we never sleep, we imitate the colours ofpainting, its life and its action. Immortal Fulvius!"By the way," said Sallust, "have you seen thenew ode by Spuraena, in honour of our EgyptianIsis ? — it is magnificent — the true religious fervour."Isis seems a favourite divinity at Pompeii,"said Glaucus.Yes !" said Pansa, " she is exceedingly in reputejust at this moment ; her statue has been utteringthe most remarkable oracles. I am not superstitious,but I must confess that she has morethan once assisted me materially in my magistracywith her advice. Her priests are so pious too !none of your gay, none of your proud, ministers ofJupiter and Fortune ; they walk barefoot, eat nomeat, and pass the greater part of the night insolitary devotion ! "An example to our other priesthood, indeed !d252 The LAST DAYS OF.Tiipiter''s temple wants reforming' sadly,''"' saidLepidus, who was a great reformer for all buthimself.They say that Arbaces the Egyptian has impartedsome most solemn mysteries to the priestsof Isis"" observed Sallust ; "he boasts his descentfrom the race of Rameses, and declares that in hisfamily the secrets of remotest antiquity are treasured."'•' He certainly possesses the gift of the evil eye,"said Clodius ; " if I ever come upon that Medusafront without the previous charm, I am sure to losea favourite horse, or throw the canes* nine timesrunning."The last would be indeed a miracle ! " saidSallust gravely.How mean 3'ou, Sallust .''" returned the gamester,with a flushed brow.I mean what you would leave me if I playedoften with you ; and that is — nothing."Clodius answered only by a smile of disdain.If Arbaces were not so rich," said Pansa, witha stately air, " I should stretch my authority aCanes oi" Caniculie, the lowest throw at dice.POMPEII. 53little, and enquire into the truth of the reportwhich calls him an astrologer and a sorcerer.Agrippa, when aedile of Rome, banished all suchterrible citizens. But a rich man — it is the dutyof an aedile to protect the rich ! "What think you of this new sect, which I amtold has even a few proselytes in Pompeii, thesefollowers of the Hebrew God — Christ's'"Oh, mere speculative visionaries*" said Claudius; " they have not a single gentleman amongstthem ; their proselytes are poor, insignificant, ignorantpeople ! "Who ought, however, to be crucified for theirblasphemy," said Pansa with vehemence: "theydeny Venus and Jove ! Nazarene is but anothername for atheist. Let me catch them, that's all !"The second course was gone — the feasters fellback on their couches — there was a pause whilethey listened to the soft voices of the South, andthe music of the Arcadian reed. Glaucus was themost rapt and the least inclined to break thesilence, but Clodius began already to think thatthey wasted time.Bene vobis ! (your health !) my Glaucus," said54 THE LAST DAYS OFhe, quaffing a cup to each letter of the Greek'sname, with the ease of the practised drinker.Will you not be avenged on your ill-fortune ofyesterday ? See, the dice court us."As you will !" said Glaucus.The dice in August, and I an aedile," (c) saidPansa magisterially ; " it is against all law."Not in your presence, grave Pansa," returnedClodius, rattling the dice in a long box ; " yourpresence restrains all licence ; it is not the thing,but the excess of the thing that hurts."What wisdom !" murmured the umbra.Well, I will look another way," said theaedile.Not yet, good Pansa; let us wait till we havesupped," said Glaucus.Clodius reluctantly yielded, concealing his vexationwith a yawn.He gapes to devour the gold," whisperedLepidus to Sallust, in a quotation from the Aulu-maria of Plautus.Ah ! how well I know these polypi, m ho holdall they touch," answered Sallust in the sametone, and out of the same play.P03IPEII. 55The second course, consisting of a variety offruits, pistachio nuts, sweetmeats, tarts, and confectionarytortured into a thousand fantastic andairy shapes, was now placed upon the table, andthe ministry, or attendants, also set there the wine(which had hitherto been handed round to theguests) in large jugs of glass, each bearing uponit the schedule of its age and quality.Taste this Lesbian, my Pansa," said Sallust ;it is excellent."It is not very old," said Glaucus, " but it hasbeen made precocious like ourselves, by being putto the fire : — the wine to the flames of Vulcan —we to those of his wife — to whose honour I pourthis cup."It is delicate," said Pansa, " but there is perhapsthe least particle too much of rosin in itsflavour."What a beautiful cup !" cried Clodius, takingup one of transparent crystal, the handlesof which were wrought with gems, and twistedin the stage of serpents, the favourite fashion atPompeii.This ring," said Glaucus, taking a costly jewel56 THE LAST DAYS OFfrom the first joint of his finger and hanging it onthe handle " gives it a richer show, and rendersit less unworthy of thy acceptance, my Clodius,\^•hom may the Gods give health and fortune longand oft to crown it to the brim !"You are too generous, Glaucus," said thegamester, handing the cup to his slave, " but yourlove gives it a double value."This cup to the Graces !" said Pansa, and hethrice emptied his calix. The guests followed hisexample.We have appointed no director to the feast,"cried Sallust.Let us throw for him, then," said Clodius,rattling the dice-box.Nay," cried Glaucus, " no cold and tritedirector for us ; no dictator of the banquet ; no rexconvivial. Have not the Romans sworn never toobey a king ? shall we be less free than your ancestors? Ho ! musicians, let us have the song Icomposed the other night : it has a verse on thissubject, " the liacchic hymn of The Hours."The musicians struck their instruments to aw IM Tonic air, while the youngest voices in thePOMPEII. 57band chaunted forth in Greek words, as numbers,the following strain : —I.Through the summer day, through the weary day,We have glided long ;Ere we speed to the Night through her portals grey.Hail us with song ! —With song, with song,With a bright and joyous song —Such as the Cretan maid.While the twilight made her bolder,Woke, high through the ivy shade.When the wine-god first consoled her.From the hush'd, low-breathing skies.Half-shut, looked their starry eyes,And all around,With a loving sound,The aegean waves were creeping :son her lap lay the lynx's head;Wild thyme was her bridal bed ;And aye through each tiny space,In the green vine's green embrace,D 558 THE LAST DAYS OFThe Fauns were slyly peeping: —The Fauns, the prying FaunsThe arch, the laughing Fauns —The Fauns were slyly peeping !II.Flagging and faint are weWith our ceaseless flight,And dull shall our journey beThrough the Realm of Night.Bathe us, O bathe our weary wingsIn the purple wave, as it freshly springsTo your cups from the fount of light —From the fount of light — from the fount of light;For there, when the sun has gone down in night.There in the bowl we find him.The grape is the well of that summer sun,Or rather the stream that he gazed upon,Till he left in truth, like the Thespian youth,*His soul, as he gazed, behind him.III.A cup to Jove, and a cup to Love,And a cup to the son of Maia,And honour with three, the band zone-free,The band of the bright Aglaia.• Narcissus.POMPEII. 59But since every bud in the wreath of pleasureYe owe to the sister Hours,No stinted cups, in a formal measure,The Roman law makes ours.He honours us most who gives us most,And boasts with a Bacchanal's honest boast,He never will count the treasure.Lastly we fleet, then seize our wings,And plunge us deep in the sparkling rings ;And aye, as we rise with a dripping plume,We '11 scatter the spray round the garland's bloom.We glow — we glow.Behold, as the girls of the Eastern waveBore once with a shout to their crystal caveThe prize of the Mysian Hylas,Even so — even so,We have caught the young god in our warm embrace,We hurry him on in our laughing race ;We hurry him on, with a whoop and song.The cloudy rivers of Night along —Ho, ho ! — we have caught thee, Silas !60 THE LAST DAYS OPThe guests applauded loudly : when the poetis your host, his verses are sure to charm.Thoroughly Greek," said Lepidus : " thewildness, force, and energy of that tongue, it isimpossible to imitate in the Roman poetry."It is, indeed, a great contrast," said Clodius,ironically at heart, though not in appearance, " tothe old fashioned and tame simplicity of that ode ofHorace which we heard before. The air is beautifullyIonic : the word puts me in mind of a toastCompanions, I give you the beautiful lone."lone — the name is Greek," said Glaucus, inasoft voice, " I drink the health with delight.But who is lone .'*"" Ah ! you have but just come to Pompeii, oryou would deserve ostracism for your ignorance,"said Lepidus conceitedly ; " not to know lone, isnot to know the chief charm of our city."SUe is of most rare beauty," said Pansa ;and what a voice !"She can feed only on nightingales'' tongues,"said Clodius."Nightingales'' tongues! — beautiful thought,"sighed the umbra.Enlighten me, I beseech you," said Clodius.POMPEII. 61Know then," began LepidusLet me speak," cried Clodiiis ; " you drawlout your words as if you spoke tortoises."And you speak stones," muttered the coxcombto himself, as he fell back disdainfully on hiscouch.Know then, my Glaucus," said Clodius, " thatlone is a stranger who has but lately come toPompeii. She sings like Sappho, and her songsare her own composing ; and as for the tibia,and the cithara, and the lyre, I know not in whichshe most outdoes the Muses. Her beauty is mostdazzling. Her house is perfect ; such taste — suchgems — such bronzes ! She is rich, and generousas she is rich."Her lovers, of course," said Glaucus, " takecare that she does not starve ; and money lightlywon is always lavishly spent."Her lovers — ah there is the enigma ! lonehas but one vice — she is chaste. She has allPompeii at her feet, and she has no lovers : shewill not even marry."No lovers !" echoed Glaucus.No; she has the soul of Vesta, with the girdleof Venus."62 THE LAST DAYS OFWhat refined expressions !" said the umbra.A miracle !" cried Glaucus. " Can \v& notsee her ?"I will take you there this evening"" said Claudius; " meanwhile," added he, once more rattlingthe diceI am your's ! " said the complaisant Glaucus.Pansa, turn your face ! ""Lepidus and Sallust played at odd and even,and the ximbra looked on, while Glaucus and Claudiusbecame gradually absorbed in the chances ofthe dice.Per Jove !" cried Glaucus, " this is the secondtime I have thrown the caniculae (the lowestthrow."Now Venus befriend me !" said Clodius, rattlingthe box for several moments, " O Alma Venus— it is Venus herself I" as he threw the highestcast named from that goddess, — whom he whowins money indeed usually propitiates !Venus is ungrateful to me," said Glaucusgaily ; " I have always sacrificed on her altar."lie who plays Avitli Clodius," whispered Lepidus," will soon, like Plautus's Curculio, put hispallium for the stakes."POMPEII. 63Poor Glaucus — lie is as blind as Fortuneherself," replied Sallust iu the same tone.I will play no more*" said Glaucus, " I havelost thirty sententia."I am sorry," began Clodius.Amiable man ! " groaned the umbra.Not at all !" exclaimed Glaucus ; " the pleasureof your gain compensates the pain of my loss."The conversation now became general and animated; the wine circulated more freely ; and loneonce more became the subject of eulogy to theguests of Glaucus.Instead of twitching the stars, let us visitone at whose beauty the stars grow pale," saidLepidus.Clodius, who saw no chance of renewing thedice, seconded the proposal ; and Glaucus, thoughhe civilly pressed his guests to continue the banquet,could not but let them see, that his curiosityhad been excited by the praises of lone ; theytherefore resolved to adjourn (all at least butPansa and the umbra) to the house of the fairGreek. They drank therefore to the health ofGlaucus and of Titus — they performed their lastlibation — they resumed their slippers — they THE LAST DAYS OFscended the stairs — passed the illumined atrium —and walking unbeaten over the fierce dog paintedon the threshold, found themselves beneath thelight of the moon just risen, in the lively and stillcrowded streets of Pompeii.They passed the jewellers' quarter, sparklingwith lights, caught and reflected by the gemsdisplayed in the shops, and arrived at last at thedoor of lone. The vestibule blazed with rows oflamps ; curtains of embroidered purple hung oneither aperture of the tablinum, whose walls andmosaic pavement glowed with the richest coloursof the artist ; and under the portico which surroundedthe odorous viridarium, they found lonealready surrounded by adoring and applaudingguests.Did you say she was Athenian ?" whisperedGlaucus, ere he passed into the peristyle.No, she is from Neapolis."Weapons !" echoed Glacis ; and, at that moment,the group dividing on either side of lone,gave to his view that bright, that nymph-likebeauty, A\hich for months had shone down uponthe waters of his memory.POMPEII. 65CHAPTER IV.THE TEMl'LE Ox ISIS. ITS PRIEST. — THE CHARACTER OFGraces Developed ITSELF.The story returns to the Egyptian. We leftArbaces upon the shores of the noon-day sea, afterhe had parted from Glaucus and his companion.As he approached to the more crowded part ofthe bay, he paused, and gazed upon that animatedscene with foiled arms, and a bitter smile uponhis dark features.Gulls, dupes, fools that ye are !"" muttered he tohimself; "whether business or pleasure, trade orreligion be your pursuit, you are equally cheatedby the passions that ye should rule ! How I couldloathe you, if I did not hate — yes, hate ! — Greek orRoman, it is from us, from the dark lore of Egypt,that ye have stolen the fire that gives you souls —your knowledge — your poesy — your laws — your66 THE LAST DAYS OFarts — your barbarous mastery of war (all howtame and mutilated, when compared with the vastoriginal !) — ye have filched, as a slave filches thefragments of the feast, from us ! And now, ye,mimics of a mimic, — Romans forsooth ! the mushroomherd of robbers ! — ye are our masters ! thePyramids look down no more on the race of Rameses— the eagle cowers over the serpent of theNile. Our masters — no, not mint ! My soul, bythe power of its wisdom, controls and chains you,though the fetters are unseen. So long as craftcan master force, so long as Religion has a cavefrom which oracles can dupe mankind, the wisehold an empire over earth. Even from your vices,Arbaces distills his pleasures : — pleasures profanedby vulgar eyes — pleasures vast, wealthy, inexhaustible,of which your enervate minds, in theirunimaginative sensuality, cannot conceive or dream !Plod on, plod on, fools of ambition and of avarice !your petty thirst for fasces and quaestor ships, andall the mummery of servile power, provokes mylaughter and my scorn. My power can extendwherever man believes. I ride over the souls thatthe purple veils. Thebes may fall, Egypt be aPOMPEII. 67name ; the world itself furnishes the subjects ofArbaces."Thus saying, the Egyptian moved slowly on ;and, entering the town, his tall figure toweredabove the crowded throng of the forum, and swepttowards the small but graceful temple consecratedto Isis. (d)That edifice was then but of recent erection, theancient temple had been thrown down in the earthquakesixteen years before, and the new buildinghad become as much in vogue with the versatilePompeians, as a new chi-ch or a new preacher maybewith us. The oracles of the goddess at Pompeiiwere indeed remarkable not more for the mysteriouslanguage in which they were clothed, than for thecredit which was attached to their mandates andpredictions. If they were not dictated by a divinity,they were framed at least by a profoundknowledge of mankind ; they applied themselvesexactly to the circumstances of individuals, andmade a notable contrast to the vague and loosegeneralities of their rival temples. As Arbaces nowarrived at the rails which separated the profanefrom the sacred place, a crowd composed of allTHE LAST DAYS OPclasses, but especially of the commercial, collected,breathless and reverential, before the many altarswhich rose in the open court. In the walls of thecella, elevated on seven steps of Parian marble,various statues stood in niches, and those wallswere ornamented with the pomegranate consecratedto Isis. An oblong pedestal occupied theinterior building, on which stood two statues, oneof Isis, and its companion represented the silentand mystic Ores. But the building contained manyother deities to grace the court of the Egyptiandeity: her kindred and many-titled Bacchus, andthe Cyprian Venus, a Grecian disguise for herself,rising from her bath, and the dog-headed Anubis,and the ox Apis, and various Egyptian idols of uncouthform and unknown appellations.But we must not suppose that among the citiesof Magna Graeca, Isis was worshipped with thoseforms and ceremonies which were of right her own.The mongrel and modern nations of the South, witha mingled arrogance and ignorance, confounded theworships of all climes and ages. And the-profoundmysteries of the Nile were degraded by a hundredPOMPEII. 69meretricious and frivolous admixtures from thecreeds of CeiAisus and of Tibur. The temple ofIsis in Pompeii was served by Roman and Greekpriests, ignorant alike of the language and the customsof her ancient votaries, and the descendant ofthe dread Egyptian kings, beneath the appearanceof reverential awe, now secretly laughed to scornthe puny mummers which imitated the solemnand typical worship of his burning clime.Ranged now on either side the steps was thesacrificial croAvd, arrayed in white garments, whileat the summit stood two of the inferior priests, theone holding a palm branch, the other a slendersheaf of corn. In the narrow passage in frontthronged the bystanders.And what," whispered Arbaces to one of thebystanders, who Alas a merchant engaged in theAlexandrian trade, which trade had probably firstintroduced in Pompeii the worship of the Egyptiangoddess — " AVhat occasion now assemblesyou before the altars of the venerable Isis ? Itseems by the white robes of the group before me,that a sacrifice is to be rendered, and by the THE LAST DAYS OFsemble of the priests, tlmt ye are prepared forsome oracle. To what question is it to vouchsafea reply?"We are merchant's'' replied the bystander(who was no other than Diomed) in the samevoice, " who seek to know the fate of onr vessels,AA'hich sail for Alexandria tomorrow. We areabout to offer up a sacrifice and implore an answerfi-om the goddess. I am not one of those whohave petitioned the priest to sacrifice, as you maysee by my dress, but I have some interest in thesuccess of the fleet; — per Jove! yes. I have apretty trade, else how could I live in these hardtimes rThe Egyptian replied gravely, " that thoughIsis was properly the goddess of agriculture, shewas no less the patron of commerce." Theseturning his head towards the east, Arbaces seemedabsorbed in silent prayer.And now in the centre of the steps appeared apriest robed in white from head to foot, the veilparting over the croMU ; two new priests relievedthose hitherto stationed at either corner, beingnaked half way down the breast, and covered, forPOMPEII. ( ithe rest, in white and loose robes. At the sametime, seated at the bottom of the steps, a priestcommenced a solemn air upon a long wind-instrumentof music. Half way down the steps stoodanother flamen, holding in one hand the votivewreath, in the other a white wand ; while, addingto the picturesque scene of that eastern ceremony,the stately Ibis (bird sacred to the Egyptian worship)looked mutely down from the wall upon therit, or stalked beside the altar at the base of thesteps.At that altar now stood the sacrificial flamen.*The countenance of Arbaces seemed to loseall its rigid calm while the aruspices inspectedthe entrails, and to be intent in pious anxiety — torejoice and brighten as the signs were declaredfavourable, and the fire began bright and clearly toconsume the sacred portion of the victim amidstodours of myrrh and frankincense It was thenthat a dead silence fell over the whispering crowd,and the priests gathering round the cella, anotherpriest, naked save by a cincture round the middle,• See a singular picture in the Museum of Naples, of an Egyptiansacrifice.72 THE LAST DAYS OFrushed forward, and dancing with wild gestures,implored an answer from the goddess. He ceasedat last in exhaustion, and a low murmuring noisewas heard within the body of the statue : thricethe head moved, and the lips parted, and then ahollow voice uttered these mystic words —There are waves like chargers that meet and glow,There are graves ready wrought in the rocks below ;On the brow of the Future the dangers lower,But blest are your barks in the fearful hour."The voice ceased — the crowd breathed morefreely — the merchants looked at each other —Nothing can be more plain," murmured Diomed;there is to be a storm at sea, as there very oftenis at the beginning of autumn, but our vessels areto be saved. O beneficent Isis VLanded eternally be the goddess !*" said themerchants ; " Avhat can be less equivocal than herprediction ? ""Raising one hand in sign of silence to the people,for the rites of Isis enjoined what to the livelyPOMPEII. 73Pomj^eians was an impossible suspense from the useof the vocal organs, the chief priest poured hislibation on the altar, and after a short concludingprayer, the ceremony was over and the congregationdismissed. Still, however, as the crowd dispersedthemselves here and there, the Egyptianlingered by the railing, and when the space becametolerably cleared, one of the priests approaching it,saluted him with great appearance of friendly familiarity.The countenance of the priest was remarkablyunprepossessing — his shaven skull was so low andnarrow in the front as nearly to approach to the conformationof that of an African savage, save only towardsthe tempts, where, in that organ styled acquisitivenessby the pupils of a science modern in name,but best practically known (as their sculpture teachesus) amongst the antients, two huge and almost pre •unnatural protuberances yet more distorted theunshapely head; — around the brows the skin waspuckered into a web of deep and intricate wrinklesthe eyes, dark and small, rolled in a muddy andyellow orbit — the nose, short yet coarse, was distendedat the nostrils like a satis and the thickVOL. I. ET4 THE LAST DAYS OFbut pallid lips, the high cheek-bones, the livid andmotley hues that struggled through the parchmentskin, completed a countenance which none couldbehold without repugnance, and few without terrorand distrust — Whatever the wishes of the mind, theanimal frame was well fitted to execute them ; thewiry muscles of the throat, the broad chest, thenervous hands and lean gaunt arms, which werebared above the elbow, betokened a form capablealike of great active exertion and passive endurance.Calenus," said the Egyptian to this fascinatingflamen, " you have improved the voice of the statuemuch by attending to my suggestion ; andyour verses are excellent — always prophesy goodfortune, unless there is an absolute impossibility ofits fulfilment."Besides," added Calenus, " if the storm doescome, and if it does overwhelm the accursed ships,have we not prophesied it? and are the barks notblest to be at rest ? — for rest prays the mariner inthe ^ga?an sea, or at least so says Horace ; — canthe mariner be more at rest in the sea than whenhe is at the bottom of it ! "POMPEII. 75Right, my Calenus ; I wish Apaecides wouldtake a lesson from yom* wisdom. But I desire toconfer with you relative to him and to other matters:you can admit me into one of your less sacredapartments ?"Assuredly," replied the priest, leading the wayto one of the small chambers which surrounded theopen gate. Here they seated themselves before asmall table spread with dishes containing fruit andeggs, and various cold meats, with vases of excellentwine, of which while the companions partook,a curtain, drawn across the entrance opening to thecourt, concealed them from view, but admonishedthem by the thinness of the partition to speak lowor to speak no secrets ; they chose the former alternative.Thou knowest"" said Arbaces, in a voicethat scarcely stirred the air, so soft and inwardwas its sound, " that it has ever been my maximto attach myself to the young. From their flexileand unformed minds, I can carve out my fittesttools. I weave — I warp — I mould them at mywill. Of the men I make merely followers or servants; of the women "E 276 THE LAST DAYS OFMistresses," said Calenus, as a livid grin distortedhis ungainly features.Yes, I do not disguise it, woman is themain object — the great appetite of my soul.As you feed the victim for the slaughter, / loveto rear the votaries of my pleasure. I love totrain, to ripen their minds — to unfold the sweetblossom of their hidden passions, in order to preparethe fruit to my tastes. I loathe your ready-madeand ripened courtesans ; it is in the softand unconscious progress of innocence to desirethat 1 find the true charm of love : it is thus that1 defy satiety ; and by contemplating the freshnessof others, I sustain the freshness of my own sensations.From the young hearts of my victims Idraw the ingredients of the cauldron in mIucIi Ire-youth myself. But enough of this : to the subjectbefore us. You lino, then, that in Neapolissome time since I encountered lone and Apa;cides,brother and sister, the children of Athenians whohad settled at Nea])olis. The death of theirparents, \\\\o knew and esteemed me, constitutedme their guardian. I was not unmindful of thetrust. The youth, docile and mild, yielded readilyPOMPEII. 77to the impression I sought to stamp upon him. Nextto woman, I love the old recollections of my ancestralland ; I love to keep alive — to propagate ondistant shores, (which her colonies perchance yetpeople,) her dark and mystic creeds. It may bethat it pleases me to delude mankind, while I thusserve the deities. To Apaecides I taught thesolemn faith of Isis. I unfolded to him somethingthose sublime allegories which are couchedbeneath her worship. I excited in a soul peculiarlyalive to religious fervour that enthusiasmwhich imagination begets on faith. I have placedhim amongst you : he is one of you."He is so," said Calenus ; " but in thus stimulatinghis faith, you have robbed him of wisdom.He is horror struck that he is no long-erduped : our sage delusions — our speaking statuesand secret staircases, dismay and revolt him ; hepines ; he wastes away ; he mutters to himself ;he refuses to share our ceremonies. He has beenknown to frequent the company of men suspectedof adherence to that new and atheistical creedwhich denies all our gods, and terms our oraclesthe inspirations of that malevolent spirit of which78 THE LAST DAYS OFEastern tradition speaks. Our oracles — alas ! weknow well whose inspirations ihe/t/ are !"This is what I feared," said Arbaces, musingly," from various reproaches he made mewhen I last saw him. Of late he hath shunnedmy steps : I must find him : I must continue mylessons ; I must lead him into the Actus of Wisdom.I must teach him that there are two stagesof sanctity — the first, faith — the next, delusion: the one for the vulgar — the second for thesage."I never passed through the first," said Calenus; " nor you either, I think, my Arbaces."You err," replied the Egyptian gravely. " I believeat this day (not indeed that which I teach,but that which I teach not,) Nature has a sanctityagainst which I cannot — (nor would I,) steel conviction.I believe in mine own knowledge, andthat has revealed to me : — but no matter ! Now toearthlier and more inviting themes. If I thus fulfilledmy object with Apaecides, what was mydesign for lone ? Thou knowest already I intendher for my queen — my bride — my heart's Isis.POMPEII. 79Never till I saw her knew I all the love of whichmy nature was capable."I hear from a thousand lips that she is asecond Helen," said Calenus, and he smacked hisown lips, but whether at the wine or at the notion,it is not easy to decide.Yes, she has a beauty that Greece itself neverexcelled"" resumed Arbaces. " But that is notall : she has a soul worthy to match with mine.She has a genius beyond that of woman — keen —dazzling — bold. Poetry flows spontaneous to herlips : utter but a truth, and, however intricateand profound, her mind seizes and commands it.Her imagination and her reason are not at warwith each other ; they harmonize and direct hercourse, as the winds and the waves direct somelofty bark. With this she unites a daring independenceof thought : she can stand alone in theworld ; she can be brave as she is gentle : this isthe nature I have sought all my life in woman,and never found till now. lone must be mine !In her I have a double passion ; I wish to enjoy abeauty of spirit as of form."80 THE LAST DAYS OFShe ie not yom-s yet, then," said the priest.No: she loves me — but as a friend: — sheloves me with her mind only. She fancies in methe paltry virtues which I have only the profoundervirtue to disdain. But you must jnirsuewith me her history. The brother and sister wereyoung and rich : lone is proud and ambitious —proud of her genius — the magic of her poetry —the charm of her conversation. When her brotherleft me, and entered your temple, in order to benear him she removed also to Pompeii. She hassuffered her talents to be known. She summonscrowds to her feasts ; her voice enchants them ;her poetry subdues. She delights in being thoughtthe successor of Erinna."Or of Sappho ?"But Sappho without love ! I encouraged herin this boldness of career — in this indulgence ofvanity and of pleasure — I loved to steep her amidstthe dissipations and luxury of this abandoned city.Mark me, Calends ! I desired to enervate her mind !it has been too pure to receive yet the breathwhich I wish not to pass, but burningly to eatinto, the crystal mirror. I wished her to bePOMPEII. 81surrounded by lovers, hollow, vain, and frivolous,(lovers that her nature must despise,) in orderto feel the want of love. Then, in those softintervals of lassitude that succeed to excitement,I can weave my spells — excite her interestattract her passions — possess myself of herheart. For it is not the young, nor the beautiful,nor the gay, that alone can fascinate lone ;her imagination must be won, and the life ofArbaces has been one scene of triumph over theimaginations of his kind."And hast thou no fear, then, of thy rivals ?The gallants of Italy are skilled in the art toplease."None ! — her Greek soul despises the barbarianRomans, and would scorn itself if it admitteda thought of love for one of that upstart race."But thou art an Egyptian, not a Greek !"Egypt," replied Arbaces, " is the mother ofAthens. Her tutelary Minerva is our deity ;and her founder Cecrops was the fugitive ofEgyptian Sais. This have I already taught toher ; and in my blood she venerates the eldestdynasties of earth. But yet I will own that ofE 582 THE LAST DAYS OFlate some uneasy suspicions have crossed my mind.She is more silent than she used to be ; she lovesmelancholy and subduing music ; she sighs withoutan outward cause. This may be the beginning oflove — it may be the want of love. In either caseit is time for me to begin my operations on herfancies and her heart : in the one case, to divertthe source of love to me ; in the other, in me toawaken it. It is for this that I have sought you."And how can I assist you .'''"I am about to invite her to a feast in myhouse : I wish to dazzle — to bewilder — to inflameher senses. Our arts — the arts by which Egypttrained her young noviciates, must be employed ;and under veil of the mysteries of religion, I willopen to her the secrets of love."Ah ! now I understand : — one of these voluptuousbanquets that, despite our dull vows of mortifiedcoldness, we, thy priests of Isis, have sharedat thy house."No, no ! Thickest thou her chaste eyes areripe for such scenes ? No : — but first we mustensnare the brother — an easier task. Listen tome,while I give you my instructions."POMPEII. 83CHAPTER V.MORE OF THE FLOWER GIRL. — THE PROGRESS OF LOVE.The sun shone gaily into that beautiful chamberin the house of Glaucus, which I havebefore said is now called ' the room of Leda.'The morning rays entered through rows of smallcasements at the higher part of the room, andthrough the door which opened on the garden,that answered to the inhabitants of the southerncities the same purpose that a greenhouse orconservatory does to us. The size of the gardendid not adapt it for exercise, but the variousand fragrant plants with which it was filled gavea luxm-y to that indolence so dear to the dwellersin a sunny clime. And now the odours, fannedby a gentle wind creeping from the adjacent sea,scattered themselves over that chamber, whose wallsvied with the richest colours of the most glowing84 THE LAST DAYS OFflowers. Besides the gem of the room — the paintingof Leda and Tyndareus, in the centre of eachcompartment of the walls were set other picturesof exquisite beauty. In one you saw Cupid leaningon the knees of Venus , in another, Ariadnesleeping on the beach, unconscious of the perfidyof Theseus. Merrily the sunbeams played to andfro on the tesselated floor and the brilliant walls —far more happily came the rays of joy to the heartof the young Glaucus.I have seen her then," said he, as he pacedthat narrow chamber; "I have heard her — nay,I have spoken to her again — I have listened tothe music of her song, and she sung of glory andof Greece. I have discovered the long-sought idolof my dreams ; and, like the Cyprian sculptor, Ihave breathed life into my own imaginings""Longer, perhaps, had been the enamoured soliloquyof Glaucus, but at that moment a shadowdarkened the threshold of the chamber, and ayoung female, still half a child in years, brokeupon his solitude. She was dressed simply in awhite tunic, which reached from the neck to theancles ; under her arm she bore a basket ofPOMPEII. 85flowers, and in the other haud she held a bronzewater-vase ; her features were more formed thanexactly became her years, yet they were soft andfeminine in their outline, and without being beautifulin themselves they were almost made so bytheir beauty of expression ; there was somethingineffably gentle, and you would say patient in heraspect — a look of resigned sorrow, of tranquil endurance,had banished the smile but not the sweetnessfrom her lips ; something timid and cautiousin her step — something wandering in her eyes,led you to suspect the affliction which she hadsuffered from her birth — she Alas blind; — but inthe orbs themselves there was no visible defect,their melancholy and subdued light was clear,cloudless, and serene. " They tell me that Glaucusis here," said she ; " may I come in ?"Ah, my Nydia," said the Greek, " is that you?I knew you would not neglect my invitation."Glaucus did but justice to himself," answeredNydia with a blush, " for he has always been kindto the poor blind girl."Who could be otherwise ?''"' said Glaucus tenderly,and in the voice of a compassionate brother.86 THE LAST DAYS OFNydia sighed and paused before she resumed,without replying to his remark. " You havebut lately rem-ned ?"'''This is the sixth sun that hath shone upon meatPompeii."^ " And you are well ? Ah, I need not ask —for who that sees the earth, which they tell me isso beautiful, can be ill ?"I am well — and you, Nydia ? — how you havegrown ! next year you will be thinking of whatanswer we shall make your lovers."A second blush passed over the cheek of Nydia,but this time she frowned as she blushed. " Ihave brought you some flowers," said she, withoutreplying to a remark that she seemed to resent,and feolinof about the room till she fomid thetable that stood by Glaucus, she laid the basketn])on it : " they are poor, but they are freshgathered."They might come from Flora herself," said hekindly, " and I renew again my vow to the Gracesthat I will wear no other garlands while thy handscan weave me such as these."POMPEII. 87"And how find j'ou the flowers in your viri-darius? — are they thriving ?"Wonderfully so — the Lares themselves musthave tended them."Ah, now you give me pleasure, for I came,as often as I could steal the leisure, to water andtend them in your absence."How shall I thank thee, fair Nydia ?" saidthe Greek. " Glaucus little dreamed that he leftone memory so watchful over his favourites atPompeii."The hand of the child trembled, and her breastheaved beneath her tunic. She turned romid in embarrassment." The sun is hot for the poor flowers,"said she, " to-day, and they will miss me, for Ihave been ill lately, and it is nine days since Ivisited them."111, Nydia ! yet your cheek has more colourthan it had last year."I am often ailing," said the blind girl touchingly,"and as I grow up I grieve more that I amblind. But now to the flowers !" So saying, shemade a slight reverence with her head, and passesTHE LAST DAYS Opinginto the viviparous busied herself with wateringthe flowers.Poor Nydia," thought Glaucus, gazing on her :thine is a hard doom. Thou seest not the earthnor the sun — nor the ocean — nor the stars —above all thou canst not behold lone."At that last thought his mind flew back to thepast evening, and was a second time disturbed inits reveries by the entrance of Clodius. It wasa remarkable thing, and a proof how much asingle evening had sufficed to increase and torefine the love of the Athenian for lone, thatwhereas he had confided to Clodius the secretof his first interview with her, and the effect ithad produced on him, he now felt an invincibleaversion even to mention to him her name. Hehad seen lone bright, pure, unsullied in the midstof the gayest and most profligate gallants ofPompeii, charming rather than a%nng the boldestinto respect, and changing the very nature of themost sensual and the least ideal; — as by herintellectual and refining spells she reversed thefable of Circe, and converted the animals into men.They who could not understand her soul werePOMPEII. 89etlierealised, as it were, by the mag-ic of her beautythey who had no heart for poetry had ears atleast for the melody of her voice. Seeing herthus surrounded, purifying and brightening allthings with her presence, Glaucus almost for thefirst time felt that of which his own native wascapable, he felt how unworthy of the goddess of hisdreams had been his companions and his pursuits.A veil seemed lifted from his eyes, he saw thatimmeasurable distance between himself and hisassociates which the deceiving mists of pleasurehad hitherto concealed ; he was refined by asense of his courage in aspiring to lone. He feltthat henceforth it was his destiny to look upwardand to soar. He could no longer breathe thatname, which sounded to the sense of his ardentfancy as something sacred and divine, to lewd andvulgar ears. She was no longer the beautiful girlonce seen and passionately remembered — she wasalready the mistress, the divinity of his soul.This feeling who has not experienced? — if thouhast not, then thou hast never loved !When Clodius therefore spoke to him in affectedtransports of the beauty of lone, Glaucus felt90 THE LAST DAYS OFonly resentment and disgust that such hipsshoukl dare to praise her; he answered coldly,and the Roman imagined that his passion wascured instead of heightened. Clodius scarcelyregretted it, for he was anxious that Glaucusshould marry an heiress yet more richly endowed —Julia, the daughter of the wealthy Diomed, whosegold the gamester imagined he could readily divertinto his own coffers. Their conversation didnot flow with its usual ease, and no sooner hadClodius left him than Glaucus bent his way tothe house of lone. In passing by the thresholdhe again encountered Nydia, who had finished hergraceful task. She knew his step on the instant.You are early abroad," said she.Yes ; for the skies of Campania rebuke thesluggard who neglects them."Ah, would I could see them !" murmured theblind girl, but so low that Glaucus did not overhearthe complaint.The Thessalian lingered on the threshold a fewmoments, and then guiding her steps by a longstaff, Which she used with great dexterity, shePompeii.took her way homeward. She soon tm-ned fromthe more gaudy streets, and entered a quarter ofthe town but little loved by the decorous and thesober. But from the low and rude evidences ofvice around her, she was saved by her misfortune.And at that hour the streets were quiet and silent,nor was her youthful ear shocked by the soundswhich too often broke along the obscene and obscurehaunts she patiently and sadly traversed.She knocked at the back-door of a sort oftavern ; it opened, and a rude voice bade hergive an account of the sesterces. Ere she couldreply, another voice less vulgarly accented said,Never mind those petty profits, my Turbo.The girls voice will be wanted again soon at ourrich friend's revels ; and he pays, as thou knowest,pretty high for his nightingale's tongues.""Oh, I hope not — I trust not," cried Nydiatrembling, " I will beg from sunrise to sunset,but send me not there.""And why ?" asked the same voice.Because — because I am young, and delicatelyborn, and the female companions I92 THE LAST DAYS OFmeet there are not fit associates for one who —who—"Is a shive in the house of Burbo," returnedthe voice ironically, and with a coarse laugh.The Thessalian put down the flowers, and, leaningher face on her hands, wept silently.Meanwhile, Glaucus sought the house of thebeautiful Neapolitan. He found Tone sittingamidst her attendants, who were at work aroundher. Her harp stood at her side, for lone herselfwas unusually idle, perhaps, unusually thoughtful,that day. He thought her even more beautiful bythe morning light, and in her simple robe, thanamidst the blazing lamps, and decorated with thecostly jewels of the previous night; — not the lessso from a certain paleness that overspread hertransparent hues, not the less so from the blushthat ■. mounted over them when he approached.Accustomed to flatter, flattery died upon his lipswhen he addressed lone. He felt it beneath herto utter the homage which every look conveyed.They spoke of Greece; this was a theme on whichlone loved rather to listen, than to converse ; itPOMPEII. 93was a theme on wliieli the Greek could have beeneloquent for ever. He described to her the silvergroves that yet clad the banks of Ulysses, and thetemples, already despoiled of half their glories —but how beautiful in decay ! He looked back onthe melancholy city of Harmonious the free, andPericles the magnificent, from the height of thatdistant memory, in which all the ruder and darkershades were mellowed into light. He had seenthe land of poetry chiefly in the poetical age ofearly youth; and the associations of patriotismwere blended with those of the flush and springlife. And lone listened to him, absorbed andmute ; dearer were those accents, and those descriptions,than all the prodigal adulation of her numberlessadorers. Was it a sin to love her countrymen.'' she loved Athens, in him — the gods of herrace, the land of her dreams, spoke to her in hisvoice ! From that time they daily saw each other.At the cool of the evening they made excursionson the placid sea. By night they met again inlone's porticos and halls. Their love was sudden,but it was strong ; it filled all the sources of theirlife. Heart — brain — sense — imagination, all ^^•ereTHE LAST DAYS OFits ministers and priests. As you take someobstacle from two objects that have a mutualattraction — they met, and united at once ; theirwonder was, that they had lived separate solong. And it was natural that they should solove. Young, beautiful, and gifted — of the samebirth, and the same souls ; there was poetry intheir very union. They imagined the heavenssmiled upon their affection. As the persecutedseek refuge at the shrine, so they recognized inthe altar of their love an asylum from the sorrowsof earth; they covered it with flowers-^ theyknew not of the serpents that lay coiled behind.One evening, the fifth after their first meetingat Pompeii, Glaucus and lone, with asmall party of chosen friends, were returningfrom an excursion round the bay ; their vesselskimmed lightly over the twilight waters, whoselucid mirror was only broken by the drippingoars. As the rest of the party conversed gailywith each other, Glaucus lay at the feet of lone,and he would have looked up in her face, buthe did not dare. lone broke the pause betweenthem.POMPEII. 95My poor brother," said she, sighing, " howonce he would have enjoyed this hour*"Your brother !" said Glaucus, " I have notseen him. Occupied with you, I have thought ofnothing else, or I shoukl have asked, if that wasnot your brother, for whose companionship youleft me at the Temple of jNIinerva, in Neapolis."It was."And is he here ?""His— 'At Pompeii ! and not constantly with you ?impossible !"He has other duties," answered lone, sadly :he is a priest of Isis."So young, too, and that priesthood, inits laws at least, so severe !" said the warmand bright-hearted Greek, in surprise andpity. " What could have been his inducement?"He was always enthusiastic and fervent in religiousdevotion; and the eloquence of an Egyptian— our friend and guardian — kindled in himthe pious desire to consecrate his life to the mostmystic of our deities. Perhaps, in the intenseness96 THE LAST DAYS OFof his zeal, he found in the severity of that peculiarpriesthood its peculiar attraction."And he does not repent his choice ? — I trusthe is happy ?"Tone sighed deeply, and lowered her veil overher eyes.I wish"" said she, after a pause, " that he hadnot been so hasty. Perhaps, like all who expecttoo much, he is revolted too easily !""Then he is not happy in his new condition —and this Egyptian, was he a priest himself? washe interested in recruits to the sacred hand ?""No. His main interest was in our happiness.He thought he promoted that of my brother. Wewere left orphans."Like myself," said Glaucus, with a deepmeaning in his voice.lone cast down her eyes as she resumed —And Arbaces sought to supply the place ofour parent. You must know him. He lovesgenus.Arbaces ! I know him already ; at least wespeak Avhen we meet. Hut for your i)raisc, Iwould not seek to know more of him. My heartPOMPEII. 97inclines readily to most of my kind. But thatdark Egyptian, with his gloomy brow and icysmile, seems to me to sadden the very sun. Onewould think that, like Eumenides the Cretan, hehad spent forty years in a cave, and had foundsomething unnatural in the daylight ever afterwards."Yet, like Eumenides, he is kind, and wise,and gentle," answered lone.Oh, happy that he has thy praise ! He needsno other virtues to make him dear to me."His calm, his coldness, "* said lone, evasivelypursuing the subject, " are perhaps but the exhaustionof past sufferings, as yonder mountain,(and she pointed to Vesuvius,) which we see, darkand tranquil in the distance, once nursed the firesfor ever quenched."They both gazed on the mountain as lone saidthese words ; the rest of the sky was bathed in rosyand tender hues, but over that grey summit, risingamidst the woods and vineyards that then clombhalf way up the ascent, there hung a black andominous cloud, the single frown of the landscape.A sudden and unaccountable gloom came over eachVOL. I. F98 THE LAST DAYS OFas they thus gazed, and in that sympathy whichlove had already taught them, and which badethem in the slightest shadows of emotion, the faintestpresentiment of evil, turn for refuge to eachother, their gaze at the same moment left themountain, and full of unimaginable tendernessmet. What need had they of words to say theyloved !POMPEII. 99CHAPTER VLTHE FOWLER SNARES AGAIN THE BIRD THAT HAD JUSTESCAPED, AND SETS HIS NETS FOR A NEW Victim.In the history I relate, the events are crowdedand rapid as those of the drama. I write of anepoch in ^vhich days sufficed to ripen the ordinaryfruits of years.Meanwhile, Graces had not of late much frequentedthe house of lone, and when he had visitedher he had not encountered Glaucus, norknew he, as yet, of that love which had so suddenlysprung up between himself and his designs.In his interest for the brother of lone, he had beenforced too, a little while, to suspend his interest inlone herself. His pride and his selfishness werearoused and alarmed at the sudden change whichhad come over the spirit of the youth. He trembled,lest himself should lose a docile pupil, andF 2100 THE LAST DAYS OFIsis an enthusiastic servant. Apa^cides had ceasedto seek or to consult him. He was rarely to befound ; he turned sullenly from the Egyptian, nay,he fled when he perceived him in the distance.Arbaces was one of those haughty and powerfulspirits accustomed to master others ; he chafed atthe notion that one, once his own, should everelude his grasp. He swore inly that Apaecidesshould not escape him.It was with this resolution that he passedthrough a thick grove in the city, ^A'hich lay betweenhis house and that of lone, in his way tothe latter ; and there, leaning against a tree, andgazing on the ground, he came unawares on theyoung priest of Isis.Apaecides," said he, and he laid his handaffectionately on the young man's shoulder.The priest started, and his first instinct seemedto be that of flight. " My son," said the Egyptian,what has chanced that you desire to shun me ?"Ascites remained silent and sullen, lookingdown on the earth, as his lips quivered, and hisbreast heaved with emotion.Speak to me, my friend," continued the Egypt101tian. " Speak. Something burdens thv spirit.What hast thou to reveal ?""To thee — nothing.""And why is it to me thou art thus confidential?"Because thou hast been my enemy."Let us confer," said Arbaces, in a low voice ;and drawing the reluctant arm of the priest in hisown, he led him to one of the seats which werescattered within the grove. They sate down, andin those gloomy forms there was something congenialto the shade and solitude of the place.Apaecides was in the spring of his years, yet heseemed to have exhausted even more of life thanthe Egyptian — his delicate and regular featureswere worn and colourless — his eyes were hollowand shone with a brilliant and feverish glare — hisframe bowed prematurely, and in his hands, whichwere small to effeminacy, the blue and swollenveins indicated the lassitude and weakness of therelaxed fibres — you saw in his face a strong resemblanceto lone, but the expression was altogetherdifferent from that majestic and spiritualcalm which breathed so divine and classical a re-102 THE LAST DAYS OFpose over his sister's beauty. In her, enthusiasmwas visible, but it seemed always suppressed andrestrained ; this made the charm and sentiment ofher countenance ; you longed to awaken a spiritWhich reposed, but evidently did not sleep. InApaecides the whole aspect betokened the fervourand passion of his temperament, and the intellectualportion of his nature, seemed, by the wild fireof the eyes — the great breadth of the temples, whencompared with the height of the brow — the tremblingrestlessness of the lips — to be swayed and tyrannizedover by the imaginative and ideal. Fancy,with the sister, had stopped short at the golden goalof poetry ; with the brother, less happy, and less restrained,it had wandered into visions more intangibleand unbodied ; — and the faculties which gavegenius to the one, threatened madness to the other.You say I have been your enemy," said Ar-faces; " I know the cause of that unjust accusation— I have placed you amidst the priests of Isisyou are revolted at their trickeries and imposture— you think that I too have deceived you —the purity of your mind is offended — you imaginethat I am one of the deceitful — "P03IPEII. 103You knew the jiiggliugs of that Impiouscraft"" — answered Ascites, " why did you disguisethem from me ? — When you excited mydesire to devote myself to the office whose garbI bear, you spoke to me of the holy life ofmen resigning themselves to knowledge — youhave given me for companions an ignorant andsensual herd who have no knowledge, but that ofthe grossest frauds — you spoke to me of mensacrificing the earthlier pleasures to the sublimecultivation of virtue — you place me amongst menreeking with all the filthiness of vice — you spoketo me of the friends, the enlighteners of om commonkind — I see but their cheats and deluders !Oh, it was basely done ! — you have robbed me ofthe glory of youth, of the convictions of virtue, ofthe sanctifying thirst after wisdom — young as Iwas, rich, fervent, the sunny please-es of earth beforeme, I resigned all without a sigh, nay, withhappiness and exultation in the thought that I resignedthem for the abstruse mysteries of divinerwisdom, for the companionship of gods — for therevelations of heaven — and now — now — "Convulsive sobs checked the priest's voice ; he104 THE LAST DAYS OFcovered his face with his hands, and hirg-e tearsforced themselves through the wasted fingers, andran profusely down his vest.What I promised to thee, that will I give, myfriend, my pupil ; these have been but trials to thyvirtue — it comes forth the brighter for thy novitiate— think no more of those dull cheats —assort no more with those menials of the goddess,the atrienses* of her hall — you are worthy to enterinto the penetralia ; I henceforth will be yourpriest, your guide, and you who now curse myfriendship, shall live to bless it !"The young man lifted up his head and gazedwith a vacant and wondering stare upon the Egyptian.Listen to me*" continued Arbaces, in an earnestand solemn voice, casting first his searching eyesaround to see that they were still alone. " FromEgypt came all the knowledge of the world; fromEgypt came the lore of Athens, and the profoundpolicy of Crete ; from Egypt came those earlyand mysterious tribes which (long before thehordes of Romulus swept over the plains ofThe slaves who had the care of the atrium.P03IPEI1. 105Italy, and in the eternal cycle of events droveback civilization into barbarism and darkness,) possessedall the arts of wisdom and the graces ofintellectual life. From Egypt came the rites andthe grandeur of that solemn Care, whose inhabitantstaught their iron vanquishers of Rome, allthat they yet know of elevated in religion andsublime in worship. And how deepest thou,young man, that that dread Egypt, the mother ofcountless nations, achieved her greatness, andsoared to her cloud capt eminence of wisdom? —it was the result of a profound and holy policy.Your modern nations owe their greatness to EgyptEgypt her greatness to her priests. Rapt inthemselves, coveting a sway over the nobler partof man, his soul and his belief, these ancient ministersof God were inspired with the grandest thoughtthat ever occurred to mortals. From the revolutionsof the stars, from the seasons of the earth,from the round and unvarying circle of human destinies,they devised an august allegory; they madeit gross and palpable to the vulgar by the signs ofgods and goddesses, and that which in reality wasGovernment they named Religion. Isis is a fableF 5106 THE LAST DAYS OFstart not — that for which Isis is a type, isa reality, an immortal being ; Isis is nothing ;Nature, which she represents, is the mother ofall things — dark, ancient, inscrutable, same tothe gifted few. ' None among mortals hath evertaken off my veil,' so saith the Isis that you adore ;but to the wise that veil hath been removed,and eve have stood face to face with the solemnloveliness of Nature. The priests then were thebenefactors, the civilizers of mankind ; true, theywere also cheats, impostors if you will. But thinkyou, young man, that if they had not deceived theirkind they could have served them. The ignorantand servile vulgar must be blinded to attain totheir proper good ; they would not believe a maxim— they revere an oracle. The Emperor of Romesways the vast and various tribes of earth, andharmonizes the conflicting and disunited elements ;thence come peace, order, law, the blessings oflife. Think you it is the man, the emperor, thatthus sways? — no, it is the pomp, the awe, themajesty that surround him, these are his impostures,his delusions ; our oracles and our divinations,our rites and our ceremonies, are the meansPOMPEII. 107of our sovereignty and the engines of our power.They are the same means to the same end, thewelfare and harmony of mankind — you listen tomerapt and intent — the light begins to dawn uponyou."Apsecides remained silent, but the changes rapidlypassing over his speaking countenance betrayedthe effect produced upon him by the wordsof the Egyptian — words made tenfold more eloquentby the voice, the aspect, and the manner ofthe man."While, then," resumed Arbaces, " our fathersof the Nile thus achieved the first elements by whoselife chaos is destroyed, namely the obedience andreverence of the multitude for the few, theydrew from their majestic and starred meditationsthat Wisdom which Alas rio delusion : they inventedthe codes and regularities of law — the arts andglories of existence. They asked belief; theyreturned the gift by civilization. Were not theirvery cheats a virtue ? Trust me, whosoever in yonfar heavens of a diviner and more beneficentnature look down upon our A^-orld — smile approvinglyupon the wisdom which has worked such108 THE LAST DAYS OFends. But you wish me to apply these generalitiesto yourself; I hasten to obey the wish. Thealtars of the goddess of our ancient faith must beserved, and served too by the stolid and soullessthings that are but as pegs and hooks whereonto hang the fillet and the robe. Remember twosayings of Sixtus the Pythagorean, sayings borrowedfrom the lore of Egypt. The first is,Speak not of God to the multitude ;" the secondis, " The Man worthy of God is a god amongmen." As Genius gave to the ministers of Egyptworship, that empire in late ages so fearfullydecayed, thus by Genius only can the dominionbe restored, I saw in you, Apaecides, a pupilworthy of my lessons — a minister worthy of thegreat ends which may yet be wrought : yourenergy, your talents, your purity of faith, yourearnestness of enthusiasm, all fitted you forthat calling which demands so imperiously , highand ardent qualities : I fanned therefore yoursacred desires ; I stimulated you to the stepyou have taken. But you blame me that I didnot reveal to you the little souls and the jugglingtricks of your companions. Had I done so, Apa?-POMPEII. 109cites, I had defeated my own object : your noblenature would have at once revolted, and Isis wouldhave lost her priest""Apaecides groaned aloud. The Egyptian continued,without heeding the interruption.I placed you, therefore, without preparation,in the temple ; I left you suddenly to discover andto be sickened by all those mummers which dazzlethe herd. I desired that you should perceivehow those engines are moved by which the fountainthat refreshes the world casts its waters in theair. It was the trial ordained of old to all ourpriests. Those who accustom themselves to theimpostures of the ATilgar, are left to practise them; —for those like you, whose higher natures demandhigher pursuit. Religion opens more godlike secrets.I am pleased to find in you the characterI had expected. You have taken the vows ; youcannot recede. Advance — I will be your guide"'And what wilt thou teach me, O singular andfearful man ? New cheats — new — "« No — I have thrown thee into the abyss ofDisbelief; I will lead thee now to the eminence ofFaith. Thou hast seen the false types ; thou shalt110 THE LAST DAYS OFlearn now the realities they represent. There isno shadow, Apaecides, without its substance. Cometo me this night. Your hand""Impressed, excited, bewildered by the languageof the Egyptian, Apaecides gave him his hand,and master and pupil parted.It was true that for Apaecides there was no retreat.He had taken the vows of celibacy ; he haddevoted himself to a life that at present seemed topossess all the austerities of fanaticism, withoutthe consolations of belief. It was natural that heshould yet cling to a yearning desire to reconcilehimself to an irrevocable career. The powerfuland profound mind of the Egyptian yet claimed anempire over his young imagination ; excited himwith vague conjecture, and kept him alternatelyvibrating between hope and fear.Meanwhile Arbaccs pursued his slow and statelyway to the house of lone. As he entered the tableshe heard a voice from the porticos of theperistyle beyond, which, musical as it was, soundeddispleasingly on his ear — it was the voice of theyoung and beautiful Glaucus, and for the first timean involuntary thrill of jealousy crossed the breastPOMPEII. Illof the Egyptian. On entering the peristyle, hefound Glaucus seated by the side of lone. Thefountain in the odorous garden cast up its silverspray in the air, and kept a delicious coolness mthe midst of the sultry noon. The handmaids,almost invariably attendant on lone, who "R-ith herfreedom of life preserved the most delicate modesty,sate at a litle distance ; by the feet of Glaucuslay the lyre on which he had been playing tolone one of the Lesbian airs. The scene — thegroup before Arbaces, was stamped by that peculiarand refined ideality of poesy which we yet noterroneously imagine to be the distinction of theancients, — the marble columns, the vases of flowers,the statue, white and tranquil, closing every vista,and, above all, the two living forms, from Which asculptor might have caught either inspiration ordespair !Arbaces, pausing for a moment, gazed on thepair with a brow from which all the usual sternserenity had fled ; he recovered himself by aneffort, and slowly approached them, but with astep so soft and echoless, that even the attendantsheard him not ; much less lone and her lover.112 THE LAST DAYS OPAnd yet," said Glaucus, " it is only beforewe love that we imagine that our poetshave truly described the passion — the instant thesun rises, all the stars that had shone in his absencevanish into air. The poets exist onlyin the night of the heart ; they are nothing touswhen we feel the full glory of the god""A gentle and most glowing image, nobleGlaucus."Both started, and recognised behind the seatof lone, the cold and sarcastic face of the Egyptian.You are a sudden guest," said Glaucusrising, and with a forced smile.So ought all to be, who know they arewelcome ;" returned Arbaces, seating himself,and motioning to Glaucus to do the same.I am glad," said lone, " to see you atlength together ; for you are suited to each other,and you are formed to be friends."Give me back some fifteen years of life,"replied the Egyptian, " before you can placeme on an equality with Glaucus. Happy shouldI be to receive his friendship ; but what can IPOMPEII. 113give him in return ? Can I make to him the sameconfidences that he would repose in me ? — ofbanquets and garlands — of Parthian steeds, andthe chances of the dice : these pleasures suit hisage, his nature, his career ; they are not formine."So sang, the artful Egyptian looked downand sighed; but from the corner of his eye hestole a glance towards lone, to see how she receivedthese insinuations of the pursuits of hervisiter. Her countenance did not satisfy him.Glaucus, slightly colouring, hastened gaily to reply.Nor was he, perhaps, without the samewish to disconcert and abash the Egyptian.You are right, wise Arbaces," said he, " wecan esteem each other, but we cannot be friends.My banquets lack the secret salt, which, accordingto rumour, gives such zest to your own. Andper Hercle ! when I have reached your age, if I,like you, may think it wise to pursue the pleasuresof manhood ; like you I shall be doubtless sarcasticon the gallantries of youth."The Egyptian raised his eyes to Glaucus witha sudden and piercing glance.114 THE LAST DAYS OFI do not understand you," said he coldly,but it is the custom to consider wit lies inobscurity." He turned as he spoke from Glaucus,with a scarcely perceptible sneer of contempt,and after a moment's pause, addressed himself tolone ; "I have not, beautiful lone,""' said he,been fortunate enough to find you within doors,the last two or three times that I have visitedyour vestibule."The smoothness of the sea has tempted memuch from home," replied lone, with a little embarrassment.The embarrassment did not escape Arbaees ;but, without seeming to heed it, he replied witha smile ; " You know the old poet says, thatWomen should keep within doors, and thereconverse.' " *The poet was a cynic," said Glaucus, " andhated women."He spake according to the customs of hiscountry, and that country is your boasted Greece.To different periods different customs. Had ourforefathers known lone, they had made a differentlaw."• Euripides.POMPEII. 115Did you learn these pretty gallantries atRome ?"" said Arbaces, vritli ill suppressed emotion.One certainly would not go for gallantriesto Egypt," retorted Glaucus, playing carelesslywith his chain.Come, come," said lone, hastening to interrupta conversation which she saw, to her greatdistress, was so little likely to cement the intimacyshe had desired to effect between Glaucus andher friend. " Arbaces must not be so hard upon hispoor pupil. An orphan, and without a mother's careI may be to blame for the independent andalmost masculine Puberty of life that I have chosen,yet it is not greater than the Roman womenare accustomed to — it is not gi-eater than theGrecian ought to be. Alas ! is it only to beamong mei, that freedom and virtue are to bedeemed united ? Why should the slavery thatdestroys you, be considered the only method topreserve us .'' Ah ! believe me, it has been the greaterror of men — and one that has worked bitterlyon their destinies, to imagine that the nature ofwomen is (I will not say inferior, that may be116 THE LAST DAYS OFSO, but) SO different from their o-\\ti, in makinglaws favourable to the intellectual advancementof women. Have they not, in so doing, madelaws against their children whom women are torear — against the husbands of whom women areto be the friends, nay, sometimes the advisers ?"lone stopped short suddenly, and her face Alassuffused with the most enchanting blushes. Shefeared lest her enthusiasm had led her too far ;yet she feared the austere Arbaces less than thecourteous Glaucus, for she loved the last ; andit Alas not the custom of the Greeks to allowtheir women (at least such of their women asthey most honoured) the same liberty and thesame station as those of Italy enjoyed. Shefelt, therefore, a thrill of delight as Glaucusearnestly replied —Ever mayest thou think thus, lone — everbe your pure heart your unerring guide ! Happyhad it been for Greece, if she had given to thechaste, the same intellectual charms that areso celebrated amongst the less Worthy of herAvoient. No state falls from freedom — fromPOMPEII. 117knowledge, while your sex smile only on thefree, and, by appreciating, encourage the wise."Arbaces was silent : for it was neither hispart to sanction the sentiment of Glaucus, norto condemn that of lone, and, after a short andembarrassed conversation, Glaucus took his leaveof lone.When he was gone, Arbaces drawing hisseat nearer to the fair Neapolitan's, said in thosebland and subdued tones, in which he knew sowell how to veil the mingled art and fiercenessof his character,Think not, my sweet pupil, if so I maycall you, that I wish to shackle that libertyyou adorn while you assume, but which, if notgreater, as you rightly observe, than that possessedby the Roman women, must at least beaccompanied by great circumspection, when arrogatedby one unmarried. Continue to drawcrowds of the gay, the brilliant, the wise themselves,to your feet — continue to charm them withthe conversation of an Aspasia, the music of anErinna — but reflect, at least, on those censorious118 THE LAST DAYS OFtongues which can so easily blight the tenderreputation of a maiden, and while you provokeadmiration, give, I beseech you, no victory toenvy."What mean you, Arbaces ?" said lone, in analarmed and trembling voice : "I know you aremy friend, that you desire only my honour andmy welfare. What is it you would say ?""Your friend — ah, how sincerely! May Isi^eak then as a friend, without reserve and withoutoffence .''"I beseech you, do so."This young profligate, this Glaucus, howdidst thou know him ? Hast thou seen himoften?" and as Arbaces spoke, he fixed his gazesteadfastly upon lone, as if he sought to penetrateinto her soul.Recoiling before that gaze, with a strange fearwhich she could not explain, the Greek answeredwith confusion and hesitation, " He was broughtto my house as a countryman of my father's, and Imay say of mine. I have known him only withinthis last week or so : but why these questions 'f'"Forgive me," said Arbaces, " I thought youPOMPEII. 119might have laioT^T^i him longer. Base insinuatethat he is !''How ! what mean you ? Why that term ?'"*It matters not : let me not rouse your indignationagainst one who does not deserve sograve an honour."I implore you speak. What has Glaucus insinuated? or rather, in what do you suppose hehas offended ?""Smothering his resentment at the last part oflone's question, Arbaces continued, " You knowhis pursuits, his companions, his habits ; the compensationand the ale, (the revel and the dice,) makehis occupation; — and amongst the associates ofvice how can he dream of virtue ?"Still you speak riddles. By the Gods, I entreatyou, say the worst at once."Well then, it must be so : know, my lone,that it was but yesterday that Glaucus boastedopenly — yes, in the public baths, of your love tohim. He said, it amused him to take advantageof it. Nay, I will do him justice, he praised yourbeauty. Who could deny it .'' But he laughedscornfully, when his Clodius, or his Lepidus,120 THE LAST DAYS OFasked him, if he loved you enough for marriage,and when he purposed to adorn his doorposts withflowers ?"Impossible ! How heard you this baseslander ?"Nay, would you have me relate to you all thecomments of the insolent coxcombs, with which thestory has circled through the town. Be assured thatI myself disbelieved at first, and that I have nowpainfully been convinced by several ear-witnessesof the truth of what I have reluctantly told thee."lone sank back, and her face was whiter thanthe pillar against-which she leant for support.I own it vexed — it irritated me, to hear yourname thus lightly pitched from lip to lip, likesome mere dancing girls fame. I hastened thismorning to seek and to Avaro you. I found Glaucushere. I was stung from my self-possession. Icould not conceal my feelings ; nay, I mss uncourteousin thy presence. Canst thou forgive thyfriend, lone ?"lone placed her hand in his, but replied not.Think no more of this," said he, " but let itbe a warning voice, to tell thee Iiom- much pru-POMPEII. 121thence thy lot requires. It cannot hurt thee, lone,for a moment; for a gay thing like this couldnever have been honoured by even a seriousthought from lone. These insults only wound^^•hen they come from one we love ; far differentindeed is he whom the lofty lone shall stoop tolove."Love"" muttered lone, with an hystericallaugh. " Ay indeed."It is not without interest to observe in those remotetimes, and under a social system so widelydifferent from the modern — the same small causesthat ruffle and interrupt the " course of life," whichoperate so commonly at this day ; — the same inventivejealousy, the same cunning slander, thesame crafty and fabricated retailing of pettygossip which so often now suffice to break the tiesof the truest love, and counteract the tenor of circumstancesmost apparently propitious. — Whenthe bark sails on over the smoothest wave, thefable tells us of the diminutive fish that can clingto the keel and arrest its progress : — so is it everwith the great passions of mankind — and we shouldpaint life but ill if, even in times the most pro-vol.I. (5122 THE LAST DAYS OFcligal of romance, and of the romance of which wemost largely avail om-selves, we did not also describethe mechanism of those trivial and householdsprings of mischief which we see every day atwork in our chambers and at our hearths. It isin these, the lesser intrigues, of life, that we mostlyfind ourselves at home with the past; — if youscorn them, you are only a romance writer — andyou do not interest the heart because you do notportray it.Most cunningly had the Egyptian appealed tolone's ruling foible — most dexterously had he appliedthe poisoned dart to her pride. He fanciedhe had arrested what at most he hoped, from theshortness of the time she had known Glaucus, wasbut an incipient fancy, and hastening to changethe subject, he now led her to talk of her brother.Their conversation did not last long. He left her,resolved not again to trust so much to absence,but to visit — to watch her — every day.No sooner had his shadow glided from her presence,than woman's pride — her sex's dissimulation— deserted his intended victim, and the haughtylone burst into passionate tears.POMPEII. 123CHAPTER VII.THE GAT LIFE OF THE Pompeii Lounger. A MINIATURELIKENESS OF THE ROMAN BATHS.When Glaucus left lone, he felt as if he trodupon air. In the interview wth which he hadjust been blessed, he had for the first time gatheredfrom her distinctly, that his love was not unwelcometo, and would not be unrewarded by, her.This hope filled him with a rapture, for whichearth and heaven seemed too narrow to afford avent. Unconscious of the sudden enemy he hadleft behind, and forgetting not only his taunts buthis very existence, Glaucus passed through thegay streets, repeating to himself, in the wantonnessof joy, the music of the soft air to Avliich lonehad listened with such intentness ; and no^^' heentered the street of Fortune with its raised footpath— its houses painted without, and the open doorsG 2124; THE LAST DAYS OFadmitting the view of the glowing frescos within.Each end of the street was adorned with a triumphalarch; and as Glaucus now came before the templeof Fortune, the jutting portico of that beautifulfane, which is supposed to have been built by one ofthe family of Cicero, perhaps by the orator himself,imparted a dignified and venerable feature to ascene otherwise more brilliant than lofty in itscharacter. That temple was one of the mostgraceful specimens of Roman architecture. Itwas raised on a somewhat lofty podium, andbetween two flights of steps ascending to aplatform, stood the altar of the goddess. Fromthis platform another flight of broad stairs ledto the portico, from the height of whose flutedcolumns hung festoons of the richest flowers.On either side the extremities of the templewere placed statues of Grecian workmanship ;and at a little distance from the temple rosethe triumphal arch crowned with an equestrianstatue of Caligula, which was flanked bytrophies of bronze. In the space before thetemple a lively throng were assembled — someseated on benches and discussing the politics ofPOMPEII. 1 25the empire, some conversing on the approachingspectacle of the amphitheatre. One knot of youngmen were lauding a new beauty, another discussingthe merits of the last play ; a third group,more stricken in age, were speculating onthe chance of the trade with Alexandria, andamidst these were many merchants In the Easterncostume, whose loose and peculiar robes, paintedand gemmed slippers, and composed and seriouscountenances, formed a striking contrast to the tuckedforms and animated gestures of the Italians.For that impatient and lively people had, as now,a language distinct from speech — a language ofsigns and motions inexpressibly significant and vivacious: their descendants retain It, and the learnedJoiio hath written a most entertaining workupon that species of hieroglyphical gesticulation.Sauntering through the crowd, Glaucus soonfound himself amidst a group of his merry anddissipated friends.Ah !" said Sallust, " it is a lustrum since I sawyou."And how have you spent the lustrum ?What new dishes have you discovered ?"126 THE LAST DAYS OFI have been scientific"" returned Sallust,and have made some experiments in the feedingof lampreys ; I confess I despair of bringing themto the perfection which our Roman ancestorsattained."Miserable man ! and why ?"Because," returned Sallust, with a sigh, " itis no longer lawful to give them a slave to eat.I am very often tempted to make away with avery fat captor (butler) that I possess, and pophim slyly into the reservoir. He would give thefish a most oleaginous flavour ! But slaves arenot slaves now-a-days, and have no sympathy withtheir master's interest — or Davis would destroyhimself to oblige me !"What news from Rome ?" said Lepidus, ashelanguidly joined the group.The Emperor has been giving a splendid supperto the senators," answered Sallust.He is a good creature," quoth Lepidus ; " theysay he never sends a man away without grantinghis request."Perhaps he would let me kill a slave for myreservoir," returned Sallust eagerly.POMPEII. 127Not unlikely," said Glaucus, " for he whogrants a favour to one Roman, must always do itat the expense of another. Be sure that for everysmile Titus has caused, a hundred eyes havewept."Long live Titus !" cried Pansa, overhearingthe Emperor's name as he swept patronizinglythrough the crowd, " he has promised my brothera tutorship, because he had run tlu'ough hisfortune."And wishes to now enrich himself among thepeople, my Pansa," said Glaucus.Exactly so," said Pansa.That is putting the people to some use," saidGlaucus.To be sure," returned Pansa. " Well, Imust go and look after the geranium — it is a littleout of repair;" and followed by a long train ofclients, distinguished from the rest of the throngby the togas they wore, (for togas, once the signof freedom in a citizen, were now the badge ofservility to a patron,) the aedile fidgeted fussilyaway.Poor Pansa !" said Lepidus, " he never has128 THE LAST DAYS OFtime for pleasure. Thank heaven I am not anaedile !"Ah, Glaucus ! care, caput, how are you ? gayas ever !" said Clodius, joining the group.Are you come to sacrifice to Fortune ?■" saidSallust.I sacrifice to her every night," returned thegamester.I do not doubt it. No man has made morevictims !""Per Hercle, a biting speech !"" cried Glaucus,laughing.The dog's letter is never out of your mouth,Sallust," said Clodius, angrily ; " you are alwayssnarling."I may well have the dog's letter in my mouth,since, whenever I play with you, I have the dog'sthrow in my hand," returned Sallust.Hist !" said Glaucus, taking a rose from aflower girl, who stood beside.The rose is the token of silence," repliedSallust ; " but I love only to see it at the suppertable."Talking of that, Diomed gives a grand feastpompeii. 129this week," said Sallust ; " are you invited,Glaucus ?"Yes; I received an invitation this morning."And I, too," said Sallust, drawing a squarepiece of papyrus from his girdle ; " I see that heasks us an hour earlier than usual ; an earnest ofsomething sumptuous." *Oh ! he is rich as Croesus," said Clodius ;and his bill of fare is as long as an epic."Well, let us to the baths," said Glaucus ;this is the time when all the world is there ;and Fulvius, whom you admire so much, is goingto read us his last ode."The young men assented readily to the proposal,and they strolled to the baths.Although the public thermae or baths were institutedrather for the poorer citizens than the wealthy,for the last had baths in their own horses ; yet. tothe crowds of all ranks who resorted to them, it wasa favourite place for conversation, and for that indolentlounging so dear to a gay and thoughtlesspeople. The baths at Pompeii differed of course inThe Romans sent tickets of invitation, like the moderns,specifying the hour of the repast ; which, if the intended feastwas to be sumptuous, was earlier than usual.G130 THE LAST DAYS OFplan and construction from the vast and complicatedthermae of Rome ; and, indeed, it seems that ineach city of the empire, there was always some slightmodification of arrangement in the general architectureof the public baths. This mightily puzzles thelearned, — as if architects and fashion were not capriciousbefore the nineteenth century! Our partyentered by the principal porch in the street of Fortune.At the wing of the portico sat the keeper ofthe baths, with his tM^o boxes before him, one for themoney he received, one for the tickets he dispensed.Round the walls of the portico were seats crowdedWith persons of all ranks ; while others, as theregimen of the physicians prescribed, were walkingbriskly to and fro the portico, stopping every nowand then to gaze on the innumerable notices ofshows, games, sales, exhibitions, Which Aversepainted or inscribed upon the Avails. The generalsubject of conversation Alas, however, the spectacleannounced in the amphitheatre ; and each ncAvcomer Alas fastened upon by a group eager toknoAv if Pompeii had been so fortunate as to producesome monstrous criminal, some happy caseof sacrilege or of murder, Which Avould allow thePOMPEII. 131exiles to provide a man for the jaws of the lion ;all other more common exhibitions seemed dull andtame, when compared with the possibility of thisfortunate occurrence.For my part," said oae jolly-looking man, whowas a goldsmith, " I think the Emperor, if he is asgood as they say, might have sent us a Jew."Why not take one of the new sect of Nazarenes?"said a philosopher: " I am not cruel — butan atheist, one who denies Jupiter himself, deservesno mercy."I care not how many gods a man likes tobelieve in," said the jeweller, " but to deny allgods, is something monstrous."Yet I fancy," said Glaucus, •' that thesepeople are not absolutely atheists. I am told thatthey believe in a God — nay, in a future state."Quite a mistake, my dear Glaucus," said thephilosopher, " I have conferred with them — tlie^-laughed in my face Avhen I talked of Pluto andHades."O ye gods !" exclaimed the goldsmith in horror,"are there any of these wretches in Pompeii?"I know there are a few — but they meet so prigTHE LAST DAYS OFlately, tluat it is impossible to discover who theyare."As Glaucus turned away, a sculptor who was agreat enthusiast in his art — looked after him admiringly.Ah !" said he, " if we could get him on thearena — there would be a model for you ! whatlimbs ! what a head ! he ought to have been agladiator ! A subject — a subject — worthy of ourart ! Why don't they give him to the lion?"Meanwhile Fulvius, the Roman poet, whom hiscontemporaries declared immortal, and who, but for,this history, would never have been heard ot inour neglectful age, came eagerly up to Glaucus:Oh, my Athenian, my Glaucus, you have cometo hear my ode. That is indeed an honour; you,a Greek — to whom the very language of commonlife is poetry. How I thank you ! It is butatrifle ; but if I secure your approbation —perhaps I may get an introduction to Titus. O,Glaucus ! a poet without a patron, is an amphorawithout a label ; the wine may be good, but nobodywill laud it ! — And what says Pythagoras, ' Frankincenseto the gods — but praise to man.' A patron,POMPEII. 133then, is the poets priest ; he procures him the incenseand obtains him his believers."But all Pompeii is your patron, and everyportico an altar in your praise''Ah ! the poor Pompeians are very civil — •they love to honour merit. But they are only theinhabitants of a petty town — sperm nieliora! shallwe within ?"Certainly ; we lose time till we hear yourpoem."At this instant there was a rush of some twentypersons from the baths into the portico ; and aslave stationed at the door of a small corridor nowadmitted the poet, Glaucus, Clodius, and a troopof the bard's other friends, into the passage.A poor place this compared with the Romanthei'mse !" said Lepidus disdainfully.Yet is there some taste in the ceilings'' saidGlaucus, who was in a mood to be pleased witheverything ; pointing to the stars which studdedthe roof.Lepidus shrugged his shoulders, but was toolanguid to reply.They now entered a somewhat spacious THE LAST DAYS OFber, which served for the purposes of the apodite-rum, (that is, a place where the bathers preparedthemselves for their luxurious ablutions). Thevaulted ceiling was raised from a cornice, knowinglycoloured with motley and grotesque paintings;the ceiling itself was panelled in white compartmentsbordered with rich crimson ; the unsulliedand shining floor was paved with white mosaics,and along the walls were ranged benches for theaccommodation of the loiterers. This chamber didnot possess the numerous and spacious windowswhich Vitruvius attributes to his more magnificentfrigidarium. The Pompeians, as all the southernItalians, were fond of banishing the light of theirsultry skies, and combined in their voluptuousassociations the idea of luxury with darkness.Two windows of glass* alone admitted the softand shaded ray ; and the compartment in whichone of-these casements was placed, was adornedwith a large relief of the Destruction of the Titans.The discoveries at Pompeii have controverted the longestablished error of the antiquaries, that glass windows wereunknown to the Romans — the use of them was not howevercommon among the middle and inferior classes in their privatedwellings.POMPEII. 135111 this apartment Fulvius seated himself with amagisterial air, and his audience gathering roundhim, encouraged him to commence his recital.The poet did not require much pressing. Hedrew forth from his vest a roll of papyrus, andafter hemming three times, as much to commandsilence as to dear his voice, he began that wonderfulode, of which, to the great mortification of theauthor of this history, no single verse can bediscovered.By the plaudits he received, it was doubtlessworthy of his fame ; and Glaucus was the onlylistener who did not find it excel the best odes ofHorace.The poem concluded, those who took only thecold bath, began to undress ; they suspended theirgarments on hooks fastened in the wall, and re-ceiling, according to their condition, either fromtheir own slaves, or those of the thermae, a looserobe, withdrew into that graceful and circularBuilding, which yet exists, to shame the unlovingposterity of the south.The more luxurious departed by another doorto the tepidarium, a place which was heated to a136 THE LAST DAYS OPvoluptuous warm til, partly by a moveable fireplace,principally by a suspended pavement, beneathwhich was conducted the caloric of thelaconic.Here this portion of the intended bathers, afterundoing themselves, remained for some timeenjoying the artificial warmth of the luxuriousair. And this room, as befitted its importantrank in the long process of ablution, was morerichly and elaborately decorated than the rest ;the arched roof was beautifully carved, andpainted ; the windows above, of ground glass, admittedbut wandering and uncertain rays ; belowthe massive cornices were rows of figures in massiveand bold relief; the walls glowed with crimson,the pavement was skilfully tesselated in whitemosaics. Here the habituated bathers, men whobathed seven times a-day, would remain in a stateof enervate and speechless lassitude, either before,or (mostly) after the water-bath; and many ofthese victims of the pursuit of health, turned theirlistless eyes on the new comers, recognising, theirfriends with a nod, but dreading the fatigue ofconversation.POMPEII, 137From this place the party again diverged, accordingto their several fancies, some to the sudato-rimini, which answered the purpose of our vapour -baths, and from thence to the warm-bath itself;those more accustomed to exercise, and capable ofdispensing with so cheap a purchase of fatigue,resorted at once to the calidarium or water-bath.In order to complete this sketch, and give to thereader an adequate notion of this, the main, luxuryof the ancients, we will accompany Lepidus, whoregularly underwent the whole process, save onlythe cold-bath, which had gone lately out of fashion.Being then gradually warmed in the tepidarium,which has just been described, the delicate steps ofthe Pompeian elegant were conducted to the sanatorium.Here let the reader depict to himself thegradual process of the vapour-bath, accompanied byan exhalation of spicy perfumes. After our batherhad undergone this operation, he was seized byhis slaves, who always awaited him at the baths,and the dews of heat were removed by a kind ofscraper, which (by the way) a modern travellerhas gravely declared to be used only to removethe dirt, not one particle of which could ever138 THE LAST DAYS OFsettle on the polished skin of the practised bather.Thence, somewhat cooled, he passed into thewater-bath, over which fresh perfumes were profuselyscattered, and on emerging from the oppositepart of the room, a cooling shower played overhis head and form. Then wrapping himself in alight robe, he returned once more to the tepidwhere he found Glaucus, who had not encounteredthe sanatorium ; and now, the main delightand extravagance of the bath commenced.Their slaves anointed the bathers from vials of gold,of alabaster, or of crystal, studded with profusegems, and containing the rarest unguents gatheredfrom all quarters of the world. The number ofthese stigmata, used by the wealthy, would fill a modernvolume — especially if the volume were printedby a fashionable publisher; Amoracinum^ Mega-hum,Narduvi^ — omne quod exit in uni; — while softmusic played in an adjacent chamber, and such asused the bath in moderation, refreshed and restoredby the grateful ceremony, conversed with allthe zest and freshness of rejuvenated life.Blest be he who invented baths !" said Glaucus,stretching himself along one of those bronzePOMPEII. 189seats (then covered with soft cushions) which thevisiter to Pompeii sees at this day in that sametepidarium : " Whether he were Hercules, or Bacchus,he deserved deification."But tell me," said a corpulent citizen, who wasgroaning and wheezing under the operation of beingrubbed do^^^l, " tell me, O Glaucus — evil chanceto thy hands, O slave, why so rough ? — tell me —ugh — ugh ! — are the baths at Rome really so magnificent?" Glaucus turned, and recognised Diomed,though not without some difficulty, so red and soinflamed were the good man's cheeks, by the sudatory,and the scraping, he had so lately undergone." I fancy they must be a great deal finer thanthese. Eh ?" Suppressing a smile, Glaucus replied,Imagine all Pompeii converted into baths,and you would then form a notion of the size ofthe imperial thermae of Rome. — But a notion of thesize only. Imagine every entertainment for mindand body — enumerate all the gymnastic gamesour fathers invented — repeat all the books Italyand Greece have produced — suppose places for allthese games, admirers for all these works — addto this, baths of the vastest size, the most com-140 THE LAST DAYS OFplicated construction — intersperse the wholewith gardens, with theatres, with porticos, withschools — suppose, in one word, a city of thegods, composed but of palaces and public edifices,and you may form some faint idea of the gloriesof the great baths of Rome.Per Hercle !" said Diomed, opening his eyes.Why it would take a man's whole life to bathe."At Rome, it often does so," replied Glaucus,gravely. " There are many who live only at thebaths. They repair there the first hour in Avhiclithey are opened, and remain till that in whichthey are closed. They seem as if they knewnothing of the rest of Rome, as if they despisedall other existence."Per Hercle !"Even those who bathe only thrice a day, contriveto consume their lives in the occupation.They take their exercise in the tennis court orthe porticos, to prepare them for the first bath ;they lounge into the theatre to refresh themselvesafter it. They take their cranium under thetrees, and think over their second bath. By thetime it is prepared, the cranium is digested.POMPEII. 141From the second bath, they stroll into one of theperishes to hear some new poet recite ; or intothe library to sleep over an old one. Then comesthe supper, which they still consider but a part ofthe bath; and then a third time they bathe ag-ain,as the best place to converse with their fiiends.'''Per Hercle ! but we have their imitators atPompeii."Yes, and without their excuse. The magnificentvoluptuaries of the Roman baths are happy ;they see nothing but gorgeousness and splendour,they visit not the squalid parts of the city, theyknow not that there is poverty in the world. AllNature smiles for them, and her only frown isthe last one which sends them to bathe in Cactus.Believe me, they are your only true philosophers !""While Glaucus was thus conversing, Lepiduswith closed eyes and scarce perceptible breath,was undergoing all the mystic operations, not oneof which he ever suffered his attendants to omit.After the perfumes and the unguents, they scatteredover him the luxurious powder whichprevented any farther accession of heat ; and thisbeing rubbed away by the smooth surface of the142 THE LAST DAYS OFpumice, he began to indue, not the garments hehad put off, but those more" festive ones termedthe synthesis with which the Romans markedtheir respect for the comme ceremony of supper,if rather, from its hour (three o'clock in our measurementof time), it might not be more fitly denominateddinner. This done, he at length openedhis eyes and gave signs of returning life.At the same time too, Sallust betokened by along yawn the evidence of existence.It is supper time," said the epicure ; " youGlaucus and Lepidus come and sup with me."Recollect you are all three engaged to myhouse this week," cried Diomed, who was mightyproud of the acquaintance of men of fashion.Ah, ah ! we recollect," said Sallust, " the seatof memory, my Diomed, is certainly in thestomach."Passing now once again into the cooler air, andso into the street, our gallants of that day concludedthe ceremony of a Pompeian bath.POMPEII.CHAPTER VIII.Graces COGS HIS DICE WITH PLEASURE ANB Veins THEGAME.The evening darkened over the restless city, asApaecides took his way to the house of the Egyptian.He avoided the more lighted and populousstreets ; and as he strode onward with his head-buried in his bosom, and his arms folded withinhis robe, there was something startling in thecontrast, which his solemn mien and wasted formpresented to the thoughtless brows and animatedair of those who occasionally crossed his path.At length, however, a man of a more sober andstaid demeanour, and who had twice passed himwith a curious but doubting look, touched him onthe shoulder.Apaecides," said he, and he made a rapid signwith his hands : it was the sign of the cross.144 THE LAST DAYS OFWell, Nazarene," replied the priest, and hispale face grew paler, " what wouldst thou ?"Nay," returned the stranger, " I would notinterrupt thy meditations ; hut the last time wemet, I seemed not to he so unwelcome."You are not unwelcome, Olynthus, hut I amsad and weary, nor am I able this evening to discusswith you those themes which are most acceptableto you.""O backward of heart," said Olinthus withbitter fervour ; " and art thou sad and weary, andsilt thou turn from the very springs that refreshand heal !"O earth," cried the young priest, striking hisbreast passionately, " from what regions shall myeyes open to the true Olympus, where thy godsreally dwell. Am I to believe with this man, thatnone whom for so many centuries my fathersworshipped, have a being or a name. Am I tobreak down, as something blasphemous and profane,the very altars Which I have deemed mostsacred; or am I to think with Arbaces — what?" —He paused, and strode rapidly away in the impatienceof a man who strives to get rid of himself.POMPEII. 145But the Nazarene was one of those hardy, vigorous,and enthusiastic men, among whom God inall times has worked the revolutions of earth, andabove all, whether in the establishment — whether inthe reformation — of His own religion, Who wereformed to convert, because formed to endive — menwhom nothing disco-ages, nothing dismays; in thefervour of belief they are inspired and they inspire.Their reason first kindles their passion, but thepassion is the instrument they use ; they forcethemselves into men's hearts, while they appearonly to appeal to their judgment. Nothing is socontagious as enthusiasm ; it is the real allegoryof the tale of Orpheus — it moves stones, it charmsbrutes. Enthusiasm is the genius of Sincerity,and Truth accomplishes no victories without it.Olinthus did not then suffer Apaecides thuseasily to escape him. He overtook, and addressedhim thus —I do not wonder, Apaecides, that I distressyou i that I shake all the elements of your mind,that you are lost in doubt, that you drift hereand there in the vast ocean of uncertain and benightedthought. I wonder not at this, but bearVOL. I. H146 THE LAST DAYS OF"vvith me a little ; watch and pray, — the darknessshall vanish, the storm sleep, and God himself, asHe came of yore on the seas of Samaria, shallwalk over the lulled billows, to the delivery ofyour soul. Ours is a Religion jealous in its demands,but how infinitely prodigal in its gifts !It troubles you for an hour, it repays you byImmortality."Such promises," said Apascides sullenly, " arethe tricks by which man is ever gulled. Oh, gloriouswere the promises which led me to the shrineof Isis !"But," answered the Nazarene, " ask thy reason,can that religion be sound, which outragesall morality ? You are told to worship your gods.^Vhat are those gods even according to What their actions, what the attributesof their divinity .'' Are they not all representedto you as the blackest of criminals ? yet you areasked to serve them as the holiest of divinities.Jupiter himself is a parricide and an adulterer.What are the meaner divinities, but imitators of hisvices ? You are told not to murder, but you worshipmurderers ; you are told not to commit adultery.POMPEII. 147and you make your prayers to an adulterer. Oh !what is this but a mockery of the holiest part ofman's nature, which is faith. Turn now to theGod, the one, the true God, to whose shrine Iwould lead you. If He seem to you too sublime,too shadowy, for those human associations, thosetouching connections between Creator and creature,to which the weak heart clings — contemplateHim in his Son, who put on mortality likeourselves. His mortality is not indeed declared,like that of your fabled gods, by the faces of ournature, but by the practice of all its virtues. InHim are united the austere morals with the tenderestaffections. If He were but a mere man, Hehad been worthy to become a god. You honourSocrates — he has his sect, his disciples, his schools.But what are the doubtful virtues of the Athenian,to the bright, the undisputed, the active, the unceasing,the devoted holiness of Christ.? I speakto you now only of his human character. Hecame in that as the Pattern of future ages, toshow us the form of virtue which Plato thirstedto see embodied. This was the true sacrifice thatHe made for man : but the halo that encircledH 2148 THE LAST DAYS OFhis dying hour not only brightened earth, butopened to us the sight of heaven ! You aretouched — you are moved. God works in yourheart. His spirit is with you. Come, resistnot the holy impulse, come at once — unhesitatingly.A few of us are now assembled to expoundthe word of God. Come, let me guide youto them. You are sad, you are weary. Listenthen to the words of God. ' Come to me"* saithHe, ' all ye that are heavy laden, and I will giveyou rest !' '"■I cannot now," said Apaecides ; " another time""Now — now," exclaimed Olinthus, earnestly,and clasping him by the arm.But Apaecides, yet unprepared for the renunciationof that faith — that life, for which he hadsacrificed so much, and still haunted by the promisesof the Egyptian, extricated himself forciblyfrom the grasp, and feeling an effort necessary toconquer the irresolution which the eloquence ofthe Christian had begin to effect in his heated andfeverish mind, he gathered up his robes and fledaway with a speed that defied pursuit.Breathless and exhausted, he arrived at last in aPOMPEII. 149remote and sequestered part of the city, and thelone house of the Egyptian stood before him. Ashepaused to recover himself, the moon emergedfrom a silver cloud, and shone full upon the wallsof that mysterious habitation.No other house was near, the darksome vinesclustered far and wide in front of the building,and behind it rose a copse of lofty forest-trees,sleeping in the melancholy moonlight ; beyond,stretched the dim outline of the distant hills, andamongst them the quiet crest of Vesuvius, notthen so lofty as the traveller beholds it now.Apaecides passed through the arching vines, andarrived at the broad and spacious portico. Beforeit, on either side of the steps, reposed the image ofthe Egyptian Sphinx, and the moonlight gave anadditional and yet more solemn calm to those largeand harmonious, and passionless features, in whichthe sculptors of that type of wisdom united somuch of loveliness with awe ; half way up the extremitiesof the steps, darkened the green andmassive foliage of the aloe, and the shadow of theeastern palm cast its long and un waving boughspartially over the marble sm-face of the stairs.150 THE LAST DAYS OFSomething there was in the stillness of theplace, and the strange aspect of the sculptured■sphynges, which thrilled the blood of the priestwith a nameless and ghostly fear, and he longedeven for an echo to his noiseless steps, as he ascendedto the threshold.He knocked at the door, over which waswrought an inscription, in characters unfamiliar tohis eyes ; it opened without a sound, and a tallEthiopian slave, Without question or salutation,motioned to him to proceed.The wide hall was lighted by lofty candelabraof elaborate bronze, and round the walls werewrought vast hieroglyphics, in dark and solemncolours, which contrasted strangely with thebright hues and graceful shapes with which theinhabitants of Italy decorated their abodes. Atthe extremity of the hall, a slave, whose countenance,though not African, was darker by manyshades than the usual colour of the south, advancedto meet him.I seek Arbaces,"" said the priest, but hisvoice trembled even in his own ear. The slavebowed his head in silence, and leading AppetitesPOMPEII. 151to a wing without the hall, conducted him up anarrow staircase, and then traversing several rooms,in which the stern and thoughtful beauty of thesphinx still made the chief and most impressiveobject of the priest's notice, — Speeches found himselfin a dim and half-lighted chamber in the presenceof the Egyptian.Arbaces was seated before a small table, onwhich lay unfolded several scrolls of papyrus, impressedwith the same character as that on thethreshold of the mansion. A small tripod stoodat a little distance, from the incense in which thesmoke slowly rose. Near this was a vast globe,depicting the signs of heaven, and upon anothertable lay several instruments, of curious andquaint shape, whose uses were unknown to Appetites.The further extremity of the room wasconcealed by a curtain, and the oblong window inthe roof admitted the rays of the moon, minglingsadly with the single lamp which burned in theapartment."Seat yourself, Apsecides," said the Egyptianwithout rising.The young man obeyed.l-'52 THE LAST DAYS OFYou ask me — " resumed Graces, after ashort pause, in which he seemed absorbed inthought. "You ask me — or would do so, themightiest secrets which the soul of man is fitted toreceive ; it is the enigma of life itself that youdesire me to solve. Placed like children in thedark, and but for a little while, in this dim andconfined existence, we shape out spectres in theobscurity ; our thoughts now sink back into ourselvesin teiTor, now wildly plunge themselves intothe guideless gloom, guessing what it may contain ;stretching our helpless hands here and there, lest,blindly, we stumble upon some hidden danger; notknowing the limits that confine, thinking now theysuffocate us with confusion, thinking now thatthey extend far away into eternity. In this stateall wisdom consists necessarily in the solution oftwo questions — ' what are we to believe, and whatare we to reject"' These questions you desire me todecide""Aj)a?cides bowed his head in assent.Man must have some beliefs"' continued theEgyptian, in a tone of sadness. " He must fastenhis hope to something : it is our common naturePOMPEII. 153that you inherit. When aghast and terrified tosee that in which you have been taught to placeyour faith, swept away, you float over a drearyand shoreless sea of incertitude, you cry forhelp, you ask for some plank to cling to, someland, however dim and distant, to attain. Wellthen — listen. You have not forgotten our conversationof to-days"""Forgotten!"I confessed to you, that those deities, forwhom smoke so many altars, were but inventions.I confessed to you that our rites and ceremonieswere but mummers, to cheat the herd to theirproper good. I explained to you that from thosecheats came the bonds of society, the harmony ofthe world, the power of the wise; that power is inthe obedience of the vulgar. Continue we thenthese salutary delusions — if man must have somebelief, continue to him that which his fathers havemade dear to him, and which custom sanctifies andstrengthens. In seeking a subtler faith for us,whose senses are too spiritual for the gross one, letus leave others that support which crumbles fromourselves. This is wise — it is benevolent."H 5154 THE LAST DAYS OFProceed."This being settled"" resumed the Egyptian,the old land-marks being left uninjured for thosew hom we are about to desert — we gird up ourloins and depart to new climes of faith. Dismissat once from your recollection, from your thought,all that, you have believed before. Suppose themind a blank, an unwritten scroll, fit to receiveimpressions for the first time. Look roundthe world — observe its order — its regularity —its design. Something must have created it — thedesign speaks a designer — in that certainty we firsttouch land. But what is that something? — a Godyou cry. Stay — no confused and confusing names.Of that which created the world, we know, wecan knoAv, nothing, save these attributes — Powerand Unvarying Regularity — stern — crushing — relentlessReg-charity — heeding no individual cases —rolling — sweeping — burning on — no matter whatscattered hearts, severed from the general mass,fall ground and scorched beneath its wheels. Themixture of evil with good — the existence of sufferingand of crime — in all times have perplexed thewise. They created a God — they supposed himP03IPEI1. 155benevolent. How then came this evil — why didhe permit — nay, why invent — why perpetuate it ?To account for this, the Persian creates a secondspirit, whose nature is evil, and supposes a continualwar between that and the God of good.In our own shadowy and tremendous Typhon,the Egyptians image a similar demon. Perplexingblunder that yet more bewilders us ! — follythat arose from the vain delusion that makesa palpable — a corporeal — a human Being — of thisunknown power — that clothes the Invisible withattributes and a nature similar to the Seen. No —to this Designer let us give a name that does notcommand our bewildering associations — and themystery becomes more clear — that name is Necessity.Necessity, say the Greeks, compel thegods, — then Why the gods ? — their agency becomesunnecessary — dismiss them at once. Necessity isthe ruler of all we see; — power, regularity — thesetwo qualities make its nature. Would you askmore? — you can learn nothing — whether it beeternal — whether it compel us, its creatures, tonew careers after that darkness which we calldeath — we cannot tell. There leave we this156 THE LAST DAYS OFancient — unseen — unfathomable power — and cometo that which, to our eyes, is the great minister ofits functions. This wc can task more, from thiswe can learn more — its evidence is around us —its name is Nature. The error of the sages hasbeen to direct their researches to the attributes ofNecessity — where all is gloom and blindness. Hadthey confined their researches to Nature — what ofknowledge might we not already have achieved .'*Here patience, examination, are never directedin vain. We see what we explore ; our mindsascend a palpable ladder of causes and effects.Nature is the great spirit of the external universeand Necessity imposes upon it the laws by whichit acts — and imparts to us the powers by whichwe examine — those powers are curiosity andmemory — their union is reason — their perfection iswisdom. Well, then, I examine by the help ofthese powers this inexhaustible Nature. I examinethe earth — the air — the ocean — the heaven — I findthat all have a mystic sympathy with each other —that the moon sways the tides — that the air maintainsthe earth, and is the medium of the life andsense of things — that by the knowledge of thePOMPEII. 157stars we measure the limits of the earth — that weportion out the epochs of time — that by their palelight we are guided into the abyss of the past —that in their solemn lore we discern the destiniesof the future. And thus, while we know not thatwhich Necessity is, we learn, at least, her decrees.And now, what morality do we glean from thisreligion ? — for religion it is. I believe in twodeities, Nature and Necessity ; I worship the lastby reverence, the first by investigation. What isthe morality it teaches ? This — all things aresubject but to general rules ; the sun shines forthe joy of the many — it may bring sorrow to thefew ; the night sheds sleep on the multitude — butit harbours murder as well as rest ; the forestsadorn the earth — but shelter the serpent and thelion ; the ocean supports a thousand barks — but itengulphs the one. It is only thus for the general,and not for the universal benefit, that Nature acts,and Necessity speeds on her awful course. Thisis the morality of the dread agents of the world —it is mine, who am their creature. I would preservethe delusions of priestcraft — for they areserviceable to the multitude ; I would impart to158-the LAST DAYS OFman the arts I discover — the sciences I perfect ;I would speed the vast career of civilizing lore : — inthis I serve the mass — I fulfil the general lav — Iexecute the gi-eat moral that Nature preaches.For myself I claim the individual exception; Iclaim it for the Wise — satisfied that my individualactions are nothing in the great balance of goodand evil ; satisfied that the product of my knowledgecan give greater blessings to the mass, thanray desires can operate evil on the few, (for thefirst can extend to remotest regions and humanizenations yet unborn,) I give to the world wisdom,to myself freedom. I enlighten the lives of others,and I enjoy my oaati. Yes ; our wisdom is eternal,but our life is short ; make the most of itwhile it lasts. Surrender thy youth to pleasure,and thy senses to delight. Soon comes the hourAvhcn the wine-cup is shattered, and the garlandsshall cease to bloom. Enjoy while you may. Bestill, O Apaecides, my pupil, and my follower !I will teach thee the mechanism of Nature, herdarkest and her wildest secrets — the lore whichfools call magic — and the mighty mysteries ofPOMPEII. 159the stars. By this shalt thou discharge thy dutyto the mass ; by this shalt thou enlighten thyrace. But I will lead thee also to pleasures ofwhich the vulgar do not dream ; and the daywhich thou gives to men shall be followed bythe sweet night which thou surrendered tothyself"As the Egyptian ceased, there rose about,around, beneath, the softest music that Lydiaever taught, or Ionia ever perfected. It camelike a stream of sound — bathing the senses unawares; — enervating — subduing with delight. Itseemed the melodies of invisible spirits, such asthe shepherd might have heard in the golden age,floating through the vales of Thessaly, or inthe noontide glades of Paphos. The words whichhad rushed to the lip of Apascides, in answer tothe sophistries of the Egyptian, died tremblinglyaway. He felt it as a profanation to break uponthat enchanted strain — the susceptibility of hisexcited nature, the Greek softness and ardour ofhis secret soul, were swayed and captured bysurprise. He sank on the seat with parted lips160 THE LAST DAYS OFand thirsting ear — while in a chorus of voices,bland and melting as those which waked Psychein the Halls of Love — rose the following song : —By the cool banks where soft Ephesus flows,A voice sailed trembling down the waves of air ;The leaves blushed brighter in the Tian's rose,The doves couch'd breathless in their summer air ;While from their hands the purple flowerets fell,The laughing Hours stood listening in the sky ; —From Pan's green cave to ^Egle's* haunted cell,Heaved the charmed earth in one delicious sigh.Love, sons of earth ! I am the Power of Love,Eldest of all the gods with Chaos f born ;My smile sheds light along the courts above.My kisses wake the eyelids of the Morn.Mine are the stars — there, ever as ye gazeYe meet the deep spell of my haunting eyes ;Hie is the moon — and mournful, if her rays,Tis that she lingers where her Marian lies• The fairest of the Naiads. t Hesiod.POMPEII. 161The flowers are mine — the blushes of the rose,The violet charming Zephyr to the shade ;Mine the quick light that in the Majbeam glows,Mine every dream that leafs* the lonely glade.Love, sons of earth — for love is earth's soft lore.Look where ye will — earth overflows with me ;Learn from the waves that ever kiss the shore.And the winds nestling on the heaving sea.All teaches love !" — The sweet voice, like a dream,Melted in light — yet still the airs above,The waving sedges and the whispering stream,And the green forest rustling — murmured " love !"As the voices died away, the Egyptian seizedthe hand of Apaecides, and led him wandering-intoxicated,yet half reluctant, across the chambertowards the curtain, at the far end ; and now, frombehind that curtain, there seemed to burst a thousandsparkling stars ; the veil itself, hitherto dark,was now lighted by these fires behind, into thetenderest blue of heaven. It represented heavenThe learned reader will recognise this image more thanonce among the antient poets.162 THE LAST DAYS OFitself, — such a heaven, as in the nights of Junemight have shone down over the streams of castle.Here and there were painted rosy andaerial clouds, from which smiled, by the limner'sart, faces of divinest beauty, — and on which reposedthe shapes of which Phidias and Apelles dreamed.And the stars which studded the transparent azurerolled rapidly as they shone, while the musicthat again woke with a livelier and lighter sound,seemed to imitate the melody of the joyousspheres.Oh ! what miracle is this, Arbaces ?" saidApsecides, in faltering accents. " After having deniedthe gods, art thou about to reveal to me — ""'Their pleasures !" interrupted Arbaces, in atone so different from its usual cold and tranquilharmony that Apaecides started, and thought theEgyptian himself transformed : and now, as theyneared the curtain, a wild — a loud — an exultingmelody burst from behind its concealment. Withthat sound the veil was, as it were, to be rent intwain — it parted — it seemed to vanish into air; anda scene which no Sybarite ever more than rivalled,broke upon the dazzled gaze of the youthful priest.POMPEII. 1 63A vast banquet-room stretched beyond, blazing withcountless lights, which filled the warm air withthe scents of frankincense, of jasmine, of violets,of myrrh; all that the most odorous flowers, allthat the most costly spices could distil, seemedgathered into one ineffable and ambrosial essence :from the light columns that sprang upward to theairy roof, hung draperies of white, studded withgolden stars. At the extremities of the room, twofountains cast up a spray, which, catching the raysof the roseate light, glittered like countless diamonds.In the centre of the room, as they entered,there rose slowly from the floor, to the soundof unseen minstrelsy, a table, spread with all theviands which sense ever devoted to fancy, andvases of that lost Morphine fabric,* so glowing inits colours, so transparent in its material, werecrowned with the exotics of the East. The couches,to Which this table was the centre, were coveredwith tapestries of azure, and gold ; and from invisibletubes in the vaulted roof, descended showersof fragrant waters, that cooled the delicious air,Which, however, was probably the porcelain of China, —though this is a matter which admits of considerable dispute.164 THE LAST DAYS OFand contended with the lamps, as If the spirits ofwave and fire disputed which element could furnishforth the most delicious odours. And now, frombehind the snowy draperies, trooped such forms asAdonis beheld, when he lay on the lap of Venus.They came, some with garlands, others with lyres ;they surrounded the youth, they led his steps tothe banquet. They flung the chaplets round himin rosy chains. The earth — the thought of earth,vanished from his soul. He Imagined himself hi adream, and suppressed his breath lest he shouldwake too soon ; the senses to which he had neveryielded as yet, beat In his burning pulse, andconfused his dizzy and reeling sight. And whilethus amazed and lost, once again, but In brisk andBacchic measures, rose the magic strain.In the veins of the calix foams and glowsThe blood of the mantling vine,But oh I in the bowl of Youth there glows,A Lesbian, more divine !Bright, bright,As the liquid light,Its waves through thine eyelids shine !POMPEII.Fill up, fill up, to the sparkling brim.The juice of the young Lyaeus,*The grape is the key that we owe to him,From the jail of the world to free us,Drink, drink,What need to shrink,When the lamps alone can see us ?Drink, drink, as I quaff from thine eyes.The wine of a softer tree.Give thy smiles to the god of the grape — thy sighs,Beloved one, give to me.Turn, turn,My glances burn,And thirst for a look from thee!As the song ended, a group of three maidens,entwined with a chain of starred flowers, andwho, while they imitated, might have shamed,the Graces, advanced towards him in the glidingmeasures of the Ionian dance ; such as the Needswreathed in moonlight on the yellow sands of the^gean wave, such as Cytherea taught her hand-nameof Bacchus, from Xuu to unbind, to release.166 THE LAST DAYS OFmaids, In the marriage-feast of Psyche and herson.Now approaching, they wreathed their chapletround his head ; now kueehng, the youngest ofthe three proffered him the bowl, from which thewine of Lesbos foamed and spared. The youthresisted no more, he grasped the intoxicatingcup, the blood mantled fiercely through hisveins. He sank upon the breast of the nymph,who sat beside him, and turning with swimmingeyes to seek for Arbaces whom he had lost in thewhirl of his emotions, he beheld him seated beneatha canopy, at the upper end of the table, andgazing upon him with a smile that encouragedhim to pleasure. He beheld him, but not as hehad hitherto seen, with dark and sable garments,with a brooding and solemn brow : a robe thatdazzled the sight, so studded was its whitest surfacewith gold and gems, blazed upon his majesticform ; white roses, alternated with the emerald andthe ruby, and shaped tiara-like, crowned his ravenlocks. He appeared like Ulysses to have gainedthe glory of a second youth — his features seemedto have exchanged thought for beauty, and hetowered amidst the loveliness that surroundedPOMPEII. 167him, in all the beaming and relaxing benignity ofan Olympian god."Drink, feast, love, mypnpil !"" said he; " blushnot that thou art passionate and young. Thatwhich thou art, thou feeblest in thy veins — thatwhich thou shalt be, survey !"With this he pointed to a recess, and the eyesof Apsecides, following the gesture, beheld on apedestal placed between the statues of Bacchusand Italia, the form of a skeleton.Start not," resumed the Egyptian, " thatfriendly guest admonishes us but of the shortnessof life. From its jaws I hear a voice that summonsus TO ENJOY."As he spoke, a group of nymphs surroundedthe statue ; they laid chaplets on its pedestal, andwhile the cups were emptied and refilled at thatglowing board, they sang the following strain : —IB^(g(g51III(g JS^SSEtS T© Tim ESST^OIi ©IF1.Thou art in the land of the shadowy Host,Thou that didst drink and love ;By the Solemn River, a gliding ghost,But thy thought is ours above!16*8 THE LAST DAYS OFIf memory yet can flyBack to the golden sky,And mourn the pleasures lost !By the ruined hall these flowers we lay,Where thy soul once held its palace ;When the rose to thy scent and sight was gay,And the smile was in the chalice,And the cithara's silver voiceCould bid thy heart rejoiceWhen night eclipsed the day.Here a new group advancing, turned the tide ofthe music into a quicker and more joyous strain :2.Death, death is the gloomy shore,Where we all sail.Soft, soft, thou gliding oar ;Blow soft sweet gale.Chain with bright wreaths the hours.Victims if all.Ever, mid song and flowers,Victims should fall !Pausing for a moment, yet quicker and quickerdanced the silver-footed music :POMPEII, ] 09Since Life 's so short, we'll live to laugh ;Ah ! wherefore waste a minute !If youth's the cup we yet can quaff,Be love the pearl within it !A third band now approached ^Y[ih brimmingcups, which they poured in libation upon thatstrange altar ; and once more, slow and solemn,rose the changeful melody :3.Thou art welcome, Guest of gloom,From the far and fearful sea !When the last rose sheds its bloom,Our board shall be spread with thee !All hail, dark Guest IWho hath so fair a pleaOur welcome Guest to beAs thou, whose solemn hallAt last shall feast us allenthe dim and dismal coast ? —Long yet be we the Host !And thou, Dead Shadow, thou.All joyless though thy brow.Thou — but our passing Guest !VOL. I. I170 THE LAST DAYS OFAt this moment, she who sat beside Apaecides,suddenly took up the song :4.Happy is yet our doom,The earth and the sun are ours !And far from the dreary tombSpeed the wings of the rosy Hours —Sweet is for thee the bowl,Sweet are thy looks, my love ;I fly to thy tender soul.As the bird to its mated dove ITake me, ah take !Clasp'd to thy guardian breast,Soft let me sink to rest ;But wake me — ah wake,And tell me with words and sighs,But more with thy melting eyes.That my sun is not set —That the Torch is not quenched at the Urn,That we love, and we breathe and burn.Tell me — thou lov'st me yet '.POMPEII. 171NOTES TO BOOK I.(«) p. 10. — " Flowers more alluring to the antient Italiansthan to their descendants," &;c.The modern Italians, especially those of the more southern partsof Italy, have a peculiar horror of perfumes ; they consider themremarkably unwholesome : and the Roman or Neapolitan lady requestsher visitors not to use them. 'N^'^hat is very strange, thenostril so susceptible of a perfume is wonderfully obtuse to itsreverse. You may literally call Home, " Setting Gentium.''''{b) p. 48. — " The sixth banqueter who was the umbra ofClodius."A very curious and interesting Treatise might be written onthe Parasites of Greece and Rome. In the former, they weremore degraded than in the latter, country. The Epistles ofAlciphron express in a lively manner the insults which theyunderwent for the sake of a dinner ; one man complains, thatfish-sauce was thrown into his eyes — that he was beat oh thehead, and given to eat stones covered with honey, while a courtezanthrew at him a bladder filled with blood, which burst onhis face and covered him with the stream. The manner in whichthese parasites repaid the hospitality of their hosts was like thatof modern diners-out, by witty jokes and amusing stories; sometimesthey indulged practical jokes on each other, " boxing oneanother's ears." The magistrates at Athens appear to have1 2172 THE LAST DAYS OFlooked very sternly upon these hungry buffoons, and they complainof stripes and a prison with no philosophical resignation.In fact, the parasite seems at Athens to have answered thepurpose of the fool of the middle ages ; — hut he was far moreworthless and perhaps more witty —the associate of courtesan,uniting the pimp with the buifooii. This is a character peculiarto Greece. The Latin comic writers make indeed prodigal use ofthe Parasite, yet he appears at Rome to have held a somewhathigher rank, and to have met with a somewhat milder treatment,than at Athens. Nor do the delineations of Terence, which, inportraying Athenian manners, probably soften down whateverwould have been exaggerated to a Roman audience, present so degradedor so abandoned a character as the Parasite of Alciphronand Athenaeum. The more haughty and fastidious Romans oftendisdained indeed to admit such buffoons as companions, andhired (as we may note in Pliny's Epistles) fools or mountebanks,to entertain their guests and supply the place of the GrecianParasite. When (be it observed) Clodius is styled Parasitein the text, the reader must take the modern not the antientinterpretation of the word.A very feeble — but very flattering reflex of the Parasite wasthe umbra or shadow — who accompanied any invited guest — andwho was sometimes a man of equal consequence— though usuallya poor relative, or a humble friend — i)i modern cant " a toady."Such is the umbra of our friend Clodius.(c) p. 54. — " The dice in August and I an aedile !"All games of chance were forbidden by law, (" Vetita legionsale'i." — Ilorat. Od. 24, 1. 3,) except ' in Saturnalia,' duringthe month of l)L'ceml)er the a'diles were charged with enforcingthis law, which, like all laws against gaming in all times, waswholly ineffectual.{(I) p. C7.— " The small but graceful temple consecrated toIsis."POMPEII.Scylla is said to have transported to Italy the worship of theEgyptian Isis.* It soon became ' the rage' — and was peculiarlyin vogue with the Roman ladies. Its priesthood were sworn tochastity, and like all such brotherhoods, were noted for theirlicentiousness. Juvenal styles the priestesses by a name (^Isiactelena?) that denotes how convenient they wei-e to lovers, andunder the mantle of night many an amorous intrigue was carriedon in the purlieus of the sacred temples. A lady vowed for somany nights to watch by the shrine of Isis— it was a sacrifice ofcontinence towards her husband — to be bestowed on her lover !While one passion of human nature was thus appealed to, anotherscarcely less strong was also pressed into the service of the goddess— namely Credulity. The priests of Isis arrogated a knowledgeof magic and of the future. Among women of all classes —and among many of the harder sex — the Egyptian sorceries wereconsulted and revered as oracles. Voltaire, with much plausibleingenuity, endeavours to prove that the gypsies are a remnant ofthe antient priests and priestesses of Isis, intermixed with those ofthe goddess of Syria. In the time of Apuleius these holy impostorshad lost their dignity and importance — despised and poorthey wandered from place to place, selling prophecies andcuring disorders ; and Voltaire shrewdly bids us remark, thatApuleius has not forgot their peculiar skill in filching from outhousesand court yards — afterwards they practised palmistry andsingular dances (query, the Bohemian dances ?) " Such," says thetoo conclusive Frenchman, " such has been the end of the antientreligion of Isis and Osiris, whose very names still impressns with awe !" At the time in which my story is cast, the worshipof Isis was however in the highest repute. And the wealthy• In the Campanian cities, the trade with Alexandria wasprobably more efficacious than the piety of Scylla (no very popularexample perhaps) in establishing the worship of the favouritedeity of Egypt.1T4 THE LAST DAYS OF Pompeii.devotees scut even to the Nile, that they might sprinkle itbmysterious waters over the altars of the goddess. I have introducedthe Ibis in the sketch of the temple of Isis, although it hasbeen supposed that that bird languished and died when takenfrom Egypt. But from various reasons, too long now to enumerate,I believe that the ibis was by no means unfrequent in theItalian temples of Isis, though it rarely lived long, and refusedto breed in a foreign climate.END OF BOOK I.BOOK II.Lucas tremescit, tota success soloNutavit aula, nubia quo pondus caretAc fliictuanti similis."Seneca. Thyestes, v. (J93.■- i 1CHAPTER I.A FLASH house" IN POMPEII— AND THE GENTLEMENOF THE CLASSIC Ring.To one of those parts of Pompeii, which wereteuaiited not hy the lords of pleasure, but by itsminions and its victims — the haunt of gladiatorsand prize-fighters — of the vicious and the penniless— of the savage and the obscene — the Alsatiaof an antient city — we are now transported.It was a large room, that opened at once on theconfined and crowded lane. Before the thresholdwere a group of men, whose iron and Avell-strungmuscles, whose short and herculean necks, whosehardy and reckless countenances indicated thechampions of the arena. On a shelf, without theshop, were ranged jars of wine and oil, and rightover this was inserted in the wall a coarse painting,which exhibited gladiators drinking, so 5178 THE LAST DAYS OFtient and so venerable is the custom of signs !Within the room were placed several small tables,arranged somewhat in the modern fashion of"boxes," and round these were seated several knotsof men, some drinking, some playing at dice,.come at that more skilful game called ' chwdecimticn'pta,'' which certain of the blundering learnedhave mistaken for chess, though it rather, perhaps,resembled backgammon of the two, andwas usually, though not always, played by theassistance of dice. The hour was in the early forenoon,and nothing better, perhaps, than that unseasonabletime itself denoted the habitual indolence ofthese tavern loungers. Yet, despite the situation ofthe house and the character of its inmates, it indicatednone of that sordid squalor which would havecharacterized a similar haunt in a modern city.The gay disposition of all the Pompeians, whosought, at least, to gratify the sense even wherethey neglected the mind, was typified by the gaudycolours which decorated the Avails, and the shapes,fantastic but not inelegant, in which the lamps,the drinking cups, the commonest household utensilswere wrought.POMPEII. 179By Pollux"" said one of the gladiators, asheleant against the wall of the threshold, " thewine thou eldest us, old Silenus," and as hespoke he slapped a portly personage on theback, " is enough to thin the best blood in one'sveins."The man thus caressingly saluted, and whosebared arms, white apron, and keys and napkintucked carelessly within his girdle, indicated himto be the host of the tavern, was ah-lady passedinto the autumn of his years ; but his form was stillso robust and athletic, that he might have shamedeven the sinewy shapes beside him, save that themuscle had seeded as it were into flesh, that thecheeks were swelled and bloated, and the increasingstomach threw into shade the vast and massivechest which rose above it. ■ ,None of thy scurrilous blustering with me'"growled the gigantic landlord, in the gentle semi-roarof an insulted tiger, " my wine is goodenough for a carcase which shall so soon soak thedust of the spollarium."*The place to which the killed or mortally wounded weredragged from the arena.180 THE LAST DAYS OFCroaker thou thus, old raven," returned thegladiator, laughing scornfully, " thou shalt live tohang thyself with despite when thou seest me winthe palm crown ; and when 1 get the purse at theAmphitheatre, as I certainly shall, my first vow toHercules shall be to forswear thee and thy vilepotations evermore."Hear to him — hear to this modest Pyrgopo-lines ! He has certainly served under BombsCluninstaridysarchides," cried the host.*Sporus, Niger, Tetraides, he declares he shallwin the purse from you. Why, by the gods, eachof your muscles is strong enough to stifle all hisbody, or / know nothing of the arena !"Ha !" said the gladiator, colouring with risingfury, " our lanista would tell a different story."What story could he tell against me, vainlinton ?" said Tetraides, frowning.Or me, who have conquered in fifteen fights .'*"said the gigantic Niger, stalking up to the gladiator.Or me ?" grunted Sporus, with eyes of fire.Miles Glorious, Act. I. ; — as much as to say in modernphrase, " lie has served under Bonibastes Furioso."POMPEII. 181Tush !" said Lydon, folding his arms, and regardinghis rivals with a reckless air of defiance.The time of trial will soon come ; keep yourvalour till then."Ay, do," said the surly host ; " and if I pressdown my thumb to save you, may the Fates cutmy thread."Your rope, you mean," said Lydon, sneeringly; " here is a sesterce to buy one."The Titan wine-vender seized the hand extendedto him, and griped it in so stern a vice that theblood spirted from the fingers' ends over the garmentsof the bystanders.They set up a savage laugh.I will teach thee, young braggart, to play theMacedonian with me. I am no puny Persian, Iwarrant thee ! What, man ! have I not foughttwenty years in the ring and never lowered myarms once ? and have I not received the rod fromthe Editor's own hand as a sign of victory, and asagrace to retirement on my laurels ? And am Inow to be lectured by a boy.'*" So saying, heflung the hand from him in scorn.Without changing a muscle, but with the same182 THE LAST DAYS OFsmiling face with which he had previously tauntedmine host, did the gladiator have the painfulgrasp he had undergone. But no sooner was hishand released, than crouching for one moment as awild cat crouches, you might see his hair bristleon his head and heard, and with a fierce and shrillyell he sprang on the throat of the giant with animpetus that threw him, vast and sturdy as hewas, from his balance ; — and down, with the crashof a falling rock, he fell ; — while over him fellalso his ferocious foe.Our host perhaps had had no need of the ropeso kindly recommended to him by Lydon, had heremained three minutes longer in that position.But, summoned to his assistance by the noise ofhis fall, a woman, who had hitherto kept in aninner apartment, rushed to the scene of battle.This new ally was in herself a match for the gladiator; she was tall, lean, and with arms thatcould give other than soft embraces. In fact, thegentle lK'l})mate of Burbo, the Mine-seller, hadlike himself fought in the lists* — nay, under theNot only did women sometimes fight in the amphitheatres —but even those of noble birth participated in that meek ambition.POMPEII. 183Emperor's eye. And Bm-bo himself, Burbo,the unconquered in the field, according to report,now and then yielded the palm to his soft Strategic.This sweet creature no sooner saw theimminent peril that awaited her worse half, thanwithout other weapons than those with WhichNatm-e had provided her, she darted upon theincumbent gladiator, and clasping him round thewaist M"ith her long and snake-like arms, liftedhim with a sudden wrench from the body of herhusband, leaving only his hands still clinging tothe throat of his foe. So have we seen a dispatchedby the hind legs from the strife Witha fallen rival, in the arras of some enviousgroom ; so have we seen one half of him high in airpassive and ofFenceless — while the other half,head, teeth, eyes, claws, seemed buried and engulfedin the mangled and prostrate enemy.Meanwhile the gladiators, lapped and pamperedand glutted upon blood, crowded delightedly roundthe combatants — their nostrils distended — theirlips grinning — their eyes gloatingly fixed on thebloody throat of the one — and the indented talonsof the other.T84 THE LAST DAYS OF'habet! (he lias got it !) habet cried they witha sort of yell, rubbing their nervous hands.Non habet, ye liars, T have not got it," .shoutedthe host, as with a mighty effort he wrenched himselffrom those deadly hands, and rose to his feetbreathless, panting, lacerated, bloody ; and frontingwith reeling eyes, the glaring look and grinningteeth of his baffled foe now struggling, (but strugglingwith disdain) in the gripe of the sturdyamazon.Fair play"" cried the gladiators, " one to one,"and crowding round Lydon and the woman, theyseparated our pleasing host from his courteousguest.But Lydon, feeling ashamed at his present position,and endeavouring in vain to shake off thegrasp of the virago, slipped his hand into his girdle,and drew forth a short knife. So menacingwas his look, so brightly gleamed the blade, thatStratonice, who was used only to the fistic methodsof battle, started back in alarm !gods !" cried she, " the ruffian !— he hasconcealed weapons ! is that fair ? Is that like agentleman and a gladiator ? No indeed, I scornPOMPEII. 185such fellows !"'■' With that she contemptuouslyturned her back on the gladiator, and hastened toexamine the condition of her husband.But he, as much inured to these constitutionalexercises as an English bull-dog is to a contestwith a more gentle antagonist, had already recoveredhimself. The purple hues receded from thecrimson surface of his cheek, the veins of the foreheadretired into their wonted size. He shookhimself with a complacent grunt, satisfied that hewas still alive, and then looking at his foe fromhead to foot with an air of more approbation thanhe had ever bestowed upon him before —By Castor," said he, " thou art a strongerfellow than I took thee for ! I see thou art aman of merit and virtue ; give me thy hand, myhero."Jolly old Burbo !" cried the gladiators applauding," staunch to the backbone — give him thyhand, Lydon."Oh, to be sure," said the gladiator : " but nowI have tasted his blood, I long to lap the whole" —Per Hercle !" returned my host, quite unmoved," that is the true gladiator feeling. Pollux !186 THE LAST Day OFto think what good training may make a man ;why a beast could not be fiercer !""A beast, O duUard ! we beat the beastshollow !" cried Tetraides.Well, well," said Stratonice, who was nowemployed in smoothing her hair and adjusting herlocks ; " if ye are all good friends again, I recommendyou to be quiet and orderly ; for some youngnoblemen, your patrons and backers, have sentto say, they will cone here to pay you a visit —they wish to see you more at their ease than at theSchools, before they make up their bets on thegreat fight at the Amphitheatre. So they alwayscome to my house for that purpose : they knowwe only receive the best gladiators in Pompeii —our society is very select, praised be the gods !"Yes," continued Burbo, drinking oiF a bowl,or rather a pail of wine, " a man who has won mylaurels can only encourage the brave. Lydon,drink, my boy; may you have an honourable oldage like mine I"Come here," said Stratonice, drawing herhusband to her affectionately by the ears, in thatPOMPEII. 187caress which Tibullus lias so prettily described,Come here !"Not so hard, she wolf, thou art worse thanthe gladiator," murmured the huge jaws of Burbo.Hist r said she, whispering him : " Calenushas just stole in, disguised, by the back way; I hopehe has brought the sesterces."Ho ! ho ! I will join him," said Burbo ;meanwhile, I say, keep a sharp eye on the cups,attend to the score. Let them not cheat thee,wife ; they are heroes to be sure, but then theyare arrant rogues ; Caius was nothing to them."Never fear me, fool," was the conjugal reply ;and Burbo, satisfied with the dear assurance,strode tlu'ough the apartment, and sought the penetraliaof his house.So those soft patrons are coming to look atourmuscles," said Niger : " who sent to previsethee of it, my mistress ?"Lepidus. He brings with him Clodius, thesurest better in Pompeii, and the young GreekGl aucun."A wager on a wager," cried Tetraides : " ClotheLAST DAYS OFdins bets on me, fur twenty sesterces ! what sayyou, Lydon ?""He bets on me ! said Lydon."No, on me .'" grunted Sporus.Dolts, do you think he woidd prefer any ofyou to Niger ?" said the athletic, thus modestlynaming himself.Well, Mell," said Stratonice, as she pierced ahuge amj)hora for her guests, who had now seatedthemselves before one of the tables, " greatmen and brave, as ye all think yourselves, whichof you will fight the Numidia lion, in case nomalefactor should be found to deprive you of theoption ?"I who have escaped your arms, stout Strategic,"said Lydon, " might safely, I think, encounterthe lion."But, tell me," said Tetraides, " where is thatpretty young slave of yours, the blind girl, withbright eyes ? I have not seen her a long time."Oh ! she is too delicate for you, my son ofNeptune"* said the hostess, " and too nice even• Son of Neptune, a Latin phrase for a boisterous, ferociousfellow.POMPEII. 189for us, I think. We send her into the town tosell flowers and sino to the ladies ; she makes hismore money so, than she would by waiting onyou. Besides, she has often other employmentsWhich lie under the rose."Other employments!" said Niger ; '• why sheis too young for them."Silence, beast !" said Stratonice ; " you thinkthere is no play but the Corinthian. If Nydia weretwice the age she is at present, she would beequally fit for Vesta, poor girl."But, harkye, Stratonice," said Lydon ; " howdidst thou come by so gentle and delicate a slave ?she were more meet for the handmaid of some richmatron of Rome than for thee."That is true," returned Stratonice, " andsome day or other I shall make my fortune byselling her. How came I by Nydia, thou askest ?"Ay."Why, thou seest, my slave Staph yla, — thouremembered Staphyla, Niger .^"Ay, a large-handed wench, with a face likea comic mask. How should I forget her, by Pluto !whose handmaid she doubtless is at this moment."190 THE LAST DAYS OFTush, brute ! — Mell, StapliyLa died one day,and a great loss she was to me, and I went into themarket to buy me another slave. But, by thegods, they were all grown so dear since I hadbought poor Staphyla, and money was so scarce,that I was about to leave the place in despair,when a merchant plucked me by the robe : ' Mistress,'said he, ' dost thou want a slave cheap, —I have a child to sell a bargain. She is but littleand almost an infant it is true, but she is quickand quiet, docile and clever, sings well, andbrothers, and is of good blood, I assure you.'Of what country.? said I."* ' Thessalonians'' Now Iknew the Thessalonians were acute and gentle. So Isaid 1 would see the girl. I found her just as yousee her now, scarcely smaller and scarcely youngerin appearance. She looked patient and resignedenough, with her hands crossed on her bosom andher eyes downcast. I asked the merchant hisprice ; it was moderate and I bought her at once.The merchant brought her to my house and disappearedin an instant. Well, my friends, guessmy astonishment when I found she was blind.Ha ! ha ! a clever fellow that merchant ! I ran atPOMPEII. 191once to the magistrates, but the rogue was ah-ladygone from Pompeii. So I was forced to go homein a very ill humour, I assure you : and the poorgirl felt the effects of it too. But it was not herfault that she was blind, for she had been so fromher birth. By degrees we got reconciled to ourpurchase. True, she had not the strength of Stagand was of very little use in the house, butshe could soon find her way about the town, asAvell as if she had the eyes of Argais : and whenone morning she brought us home a handful ofsesterces, which she said she had got from sellingsome flowers she had gathered in our poor littlegarden, we thought the gods had sent her to us.So from that time, we let her go out as she likes,filling her basket with flowers which she wreathsinto garlands after the Thessalian fashion, whichpleases the gallants; and the great people seem totake a fancy to her, for they always pay her morethan they do any other flower girl, and she bringsall of it home to us, M-hich is more than any otherslave would do. So I work for myself, but I shallsoon aftbrd from her earnings to buy me a secondStaphyla ; doubtless the Thessalian kidnapper had192 THE LAST DAYS OFstolen the blind girl from gentle parents;* besidesher skill in the garlands, she sings and plays onthe cithara, which also brings money: and lately —but that is a secret."That is a secret — what V cried Lydon," artthou turned Sphinx ?"Sphinx, no — why Sphpix ?"Cease thy gabble, good mistress, and bringus our meat — I am hungry, " said Sporus impatiently.And I too," echoed the grim Niger, whettinghis knife on the palm of his hand.The amazon stalked away to the kitchen, andsoon returned with a tray laden with large piecesof meat half-raw ; for so, as now, did the heroes ofthe prize-fight imagine they best sustained theirhardihood and ferocity ; they drew round the tablewith the eyes of famished wolves — the meat vanished,the wine flowed. So leave we those importantpersonages of classic life, to follow thesteps of Burbo.'Die Thessalian slave-merchants were celebrated for purloiningpersons of liirth and education ; they did not always sparethose of their own country. Aristophanes sneers bitterly at thatpeople, (proverbially treacherous,) for their unquenchable desireof gain by this barter of flesh.POMPEII. 193CHAPTER II.TWO WORTHIES.In the efivlier times of Rome the priesthood wasa profession, not of kicre, but of honour. It wasembraced by the noblest citizens — it was forbiddento the plebeians. Afterwards, and long previousto the present date, it was equally open toall ranks — at least that part of the professionwhich embraced the stamens, or priests, not ofreligion generally, but of peculiar gods. Eventhe priest of Jupiter (the Flamen Dials), precededby a lictor, and entitled by his office to the entranceof the Senate, at first the especial dignitaryof the patricians, was subsequently the choiceof the people. The less national and less honoureddeities were usually served by plebeian ministers,and many embraced the profession, as now theCatholic Christians enter the monastic fraternity, lessVOL. I. K194 Tie LAST DAYS OFfrom the impulse of devotion than the suggestionsof a calculating poverty. Thus Calenus, the priestof Isis, was of the lowest origin. His relations,though not his parents, were freedmen. He hadreceived from them a liberal education, and fromhis father a small patrimony which he had soonexhausted. He embraced the priesthood as a lastresource from distress. Whatever the state emolumentsof the sacred profession, which at thattime were probably small, the officers of a populartemple could never complain of the profits of theircalling. There is no profession so lucrative asthat which practises on the superstition of themultitude.Calenus had but one surviving relative at Pompeii,and that was Burbo. Various dark and disreputableties, stronger than those of blood, unitedtogether their hearts and interests ; and often theminister of Isis stole disguised and furtively fromthe supposed austerity of his devotions — and glidingthrough the back-door of the retired gladiator,a man infamous alike by vices and by profession,rejoiced to throw off the last rag of an hypocrisywhich, but for the dictates of avarice, his rulingPOMPEII. J 95passion, would at all times have sat clumsily upona nature too brutal for even the mimicry of virtue.Wrapt in one of those large mantles whichcame in use among the Romans in proportionas they dismissed the toga, whose ample foldswell concealed the form, and in which a sort ofhood (attached to it) afforded no less a security tothe features, Calenus now sate in the small andprivate chamber of the wine-seller, from which asmall faux, or passage, ran at once to that backentrance with which nearly all the houses of Pompeiiwere furnished.Opposite to him sat the sturdy Burbo, carefullycounting, on a table between them, a little pile ofcoins which the priest had just poured from hispurse, for purses Avere as common then as now, withthis difference — they were usually better furnished !You see," said Calenus, " that we pay youhandsomely, and you ought to thank me for recommendingyou to so advantageous a market.""I do, my cousin, I do," replied Burbo affectionately,as he swept the coins into a leathernreceptacle which he then deposited in his girdle,drawing the buckle round his capacious waist moreK 2196 THE LAST DAYS OFclosely than he was wont to do in the lax hoursof his domestic avocations. " And hy Isis, Isis,and Nysis, or whatever other gods there may bein Egypt, my little Nydia is a very Hesperides,a garden of gold, to me.""She sings well, and plays like a mnse,"'"' returnedCalenus ; " those are virtues that he who employsme always pays liberally""He is a god," cried Burbo, enthusiastically;every rich man, who is generous, deserves to beworshipped. But come, a cup of wine, old friend,tell me more about it. What does she do ?she is frightened, talks of her oath, and revealsnothing."Nor will I, by my right hand ; I too havetaken that terrible oath of secrecy."Oath ! what are oaths to men like us ?''"'True, oaths of a common fashion ; but this !"and the stalwart priest shuddered as he spoke,^"et," he continued, in emptying a huge cup of unmixedwine, " I will own to thee, that it is not somuch the oath that I dread, as the vengeance ofhim who proposed it. By the gods ! he is a mightysorcerer, and could draw my confession from thePOMPEII. 197moon, did I dare to make it to her. Talk nomore of this. Bj Pollux, wild as those banquetsare which I enjoy with him, I am never quite atmy ease there. I love, my boy, one jolly hourwith thee, and one of the plain, unsophisticated,laughing girls that I meet in this chamber, allsmoke dried though it be, better than whole nightsof those magnificent debauches."Ho ! mayest thou so ! tomorrow night, pleasethe gods, we will have then a snug carousel.""' With all my heart," said the priest, rubbinghis hands, and drawing himself nearer to the table.At this moment, they heard a slight noise atthe door, as of one feeling the handle. The priestlowered the cowl over his head.Tush," whispered the host, " it is but theblind girl," as Nydia opened the door and enteredthe apartment.Ho ! girl, and how dost thou? thou loosest pale,thou hast kept late revels .'' No matter, theyoung must be always the young," said Burbo,encouragingly.The girl made no answer, but she dropped onone of the seats with an air of lassitude. Her198 THE LAST DAYS OFcolour Event and came rapidly ; she beat the floorimpatiently with her small feet, then she suddenlyraised her face, and said with a determined voice —Master, you may starve me if you will,you may beat me, you may threaten me withdeath, but I will go no more to that unholyplace."How, fool !" said Burbo, in a savage voice,and his heavy brows met darkly over his fierceand bloodshot eyes ; " How, rebellious ! takecare."I have said it," said the poor girl, crossing herhands on her breast.What ! my modest one, sweet vestal, thouwilt go no more : very well, thou shalt be carried.*'^I will raise the city with my cries," said she,passionately, and the colour mounted to her brow.We will take care of that, too ; thou shalt gogagged."Then may the gods help me !" said Nydia,rising ; " I will appeal to the magistrates."Thine oath, remember /" said a hollow voice,as for the first time Calenus joined in the dialogue.POMPEII. 199At those words, a trembling shook the frame ofthe unfortunate girl ; she clashed her hands imploringly." Wretch that I am," she cried, andburst violently into sobs.Whether, or not, it was the sound of that vehementsorrow which brought the gentle Stratoniceto the spot, her grisly form at this moment appearedin the chamber.How now, what hast thou been doing withmy slave, brute ?" said she, angrily, to Burbo.Be quiet, wife," said he, in a tone half sullen,half timid; "you want new girdles and fine clothes,do you ? Well then, take care of your slave, oryou may want them long. Va capite tuo — vengeanceon thy head, wretched one !*"What is this r" said the hag, looking fromone to the other.Nydia started as by a sudden impulse from thewall, against which she had leant ; she threw herselfat the feet of Stratonice ; she embraced herknees, and looking up at her with those sightless,but touching eyes —O my mistress !" sobbed she, "you are awoman, you have had sisters, you have been200 I THE LAST DAYS OFyoung like me, feel for me, save me ! I will go tothose horrible feasts no more."Stuff," said the hag, dragging her up rudelyby one of those delicate hands, fit for no harsherlabour than that of weaving the flowers Whichmade her pleasure or her trade ; " stuft'I these finescruples are not for slaves."Harkye," said Burbo, drawing forth his purse,and chinking its contents ; " you hear this music,wife ; by Pollux, if you do not break in yoncolt with a tight rein, you will hear it nomore."The girl is tired," said Stratonice, nodding toCalenus ; " she will be more docile when you nextwant her."You ! 1/ou ! who is here .'*" cried Nydia, castingher eyes round the apartment with so fearfuland straining a survey, that Calenus rose in alarmfrom his seat —"She must see with those eves !" muttered he.Who is here ? Speak, in heaven's name !Ah, if you were blind like me, you would be lesscruel," said she ; and she again burst into tears.POMPEII. 201Take her away," said Burbo, impatiently ;I hate these whisperings'"Come"" said Stratonice, pushing the poor childby the shoulders.Nydia drew herself aside, With an air to wliieliresolution gave dignity.Hear me"" she said, " I have served you faithfully— I, Who was brought up — Ah I my mother,my poor mother ! didst thou dream I should cometo this ?" She dashed the tear from her eyes, andproceeded — " Command me in aught else, and Iwill obey ; but, I tell you now, hard, stern, inexorableas you are, I tell you, that I will go thereno more ; or, if I am forced there, that I Avill implorethe mercy of the Praetor himself — I havesaid it : hear me, ye gods, I swear ! "^The hag's eyes glowed with fire ; she seizedthe child by the hair, with one hand, and raisedon high the other — that formidable right hand,the least blow of which seemed capable to crushthe frail and delicate form that trembled in hergrasp. That thought itself appeared to strike her,for she suspended the blow, changed her purpose,K 5202 THE LAST DAYS OFand dragging Nydia to the wall, seized from ahook a rope, often, alas ! applied to a similar purpose; and the next moment, the shrill, the agonizedshrieks of the blind girl, rang piercinglythi-ough the house.POMPEII 20oCHAPTER III.GLAUCUS MAKES A PURCHASE THAT AFTERWARDSCOSTS HIM HEAR.Hollo, my brave fellows!" said Lepidus, stoopinghis head, as he entered the low door-way of thehouse of Burbo. " We have come to see Avliiehof you most honor's your lanista." The gladiatorsrose from the table, in respect to three gallants,known to be among the gayest and richest youthsof Pompeii, and whose voices were therefore thedispensers of amphitheatrical reputation.What fine animals," said Clodius to Glaucus ;worthy to be gladiators.""It is a pity they are not warriors," returnedGlaucus.A singular thing it was to see the dainty andfastidious Lepidus, whom in a banquet a ray ofdaylight seemed to blind, whom in the bath abreeze of air seemed to blast, in whom Natureseemed twisted and perverted from every natural204 THE LAST DAYS OFimpulse, and curdled into one dubious thing ofeffeminacy and art ; — a singular thing was it to seethis Lepidus, now all eagerness, and energy, andlife, patting the vast shoulders of the gladiators witha blanched and girlish hand, feeling with a mincinggripe their great brawn and iron muscles, all lost incalculating admiration at that manhood which hehad spent his life in carefully banishing from himself.So have we seen at this day, the beardless flutterersof the saloons of London, thronging round theheroes of the Fivescourt — so have we seen them admireand gaze, and calculate a bet — so have we seenmeet together in ludicrous yet in melancholy assemblage— the two extremes of civilized societythe patrons of pleasure and its slaves — vilest ofall slaves — at once ferocious and mercenary ; — maleprostitutes who sell their strength, as women theirbeauty ; beasts in act, but outdoing the beasts inmotive, for the last at least do not mangle themselvesfor money !Ha ! Niger, how will you fight," said Lepidus,and with whom?"*' Sporus challenges me," said the grim giant ;we shall light to the death, I hoj^e. 'POMPEII. £05Ah ! to be sure," grunted Sporus, with atwinkle of his small eye.He takes the sword, I the net and the trident :it will be rare sport. I hope the survivor willhave enough to keep up the dignity of the crown""Never fear, we 11 fill the purse, my Hector,"said Clodius; " let me see, you fight against Niger .'*Glaucus, a bet — I back Niger."I told you so," cried Niger exultingly. " Thenoble Clodius knows me ; count yourself dead already,my Sporus."Clodius took out his tablet, " A bet, ten sententia.*What say you .'*"So be it," said Glaucus, " but whom have wehere ? I never saw this hero before," and he glancedat Lydon, whose limbs Avere slighter than thoseof his companions, and who had something of gi-ace,and something even of noble in his face, which hisprofession had not yet wholly destroyed.It is Lydon, a youngster, practised only withthe wooden sword as yet," answered Niger condescendingly." But he has the true blood in him,and has challenged Tetraides."A little more tluiii 80/.206 THE LAST DAYS OFHe challenged 7ne,'" said Lydon, " I accept theoffer."And how do you fight ?" asked Lepidus :Chut, my hoy, wait a while before you contendwith Tetraides." Lydon smiled disdainfully.Is he a citizen or a slave .'*" said Clodius.A citizen, we are all citizens here," quothNiger.Stretch out your arm, my Lydon," said Lepidus,with the air of a connoisseur.The gladiator, with a significant glance at hiscompanions, extended an arm which, if not so hugein its girth as those of his comrades, was so firmin its muscles — so beautifully symmetrical in itsproportions, that the three visitors uttered simultaneouslyan admiring exclamation.Well, man, what is your weapon .'^" said Claudius,tablet in hand.We are to fight first with the cestus ; afterwards,if both survive, with swords," returnedTetraides, sharply, and with an envious scowl.With the cestus," cried Glaucus, " there youare wrong, Lydon. The cestus is the Greek fashion,1 know it well. You should have encouraged fleshPOMPEII. 207for that contest ; you are far too thin for it — avoidthe cestus."I cannot," said Lydon.And why ?"I have said — because he has challenged me."But he will not hold you to the preciseweapon""My honour holds me I"" returned Lydon proudly.I bet on Tetraides, two to one, at the cestus,"said Clodius; " shall it be, Lepidus ? — even betting,with swords."If you give me three to one, I will not take theodds," said Lepidus ; " Lydon will never come tothe swords. You are mighty courteous."What say you, Glaucus ?" said Clodius.I will take the odds three to one."Ten sestertia to thirty .^"Yes"*Clodius wrote the bet in his book.Pardon me, noble sponsor mine," said LydonThe reader will not confound the ses tertii with the sestertia.A sestertium, which was a sum not a coin, was a thousand timesthe value of a sesterces ; the first was equivalent to 8/. In. 5^cl.the last to Id. 3J farthings of our money.208 THE LAST DAYS OFin a low voice to Glaucus, " but how much thinkyou the victor will gain ?''How much ? why, perhaps seven sestertia."You are sure it will be as much ?"At least. But out on you ! — a Greek wouldhave thought of the honour, and not the money.Oh ! Romans, everywhere ye are Romans !"A blush mantled over the bronzed cheek of thegladiator."Do not wrong me, noble Glaucus; I think ofboth, but I should never have been a gladiatorbut for the money."Base ! mayest thou fell ! A miser never wasa hero."I am not a miser," said Lydon haughtily, andhe withdrew to the other end of the room.But I don't see Burbo, where is Burbo .'' Imust talk with Bm'bo," cried Clodius.He is within," said Niger, pointing to thedoor at the extremity of the room.And Stratonice, the brave old lass, where isshe .''" quoth Lepidus.^^'hy, she was here just before you entered,but she heard something that displeased her yonderPOMPEII.and vanished. Pollux ! old Burbo had perhapscaught hold of some girl in the back-room. I hearda female's voice crying out ; the old dame is as jealousas Juno."*'Ho! excellent'' cried Lepidus, laughing.Come, Clodius, let us go shares M-ith Jupiter,perhaps he has caught a Leda."At this moment a loud cry of pain and terrorstartled the group.Oh, spare me ! spare me ! I am but a child, Iam blind, — is not that punishment enough ?""O Pallas ! I know that voice, it is my poorflower girl !" exclaimed Glaucus, and he darted atonce into the quarter whence the cry rose.He burst the door, he beheld Nydia writhing inthe grasp of the infuriate hag ; the cord, alreadydabbled with blood, was raised in the air, it wassuddenly arrested.Fury !" said Glaucus, and with his left handhe caught Nydia from her grasp. " How dare yeuse thus a girl, — one of your own sex, — a child ? —My Nydia, my poor infant !"Oh I is that you, is that Glaucus," exclaimedthe flower girl, in a tone almost of transport ; the210 THE LAST DAYS OFtears stood attested on her cheek, she smiled, sheching to his breast, she kissed his robe as she chmg.And how dare you, pert stranger, interferebetween a free woman and her slave ! Bv thegods ! despite yom fine tmiie and your filthy perfumes,I doubt whether you are even a Romancitizen, my mannikin."Fair words, mistress, fair words," said Claudius,now entering with Lepidus. " This is myfriend and sworn brother ; he must be put undershelter of your tongue, sweet one ; it rains stones rGive me my slave !'" shrieked the virago, placingher mighty grasp on the breast of the Greek.Not if all your sister Furies could help you,"answered Glaucus. " Fear not, sweet Nydia ; anAthenian never forsook distress !"Hollo !" said Burbo, rising reluctantly, " whatturmoil is all this about a slave ; let go the younggentleman, wife — let him go — for his sake the pertthing shall be spared this once." So saying, hedrew, or rather dragged, off his ferocious hcljunate.Methought when we entered," said Clodius,there was another man present."He is gone."POMPEII.For, the priest of Isis had indeed thought it hightime to vanish.Oh, a friend of mine ! a brother eupman, aquiet dog, who does not love these snarling," saidBurbo carelessly. " But go, child, you vriW tearthe gentleman's tunic if you cling to him so tight ;go, you are pardoned."Oh, do not, do not forsake me !" cried Nydia,clinging yet closer to the Athenian.Moved by her forlorn situation, her appeal tohim, her own innumerable and touching graces,the Greek seated himself on one of the rude chairs.He held her on his knees — he wiped the bloodfrom her shoulders with his long hair — he kissedthe tears from her cheeks — he whispered to her athousand of those soothing words with which wecalm the grief of a child ; — and so beautiful did heseem in his gentle and consoling task, that eventhe fierce heart of Stratonice was touched. Hispresence seemed to shed light over that base andobscene haunt — young, beautiful, glorious, he wasthe emblem of all that earth made most happycomforting one that earth had abandoned !Well, who could have thought our blind Nydia212 THE LAST DAYS OFlead been so honoured," said the virago, wiping herheated brow.Glaucus looked up at Burbo.My good man," said he, " this is your shive ;she sings well, she is accustomed to the care offlowers, I wish to make a present of such a slave toa lady. Will you sell her to me .?" As he spokehe felt the whole frame of the poor girl tremblewith delight ; she started up, she put her dishevelledhair from her eyes, she looked around, as if,alas ! she had the power to see!Sell our Nydia ! no, indeed," said Stratonice,gruffly.Nydia sank back with a long sigh, and againclasped the robe of her protector.Nonsense," said Clodius imperiously, " youmust oblige me. What, man ! what, old dame !offend me, and your trade is ruined. Is not Burbomy kinsman Pansa's client ? Am I not theoracle of the amphitheatre and its heroes ? If Isay the word, break up your wine-jars, you sell nomore ; Glaucus, the slave is yours."Burl)o scratched his huge head in evident embarrassment.POMPEII. 213The girl is worth her weight in goal to me""Name your price, I am rich," said Glaucus.The antient Italians were like the modern, therewas nothing they woukl not sell, much less a poorblind girl.I paid six sestertia for her, she is worth twelvenow"" muttered Stratonice.You shall have twenty ; come to the magistratesat once, and then to my house for yourmoney's"'I would not have sold the dear girl for a hundred,but to oblige noble Clodius,"'"' said Burbowhiningly. " And you will speak to Pansa aboutthe place of designate at the amphitheatre, nobleClodius ; it would just suit me.''"'Thou shalt have it"" said Clodius ; adding in awhisper to Burbo, " yon Greek can make yourfortune ; money runs through him like a sieve ;mark to-day with white chalk, my Priam""An davis f said Glaucus, in the formalquestion of sale and barter.Dabitiir,'"' answered Burbo.Then, then, T am to go with you, — with you,O happiness r murmured Nydia.214 THE LAST DAYS OFPretty one, yes ; and tliy hardest task henceforthshall be to sing thy Grecian hymns to theloveliest lady in Pompeii."The girl sprang from his clasp, a change cameover her whole face, so bright the instant before ;she sighed heavily, and then once more taking hishand, she said,I thought I was to go to your house."And so thou shalt for the present ; come — welose time."POMPEII, 215CHAPTER IV.THE RIVAL OF GLAUCUS PRESSES ONWARD IK THERACE.loNE v,'as one of those brilliant characters which,but once or twice, flash across our career. Sheunited in the highest perfection the rarest of earthly-gifts— Genius and Beauty. No one ever possessedsuperior intellectual qualities without knowingthem — the alliteration of modesty and merit is prettyenough, but where merit is great, the veil of thatmodesty you admire never disguises its extentfi'om its possessor. It is the proud consciousnessof certain qualities that it cannot reveal to theevery-day world, that gives to genius that shy andreserved and troubled air, which puzzles and flattersyou when you encounter it. Do not deceive yourself,vain worldling, by the thought that the embarrassedmanner of yon great man is a sign that216 THE LAST DAYS OFhe does not know his superiority to you ! — thatwhich you take for modesty is but the struggle ofself-esteem. He knows but too oppressively howimmeasurably greater he is than you, and is onlydisconcerted, because, in the places you encounterhim, he finds himself suddenly descended to Amourlevel. He has not conversation — he has notthoughts — lie has not intercourse with such as youit is your littleness that disconcerts him, not hisown !lone, then, knew her genius, but, with thatcharming versatility that belongs of right towomen, she had the faculty, so few of a kindredgenius in the less malleable sex can claim ; — thefaculty to bend and model her graceful intellectto all whom it encountered. The sparklingfountain threw its waters alike upon the strand, thecavern, and the flowers ; it refreshed, it smiled,it dazzled everywhere. That pride, Which isthe necessary result of superiority, she woreeasily — in her breast it concentred itself inindependence. She pursued thus her o\vn brightand solitary path. She asked no aged matron todirect and guide her — she walked alone by thePOMPEII. 217torch of her own flickering purity. She obeyedno tyrannical and absolute custom. She mouldedcustom to her own will, but this so delicately andwith so feminine a grace, so perfect an exemptionfrom error, that you could not sav she oiitras-edcustom, but commanded it. It was possible not tolove lone ; perhaps she seemed too high for the loveof ATilgar natures ; but if you did once love her,it was to adoration. The wealth of her graceswas inexhaustible — she beautified the commonestaction ; a word, a look from her, seemed mao-ie.Love her and you entered into a new world, youpassed from this trite and commonplace earth. Youwere in a land in which your eyes saw everythingthrough an enchanted medium. In her presenceyou felt as if listening to exquisite music ; youwere steeped in that sentiment which has so littleof earth in it, and which music so well aspires —that intoxication which refines and exalts, whichseizes, it is true, the senses, but gives them the characterof the soul.She was peculiarly formed then to commandand fascinate the less ordinary and the bolder naturesof men ; to love her was to unite two passions,VOL. I. L218 THE LAST DAYS OFthat of love and of ambition — you aspired whenyou adored her. It was no wonder that she hadcompletely chained and subdued the mysteriousbut burning soul of the Egyptian, a man inwhom dwelt the fiercest passions. Her beauty andher soul alike enthralled him.Sot apart himself from the common world, heloved that daringness of character which also madeitself among common things aloof and alone. Hedid not, or he would not see, that that very isolationput her yet more from him than from the\Tilgar. Far as the poles — far as the night fromday, his solitude was divided from hers. He wassolitary from his dark and solemn vices — she fromher beautiful fancies, and her purity of virtue.If it was not strange that lone thus enthralledthe Egyptian, far less strange was it that shehad captured, as suddenly as irrevocably, the brightand sunny heart of the Athenian. The gladnessof a temperament which seemed woven from thebeams of light, had led Glaucus into pleasure. Heobeyed no more vicious dictates, when he wanderedinto the dissipations of his time, than the exhilaratingvoices of youth and health. He threwPOMPEII. 219the brightness of his native over every abyss andcavern through which he strayed. His imaginationdazzled him, but his heart never was corrupted.Far more penetrating than his companionsdeemed, he saw that they sought to prey upon hisriches and his youth, but he despised wealth saveas the means of enjoyment, and youth was thegreat sympathy that united him to them. He felt,it is true, the impulse of nobler thoughts andhigher aims than in pleasure could be indulged :but the world was one vast prison, to which theSovereign of Rome was the Imperial gaoler ; — andthe very virtues, which in the free days of Athenswould have made him ambitious, in the slavery ofearth, made him inactive and supine. For in thatunnatural and bloated civilization, all that Alasnoble in emulation was forbidden. Ambition inthe regions of a despotic and luxurious court, wasbut the contest of flattery and craft. Avarice hadbecome the sole ambition — men desired praetor-shipsand provinces only as the licence to pillage,and government was but the excuse of rapine. Itis in small States that glory is most active andpure — the more confined the limits of the circle,L 2220 THE LAST DAYS OFthe more ardent the patriotism. Opinion is concentratedand strong — every eye reads your actions —your public motives are blended with your privateties — every spot in your narrow sphere is crowdedwith forms familiar since your childhood — the applauseof your citizens is like the caresses of yom-friends.But in large States, the city is hut thecourt ; the provinces — unknown to you, unfamiliarin customs, perhaps in language, — have no claim onyour patriotism, the ancestry of their inhabitantsis not yours. In the court you desire favour insteadof glory ; at a distance from the court publicopinion has vanished from you, and self-interesthas no counterpoise.Italy, Italy, while I write, your skies are overme — your seas flow beneath my feet, listen notto the blind policy which would unite all yourcrested cities, mourning for their republic, into oneempire ; false, pernicious delusion ! your only hopeof regeneration is in division. Florence, Milan,Venice, Genoa, may be free once more, ifeach is free. But dream not of freedom for thewhole while you enslave the parts ; the heart mustbe the centre of the system, the blood mast circus221late freely everywhere ; and in vast communities,you behold but a bloated and feeble giant, whosebrain is imbecile, whose limbs are dead, and A\'hopays in disease and weakness the penalty of transcendingthe natural proportions of health andvigour.Thus thrown back upon themselves, the moreardent qualities of Glaucus found no vent, save inthat overflowing imagination, which gave grace topleasure and poetry to thought. Ease was lessdespicable than contention with parasites and slaves,and luxury could yet be refined though ambitioncould not be ennobled. But all that was best andbrightest in his soul woke at once Avhen he knewlone. Here was an empire — worthy of demigodsto attain ; here was a glory, which the reekingsmoke of a foul society could not soil or dim.Love in every time, in every state, can thus findspace for its golden altars. And tell me if thereever, even in the ages most favourable to glory,could be a triumph more exalted and elating thanthe conquest of one noble heart .''And whether it was that this sentiment inspiredhim, his ideas glowed more brightly — his soul222 THE LAST DAYS OFseemed more awake and more visible in lone'spresence. If natural to love lier, it was nati-althat she should return the passion. Young, brilliant,eloquent, enamoured, and Athenian, he wasto her as the incarnation of the poetry of herfathers'" land. They were not like creatures of aworld in which strife and sorrow are the elements ;they were like things to be seen only in the holydayof Nature, so glorious and so fresh wastheir youth, their beauty, and their love. Theyseemed out of place in the harsh and every-dayearth ; they belonged of right to the Saturnianage, and the dreams of demigod and nymph. Itwas as if the poetry of life gathered and fed itselfin them, and in their hearts were concentrated thelast rays of the Sun of Delos and of GreeceBut if lone was independent in her choice oflife, so was her modest pride proportionably vigilantand easily alarmed. The falsehood of theEgyptian was invented by a deep knowledge ofher nature. The story of coarseness — of indelicacyin Glaucus, stung her to the quick. She felt it areproach upon her character and her career, a punishmentabove all to her love ; she felt, for thePOMPEII, 223first time, how suddenly she had yielded to thatlove ; she blushed with shame at a weakness, theextent of which she was startled to perceive ; sheimagined it was that weakness which had incurredthe contempt of Glaucus ; she endured the bitterestcurse of noble natures — humiliation ! — Yet herlove, perhaps, was no less alarmed than her pride.If one moment she murmured reproaches uponGlaucus — if one moment she renounced, she almosthated, him — at the next she burst into passionatetears, her heart yielded to its softness, and she saidin the bitterness of anguish, " He despises me — hedoes not love me !"From the hour the Egyptian had left her, shehad retired to her most secluded chamber — shehad shut out her hand-maids — she had deniedherself to the crowds that besieged her door.Glaucus was excluded with the rest ; he wondered,but he guessed not why! He never attributedto his lone — his queen — his goddess — thatwomanlike caprice of which the love-poets of Italyso unceasingly complain. He imagined her, in themajesty of her candour, above all the arts thattorture. He was troubled, but his hopes Avere not224 THE LAST DAYS OFdimmed, for he knew already that he loved andwas beloved ; ^vhat more could he desire as anamulet against fear ?At deepest night, then, when the streets werehushed, and the high moon only beheld his devotions,he stole to that temple of his heart — her home ;* andwooed her after the beautiful fashion of his country.He covered her threshold with the richestgarlands, in which every flower was a volume ofsweet passion, and he charmed the long summernight with the sound of the Lycian lute; andverses, which the inspiration of the moment sufficedto weave.But the window above opened not ; no smilemade yet more holy the shining air of night. Allwas still and dark. He knew not if his verse waswelcome, and his suit was heard.Yet lone slept not, nor disdained to hear. Thosesoft strains ascended to her chamber ; they soothedthey subdued her. While she listened, she believednothing against her lover ; but when theyAvere stilled at last, and his step departed, the• Atlienspiis — " The true temple of Cupid is the house of thebeloved one."POMPEII. 225spell ceased ; and, in the bitterness of her soul,she almost conceived in that delicate flattery, ancAv affront.I said she was denied to all ; but there was oneexception — there was one person who would notbe denied, assuming over her actions and her housesomething like the authority of a parent : Arbaces,for himself, claimed an exemption from all theceremonies observed by others. He entered thethreshold with the licence of one who feels that heis privileged, and at home. He made his way toher solitude, and with that sort of quiet andapologetic air, which seemed to consider theright as a thing of course. With all the independenceof lone's character, his art had enabled himto obtain a secret and powerful control over hermind. She could not shake it off; sometimes liedesired to do so ; but she never actively struggledagainst it. She was fascinated by his serpent eye.He arrested, he commanded her, by the magic ofa mind long accustomed to awe and to subdue.Utterly unaware of his real character, or his hiddenlove, she felt for him the reverence whichgenius feels for wisdom, and virtue for sanctity.L 5226 THE LAST DAYS OFShe regarded him as one of those mighty sages ofoil, who attained to the mysteries of knowledgeby an exemption from the passions of their kind.She scarcely considered him as a being, like herself,of the earth, but as an oracle at once dark andsacred. She did not love him, but she feared.His presence Alas unwelcome to her ; it dimmedher spirit even in its brightest mood ; he seemedwith his chilling and lofty aspect, like some eminencewhich casts a shadow over the sun. But shenever thought of forbidding his visits. She waspassive under the influence which created in herbreast, not the repugnance, but something of thestillness, of terror,Arbaces himself now resolved to exert allhis arts to possess himself of that treasure heso burning' coveted. He was cheered andelated by his conquest over her brother. Fromthe hour in which A})a?cides fell beneath theVoluptuous sorcery of that fete which wehave described, he felt his empire over theyoung priest triumphant and ensured. Heknew that there is no victim so thoroughlysubdued, ass a young and fervent man, for thePOMPEII. 2£7first time, delivered to the thraldom of thesenses.When Apaecides recovered, with the morning-light,from the profound sleep which succeeded tothe delirium of wonder and of please, he was, it istrue, ashamed — terrified — appalled. His vows ofausterity and celibacy echoed in his ear ; his thirstafter holiness — had it been quenched at so unhalloweda stream ? But Arbaces knew well the meansby which to confirm his conquest. From the artsof pleasure, he led the young priest at once tothose of his mysterious wisdom. He bared to hisamazed eyes the initiatory secrets of the sombrephilosophy of the Nile — those secrets plucked fromthe stars, and the wild chemistry, which in thosedays, when reason herself was but the creature ofimagination, might well pass for the lore of adiviner magic. He seemed to the young eyes ofthe priest, as a being above mortality, and endowedwith supernatural gifts. That yearningand intense desire for the knowledge Which isnot of earth — which had burnt from his boyhoodin the heart of the priest — was dazzled,until it confused and mastered his clearer228 THE LAST DAYS OFsense. He gave himself to the art which thusaddressed at once the two strongest of humanpassions, that of pleasure, and that of knowledge.He was loth to believe that one so wisecould err — that one so lofty could stoop todeceive. Entangled in the dark web of metaphysicalmoralities, he caught at the excuse by whichthe Egyptian converted vice into a virtue. Hispride was insensibly flattered that Arbaces haddeigned to rank him with himself — to set himapart from the laws which bound the vulgar — tomake him an august participator, both in themystic studies, and the magic fascinations, of hissolitude. The pure and stern lessons of that creedto which Olinthus had sought to make him convert,were swept away from his memory by thedeluge of new passions. And the Egyptian, whowas versed in the articles of that true faith, andwho soon learned from his pupil the effect whichhad been produced upon him by its believers,sought, not unskilfully, to undo that effect, by atone of reasoning, half sarcastic, and half earnest.This faith," said he, " is but a borrowed plagiarism,from one of the many allegories invented byPOMPEII. 229our priests of old. Observe"" he added, pointing toa hieroglyphical scroll — " observe, in these antientfigures, the origin of the Christian's Trinity. Hereare also three Gods — the Deity — the Spirit — andthe Son. Observe that the epithet of the Son is'Saviour' — observe, that the sign by which hishuman qualities are denoted, is the cross,* Notehere, too, the mystic history of Osiris, how he puton death — how he lay in the grave, and how, thusfulfilling a solemn atonement, he rose again fromthe dead ! In these stories we but design topaint an allegory from the operations of nature,and the evolutions of the eternal heavens. But,the allegory unknown, the types themselves havefurnished to credulous nations the materials ofmany creeds. They have travelled to the vastplains of India ; they have mixed themselves upin the visionary speculations of the Greek : becomingmore and more gross and embodied, as theyemerge farther from the shadows of their antiqueorigin, they have assumed • human and palpableform in this novel faith ; and the believers ofThe believer will draw from this vague coincidence a verydifferent corollary than that of the Egyptian.230 THE LAST DAYS OFGalilee are but the unconscious repeaters of one ofthe superstitions of the Nile !"This was the last argument which completelysubdued the priest. It was necessary to him as tofull — to believe in something ; — and undividedand, at last, reluctant, he surrendered himselfto that belief which Arbaces inculcated, and whichall that was human in passion — all that was flatteringin vanity — all that was alluring in pleasure —served to invite to, and contributed to confirm.This conquest thus easily made, the Egyptiancould now give himself wholly up to the pursuit ofa far dearer and mightier object ; and he hailed,in his success with the brother, an omen of histriumph over the sister.He had seen lone on the day following the revelwe have witnessed ; and which was also the dayafter he had poisoned her mind against his rival.The next day, and the next, he saw her also, andeach time he laid himself out with consummateart, partly to confirm her impression against Glaucus,and principally to prepare her for the impressionshe desired her to receive. The proud lone tookcare to conceal the anguish she endured ; and thePOMPEII. 231pride of woman has an hypocrisy, which can deceivethe most penetrating, and shame the mostastute. But Arbaces was no less cautious not torecur to a subject which he felt it was most politicto treat as of the lightest importance. He knewthat by dwelling much upon the fault of a rival,you only give him dignity in the eyes of your mistress: the wisest plan is, neither loudly to hate,nor bitterly to contemn : the wisest plan is, tolower him by an indifference of tone, as if youcould not dream that he could be loved. Yoursafety is in concealing the wound to your ownpride, and imperceptibly alarming that of the umpire,Avhose voice is fate ! Such, in all times, willbe the policy of one, who knows the science of thesex — it was now the Egyptian's.He recurred no more then to the presumptionof Glaucus : he mentioned his name, butnot more often than that of Clodius or of Lepidus.He affected to class them together, as things ofa low and ephemeral species ; as things wantingnothing of the butterfly, save its innocence and itsgrace. Sometimes he slightly alluded to someinvented debauch, in which he declared them com-232 THE LAST DAYS OFpassions : sometimes he reverted to them as theantipodes of those lofty and spiritual natures, towhose order that of lone belonged. Blinded alikeby the pride of lone, and, perhaps, by his own, hedreamed not that she already loved ; but he dreadedlest she might have formed for Glaucus the firstfluttering prepossessions that lead to love. And,secretly, he ground his teeth in rage and jealousy,when he reflected on the youth, the fascinations,and the brilliancy of that formidable rival he pretendedto undervalue.It was on the fourth day from the date of theclose of the previous book, that Arbaccs and lonesate together.You wear your veil at home"" said the Egyptian; " that is not fair to those whom you honourwith your friendships*'But, to Arbaces," answered lone, who, indeed,had cast the veil over her features, to conceal eyesred With weeping — " to Arbaces, who looks onlyto the mind-what matters it that the face is concealed."I do look only to the mind," replied the Egypt233tian; " show me then your face — for there I shallsee it !"You grow gallant in the air of Pompeii," saidlone, with a forced tone of gaiety.Do you think, fair lone, that it is only atPompeii that I have learned to value you." TheEgyptian's voice trembled — he paused for a moment,and then resumed.There is a love, beautiful Greek, which isnot the love only of the thoughtless and the young —there is a love which sees not with the eyes, whichhears not with the ears ; but in Which soul isenamoured of soul. The comites-man of thy ancestors,the cave-nursed Plato, dreamed of sucha love — his followers have sought to imitate it ;but it is a love that is not for the herd to echo — itis a love that only high and noble natures can conceive— it hath nothing in common with the Sympathiesand ties of coarse affection ; — wrinkles donot revolt it — the homeliness of feature does notdeter — it asks youth, it is true — but it asks it onlyin the freshness of the emotions — it asks beauty, itis true — but it is the beauty of the thought and of234 THE Lear DAYS OFthe spirit. Such is the love, O lone, which is aworthy offering to thee, from the cold and theaustere. Austere and cold thou deepest me —such is the love that I venture to lay upon thyshrine — thou canst receive it without a blush""And its name is Friendship V replied lone ;her answer was innocent — yet it sounded like thereproof of one conscious of the design of the speaker."Friendship*" said Arbaces, vehemently; "No,that is a word too often profaned, to apply to asentiment so sacred. Friendship ! it is a tie thatbinds fools and profligates ! Friendship ! it is thebond that unites the frivolous hearts of a Glaucusand a Clodius ! Friendship i no, that is an affectionof earth, of vulgar habits and sordid sympathies; the feeling of which I speak, is borrowedfrom the stars* — it partakes of that mystic and ineffableyearning, which we feel when we gaze onthem — it burns — yet it purifies — it is the lamp ofNaphtha in the alabaster vase — glowing with fragrantodours, but shining only through the purestvessels. No ; it is not love, and it is not friendship,that Arbaces feels for lone. Give it noPlato.POMPEII. soname — earth has no name for it — it is not ofearth — why debase it with earthly epithets, andearthly associations."Never before had Arbaces ventured so far, yethe felt his ground step by step ; he knew that heuttered a language which, if at this day of affectedplatonism, would speak unequivocally to the earsof beauty, was at that time strange and unfamiliar,to which no precise idea could be attached, fromwhich he could imperceptibly advance or recede,as occasion suited ; as hope encouraged, or feardeterred. lone trembled, though she knew notwhy ; her veil hid her features, and masked anexpression, which, if seen by the Egyptian, wouldhave at once damped and enraged him ; in fact, henever Meas more displeasing to her — the harmoniousmodulation of the most suasive voice that ever disguisedunhallowed thought, fell discordantly onher ear. Her whole soul was still filled with theimage of Glaucus ; and the accent of tendernessfrom another, only revolted and dismayed ; yetshe did not conceive that any passion more ardentthan that platonism which Arbaces expressed,kicked beneath his words. She thought that he,236 THE LAST DAYS OFin truth, spoke only of the affection and sympathyof the soul ; but was it not precisely that affectionand that sympathy which had made a part of thoseemotions she felt for Glaucus ; and could any otherfootstep than his approach the haunted actus ofher heart?Anxious at once to change the conversation, shereplied, therefore, with a cold and indifferentvoice, " Whomsoever Arbaces honours with thesentiments of esteem, it is natural that his elevatedWisdom should colour that sentiment with its ownhues ; it is natural that his friendship should be]purer than that of others, whose pursuits and errorshe does not deign to share. But tell me, Arbaces,hast thou seen my brother of late ? he has notvisited me for several days ; and when I last sawhim, his manner disturbed and alarmed me much :I fear lest he was too precipitate in the severechoice that he has adopted, and that he repents anirrevocable step."Be cheered, lone," replied the Egyptian. " Itis true, that some little time since he was troubledand sad of spirit ; those doubts beset him, whichwere likely to haunt one of that fervent POMPEII. 23rament which ever ebbs and flows, and vibratesbetween excitement and exhaustion. But Ac, lone,he came to me in his anxieties and his distress ;he sought one who pitied and loved him : I havecalled his mind ; I have removed his doubts ; Ihave taken him from the threshold of wisdom intoits temple ; and before the majesty of the goddesshis soul is hushed and soothed. Fear not, he willrepent no more; they who trust themselves to Ar-faces,never repent but for a moment."You rejoice me," answered lone : " My dearbrother ! in his contentment I am happy."The conversation then turned upon lighter subjects; the Egyptian exerted himself to please, hecondescended even to entertain ; the vast varietyof his knowledge enabled him to adorn and lightup every subject on which he touched ; and lone,forgetting the displeasing effect of his former ^^'ords,was carried away, despite her sadness, by themagic of his intellect. Her manner became unrestrained,and her language fluent. And Arbaces,who had waited his opportunity, now hastened toseize it.'' You have never seen," said he, " the interior238 THE LAST DAYS OFof my home ; it may amuse you to do so : it containssome rooms that may explain to you what youhave often asked me to describe ; — the fashion ofan Egyptian house; not, indeed, that you will perceivein the poor and minute proportions of Romanarchitecture, the massive strength, the vast space,the gigantic magnificence, or even the domesticconstruction of the palaces of Thebes and Memphis; but something there is, here and there, thatmay serve to express to you some notion of thatantique civilization which has humanized the world.Devote, then, to the austere friend of your youthone of these bright summer evenings, and let meboast that my gloomy mansion has been honouredwith the presence of the admired lone."Unconscious of the pollutions of the mansion, —of the danger that awaited her, lone readily assentedto the proposal ; the next evening wasfixed for the visit ; and the Egyptian, with aserene countenance, and a heart beating with fierceand unholy joy, departed. Scarce had he gone,when another visiter claimed admission — but nowwe return to Glaucus.POMPEII. 239CHAPTER V.THE POOR TORTOISE. — New CHANGES FOR Lydia.The morning sun shone over the small andodorous garden enclosed within the peristyle ofthe house of the Athenian. He lay, reclined, sadand listlessly, on the smooth gi-ass which intersectedthe viridarium; and a slight canopy stretchedabove broke the fierce rays of the summer sun.When that fairy mansion was first disinterredfrom the earth, they found in the garden the shell ofa tortoise that had been its inmate.* That animal,so strange a link in the creation, to whom Natureseems to have denied all the pleasures of life, save• I do not know whether it be sill preserved, (I hope so,) butthe shell of a tortoise was found in the house appropriated, inthis work, to Glaucus.240 THE LAST DAYS OFlifers passive and dreamlike perception, had been theguest of the place for years before Glaucus purchasedit ; for years, indeed, which went beyond thememory of man, and to which tradition assignedan almost incredible date. The house had beenbuilt and rebuilt — its possessors had changed andfluctuated — generations had flourished and decayed— and still the tortoise dragged on its slow andunsjinpathizing existence. In the earthquake,which sixteen years before had overthrown manyof the public buildings of the city, and scaredaway the amazed inhabitants, the house now inhabitedby Glaucus had been terribly shattered.The possessors deserted it for many days ;on their return, they cleared away the ruins whichencumbered the viridarium, and found still thetortoise, unharmed and unconscious of the surroundingdestruction. It seemed to bear a charmedlife in its languid blood and imperceptiblemotions : yet was it not so inactive as it seemed ;it held a regular and monotonous course : inch byinch it traversed the little orbit of its domain,taking months to accomplish the whole gyration.It was a restless voyager that tortoise ! — patientlyPOMPEII. 241and with pain did it perform its self-appointedjourneys, evincing no interest in the thingsaround it — a philosopher concentred in itself!There was something grand in its solitaryselfishness ! — the sun in which it basked — thewaters poured daily over it — the air, which itinsensibly inhaled, were its sole and unfailingluxuries. The mild changes of the season, inthat lovely clime, affected it not. It covered itselfwith its shell — as the saint in his piety — as thesage in his wisdom — as the lover in his hope.It was impetuous to the shocks and mutationsof time; — it was an emblem of time itself: slow —reg-alar — perpetual : emitting of the passions thatfret themselves around ; — of the wear and tear ofmortality. The poor tortoise ! — nothing less thanthe bursting of volcanoes, the convulsions of theriven world, could have quenched its sluggishspark ! The Inexorable Death, that spared notpomp or beauty, passed unfeelingly by a thingto which death could bring so insignificant achange.For this animal, the mercurial and vivid Greekfelt all the wonder and affection of contrast. HeVOL. I. M242 THE LAST DAYS OFcould spend hours in surveying its creeping progress,in moralizing over its mechanism. Hedespised it in joy, — he envied it in sorrow.Regarding it now as he lay along the sward,its dull mass moving while it seemed motionless,the Athenian murmured to himself —"The eagle dropped a stone from his talons,thinking to break thy shell — the stone crushed thehead of a poet. This is the allegory of fate !Dull thing ! Thou hadst a father and a mother ;perhaps, ages ago, thou thyself hadst a mate.Did thy parents love, or didst thou ? Did thyslow blood circulate more gladly when thou didstcreep to the side of thy wedded one ? Wert thoucapable of affection ? Could it distress thee if shewas away from thy side ? Couldst thou feelwhen she-was present .'' What would I not giveto know the history of thy mailed breast — to gazeupon the mechanism of thy faint desires — to markwhat hair-breadth difference separates thy sorrowfrom thy joy ? Yet, methinks, thou wouldstknow if lone were present ! Thou wouldst feel hercoming like a happier air, like a gladder sun. Ienvy thee now, for thou knowest not that she isPOMPEII. 243absent ; and I — would I could be like thee — betweenthe intervals of seeing her ! What doubt,what presentiment, haunts me ! why Avill she notadmit me ? Days have passed since I heard hervoice. For the first time life grows flat to me.I am as one who is left alone at a banquet, thelights dead, and the flowers faded. Ah ! lone,couldst thou di-beam how I adore thee !"From these enamoured reveries, Glaucus wasinterrupted by the entrance of Nydia. She camewith her light, though cautious step, along themarble tablinum. She passed the portico, andpaused at the flowers which bordered the garden.She had her water-vase in her hand, and shesprinkled the thirsting plants, which seemed tobrighten at her approach. She bent to inhaletheir odour. She touched them timidly and caressingly.She felt, along their stems, if any witheredleaf, or creeping insect, marred their beauty.And as she hovered from flower to flower, withher earnest and youthful countenance, and gracefulmotions, you could not have imagined a fitterhandmaid for the goddess of the garden.Nydia, my child," said Glaucus.M 2244 THE LAST DAYS OFAt the sound of his voice, she paused at once —Hastening, blushing, breathless ; with her lips parted,her face upturned to catch the direction of thesound — she laid down the vase — she hastened tohim — and wonderful it was to see how unerringlyshe threaded her dark way through the flowers,and came by the shortest path to the side of hernew lord.Nydia,"*** said Glaucus, tenderly stroking backher long and beautiful hair —It is now three days since thou hast beenunder the protection of my household gods. Havethey smiled on thee ? Art thou happy ?"Ah ! so happy !" sighed the slave.And now," continued Glaucus, '^ that thouhast recovered somewhat from the hateful recollectionsof thy former state ; and now, that theyhave fitted thee (touching her broidered tunic)with garments more meet for thy delicate shape ;and now, sweet child, that thou hast accustomedthyself to a happiness, which may the gods grantthee ever, I am about to pray at thy hands a boon."Oil ! what can I do for thee ?" said Nydia, claspingher hands.POMPEII. 245Listen'' said Glaucus, " and young as thou art,thou shalt be my confidant. Hast thou ever heardthe name of lone ?''The blind girl gasped for breath, and turningpale as one of the statues which shone upon themfrom the peristyle, she answered with an effort,and after a moment's pause —Yes, I have heard that she is of Neapolis, andbeautiful.""■ Beautiful ! her beauty is a thing to dazzle theday ! Neapolis ! nay, she is Greek by origin ; Greeceonly could furnish forth such shapes. Nydia, — Ilove her !"I thought so," replied Nydia calmly.I love, and thou shalt tell her so. I am aboutto send thee to her. Happy Nydia, thou wilt bein her chamber — thou wilt drink the music of hervoice, — thou wilt bask in the sunny air of herpresence !"What ! what I wilt thou then send me fromthee rThou wilt go to lone," answered Glaucus, inatone that said, ' what more canst thou desire VNydia bm-st into tears.246 THE LAST DAYS OFGlaucus, raising himself, drew her towards himwith the soothing caresses of a brother.My child, my Nydia, thou deepest in ignoranceof the happiness I bestow on thee. She isgentle, and kind, and soft as the breeze of spring.She will be a sister to thy youth. She will appreciatethy winning talents ; she will loA^e thy simplegraces as none other could, for they are like herown. Deepest thou still ? fond fool ! I will notforce thee, sweet. Wilt thou not do for me thiskindness ?"Well, if I can serve thee, command. See, Iweep no longer, I am calm."That is my own Nydia," continued Glaucus,kissing her hand. " Go then to her : — if thou artdisappointed in her kindness — if I have deceivedthee, return when thou wilt ? I do not give theeto another, I but lend. My home ever be thyrefuge, sweet one. Ah ! would it could shelter allthe friendless and distressed. But if my heart whisperstruly, I shall claim thee again soon, my child.My home and lone's will become the same, andthou shalt dwell with both."A shiver j^asscd through the slight frame ofPOMPEII. 247the blind girl, but she wept no more — she wasresigned.Go then, my Nydia, to Tone's house — theyshall show thee the way. Take her the fairestflowers thou canst pluck ; the vase which containsthem I will give thee, thou must excuse its unworthiness.They shall take, too, with thee the lutethat I gave thee yesterday, and from which thouknowest so well to awaken the charming spirit.Thou shalt give her also this letter, in which, aftera mitred efforts, I have embodied something ofmy thoughts. Let thy ear catch every accent —every modulation of her voice, and tell me, whenwe meet again, if its music should flatter me ordiscourage. It is now, Nydia, some days since Ihave been admitted to lone ; there is something-mysteriousin this exclusion. I am distracted withdoubts and fears ; learn, for thou art quick, and'- thy care for me will sharpen tenfold thy acuteness —learn the cause of this unkindness, speak of me asoften as thou canst, let my name come ever to thylips ; insinuate how I love rather than proclaimit ; watch if she sighs while thou speaks, if sheanswer thee, — or if she reprove — in what accents she248 THE LAST DAYS OFreproves. Be my friend, plead for me, and oh !how vastly wilt thou overpay the little I havedone for thee. Thou comprehended, Nydia, thouart yet a child — have I said more than thoucanst understand ?"No,"And thou wilt serve me ?"Yes."'Joie to me v/hen thou hast gathered theflowers, and I will give thee the vase I spake of;seek me in the chamber of Leda : pretty one, thoudost not grieve now."Glaucus, I am a slave, what business have Iwith grief or joy ? 'Say est thou so ? No, Nydia, be free. I givethee freedom — enjoy it as thou wilt, and ]pardonme that I reckoned on thy desire to serve me."You are offended. Oh ! I would not for thatA\hich no freedom can give, offend you, Glaucus ;my guardian, my saviour, my protector, forgivethe poor blind girl ! She does not grieve even inleaving thee, if she can contribute to thy happiness."May the gods bless this grateful heart !" saidGlaucus, greatly moved; — and unconscious of thePOMPEII. 249fii-es he excited, he repeatedly kissed her forehead.Thou forgives me," said she, " and thou wilttalk no more of freedom ; my happiness is to bethy slave, thou hast promised thou wilt not giveme to another — "I have promised."And now then, I will gather the flowers."Silently, Nydia took from the hand of Glaucusthe costly and jewelled vase, in which the flowersvied with each other in hue and fragrance ; tearlesslyshe received his parting admonition. Shepaused for a moment when his voice ceased — shedid not trust herself to reply — she sought hishand — she raised it to her lips, dropped her veilover her face, and passed at once from his presence.She paused again as she reached the threshold —she stretched her hands towards it and murmured.Three happy days — days of unspeakable delighthave I known since I passed thee — blessed thresholdI — may peace dwell ever with thee when I amgone ! And now, my heart tears itself from thee,and the only sound it utters bids me — die !"M 5250 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VI.THE HAPPY BEAUTY AND THE BLIND SLAVE.A SLAVE entered the chamber of lone. A messengerfrom Glaucus desired to be admitted.lone hesitated an instant.She is bUnd, that messenger"" said the slave ;she will do her commission to none but thee"'Base is that heart which does not respect affliction! The moment she heard the messenger wasWind, lone felt the impossibility of returning achilling reply. Glaucus had chosen a herald thatwas indeed sacred — a herald that could not bedenied.What can he want with me ? what message canhe send ?" and the heart of lone beat quick. Thecurtain across the door was withdrawn, a soft andPOMPEII. 251eclioless step fell upon the marble. And Nydia,led by one of the attendants, entered with her preciousgift.She stood still a moment, as if listening for somesound that might direct her.Will the noble lone," said she, in a soft andlow voice, "deign to speak, that I may knowwhither to steer these benighted steps, and that Imay lay my offerings at her feet ?"Fair child"" said lone, touched and soothingly,give not thyself the pain to cross these slipperyfloors, my attendant will bring to me what thouhast to present ;" and she motioned to the handmaidto take the vase.I may give them to none but thee," answeredNydia ; and guided by her ear, she walked slowlyto the place where lone sate, and kneeling whenshe came before her, proffered the vase.lone took it from her hand, and placed it on thetable at her side. She then raised her gently, andwould have seated her on the couch, but the girlmodestly resisted.•' 1 have not yet discharged my office," said she,252 THE LAST DAYS OFand she drew the letter of Glaucus from her vest.This will, perhaps, explain why he who sent mechose so unworthy a messenger to lone."The Greek took the letter with a hand, thetrembling of which Nydia at once felt and sighedto feel. With folded arms, and downcast looks, shestood before the proud and stately form of lone ; —no less proud, perhaps, in her attitude of submission,lone waved her hand and the attendantswithdrew ; she gazed again upon the form of theyoung slave in surprise and beautiful compassion ;then, retiring a little from her, she opened andread the following letter :Glaucus to lone sends more than he dares toutter. Is lone ill ? tliy slaves tell me ' no,' andthat assurance comforts me. Has Glaucus offendedlone ? ah ! that question I may not ask fromthem. For five days I have been banished fromthy presence. Has the sun shone .'* — I know it not ;has the sky smiled ? — it has had no smile for me.My sun and my sky are lone. Do I ostend thee ?Am I too bold ? Do I say that on the ta])k'twhich my tongue has hesitated to breathe ? Alas !it is in thine absence that I feel most thePOMPEII.spells by which thou hast subdued me. And absence,that deprives me of joy, brings me courage.Thou wilt not see me ; thou hast banished also thecommon flatterers that flock around thee. Canstthou confound me with them ? It is not possible !Thou knowest too well that I am not of them —that their clay is not mine. For even were I ofthe humblest mould, the fragrance of the rose haspenetrated me, and the spirit of thy nature hathpassed within me, to embalm, to sanctify, to inspire.Have they slandered me to thee, lone .''Thou wilt not believe them. Did the Delphicoracle itself tell me thou wert unworthy, I wouldnot believe it : and am I less incredulous thanthou.^ I think of the last time we met — of thesong which I sang to thee — of the look that thougayest me in return. Disguise it as thou wilt,lone, there is something kindred between us, andour eyes acknowledged it, though our lips weresilent. Deign to see me, to listen to me, andafter that exclude me if thou wilt. I meant notso soon to say I loved. But those words rush tomy heart — they will have way. Accept, then, myhomage and my vows. Wc met first at the shrine254 THE LAST DAYS OFof Pallas ; shall we not meet before a softer and amore antient altar.Beautiful ! adored lone ! If my hot youthand my Athenian blood have misguided and alluredme, they have but taught my wanderings toappreciate the rest — the haven they have attained.I hang up my dripping robes on the Sea-god'sshrine. I have escaped shipwreck. I have foundTHEE. lone, deign to see me ; thou art gentle tostrangers, wilt thou be less merciful to those ofthine own land ? I await thy reply. Accept theflowers which I send — their sweet breath has alanguage more eloquent than words. They takefrom the sun the odours they return — they are theemblem of the love that receives and repays tenfold— the emblem of the heart that drunk thy raysand owes to thee the germ of the treasures that itproffers to thy smile. I send these by one thatthou wilt receive for her own sake, if not for mine.She, like us, is a stranger ; her father's ashes lieunder brighter skies ; but, less happy than we, sheis blind and a slave. Poor Nydia ! 1 seek as muchas possible to repair to her the cruelties of Nature,and of Fate, in asking permission to place herPOMPEII. 255with thee. She is gentle, quick, and docile. Sheis skilled in music and the song; and she is avery Coloris* to the flowers. She thinks, lone, thatthou wilt love her; if thou dost not, send herback to me.One word more. — Let me be bold, lone. Whythickest thou so highly of yon dark Egyptian ; hehath not about him the air of honest men ? WeGreeks learn mankind from our cradle ; we are notthe less profound, in that we affect no sombremien ; our lips smile, but our eyes are grave — theyobserve — they note — they study. Arbaces is notone to be credulously trusted : can it be, that hehath wronged me to thee ? I think it, for I lefthim with thee; thou safest how my presencestung him ; since then, thou hast not admitted me.Believe nothing that he can say to my disfavour ;if thou dost, tell me so at once; for this loneowes to Glaucus. Farewell ! This letter touchesthine hand ; these characters meet thine eyes —shall they be more blest than he who is theirauthor. Once more, farewell !"The Greek Flora.256 THE LAST DAYS OPIt seemed to lone, as she read this letter, as if amist had fallen from her eyes. What had been thesupposed offence of Glaucus ? that he had notreally loved ! And now, plainly, and in no dubiousterms, he confessed that love. From that momenthis power was fully restored. At every tenderword in that letter, so full of romantic and trustfulpassion, her heart smote her. And had she doubtedhis faith, and had she believed another .'' and had shenot, at least, allowed to him the culprit's right toknow his crime, to plead in his defence ? — the tearsrolled down Iior cheeks — she kissed the letter — sheplaced it in her bosom ; and, turning to Nydia, whostood in the same place, and in the same posture —Wilt thou sit, my child," said she, " while Iwrite an answer to this letter ?"You will answer it then ?" said Nydia, coldly ;well, the slave that accompanied me will takeback your answer""For you"" said lone, " stay with me — trustme, your service shall be light."Nydia bowed her head.What is your name, fair girl ?"'' They call me Nydia."POMPEII. 257Your country?"The land of Olpupiis— Thessaly.'^Thou shalt be to me a friends'' said lone,caressingly, " as thou art ah-lady half a countrywoman.Meanwhile, I beseech thee, stand not onthese cold and glassy marbles — There ! now thouart seated, I can leave thee for an instant."lone to Glaucus greeting, — come to me, Glaucus,"wrote lone ; " come to me tomorrow — Imay have been unjust to thee ; but I will tell thee,at least, the faiilt that has been imputed to thycharge. Fear not, henceforth, the Egyptian — fearnone. Thou mayest thou hast expressed too muchalas ! in these hasty words I have alreadydone so — farewell !"As lone reappeared with the letter, which shedid not dare to read after she had written — (Ah !common rashness, common timidity of love I) —Nydia started from her seat.You have written to Glaucus ?''"'I have."And will he thank the raessenwr who g-ivesto him thy letter .'*'"lone forgot that her companion was blind ; she258 THE LAST DAYS OFblushed from the brow to the neck, and remainedsilent.I mean this," added Nydia, in a calmer tone ;the lightest word of coldness from thee will saddenhim — the lightest kindness will rejoice. If itbe the first, let the slave take back thine answer; if it be the last, let me — I will return thisevening."And why, Nydia," asked lone, evasively,wouldst thou be the bearer of my letter P"""• It is so, then!" said Nydia. " Ah! how couldit be otherwise ; who could be unkind to Glaucus.'^"My child," said lone, a little more reservedlythan before, " thou speaks warmly — Glaucus,then, is amiable in thine eyes ?"Noble lone! Glaucus has been that to me whichneither fortune nor the gods have been — a friend TThe sadness mingled with dignity with whichNydia uttered these simple words, affected thebeautiful lone ; she bent down and kissed her.Thou art grateful, and deservedly so; why shouldI blush to say that Glaucus is worthy of thy gratitude? Go, my Nydia — take to him thyself thisletter — but return again. If I am from home,POMPEII. 259when thou returned — as this evening, perhaps, Ishall be — thy chamber shall be prepared next myown. Nydia, I have no sister — wilt thou be oneto me?"The Thessalian kissed the hand of lone, andthen said, with some embarrassment,One favour, fair lone — may I dare to ask it ?""Thou canst not ask what I will not grant,"replied the Neapolitan.They tell me," said Nydia, " that you arebeautiful beyond the loveliness of earth. Alas ! Icannot see that which gladdens the world ! Wiltthou suffer me then to pass my hand over thy face —that is my sole criterion of beauty, and I usuallyguess aright?"She did not wait for the answer of lone, but,as she spoke, gently and slowly passed her handoverthe bending and half averted features ofthe Greek — features which but one image in theworld can yet depicture and recall — that image isthe mutilated, but all wondrous, statue in her nativecity — her own Neapolis; — that Parian face, beforewhich all the beauty of the Florentine Venusis poor and earthly — that aspect so full of THE LAST DAYS OFmony — of youth — of genius — of the soul — whichmodern speculators have supposed the representationof Psyche.*Her touch lingered over the braided hair andpolished brow — over the downy and damask cheekover the dimpled lip — the swanlike and whitestneck. " I know, now, that thou art beautifulshe said, " and I can picture thee to my darknesshenceforth, and for ever !"When Nydia left her, lone sank into a deepbut delicious reverie. Glaucus then loved her ; heowned it — yes, he loved her. She drew forth againthat dear confession ; she paused over every word,she kissed every line ; she did not ask why he hadbeen maligned, she only felt assured that he hadbeen so. She wondered how she had ever believeda syllable against him ; she wondered how theEgyptian had been enabled to exercise a poweragainst Glaucus : she felt a chill creep over her asshe again turned to his warning against Arbaces,and her secret fear of that gloomy being darkThe wonderful remains of the statue, so called in the MuseBorhonico. The face, for sentiment and for feature, is the mostbeautiful of all which antient sculpture has bequeathed to us.POMPEII. 261ened into awe. She was awakened from thesethoughts by her maidens, who came to announce toher that the hour appointed to visit Arbaees wasarrived ; she started, she had forgotten the promise.Her first impression was to renounce it ; her second,was to laugh at her own fears of her eldest survivingfriend. She hastened to add the usual ornamentsto her dress, and doubtful whether sheshould yet question the Egyptian more closely withrespect to his accusation of Glaucus, or whethershe should wait till, without citing the authority,she should insinuate to Glaucus the accusation itself,she took her way to the gloomy mansion ofArbaees.262 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VII.lone ENTRAPPED. — THE MOUSE TRIES TO GNAW THE NET.O DEAREST Nydia!" exclaimed Glaucus as heread the letter of lone, " whitest-robed messengerthat ever passed between earth and heaven — how,how shall I thank thee ?''I am rewarded," said the poor Thessalian.To-morrow, tomorrow, how shall I while thehours till then ?"The enamoured Greek would not let Njxliaescape him, though she sought several times toleave the chamber ; he made her recite to him overand over again every syllable of the brief conversationthat had taken place between her and lone ; athousand times, forgetting her misfortune, he questionedher of the looks, of the countenance of hisPOMPEII. 263beloved ; and then quickly again excusing his fault,he bade her recommence the whole recital which hehad thus interrupted. The hours thus painful toNydia passed rapidly and delightedly to him, andthe twilight had already darkened, ere he once moredismissed her to lone with a fresh letter and withnew flowers. Scarcely had she gone, than Clodiusand several of his gay companions broke in uponhim ; they rallied him on his seclusion during thewhole daw, and his absence from his customaryhaunts ; they invited him to accompany them tothe various resorts in that lively city, which nightand day proffered diversity to pleasure. Then, asnow, in the south, (for no land perhaps losing moreof greatness has retained more of custom,) it wasthe delight of the Italians to assemble at the evening; and under the porticos of temples or the shadeof the groves that interspersed the streets, listeningto music, or the recitals of some inventive tale-teller; they hailed the rising moon with libations ofwine, and the melodies of song. Glaucus was toohappy to be unsocial ; he longed to cast off the exuberanceof joy that oppressed him. He willinglyaccepted the proposal of his comrades, and laughedTHE LAST DAYS OFingle they sallied out together down the populousand glittering streets.In the mean time Nvdia once more gained thehouse of lone, who had long left it ; she inquiredindifferently whither she had sone.The answer arrested and appalled her."To the house of Arbaces — of the Egyptian?Impossible !"It is true, my little one," said the slave whohad replied to her question. " She has known theEgyptian long."Long ! ye gods, yet Glaucus loves her !"''' murmuredNydia to herself. " And has," asked shealoud, — " has she often visited him before ?"Never till now," answered the slave : " If allthe rumoured scandal of Pompeii be true, it would1)0 better, perhaps, if she had not ventured thereatpresent. But she, poor mistress mine, hearsnothing of that which reaches us ; the talk ofthe vestibulum reaches not to the peristyle*"Never till now !" repeated Nydia. " Art thousure rSure, pretty one ; but what is that to thee orto us ?'^Terence.POMPEII. 265Nydia hesitated a moment, and then pntthigdown the flowers with which she had been charged,she called to the slave who had accompanied her,and left the house without saying another word.Not till she had got half-way back to the houseof Glaucus did she break silence, and even then sheonly immured inly :She does not dream, she cannot, of the dangersinto which she has plunged. Fool that I am, — shallI save her ? — yes, for I love Glaucus better thanmyself."When she arrived at the house of the Athenian,she learnt that he had gone out With a party ofIlls friends, and none knew whither. He probablywould not be home before midnight.The Thessalian groaned ; she sank upon a seat inthe hall, and covered her face with her hands as ifto collect her thoughts. " There is no time to belost," thought she, starting up. She turned to theslave who had accompanied her.Knowest thou," said she, " if lone has anyrelative, any intimate friend at Pompeii ?""Why, by Jupiter !" answered the slave, "artthou silly enough to ask the question ? Every oneVOL. I. N266 THE LAST DAYS OFin Pompeii knows that lone has a brother who,young and rich, has been — under the rose I speakso foolish as to become a priest of Isis."A priest of Isis ! O gods ! his name ?"Apaecides."I know it all," muttered Nydia: " brother andsister then are to be both victims ! Apaecides ! yesthat was the name I heard in , ha ' he well,then, knoAvs the peril that surrounds his sister. Iwill to him."She sprang up at that thought, and taking thestaff which always guided her steps, she hastened tothe neighbouring shrine of Isle. Till she had beenunder the guardianship of the kindly Greek, thatstaff had sufficed to conduct the poor blind girlfrom corner to corner of Pompeii. Every street,every turning in the more frequented parts, wasfamiliar to her ; and as the inhabitants entertaineda tender and half superstitious veneration for thosesubject to her infirmity, the passengers had alwaysgiven way to lier timid steps. Poor girl, she littledreamt that she should, ere very many days werepassed, find her blindness her protection, and aguide far safer than the keenest eyes.POMPEII. 267But since she had been under the roof of Glaucus,he had ordered a slave to accompany her always; and the poor devil thus appointed, who wassomewhat of the fattest, and who after havingtwice performed the journey to lone's house, nowsaw himself condemned to a third excursion,(Whither the gods only knew,) hastened after her,deploring his fate, and solemnly assuring Castorand Pollux, that he believed the blind girl had thetalaria of Mercury as well as the infirmity of Cupid.Nydia, however, required but little of his assistanceto find her way to the popular temple of Isis :the space before it was now deserted, and she wonwithout obstacle to the sacred rails.There is no one here," said the fat slave :what dost thou want, or whom ? knowest thounot that the priests do not live in the temple ?"Call out," said she impatiently; " night and daythere is always one flamen at least watching inthe shrines of Isis."The slave called, — no one appeared.Seest thou no one ?"No one."Thou mistakes ; I hear a sigh : look again."N 2268 THE LAST DAYS OFThe slave, wondering and grumbling, cast countiesheavy eyes, and before one of the altars, whoseremains still crowd the narrow space, he beheld aform bending as in meditation.I see a figure," said he, " and by the whitegarments it is a priest."O flamen of Isis !" cried Nydia, " servant ofthe Most Ancient, hear me !"'•' Who calls 'f"" said a low and melancholy voice.One who has no common tidings to impart toa member of your body ; I come to declare and notto ask oracles."With whom wouldst thou confer ? this is nohour for thy conference ; depart, disturb me not :the night is sacred to the gods, the day to men."Methinks I know thy voice ; thou art he whomI seek ; yet I have heard thee speak but oncebefore. Art thou not the priest Apaecides.''''I am that man," replied the priest, emergingfrom the altar, and approaching the rail.Thou art ! the gods be praised !" Having herhand to the slave, she bade him withdraw to a distance,and he, who naturally imagined some superstitionconnected perhaps with the safety of lonePOMPEII. 269could alone lead her to the temple, obeyed, andseated himself on the gromid at a little distance."Hush!" said she, speaking quick and low; "artthou indeed Apaecides ?"If thou knowest me, canst thou not recall myfeatures ?"I am blind," answered Nydia, " my eyes arein my voice, and that recognises thee : yet swearthat thou art he."By the gods I swear it, by my right hand, andby the Moon."Hush ! speak low — bend near — give me thyhand : knowest thou Arbaces ? — Hast thou laidflowers at the feet of the dead ? — Ah ! thy handig cold — hark yet! — hast thou taken the awfulvow rWho art thou, whence comest thou, pale maiden?" said Apaecides fearfully : " I know thee not,thine is not the breast on which this head hathlain ; I have never seen thee before.But thou hast heard my voice : no matter,those recollections it should shame us both to recall.Listen, thou hast a sister."Speak ! speak I what of her ?"270 THE LAST DAYS OFThou knowest the Banquets of the Dead,stranger, — it pleases thee, perhaps, to share them —would it please thee to have thy sister a partaker ?would it please thee that Arbaees was her host P"O gods, he dare not ! Girl, if thou pocketme, tremble. I will tear thee limb from limb."I speak the truth ; and Awhile I speak, lone isin the halls of Arbaees — for the first time hisguest. Thou knowest if there be peril in thatfirst time ! Farewell ! I have fulfilled my charge"'Stay ! stay !" cried the priest, passing his wanhand over his brow ; " If this be true, what, whatcan be done to save her ? They may not admitme. I know not all the mazes of that intricatemansion. O Nemesis ! justly am I punished !"I will dismiss yon slave, be thou my guide andcomrade; I will lead thee to the private door of thehouse : I will whisper to thee the word which admits.Take some weapon : it may be needful !*"Wait an instant," said Apaecides, retiring intoone of the cells that flank the temple, and re-appearingin a few moments wrapped in a large cloak,Avliich was then much worn by all classes, andA\hich concealed his sacred dress. " Now !" hePOMPEII. 271said, grinding his teeth, "if Graces hath daredto — but he dare not ! he dare not ! Why shouldI suspect him ? Is he so base a villain ? I willnot think it — yet, sophist ! dark bewildered thathe is ! O gods, protect ! — hush ! are there gods ?Yes, there is one goddess, at least, whose voiceI can command ; and that is — Vengeance !"Muttering these disconnected thoughts, Apsecides,followed by his silent and sightless companion,hastened through the most solitary pathsto the house of the Egyptian.The slave, abruptly dismissed by Nydia —shrugged his shoulders — muttered an adjuration,and, nothing loth, rolled off to his cubiculum.272 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VIII.THE SOLITUDE AND Soliloquy OF THE EGYPTIAN —HIS CHARACTER ANALYSED.We must go back a few hours in the progressof our story. At the first grey dawn of the day,which Glaucus had already marked with Avhite,the Egyptian was seated sleepless and alone, onthe summit of the lofty and pyramidal tower whichflanked his house. A tall parapet around it servedas a wall, and conspired, with the height of theedifice and the gloomy trees that girded the mansion,to defy the prying eyes of curiosity or observation.A table, on which lay a scroll filled with mysticfigures, was before him. On high, the stars waxeddim and faint, and the shades of night melted fromthe sterile mountain tops; only above Vesuvius thererested a deep and massy cloud, which for severaldays past had gathered darker and more solid overPOMPEII. 27-3Its summit. The struggle of night and day wasmore visible over the broad ocean, which stretchedcalm, like a gigantic lake ; and bounded by thecircling shores that, covered with vines and foliage,and gleaming here and there with the white walls ofsleeping cities, sloped to the scarce rippling waves.It was the hour, above all others, most sacredto the daring and antique art of the Egyptian ;the art which would read our changeful destiniesin the stars.He had filled his scroll, he had noted the momentand the sign ; and, leaning upon his hand,he had surrendered himself to the thoughts whichhis calculation excited.Again do the stars forewarn me ! Some danger,then, assuredly awaits me V said he slowly ;some danger, violent and sudden in its nature.The stars wear for me the same mocking menacewhich, if our chronicles do not err, they once worefor Pyrrhus — for him, doomed to strive for allthings — to enjoy none; — restless, agitated, fated —all attacking, nothing gaining — battles without fruit,laurels without triumph, fame without success ;at last made craven by his own superstitions, andN 5THE LAST DAYS OFslain like a clog by a tile from the hand of an oldroman ! ^^erilj, the stars flatter when they giveme a type in this fool of war — when they promiseto the ardour of my wisdom the same results as tothe madness of his ambition — perpetual exercise — nocertain goal — the Sisyphus task, the mountain andthe stone ! — the stone, a gloomy image ! — it remindsme, that I am threatened with somewhat of thesame death as the Episode. Let me look again.'Beware'' say the shining prophets ? 'how thoupasses under ancient roofs, or besieged walls, oroverhanging cliffs — a stone, hurled from above, ischarged by the curses of Destiny against thee !'And, at no distant date from this, comes the peril :but I cannot of a certainty read the day andhour. Well ! if my glass runs low, the sands shallsparkle to the last. Yet, if I 'scape this peril —ay, if I 'scape — bright and clear as the moonlighttrack along the waters glows the rest ofmy existence. I see honours, happiness, success,shining upon every billow of the dark gulf beneathWhich I must sink at last. What, then,with such destinies beyond the peril, shall I succumbto the ]peril ? My soul whispers hope, itPOMPEII. 275sweeps exultingly beyond the boding hour, itrevels in the future — its own courage is its fittestomen. If I were to perish so suddenly and sosoon, the shadow of death would darken over me,and I should feel the icy presentiment of my doom.My soul, that so smiles within me, woidd express,in sadness and in gloom, its forecast of the drearyArcus. It smiles, — it assures me of deliverance''As he thus concluded his soliloquy, the Egyptianinvoluntarily rose. He paced rapidly the narrowspace of that star-roofed floor ; and, pausing at theparapet, looked again upon the grey and melancholyheavens. The chills of the faint dawncame refreshingly upon his brow, and graduallyhis mind resumed its natural and collected calm.He withdrew his gaze from the stars, as one afterone they receded into the depths of heaven ; andhis eyes fell over the broad expanse below. Dimin the silenced port of the city rose the masts ofthe gallies : along that mart of luxury and oflabour Meas stilled the mighty hum. No lights,save here and there from before the columns of atemple, or in the porticos of the voiceless forum,broke the wan and fluctuating light of the strungTHE LAST DAYS OFgoing mom. From the heart of the torpid city —so soon to vibrate with a thousand passions —there came no solid ; the streams of Use circulatednot ; they lay locked and torpid under the ice ofsleep. From the huge space of the amphitheatre,with its stony seats rising one above the other —coiled and round as some slumbering monsterrose a thin and ghastly mist, which gathereddarker, and more dark, over the scattered foliagethat gloomed in its vicinity. The city seemed as,after the awful change of seventeen ages, it seemsnow to the traveller, — a City of the Dead.*The ocean itself — that serene and tideless sea —lay scarce less hushed, save that from its deepbosom came, softened by the distance, a faint andregular murmur, like the breathing of its sleep ;and curving far, as with outstretched arms, intothe green and beautiful land, it seemed unconsciouslyto clasp to its breast the cities slopingto its margin — Stable, and Herculaneum, andPompeii — those children and darlings of the deep.When Sir Walter Scott visited Pompeii with Sir WilliamGell, almost his only remark was the exclamation, " The City ofthe Dead— the City of the Dead I"POMPEII. 277Ye slumber," said the Egyptian, as he scowledover the cities, the boast and flower of Campania ;ye shiver ! — would it were the eternal reposeof death! As ye now — jewels in the crown ofempire — so once were the cities of the Nile !Their greatness hath perished from them — theysleep amidst ruins — their palaces and their shrinesare tombs — the serpent coils in the grass of theirstreets — the lizard basks in their solitary halls.By that mysterious law of Nature, which humblesone to exalt the other, ye have thriven upon theirruins — thou, haughty Rome, hast usurped theglories of Sesostris and Semiramis — thou art arobber, clothing thyself with their spoils ! Andthese — slaves in thy triumph — that I (the last sonof forgotten monarchs) survey below, reservoirs ofthine all-pervading power and luxury, I curse asI behold ! The time shall come when Egyptshall be avenged ! when the Barbarian's steedshall make his manger in the Golden House ofNero ! and thou that hast sown the wind withconquest, shalt reap the harvest in the whirlwindof desolation."As the Egyptian uttered a prediction winch278 THE LAST DAYS OFFate so fearfully fulfilled, a more solemn andboding image of ill omen never occurred to thedreams of painter or of poet. The morning light,which can pale so wanly even the young cheekof beauty, gave his majestic and stately featuresalmost the colours of the grave, with the dark hairfalling massively around them, and the dark robesflowing long and loose — and the arm outstretchedfrom that lofty eminence — and the glittering eyes,fierce with a savage gladness, — half prophet andhalf fiend !He turned his gaze from the city and the oceanbefore him lay the vineyards and meadows ofthe rich Campania. The gate and walls — ancient,half Elastic — of the city, seemed not to bound itsextent. Villas and villages stretched on everyside up the ascent of Vesuvius, not nearly thenso steep or so lofty as at present. For as Romeitself is built on an exhausted volcano, so in similarsecurity the inhabitants of the South tenantedthe green and vine-clad places around a volcanowhose fires they believed at rest for ever. Fromthe gate stretched the long Street of Tombs, variousPOMPEII. 279in size and architecture, by which, on that side,the city is yet approached. Above all, rose thecloud-capt summit of the Dread Mountain, Withthe shadows, now dark, now light, betraying themossy caverns and ashy rocks, which testified thepast conflagrations, and might have prophesied —but Man is blind — that which was to come !Difficult was it then and there to guess thecauses why the tradition of the place wore sogloomy and stern a hue ; why, in those smilingplains, for miles around — to Baiae? and Museum —the poets had imagined the entrance and thresholdsof their hell — their Acheron, and their fabledStyx : why in those Phlegrae,* now laughing withthe vine, they placed the battles of the gods, andsupposed the daring Titans to have sought thevictory of Heaven — save indeed, that yet, in yonseared and blasted summit, fancy might thinkto read the characters of the Olympian thunderbolt.But it was neither the rugged height of thestill volcano, nor the fertility of the sloping fields,• Or Phlegraei campi ; viz. scorched or tourist fields.280 THE LAST DAYS OPnor the melancholy avenue of tombs, nor the glitteringvillas of a polished and luxurious people, thatnow arrested the eye of the Egyptian. On onepart of the landscape, the mountain of Vesuviusdescended to the plain in a narrow and uncultivatedridge, broken here and there by jagged crags andcopses of v.'ild foliage. At the base of this lay amarshy and unwholesome pool, and the int^'iitgaze of Arbaces caught the outline of some livingform moving by the marshes, and stooping everand anon as if to pluck its rank produce.Ho !" said he aloud, " I have then anothercompanion in these unworldly night watches. TheWitch of Vesuvius is abroad. What doth she, too —as the credulous imagine — doth she, too, learn thelore of the great stars ? Hath she been utteringfoul magic to the moon, or culling (as her pausesbetoken) foul herbs from the venomous marsh ?Well, I must see this fellow labourer. Whoeverstrives to know, learns that no human lore is despicable.Despicable only you — ye fit and bloatedtidings — slaves of luxury — sluggards in thought —who, cultivating nothing but the barren sense, dreamPOMPEII. 281that its poor soil can produce alike the myrtle andthe laurel. No, the wise only can enjoy ! — to usonly true luxiuy is given, when mind, brain, invention,experience, thought, learning, imagination,all contribute like rivers to swell the seas ofSENSE ! — lone !"As Arbaces uttered that last and charmed word,his thoughts sunk at once into a more deep andprofound channel. His steps paused, he took nothis eyes from the ground ; once or twice he smiledjoyously, and then, as he turned from his place ofvigil, and sought his couch, he muttered, " Ifdeath froA^Tis so near, I Avill say at least that Ihave lived — lone shall be mine."The character of Arbaces was one of those intricateand varied webs, in which even the mindthat sate within it was sometimes confused and perplexed.In him, the son of a fallen dynasty, theoutcast of a sunken people, was that spirit of discontentedpride, which ever rankles in one of asterner mould, who feels himself inexorably shutfrom the sphere in which his fathers shone, and towhich nature as well as birth no less entitled THE LAST DAYS OFself. This sentiment hath no benevolence ; it warswith society, it sees enemies in mankind. Butwith this sentiment did not go its common companion,poverty. Arbaces possessed wealth whichequalled that of most of the Roman nobles. Andthis enabled him to gratify to the utmost the passionswhich had no outlet in business or ambition.Travelling from clime to clime, and beholding stillRome everywhere, he increased both his hatred ofsociety and his passion for pleasure. He was in avast prison, which however he could fill with theministers of luxury. He could not escape from theprison, and his only object therefore was to give itthe character of the palace. The Egyptians, fromthe earliest time, were devoted to the joys of sense ;Arbaces inherited both their appetite for sensualityand the glow of imagination which struck lightfrom its rottenness. But still, unsocial in his pleasuresas in his graver pursuits, and brooking neithersuperior nor equal, he admitted few to his companionshipsave the willing slaves of his profligacy.He was the solitary lord of a crowded harem.But withall, he felt condemned to that satietyPOMPEII. 283which is the constant curse of men whose intellectis above their pursuits, and that which once hadbeen the impulse of passion froze down to the ordinanceof custom. From the disappointments ofsense he sought to raise himself by the cultivationof knowledge ; but as it was not his object to servemankind, so he despised that knowledge which ispractical and usefid. His dark imagination lovedto exercise itself in those more visionary and obscureresearches which are ever the most delightfulto a wayward and solitary mind, and to which hehimself was invited by the daring pride of his disposition,and the mysterious traditions of his clime.Dismissing faith in the confused creeds of theHeathen world, he reposed the gi-latest faith in thepower of human wisdom. He did not know, perhapsno one in that age distinctly did, the limitswhich Nature imposes upon our discoveries. Seeingthat the higher we mount in knowledge the morewonders we behold, he imagined that Nature notonly worked miracles in her ordinary course, butthat she might, by the cabala of some master soul,be diverted from that course itself. Thus he pur-theLAST DAYS OFsued Science, across her appointed boundaries, intothe land of perplexity and shadow. From thetruths of astronomy he wandered into astrologicfallacy. From the secrets of chemistry he passedinto the spectral labyrinth of magic ; and he whocould be sceptical as to the power of the gods, wascredulously superstitious as to the power of man.The cultivation of magic, carried at that day toa singular height among the would-be-wise, wasespecially eastern in its origin; it was alien tothe early philosophy of the Greeks, nor had itbeen received by them with favour until States,who accompanied the army of Xerxes, introduced,amongst the simple credulity of Hellas, the solemnsuperstitions of Zoroaster. Under theRoman Emperors it had become, however, naturalizedat Rome, (a meet subject for Juvenisfiery wit.) Intimately connected with magicwas the worship of Isis, and the Egyptian religionwas the means by which was extended thedevotion to Egyptian sorcery. The theurgic, orbenevolent magic, the poetic, or dark and evilnecromancy, were alike in pre-eminent reputePOMPEII. 285during the first century of the Christian era ; andthe marvels of Faustus are not comparable to thoseof Apollonius. (a) Kings, courtiers, and sages, alltrembled before the professors of the dread science.And not the least remarkable of his tribe was theformidable and profound Arbaces. His fame andhis discoveries Avere known to all the cultivatorsof magic, they even survived himself; but itwas not by his real and worldly name that he washonoured by the sorcerer and the sage. He receivedfrom their homage a more mystic appellation,and was long remembered in Magna Graeca,and the Eastern plains, by the name of " Hermes,the Lord of the Flaming Belt"" His subtle speculationsand boasted attributes of wisdom, recordedin various volumes, were among those tokens " ofthe curious arts," which the Christian convertsmost joyfully yet most fearfully burnt at Ephesus,depriving posterity of the proofs of the cunning ofthe fiend.The conscience of Arbaces was solely of the intellect— it was awed by no moral laws. If manimposed these checks upon the herd, so he believed286 THE LAST DAYS OFthat man, by superior wisdom, could raise himselfabove them. " If (he reasoned) I have the geniusto impose laws, have I not the right to commandmy own creations ? Still more, have I not the rightto control — to evade — to scorn — the fabrications ofyet meaner intellects than my o\\'n !"" Thus, if hewere a villain, he justified his Villainy by whatought to have made him virtuous, namely, — theelevation of his capacities.As all men have more or less the passion ofpower, in Arbaces that passion correspondedexactly to his character. It was not the passionof an external and brute authority. He desirednot the purple and the fasces, the insignia of vulgarcommand. His pride, his contempt for Rome,which made the world, (and whose haughty namehe regarded with the same disdain as that whichRome herself lashed upon the barbarian,) wouldnever have permitted him to aspire to sway overothers, for that would have rendered him at once thetool or creature of the Emperor. He, the Son ofthe Great Race of Rameses — he execute the ordersof, and receive his power from, another ! — the morePOMPEII. 287notion filled him with rage. But in rejecting anambition that coveted nominal distinctions, he butindulged the more in the ambition to rule the heart.Honouring mental power as the greatest of earthlygifts, he loved to feel that power palpably in himself,by extending it over all whom he encountered.Thus had he ever sought the young — thus had heever fascinated and controlled them. He loved tofind subjects in men's souls — to rule over an invisibleand immaterial empire ! — had he been less sensualand less wealthy, he might have sought to becomethe founder of a new religion. As it was, his energieswere checked by his pleasures. Besides, however,the vague love of this moral sway (vanity sodear to sages ! ) he was influenced by a singularand dream-like devotion to all that belonged to themystic Land his ancestors had swayed. Althoughhe disbelieved in her deities, he believed in theallegories they represented (or rather he interpretedthose allegories anew). He loved to keepalive the worship of Egypt, because he thus maintainedthe shadow and the recollection of herpower. He loaded, therefore, the altars of Osiris'BSS THE LAST DAYS OFand of Isis with regal donations, and was everanxious to dignify their priesthood hy new andWealthy converts. The vow taken — the priesthoodembraced — he usually chose the comrades of hispleasures from those whom he had made his victims,partly because he thus secured to himself theirsecrecy, partly because he thus yet more confirmedto himself his peculiar power. Hence the motivesof his conduct to Apaecides, strengthened as thesewere, in that instance, by his passion for lone.He had seldom lived long in one place ; but ashegrew older, he grew more wearied of the excitementof new scenes, and he had sojourned amongthe delightful cities of Campania for a periodwhich surprised even himself. In fact, his pridesomewhat crippled his choice of residence. Hecould not live in those burning climes, A\'hich hedeemed of right his own hereditary possession, andwhich now cowered, supine and sunken, under thewings of the Roman eagle. Rome herself winhateful to his indignant soul ; nor did he love tofind his riches rivalled by the minions of the court,and cast into comparative poverty by the mightymagnificence of the court itself The CampanianPOMPEII. 289cities proffered to him all that his nature craved ;the luxuries of an unequalled clime ; — the imaginativerefinements of a voluptuous civilization. Hewas removed from the sight of a superior vt-earth ;he was without rivals to his riches ; he was freefrom the spies of a jealous court. As long as hewas rich none pried into his conduct. He pursuedthe dark tenor of his May undisturbed andsecure.It is the curse of sensualists never to love tillthe pleasures of sense begin to pall — their ardentyouth is frittered away in countless desires ; theirhearts are exhausted. So, ever chasing love, andtaught by a restless imagination to exaggerateperhaps its charms, the Egyptian had spent allthe glory of his years without attaining the objectof his desires. The beauty of tomorrow succeededthe beauty of to-day, and the shadows bewilderedhim in his pursuit of the substance. When,two years before the present date, he beheld lone,he saw, for the first time, one whom he imaginedhe could love. He stood, then, upon that bridge oflife, from which man sees before him distinctly awasted youth on the one side, and the darkness ofVOL. I. o290 THE LAST DAYS OPapproaching age upon the other ; a time in whichwe are more than ever anxious perhaps to secureto us, ere it he yet too late, whatever we havebeen taught to consider necessary to the enjoymentof a Hfe of which the brighter half is gone.With an earnestness and a patience which hehad never before commanded for his pleasures,Arbaces had devoted himself to win the heart oflone. It did not content him to love, he desiredto be loved. In this hope, he had watched the expandingyouth of the beautiful Neapolitan : andknowing the influence that the mind possesses overthose who are taught to cultivate the mind, he hadcontributed willingly to form the genius and enlightenthe intellect of lone, in the hope that she wouldbe thus able to appreciate what he felt would be hisbest claim to her affection ; viz. a character which,lowered criminal and perverted, was rich in its originalelements of strength and grandeur. When hefelt that character to be acknowledged, he willinglyallowed, nay, encouraged her, to mix among theidle votaries of pleasure, in the belief that hersoul, fitted for higher commune, would miss thecompanionship of his own, and that in comparisonPOMPEII. 291with others, she would learn to love himself. Hehad forgot, that as the sunflower to the sun, soyouth turns to youth, until his jealousy of Glaucussuddenly apprised him of his error. Fromthat moment, though, as we have seen, he knew notthe extent of his danger, a fiercer and more tumultuousdirection was given to a passion long controlled.Nothing kindles the fire of love like asprinkling of the anxieties of jealousy; it takes thena wilder, a more resistless, flame ; it forgets itssoftness ; it ceases to be tender ; it assumes somethingof the intensity — of the ferocity — of hate.Arbaces resolved to lose upon cautious and perilouspreparations no longer time ; he resolved toplace an irrevocable barrier between himself andhis rivals ; he resolved to possess himself of theperson of lone : Not that in his present love, solong nurst and fed by hopes pm-er than those ofpassion alone, he would have been contented withthat mere possession. He desired the heart, thesoul, no less than the beauty of lone ; but heimagined that once separated by a daring crimefrom the rest of mankind — once bomid to lone bya tie that slavery could not break, she would beo 2292 THE LAST DAYS OFdriven to concentrate her thoughts in him — that hisarts would complete his conquest, and that, accordingto the true moral of the Roman and theSabine, the empire obtained by force would becemented by gentler means. This resolution wasyet more confirmed in him by his belief in theprophecies of the stars ; they had long foretoldto him this year, and even the present month,as the epoch of some dread disaster, menacinglife itself. He was driven to a certain andlimited date. He resolved to crowd, monarch-like,on his funeral pjTre, all that his soul held mostdear. In his own words, if he were to die, heresolved to feel that he had lived, and that loneshould be his own !POMPEII. 293CHAPTER IX.WHAT BECOMES OF lONE IN THE HOUSE OF Graces. —THE FIRST SIGNAL OF THE WRATH OF THE DREAD FOE.When lone entered the spacious hall of theEgyptian, the same awe which had crept overher brother impressed itself also upon her ; thereseemed to her as to him something ominous andwarning in the still and mournful faces of thosedread Theban monsters, whose majestic and passionlessfeatures, the marble so well portrayed, —Their looks, with the reach of past ages, was wise,And the soul of eternity thought in their eyes."The tall Ethiopian slave grinned as he admittedher, and motioned to her to proceed. Half wayup the hall, she was met by Arbaces himself, infestive robes, which glittered with jewels. Althoughit was broad day without, the mansion, according294 THE LAST DAYS OFto the practice of the luxurious, was artificiallydarkened, and the lamps cast their still and odour-givinglight over the rich floors and ivory roofs.Beautiful lone," said Arbaces, as he bent totouch her hand, "it is you that have eclipsed theday — it is your eyes that light up the halls — it isyour breath which fills them with perfumes."You must not talk to me thus," said lone,smiling ; " you forget that your lore has sufficientlyinstructed my mind, to render these gracefulflatteries to my person unwelcome. It wasyou who taught me to disdain adulation ; will youunteach your pupil ?"There was something so frank and charming inthe manner of lone, as she thus spoke, that theEgyptian was more than ever enamoured, andmore than ever disposed to renew the offence hehad committed ; he, however, answered quickly andgaily, and hastened to renew the conversation.He led her through the various chambers of ahouse, which seemed to contain to her eyes, unexperiencedto other splendour than the minute eleganceof Campanian cities, the treasures of theworld.POMPEII. 295In the walls were set pictures of inestimableart ; the lights shone over statues of the noblestage of Greece. Cabinets of gems, each cabinet itselfa gem, filled up the interstices of the columns;the most precious woods lined the thresholds andcomposed the doors ; gold and jewels seemed prodigalityall around. Sometimes they were alonein these rooms — sometimes they passed throughsilent rows of slaves, who, kneeling as she passed,proffered to her offerings of bracelets, of chains, ofgems, which the Egyptian vainly entreated her toreceive.I have often heard," said she, wonderingly,that you were rich ; but I never dreamed of theamount of your wealth."Would I could coin it all," replied the Egyptian," into one crown, which I might place uponthat snowy brow !"Alas ! the weight would crush me ; I shouldbe a second Tarpeia," answered lone, laughingly.But thou dost not disdain riches — O lone!they know not what life is capable of, who are notwealthy. Gold is the great magician of earth — itrealizes our dreams — it gives them the power of a296 THE LAST DAYS OFGod — there is a grandeur, a sublimity in its possession: it is the mightiest, yet, the most obedientof our slaves."The artful Arbaces sought to dazzle the youngNeapolitan by his treasures and his eloquence ; hesought to awaken in her the desire to be mistressof what she surveyed ; he hoped that she would confoundthe owner with the possessions, and that thecharms of his wealth would be reflected on himself.Meanwhile, lone was secretly somewhat uneasyat the gallantries which escaped from those lips,which, till lately, had seemed to disdain the commonhomage we pay to beauty. And with thatdelicate subtlety, which woman alone possesses,she sought to ward off shafts deliberately aimed,and to laugh or to talk away the meaning from hiswarming language. Nothing in the world is morepretty than that same species of defence ; it is thecharm of the African necromancer, who professed-vyith a feather to turn aside the winds.The Egyptian was intoxicated and subdued byher grace even more than by her beauty; it was withdifficulty that he suppressed his emotions ; alas !POMPEII. 297the feather was only powerful against the summerbreezes, — it would be the sport of the storm.Suddenly, as they stood in one hall, wliieh wassurrounded by draperies of silver and white, theEgyptian clapped his hands, and as if by enchantment,a banquet rose from the floor, — a couchor throne, with a crimson canopy, ascended simultaneouslyat the feet of lone — and at the sameinstant from behind the curtains swelled the invisibleand softest music.Arbaces placed himself at the feet of lone, andchildren, young and beautiful as Loves, ministeredto the feast.The feast was done, the music sank into a lowand subdued strain, and Arbaces thus addressedhis beautiful guest.Hast thou never in this dark and uncertainworld — hast thou never aspired, my pupil, to lookbeyond — hast thou never wished to put aside theveil of futurity, and to behold on the shores of Fatethe shadowy images of things to be ? For it is notthe Past alone that has its ghosts ; each event tocome has also its spectrum — its shade ; when theo5298 THE LAST DAYS OFhour arrives, life enters it, the shadow becomes corporeal,and walks the world. Thus, in the landbeyond the grave, are ever two impalpable andspiritual hosts, the things to be, the things thathave been ! If by our wisdom we can penetratethat land, we see the one as the other, and learn, as/ have learnt, not alone the mysteries of the dead,but also the destiny of the living.""As thou hast learnt ! — can wisdom attain so far?"Wilt thou prove my knowledge, lone, and beholdthe representation of thine own fate ? It is adrama more striking than those of-aeschylus — itis one I have prepared for thee, if thou wilt see theshadows perform their part."The Neapolitan trembled; — she thought of Glaucus,and sighed as well as trembled ; — were theirdestinies to be united ? Half incredulous, half believing,half awed, half alarmed by the words ofher strange host, she remained for some momentssilent, and then answered.It may revolt — it may terrify — the knowledge ofthe future will, perhaps, only embitter the present!"Not so, lone ; I have myself looked upon thyfuture lot, and the ghosts of thy Future bask in thePOMPEII. 299gardens of Elysium ; amidst the asphodel and therose they prepare the garlands of thy sweet destiny,and the Fates, so harsh to others, weave onlyfor thee the web of happiness and love. Wiltthou then come and behold thy doom, so that thoumayst enjoy it beforehand ?"Again the heart of lone murmured ' Glaucus ;''she uttered a half audible assent ; the Egyptianrose, and taking her by the hand, he led heracross the banquet-room — the curtains withdrew,as by magic hands, and the music broke forthin a louder and gladder strain ; they passed arow of columns, on either side of which fountainscast aloft their fragrant waters ; they descendedby broad and easy steps into a garden.The eve had commenced ; the moon was alreadyhigh in heaven, and those sweet flowersthat sleep by day, and fill, with ineffable odours,the airs of night, were thickly scattered amidstalleys cut through the star-lit foliage; — or, gatheredin baskets, lay like offerings at the feet of the frequentstatues that gleamed along' their path.Whither wouldst thou lead me, Arbaces ?""said lone, wonderingly.300 THE LAST DAYS OFBut yonder," said he, pointing to a small buildingwhich stood at the end of the vista, " It is atemple consecrated to the Fates — our rites requiresuch holy ground."They passed into a narrow hall, at the end ofwhich hung a sable curtain, Arbaces lifted it, loneentered, and found herself in total darkness.Be not alarmed," said the Egyptian, " the lightAvill rise instantly ;" while he so spoke, a soft andwarm and gradual light diffused itself around ; asit spread over each object, lone fancied that shewas in an apartment of moderate size, hung everywherewith black ; a couch of the same hue wasbeside her. In the centre of the room was a smallaltar on which stood a tripod of bronze. At oneside, upon a lofty column of granite, was a colossalhead of the blackest marble, Which she perceived,by the crown of wheatears that encircled the brow,represented the great Egyptian goddess. Arbacesstood before the altar ; he had laid his garland onthe shrine, and seemed occupied with pouring intothe tripod the contents of a brazen vase ; suddenlyfrom that tripod least into life a blue, quick, darting,irregular flame ; the Egyptian drew back toP03IPEII. 301the side of lone ; and muttered some words in alang-age unfamiliar to her ear, the curtain at theback of the altar waved tremulously to and fro —it parted slowly, and in the aperture which wasthus made, lone beheld an indistinct and pale landscape,which gi-actually grew brighter and cleareras she gazed; at length, she discovered plainlytrees, and rivers, and meadows, and all the beautifuldiversity of the richest earth. At lengthbefore the landscape, a dim shadow glided ; it restedopposite to lone ; slowly the same charmseemed to operate upon it as over the rest of thescene ; it took form and shape, and lo ! — in itsfeature and in its form lone beheld herself !Then the scene behind the spectre faded away,and was succeeded by the representation of a gorgeouspalace ; a throne was raised in the centreof its hall — the dim forms of slaves and guardswere ranged around it, and a pale hand held overthe throne the likeness of a diadem.A new actor now appeared — he was clothedfrom head to foot in a dark robe — you saw neitherhis face, nor the outline of his figure — he knelt atthe feet of the shadowy lone — he clasped her hand —302 THE LAST DAYS OFhe pointed to the throne, as if to invite her toascend it.The Neapolitan's heart beat violently — " Shallthe shadow disclose itself?" whispered a voicebeside her — the voice of Arbaces.Ah, yes !"" answered lone, softly.Arbaces raised his hand — the spectre seemed todrop the mantle that concealed its form — and loneshrieked — it was Arbaces himself that thus kneltbefore her.This is, indeed, thy fate !" whispered againthe Egyptian's voice in her ear. " And thou artdestined to be the bride of Arbaces."I6ne started — the black curtain closed over thephantasmagoria; and Arbaces himself, the real,the living Arbaces, was at her feet.Oh, lone !" said he, passionately gazing uponher ; " listen to one who has long struggled vainlywith his love. I adore thee ! The Fates do notlie — thou art destined to be mine — I have soughtthe world around, and found none like thee. Frommy youth upward, I have sighed for such as thouart. I have dreamed till I saw thee — I wake, andI behold thee. Turn not away from me, lone ;POMPEII. 303think not of me as thou hast thought; I am notthat being — cold — insensate, and morose, which Ihave seemed to thee. Never woman had lover, sodevoted — so passionate as I will be to lone. Donot struggle in my clasp — see — I release thy hand.Take it from me, if thou wilt — well, be it so !But do not reject me, lone — do not rashly reject —judge of thy power over me, when thou canst thustransform. I who never knelt to mortal being,kneel to thee. I who have commanded fate, receivefrom thee my own. lone, tremble not, thou artmy queen — my goddess ; — be my bride ! All thewishes thou canst form shall be fulfilled. The endsof the earth shall minister to thee — pomp, power,luxury, shall be thy slaves. Arbaces shall have noambition, save the pride of obeying thee. lone,turn upon me those eyes — shed upon me thysmile. Dark is my soul, when thy face is hidfrom it — shine over me, my sun — my heaven —my daylight ! — lone, lone — do not reject mylove!"Alone, and in the power of this singular andfearful man, lone was not yet terrified ; the respectof his language, the softness of his voice,304 THE LAST DAYS OFreassured her ; and in her own purity, she felt protection.But she was confused — astonished; itwas some moments before she could recover thepower of reply.Rise, Graces !" said she, at length ; and sheresigned to him once more her hand, which sheas quickly withdrew again, when she felt upon itthe burning pressure of his lips. " Rise ! and ifthou art serious, if thy language be in earnest — "Ifr said he, tenderly.Well, then, listen to me ; you have been myguardian — my friend — my monitor ; for this newcharacter I was not prepared — think not," sheadded quickly, as she saw his dark eyes glitterwith the fierceness of his passion — " think not,that I scorn — that 1 am not touched — that I amnot honoured by — this homage ; but, say — canstthou hear me calmly .P""Ay, though thy words were lightning, andcould blast me!"/ love another's'' said lone, blushingly, butina firm voice.By the gods — by hell !" shouted Arbaces,rising to his fullest height ; " dare not tell mePOMPEII. 305that — dare not mock me: — it is impossible! —whom hast thou seen — whom known? Oh, lone !it is thy woman's invention ; thy woman's art thatspeaks — thou wouldst gain time : I have surprised— I have terrified thee. Do with me as thouwilt — say, that thou lowest not me; but, say not,that thou lowest another !""Alas ! " began lone ; and then, appalled before hissudden and unlooked-for violence, she burst into tears.Arbaces came nearer to her — his breath glowedfiercely on her cheek ; he wound his arms roundher — she sprang from his embrace. In the strugglea tablet fell from her bosom on the ground ;Arbaces perceived, and seized it — it was the letterthat morning received from Glaucus. lone sankupon the couch, half dead with terror.Rapidly the eyes of Arbaces ran over the writing;the Neapolitan did not dare to gaze uponhim ; she did not see the deadly paleness that cameover his countenance — she marked not his writhingfrown, nor the quivering of his lip, nor the convulsionsthat heaved his breast. He read it to theend, and then, as the letter fell from his hand, hesaid, in a voice of deceitful calmness —306 THE LAST DAYS OFIs the writer of this the man thou lowest ?"lone sobbed, but answered not.Speak!" he rather shrieked than said.Its— its!"And his name — it is written here — his nameis Glaucus !"lone, clasping her hands, looked round as forsuccour or escape.Then hear me," said Arbaces, sinking hisvoice into a whisper j " thou shalt go to thy tomb,rather than to his arms. What ! thickest thouArbaces Avill brook a rival such as this punyGreek ? What ! thickest thou that he has watchedthe fruit ripen, to yield it to another. Pretty fool,no ! Thou art mine — all — only mine — and thus —thus I seize and claim thee." As he spoke, hecaught lone in his arms ; and, in that ferociousgrasp, was all the energy — less of love than ofrevenge.But to lone, despair gave supernatural strength ;she again tore herself from him — she rushed tothat part of the room by which she had entered —she half withdrew the curtain — he seized her —again she broke away from him — and fell, ex-pompeii.307haunted, and with a loud shriek, at the base ofthe colin which supported the head of theEgyptian goddess. Arbaces paused for a moment,as to regain his breath ; and then once moredarted upon his prey.At that instant the curtain was rudely tornaside, the Egyptian felt a fierce and strong graspupon his shoulder. He turned — he beheld beforehim the flashing eyes of Glaucus, and the pale —worn — but menacing — countenance of Apascides.Ha !" he muttered, as he glared from one to theother, " what fury hath sent ye hither ?"Ate," answered Glaucus ; and he closed atonce with the Egyptian. Meanwhile, Apaecidesraised his sister, now lifeless, from the ground ; hisstrength exhausted by his long overwrought mind,did not suffice to bear her away, light and delicatethough her shape : he placed her therefore on thecouch, and stood over her with a brandished knife,watching the contest between Glaucus and the Egyptian,and ready to plunge his weapon in the bosom ofArbaces should he be victorious in the struggle.There is, perhaps, nothing on earth so terrible as thenaked and unarmed contest of animal strength, no308 THE LAST DAYS OFweapon Lut those wliicli nature supplies to rage.Both the antagonists were now locked in eachoother's grasp — the hand of each seeking the throatof the other — the face drawn back — the fierce eyesflashing — the muscles strained — the veins swelled— the lips apart — the teeth set; — both werestrong beyond the ordinary power of men, both animatedby relentless wrath ; they coiled, they wound,around each other ; they rocked to and fro — theyswayed from end to end of their confined arena ; —they uttered cries of ire and revenge ; — they werenow before the altar — now at the base of the columnwhere the struggle had commenced : theydrew back for breath — Arbaces leaning against thecolumn — Glaucus a few paces apart.O ancient goddess"" exclaimed Arbaces, claspingthe column, and raising his eyes towards thesacred image it supported ; " protect thy chosen,proclaim thy vengeance against this thing of anupstart creed, who with sacrilegious violence profanesthy resting-place and assails thy servant."As he spoke, the still and vast features of thegoddess seemed suddenly to glow with life ; throughthe black marble, as through a transparent veil,POMPEII. 309flushed luminously a crimson and burning hue —around the head played and darted confiscations oflivid lightning — the eyes became like balls of luridfire, and seemed fixed in withering and intolerablewrath upon the countenance of the Greek. A^vedand appalled by this sudden and mystic answer tothe prayer of his foe — and not free from the hereditarysuperstitions of his race — the cheeks ofGlaucus paled before that strange and ghastly animationof the marble — his knees knocked together,he stood, seized with a divine panic, dismayed,aghast, half unmanned before his foe ! Arbacesgave him not breathing time to recover his stupor;Die, wretch !" he shouted in a voice of thunder,as he sprang upon the Greek ; " the MightyMother claims thee as a living sacrifice." Takenthus by surprise in the first consternation of hissuperstitious fears, the Greek lost his footing-^— themarble floor was as smooth as glass — he slid — hefell. Arbaces planted his foot on the breast of hisfallen foe. Apaecides, taught by his sacred profession,as well as by his knowledge of Arbaces,to distrust all miraculous interpositions, had notshared the dismay of his companion, — he rushedQ]0 THE LAST DAYS OFforward, his knife gleamed in the air ; the watchfulEgyptian caught his arm as it descended ; one wrenchof his powerful hand tore the weapon from the weakgrasp of the priest ; one sweeping blow stretchedhim to the earth: — with a loud and exulting yellArbaces brandished the knife on high. Glaucusgazed upon his impending fate with unwinking eyes,and in the stern and scornful resignation of a fallengladiator ; — when at that awful instant the floorshook under them with a rapid and convulsive throea mightier spirit than that of the Egyptian wasabroad ! — a giant and crushing power before whichsunk into sudden impotence his passion and hisarts. It woke — it stirred — that Dread Daemon ofthe Earthquake — laughing to scorn alike the magicof human guile and the malice of human wrath.As a Titan, on whom the mountains are piled, itroused itself from the sleep of years — it moved onits dscdal couch — the caverns below groaned andtrembled beneath the motion of its limbs. In themoment of his vengeance and his power — the self-prizeddemigod was humbled to his real clay. Farand wide, along the soil, went a hoarse and rumblingsound — the curtains of the chamber shook asPOMPEII. 311at the blast of a storm — the altar rocked — the tripodreeled, — and, high over the place of contest, thecolumn trembled and waved from side to side ;the sable head of the goddess tottered and fell fromits pedestal ; — and as the Egyptian stooped abovehis intended victim, right upon his bended form,right between the shoulder and the neck, struckthe marble mass ! — the shock stretched him likethe blow of death, at once, suddenly, without soundor motion or semblance of life, upon the floor ;apparently crushed by the very divinity he hadimpiously animated and invoked !The Earth has preserved her children," saidGlaucus, staggering to his feet. " Blessed be thedread convulsion ! Let us worship the providenceof the gods !"" He assisted Apaecides to rise, andthen turned upward the face of Arbaces; it seemedlocked as in death, blood gushed from the Egyptian'slips over his glittering robes, — he fell heavilyfrom the arms of Glaucus, and the red streamtrickled slowly along the marble. Again the earthshook beneath their feet, they were forced to clingto each other; the convulsion ceased as suddenly asit came ; they tarried no longer ; Glaucus bore312 THE LAST DAYS OFlone lightly in his arms, and they fled from theunhallowed spot. But scarce had they enteredthe garden, than they were met on all sides byflying and disordered groups of women and slaves,whose festive and glittering garments contrasted inmockery the solemn terror of the hour ; — they didnot appear to heed the strangers — they were occupiedonly with their own fears. After the tranquillityof sixteen years, that burning and treacheroussoil again menaced destruction ; they utteredbut one cry, " the earthquake ! — the earthquake!"— And, passing unmolested from the midstof them, Precedes and his companions, withoutentering the house, hastened down one of thealleys, passed a small open gate, and there sittingon a little mound, over which gloomed the darkgreen aloes, the moonlight fell on the bendedfigure of the blind girl, — she was weeping bitterly.P03IPEII. '31oNOTE TO BOOK II.(a) Page 285. " The marvels of Faustus are not comparableto those of Apollonius."During the earlier ages of the Christian epoch, the HeathenPhilosophy, especially of Pythagoras and of Plato, had becomedebased and adulterated, not only by the wildest mysticism,but the most chimerical dreams of magic. Pythagoras, indeed,scarcely merited a nobler destiny ; for though he was an exceedinglyclever man, he was a most prodigious mountebank, andwas exactly formed to be the great father of a school of magicians.Pythagoras himself either cultivated magic or arrogatedits attributes, and his followers told marvellous tales of hiswriting on the moon's disc, and appearing in several places atonce. His golden rules and his golden thigh were in especialveneration in I\lagna Grecian, and out of his doctrines of occultnumbers, his followers extracted numbers of occult doctrines.The most remarkable of the later impostors who succeeded him,was Apollonius of Tyana, referred to in the text. All sorts ofprodigies accompanied the birth of this gentleman. Proteus, theEgyptian god, foretold to his mother yet pregnant, that it was hehimself (Proteus) who was about to re-appear in the worldthrough her agency. After this, Proteus might well be consideredto possess the power of transformation ! Apollonius knew thelanguage of birds, read men's thoughts in their bosoms, and walk-vol.I. PTHE LAST DAYS OFed about with a familiar spirit. He was a devil of a fellow with adevil, and induced a mob to stone a poor demon of venerable andmendicant appearance, who, after the lapidary operation, changedinto a huge dog. He raised the dead, passed a night with Achilles,and when Domitian was murdered, he called out aloud, (thoughat Ephesus at the moment,) " Strike the tyrant !" The end ofso honest and great a man was worthy his life. It would seemthat he ascended into heaven. What less could be expected ofone who had stoned the devil ! Should any English writer meditatea new Faust, I recommend to him Apollonius.But the magicians of this sort were Philosophers? excellentmen and pious ; there were others of a far darker and deadlierknowledge, the followers of the Poetic Magic, in other words theBlack Art. Both of these, the Poetic and the Theurgic, appearto be of Egyptian origin ; and it is evident, at least, that theirpractitioners appeared to pride themselves on drawing their chiefsecrets from that ancient source;— and both are intimately connectedwith astrology. In attributing to Arbaces the knowledgeand the repute of magic, as well as that of the science of thestars, I am therefore perfectly in accordance with the spirit ofhis time, and the circumstances of his birth. He is a characteristicof that age. At one time, I purposed to have developedand detailed more than I have done the pretensions of Arbacesto the mastery of his art, and to have initiated the reader intothe various sorceries of the period. But as the character of theEgyptian grew upon me, I felt that it was necessary to be sparingof that machinery which, thanks to this five-shillings nuirch ofknowledge, every one now may fancy he can detect. Such as heis— Arbaces is become too much of an intellectual creation to demanda frequent repetition of the coarser and more physical materiaof terror. I suffered him, then, merely to demonstrate hiscapacities in the elementary and obvious secrets of his craft, andleave the subtler magic he possesses to rest in mystery andshadow.POMPEII. 315As to the Witch of Vesuvius, (who will be introduced in thesecond volume,) her spells and her philters, her cavern and itsappliances, however familiar to us of the North, are faithful alsoto her time and nation. A witch of a lighter character, and mannersless ascetic, the learned reader will remember with delightin the " Golden Ass" of Apuleius ; and the reader who is notlearned is recommended to the spirited translation of that enchantingromance by Taylor.END OF BOOK II.LONDON :PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.