THELAST DAYSOFPOMPEII.BY THE AUTHOR OF « PELHAM,""EUGENE ARAM," "ENGLAND, AND THE ENGLISH."&c. &c.Such is Vesuvius! and these things take place in it every year. But alleruptions which have happened since would be trifling, even if all summed intoone, compared to what occurred at the period we refer to. * * * * *Day was turned into night, and night into darkness — an inexpressible quantityof dust and ashes was poured out, deluging land, sea, and air, and burying twoentire cities, Herculaneum and Pompeii, while the people were sitting in thetheatre 1" Dion Cassius, lib. Lxvi.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. III.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET;SUCCESSOR TO HENRY Colour.PRU3i/-|inn<;74ERRATUM.— VOL. III.Page 28, line 4, for " Mercian" read " Mysian.'"THELAST DAYS OF POMPEIIBOOK IV. Continued.VOL. III.THE LAST DAYSPOMPEII.CHAPTER VI.IN WHICH THE Reader LEARNS THE CONDITION OFGLAUCUS — FRIENDSHIP TESTED — ENMITY SOFTENEDLOVE THE same; BECAUSE THE ONE LOVING IS BLIND IThe night was somewhat advanced, and thegay lounging-places of the Pompeians were stillcrowded. You might observe in the countenancesof the various idlers a more earnest expressionthan usual. They talked in large knots andgroups, as if they sought by numbers to divide thehalf painful, half pleasurable anxiety which belongedto the subject on which they conversed : —Tt was a subject of life and death.A young man passed briskly by the graceful4 THE LAST DAYS OFportico of the Temple of Fortune — so briskly,indeed, that he came with no slight force fullagainst the rotund and comely form of thatrespectable citizen Diomed, who was retiringhomeward to his suburban villa.*' Halloo!" groaned the merchant, recoveringwith some difficulty his equilibrium; " have youno eyes? or do you think I have no feeling? ByJupiter ! you have well nigh driven out the divineparticle ; such another shock, and my soul will bein Hades !"Ah, Diomed I is it you? Forgive my inadvertence.I was absorbed in thinking of thereverses of life. Our poor friend, Glaucus, eh?who could have guessed it?Well, but tell me, Clodius, is he really to ]jetried by the Senate ?"Yes ; they say the crime is of so extraordinarya nature, that the Senate, itself must adjudge it;and so the victors are to induct him* formally."He has been accused publicly, then ?"Pliu. Ep. ii. 11, 12, V. 4, 13.POMPEII. 5^' To be sure ; where have you been not to hearthat?"Why, I have only just returned from Nea-poles,-whither I went on business the very morningafter his crime ; — so shocking, and at myhouse the same night that it happened !"'' There is no doubt of his guilt," said Clodius,shrugging his shoulders ; '^ and as these crimestake precedence of all little undignified peccadilloes,they will hasten to finish the sentenceprevious to the games.""The games! Good gods!" replied Diomed,with a slight shudder; " can they adjudge him tothe beasts — so young, so rich !"True ; but then he is a Greek. Had he beena Roman, it would have been a thousand pities.These foreigners can be borne with in their prosperity; but in adversity we must not forget thatthey are in reality slaves. However, we of theupper classes are always tender-hearted ; and hewould certainly get off tolerably well if he wereleft to us ; for, between ourselves, what is a paltry6 THE LAST DAYS OFpriest of Isis? what Isis herself? But the commonpeople are superstitious ; they clamour forthe blood of the sacrilegious one. It is dangerousnot to give way to public opinion."And the blasphemer — the Christian, or Nazarene,or whatever else he be called ? "Oh, poor dog ! if he will sacrifice to Cybeleor Isis, he will be pardoned — if not, the tiger hashim. At least so I suppose ; but the trial willdecide. We talk while the urn's still empty.And the Greek may yet escape the deadly 0* ofhis own alphabet. But enough of this gloomysubject. How is the fair Julia?"Well, I fancy."Commend me to her. But, hark! the dooryonder creaks on its hinges ; it is the house ofthe praetor. Who comes forth ! By Bacchus ! itis the Egyptian ! What can he want with ourofficial friend ? "** Some conference touching the murder, doubt,the initial of fdvaro; (Death), the condemning letter of theGreeks, as C was of the Romans.POMPEII. 7less," replied Diomed; " but what was supposedto be the inducement to the crime ? Glaucus wasto have married the priest's sister."'^ Yes, some say Appetites refused the alliance.It might have been a sudden quarrel, Glaucus wasevidently inebriate — nay, so much so, as to havebeen quite insensible when taken up, and I hear isstill delirious — whether with wine, terror, remorse,the Furies, or the Bacchanals, I cannot say."Poor fellow, he has good counsel?"The best — Caius Pollio, an eloquent fellowenough. Pollio has been hiring all the poor gentlemenand well-born spendthrifts of Pompeii todress shabbily and sneak about, swearing theirfriendship to Glaucus (who would not have spokento them to be made emperor! — I will do himjustice, he was a gentleman in his choice of acquaintance),and trying to melt the stony citizensinto pity. But it won't do ; Isis is mightilypopular just at this moment."And, by the by, I have some merchandise atAlexandria. Yes, Isis ought to be protected."b THE LAST DAYS OF"True; so farewell, old gentleman; we shallmeet soon — if not, we must have a friendly bet atthe amphitheatre. All my calculations are confoundedby this cursed misfortune of Glaucus.He had bet on Lydon, the gladiator ; I must makeupmy tablets elsewhere. Vale !"Leaving the less active Diomed to regain hisvilla, Clodius strode on, humming a Greek air,and perfuming the night with the odours thatsteamed from his snowy garments and flowing-locks.If," thought he, " Glaucus feed the lion,Julia will no longer have a person to love betterthan me: she will certainly dote on me; — andso, I suppose, I must marry. By the gods! thetwelve lines begin to fail, — mei look suspiciouslyat my hand when it rattles the dice. That infernalSallust insinuates cheating ; and if it bediscovered that the ivory is cogged, why farewellto the merry supper and the perfumed billet ; —Clodius is undone ! Better marry, then, whileI may, renounce gaming, and push my fortune,POMPEII. 9(or rather the gentle Julia's) at the imperialcourt."Thus muttering the schemes of his ambition,if by that high name the projects of Clodius maybecalled, the gamester found himself suddenlyaccosted ; he turned, and beheld the dark browof Graces.'' Hail, noble Clodius! pardon my interruption ;and inform me, I pray you, which is the house ofSallust.""It is but a few yards hence, wise Graces.But does Sallust entertain to-night?"I know not," answered the Egyptian, " noram I, perhaps, one of those whom he would seekas a boon companion. But thou knowest that hishouse holds the person of Glaucus the murderer."Ay ! he, good-hearted epicure, believes inthe Greek's innocence ! You remind me that hehas become his surety ; and, therefore, till thetrial, is responsible for his appearance.* Well,If a criminal could obtain surety (called vates in capitaloffences), he was not compelled to lie in prison till after sentence.b210 THE LAST DAYS OFSallust's house is better than a prison, especiallythat wretched hole in the Forum. But for whatcan you seek Glaucus?"Why, noble Clodius, if we could save himfrom execution it would be well. The condemnationof the rich is a blow upon society itself. Ishould like to confer with him — for I hear he hasrecovered his senses — and ascertain the motives ofhis crime, — they may be so extenuating as toplead in his defence."You are benevolent, Graces."*' Benevolence is the duty of one who aspiresto wisdom," replied the Egyptian modestly.'' Which way lies Sallust's mansion?"I will shew you," said Clodius, " if you willsuffer me to accompany you a few steps. But,pray what has become of the poor girl who wasto have wed the Athenian — the sister of the murderedpriest?"Alas! well-nigh insane. Sometimes she uttersimprecations on the murderer — then suddenlystops short — then cries, * But why curse 1 Oh, myPOMPEII. 11brother! Glaucus was not tby murderer — neverwill I believe it!' Then she begins again, andagain stops short, and mutters awfully to herself,Yet if it were indeed he!' "Unfortunate lone!"'^ But it is well for her that those solemn caresto the dead which religion enjoins have hithertogreatly absorbed her attention from Glaucus andherself; and, in the dimness of her senses, shescarcely seems aware that Glaucus is apprehendedand on the eve of trial. When the funeral ritesare performed, her apprehension will return ; andthen I fear me much, that her friends will be revoltedby seeing her run to succour and aid themurderer of her brother ! "Such scandal should be prevented."I trust I have taken precautions to that effect.I am her lawful guardian, and have just succeededin obtaining permission to escort her, afterthe burial of Apsecides, to my own house : there,please the gods ! she will be secure."You have done well, sage Arbaces. And,12 THE LAST DAYS OFnow, yonder is the house of Sallust. The godskeep you! Yet, hark you, Arbaces, — why sogloomy and unsocial ? Men say you can be gay, —why not let me initiate you into the pleasures ofPompeii? — I flatter myself no one knows thembetter."I thank you, noble Clodius ; under yourauspices I might venture, I think, to wear thephilyra ; but, at my age, I should be an awkwardpupil."Oh, never fear ; I have made converts of fellowsof seventy. The rich, too, are never old."'' You flatter me. At some future time I willremind you of your promise."'' You may command Marcus Clodius at alltimes ; — and so vale!"'' Now," said the Egyptian, soliloquising, '^ I amnot wantonly a man of blood ; I would willinglysave this Greek, if he will, by confessing the crime,be lost for ever to lone, and for ever free me fromthe chance of discovery ; and I can save him bypersuading Julia to own the philter, which willPOMPEII. 13be held his excuse. But if he do not confess thecrime, why Julia must be shamed from the confession,and he must die ! — die, lest he prove myrival with the living — die, that he may be myproxy with the dead. Will he confess? — can henot be persuaded that in his delirium he struckthe blow ? To me it would give far greater safetythan even his death. Hem ! we must hazard theexperiment."Sweeping along the narrow street, Arbaces nowapproached the house of Sallust. when he behelda dark form, wrapped in a cloak, and stretched atlength across the threshold of the door.So still lay the figure, and so dim was its outline,that any other than Arbaces might have felt asuperstitious fear, lest he beheld one of those grimlemures, who, above all other spots, haunted thethreshold of the homes they formerly possessed.But not for Arbaces were such dreams.Rise!" said he, touching the figure with hisfoot; '' thou obstructed the way!"Ha! who art thou?" cried the form, in a14 THE LAST DAYS OFsharp tone ; and as she raised herself from theground the star-light fell full on the pale face andfixed but sightless eyes of Lydia the Tressilian.Who art thou ? I know the burden of thyvoice."Blind girl ! what dost thou here at this latehour? Fie — is this seeming thy sex or years?Home, girl ! "I know thee," said Lydia, in a low voice ;thou art Arbaces, the Egyptian ;" then, as ifinspired by some sudden impulse, she flung herselfat his feet, and, clasping his knees, exclaimed,in a wild and passionate tone, " O, dread andpotent man! save him — save lira ! he is notguilty it is I ! He lies within, ill — dying, andI — I am the hateful cause ! And they will notadmit me to him — they spurn the blind girl fromthe hall. O, heal him ! thou knowest some herbsome spell — some counter charm, for it isa potion that hath wrought this frenzy!"Hush, child ! I know all — thou forgottenthat I accompanied Julia to the Saga's home.POMPEII. 16Doubtless her hand administered the draught ; buther reputation demands thy silence. Reproachnot thyself — what must be, must : meanwhile,I seek the criminal — he may yet be saved.Away ! "Thus saying, Arbaces extricated himself fromthe clasp of the despairing Thessalian, and knockedloudly at the door.In a few moments the heavy bars were heardsullenly to yield, and the porter, half opening thedoor, demanded who was there.Arbaces — important business to Sallust, relativeto Glaucus. I come from the praetor."The porter, half yawning, half groaning, admittedthe tall form of the Egyptian. Lydiasprang forward. " How is he ?" she cried, " tellme — tell me !"Ho! mad girl, is it thou still! — for shame.Why, they say he is sensible."The gods be praised ! — and you will notadmit me ? Ah ! I beseech thee "Admit thee! — no. A pretty salute I should16 THE LAST DAYS OFprepare for these shoulders were I to admit suchthings as thou ! Go home ! "The door closed, and Lydia, with a deep sigh,laid herself down once more on the cold stones ;and, wrapping her cloak round her face, resumedher weary vigil.Meanwhile, Arbaces had already gained thetriclinium where Sallust, with his favourite freedman,sat late at supper.What ! Arbaces! and at this hour ! — acceptthis cup."Nay, gentle Sallust ; it is on business, notpleasure, that I venture to disturb thee. Howdoth thy charge? — they say in the town that hehas recovered sense."Alas ! and truly," replied the good-naturedbut thoughtless Sallust, wiping the tear from hiseyes; " but so shattered are his nerves and frame,that T scarcely recognise the brilliant and gaycarouser I was wont to know. Yet, strange tosay, be cannot account for the cause of the suddenfrenzy that seized him — he retains but a dimPOMPEII. 17consciousness of what hath passed ; and, despitethy witness, wise Egyptian, solemnly upholds hisinnocence of the death of Apsecides."Sallust," said Arbaces, gravely, '' there ismuch in thy friend's case that merits a peculiarindulgence ; and could we learn from his lips theconfession and the cause of his crime, much mightbe yet hoped from the mercy of the senate ; forthe senate, thou knowest, hath the power eitherto mitigate or to sharpen the law. Therefore itis that I have conferred with the highest authorityof the city, and obtained his permissionto hold a private conference this night with theAthenian. To-morrow, thou knowest, the trialcomes on."Well," said Sallust; " thou wilt be worthy ofthy eastern name and fame if thou canst learnaught from him ; but thou mayest try. PoorGlaucus ! — and he had such an excellent appetite!He eats nothing now ! "The benevolent epicure was moved sensibly atthis thought. He sighed, and ordered his slavesto refill his cup.18 THE LAST DAYS OFNight wanes," said the Egyptian; " sufferme to see thy ward now."Sallust nodded assent, and led the way to asmall chamber, guarded without by two dozingslaves. The door opened ; at the request ofArbaces, Sallust withdrew — the Egyptian wasalone with Glaucus.One of those tall and graceful candelabracommon to that day, supporting a single lamp,burned beside the narrow bed. Its rays fellpalely over the face of the Athenian, and Arbaceswas moved to see how sensibly that countenancehad changed. The rich colour was gone, thecheek was sunk, the lips were convulsed andpallid ; fierce had been the struggle betweenreason and madness, life and death. The youth,the strength of Glaucus had conquered ; but thefreshness of blood and soul — the life of life, itsglory, and its zest, were gone for ever.The Egyptian seated himself quietly beside thebed ; Glaucus still lay mute and unconscious ofhis presence. At length, after a considerablepause, Arbaces thus spoke : —POMPEII. 19Glaucus, we have been enemies. I come tothee alone, and in the dead of night — thy friend,perhaps thy saviour."As the steed starts from the path of the tiger,Glaucus sprang up breathless — alarmed, pantingat the abrupt voice, the sudden apparitionof his foe. Their eyes met, and neither, forsome moments, had power to withdraw his gaze.The flush went and came over the face of theAthenian, and the bronzed cheek of the Egyptiangrew a shade more pale. At length, withan inward groan, Glaucus turned away, drewhis hand across his brow, sunk back, and muttered—Am I still dreaming?"No, Glaucus, thou art awake. By this righthand, and my father's head, thou seest one whomay save thy life. Hark ! I know what thou hastdone, but I know also its excuse, of which thouthyself art ignorant. Thou hast committed murder,it is true — a sacrilegious murder: frown not —start not — these eyes saw it. But I can save20 THE LAST DAYS OFthee — I can prove how thou wert bereaved ofsense, and made not a free-thinking and free-actingman. But in order to save thee, thou must confessthy crime. Sign but this paper, acknowledgingthy hand in the death of Appetites, and thou shaltavoid the fatal urn."** What words are these! — murder, and Apsecides !Did I not see him stretched on the ground bleedingand a corpse? and wouldst thou persuade methat did the deed ? Man, thou lies! — away!"Be not rash — Glaucus, be not hasty ; the deedis proved ; come, come, thou mayest well be excusedfor not recalling the act of thy delirium, andwhich thy sober senses would have shunned evento contemplate. But let me try to refresh thyexhausted and weary memory. Thou knowestthou wert walking with the priest, disputing abouthis sister ; thou knowest he was intolerant, andhalf a Nazarene, and he sought to convert thee,and ye had hot words ; and he calumniated thymode of life, and swore he would not marry loneto thee — and then, in thy wrath and thy frenzy,POMPEII. 21thou clidst strike the sudden blow. Come, come !you can recollect this ? — read this papyrus, it runsto that effect — sign it, and thou art saved."Barbarian, give me the written lie, that I maytear it ! / the murderer of lone's brother ! / confessto have injured one hair of the head of himshe loved! Let me rather perish a thousandtimes ! "Beware !" said Arbaces, in a low and hissingtone ; '* there is but one choice — thy confessionand thy signature, — or the Amphitheatre and theLion's maw !"As the Egyptian fixed his eyes upon the sufferer,he hailed with joy the signs of evident emotion thatseized the latter at these words. A slight shudderpassed over the Athenian's frame — his lip fell — anexpression of sudden fear and wonder betrayeditself in his brow and eye.Great gods! " he said, in a low voice, 'whatreverse is this ? It seems but a little day sincelife lao-hed out from amidst roses — lone mine —youth, health, love, lavishing on me their treadsTHE LAST DAYS OFsures — and now; pain, madness, shame, death!And for what ? what have I done ? Oh, I am madstill!"Sign, and be saved I" said the soft sweet voiceof the Egyptian.Tempter, never ! " cried Glaucus, in the reactionof rage. " Thou knowest me not ; thouknowest not the haughty soul of an Athenian!The sudden face of death might appal me for amoment, hut the fear is over. Dishonour appalsfor ever ! Who will debase his name to save hislife? who exchange clear thoughts for sullieddays ? who will belie himself to shame, and standblackened in the eyes of glory and of love ? If toearn a few years of polluted life there be so base acoward, dream not, dull barbarian of the east ! tofind him in one who has trod the same sod as harmonious,and drank the same air as Socrates. Go !leave me to live without self reproach — or to perishwithout fear I"Bethink thee well ! the lion's fangs ; the hootsof the brutal mob ; the vulgar gaze on thy dyingPOMPEII. 23agony and mutilated limbs ; thy name degraded ;thy corpse unburied ; the shame thou wouldstavoid clinging to thee for aye and ever !"Thou rarest ! thou art the madman ! Shameis not in the loss of other men's esteem, — it is inthe loss of our own. Wilt thou go? — my eyes loathethe sight of thee ! hating ever, I despise thee now ! "I go !" said Arbaces, stung and exasperated,but not without some pitying admiration of hisvictim, '' I go ; we meet twice again — once at theTrial — once at the Death ! Farewell!"The Egyptian rose slowly, gathered his robesabout him, and left the chamber. He soughtSallust for a moment, whose eyes began to reelwith the vigils of the cup: '' He is still unconscious,or still obstinate ; there is no hope forhim."'' Say not so," replied Sallust, who felt but littleresentment against the Athenian's accuser, for hepossessed no great austerity of virtue, and wasrather moved by his friend's reverses than persuadedof his innocence, — " Say not so, my24 THE LAST DAYS OFEgyptian ! so good a drinker shall be saved ifpossible. Bacchus against Isis ! "We shall see," said the Egyptian.Sullenly the bolts were again Withdrawn — thedoor unclosed ; Arbaces was in the open street ;and poor Lydia once more started from her longwatch.Wilt thou save him?" she cried, clasping herhands.Child, follow me home ; I would speak to theeit is for his sake I ask it."*< And thou wilt save him ?"No answer came forth to the thirsting ear of theblind girl ; Arbaces had already proceeded far upthe street : she hesitated a moment, and then followedhis steps in silence.^' I must secure this girl," said he, musingly',lest she give evidence of the philter; as to thevain Julia, she will not betray herself."POMPEII. 25CHAPTER VII.A CLASSIC FUNERAL.While Arbaces had been thus employed, Sorrowand Death were in the house of lone. It wasthe night preceding the morn in which the solemnfuneral rites were to be decreed to the remains ofthe murdered Appetites. The corpse had beenremoved from the Temple of Isis to the house ofthe nearest surviving relative, and lone had heard,at the same breath, the death of her brother andthe accusation against her betrothed. That firstviolent anguish which blunts the sense to all butitself, and the forbearing silence of her slaves, hadprevented her learning minutely the circumstancesattendant on the fate of her lover. His illness,VOL. III. c26 THE LAST DAYS OFhis frenzy, and his approaching trial, were unknownto her. She learnt only the accusationagainst him, and at once indignantly rejected it ;nay, on hearing that Arbaces was the accuser,she required no more to induce her firmly andsolemnly to believe, that the Egyptian himself wasthe criminal. But the vast and absorbing importanceattached by the ancients to the performanceof every ceremonial connected with the death of arelation, had, as yet, confined her wo and herconvictions to the chamber of the deceased. Alas !it was not for her to perform that tender andtouching office, which obliged the nearest relativeto endeavour to catch the last breath — the partingsoul — of the beloved one ; but it was hers to closethe straining eyes, the distorted lips; to watch bythe consecrated clay, as, fresh bathed and anointed,it lay in festive robes upon the ivory bed ,• tostrew the couch with leaves and flowers, and torenew the solemn cypress-branch at the thresholdof the door. And in these sad offices, in lamentationand in prayer, lone forgot herself. It wasPOMPEII. 27among the loveliest customs of the ancients tobury the young at the morning twilight ; for, asthey strove to give the softest interpretation todeath, so they poetically imagined that Aurora,who loved the young, had stolen them to herembrace ; and though in the instance of the murderedpriest this fable could not appropriatelycheat the fancy, the general custom was stillpreserved.*The stars were fading one by one from thegrey heavens, and night slowly receding beforethe approach of morn, when a dark group stoodmotionless before lone's door. High and slendertorches, made paler by the unhallowed dawn,cast their light over various countenances, hushedfor the moment in one solemn and intent expression.And now there rose a slow and dismalmusic, which accorded sadly with the rite, andThis was rather a Greek than a Roman custom ; but thereader will observe, that in the cities of Blagna Greece, theGreek customs and superstitions were much mingled with theRoman.28 THE LAST DAYS OFfloated far along the desolate and breathlessstreets ; while a chorus of female voices, (thePrsefiese so often cited by the Roman poets),accompanying the Tibicin and the Mercian flute,woke the following strain : —O'er the sad threshold, where the cypress boughSupplants the rose that should adorn thy home,On the last pilgrimage on earth that nowAwaits thee, wanderer to Cocytus, come !Darkly we woo, and weeping we invite —Death is thy host — his banquet asks thy soul ;Thy garlands hang within the House of Night,And the black stream alone shall fill thy bowl.No more for thee the laughter and the song.The jocund night — the glory of the day !The Argive daughters* at their laboiu's long ;The hell-bird swooping on his Titan prey —The Danai'des.POMPEII. 29The false bolides* upheaving slow,O'er the eternal hill, the eternal stone ;The crowned Lydian-)- in his parching wo.And green Calirrhoe's monster-headed son, J —These shalt thou see, dim-shadowed through the dark,Wbin.h makes the sky of Pluto's dreary shore ;Lo ! where thou stand'st, pale-gazing on the barkThat waits our rite § to bear thee trembling o'er !Come, then ! no more delay ! — the phantom pinesAmidst the Unburied for its latest home ;O'er the grey sky the torch impatient shines —Come, mourner, forth ! — the lost one bids thee come!As the hymn died away, the group parted intwain ; and placed upon a couch, spread with apurple pall, the corpse of Apsecides was carriedforth with the feet foremost. The designate,or marshal of the sombre ceremonial, accom-Sisyphus. f Tantalus. J Geryon.§ The most idle novel-reader need scarcely be reminded, thatnot till after the funeral rites were the dead carried over theStyx.30 THE LAST DAYS OFpanted by his torch-bearers clad in black, gavethe signal, and the procession moved deadly on.First went the musicians playing a slow march —the solemnity of the lower instruments broken bymany a louder and wilder burst of the funeraltrumpet ; next followed the hired mourners, chantingtheir dirges to the dead ; and the female voiceswere mingled with those of boys, whose tenderyears made still more striking the contrast of lifeand death — the fresh leaf and the withered one.But the players, the buffoons, the archimedes,(whose duty it was to personate the dead) — these,the customary attendants at ordinary funerals,were banished from a funeral attended with somany terrible associations.The priests of Isis came next in their snowygarments, barefooted, and supporting sheaves ofcorn ; while before the corpse were carried theimages of the deceased, and his many Athenianforefathers. And behind the bier followed, amidsther women, the sole surviving relative of the deadher head bare, her locks dishevelled, her facePOMPEII. 31.paler than marble, but composed and still, saveever and anon, as some tender thought, awakenedby the music, flashed upon the dark lethargy ofwo, she covered that countenance with her hands,and sobbed unseen ; for hers was not the noisysorrow, the shrill lament, the ungoverned gesture,which characterised those who honoured less faithfully.In that age, as in all, the channel of deepgrief flowed hushed and still.And so the procession swept on, till it had traversedthe streets, passed the city gate, and gainedthe Place of Tonics without the wall, which thetraveller yet beholds.Raised in the form of an altar — of unpolishedpine, amidst whose interstices were placed preparationsof combustible matter — stood the funeralpyre ; and around it drooped the dark and gloomycypresses so consecrated by song to the tomb.As soon as the bier was placed upon the pile,the attendants parting on either side, lone passedup to the couch, and stood before the unconsciousclay for some moments motionless and silent.32 THE LAST DAYS OFThe features of the dead had been composed fromthe first agonised expression of violent death.Hushed for ever the terror and the doubt, thecontest of passion, the awe of religion, the struggleof the past and present, the hope and the horrorof the future ! — of all that racked and desolatedthe breast of that young aspirant to the Holy ofLife, what trace was visible in the awful serenityof that impenetrable brow and breathing lip ?The sister gazed, and not a sound was heardamidst the crowd ; there was something terrible,yet softening also, in the silence ; and when itbroke, it broke sudden and abrupt — it broke witha loud and passionate cry — the vent of long-smothereddespair.My brother, my brother!" cried the poororphan, falling upon the couch; " thou whomthe worm on thy path feared not — what enemycouldst thou provoke ? Oh, is it in truth come tothis? Awake! awake! we grew together! Arewe thus torn asunder ? Thou art not dead — thousteepest. Awake! awake!"POMPEII. 33The sound of her piercing voice aroused thesympathy of the mourners, and they broke intoloud and rude lament. This startled, this recalledlone ; she looked hastily and confusedly up, as iffor the first time sensible of the presence of thosearound.Air she murmured, with a shiver, " we arenot fJien clone!"With that, after a brief pause, she rose ; andher pale and beautiful countenance was againcomposed and rigid. With fond and tremblinghands, she unclosed the lids of the deceased ;* butwhen the dull glazed eye, no longer beamingwith love and life, met hei'S, she shrieked aloudas if she had seen a spectre. Once snore recoveringherself, she kissed again and again thelids, the lips, the brow ; and, with mechanic andunconscious hand, received from the High Priestof her brother's temple the funeral torch.The sudden burst of music, the sudden song ofPlan. ii. 37.c234 THE LAST DAYS OFthe mourners, announced the birth of the sanctifyingflame.1.On thy couch of cloud reclined,Wake, O soft and sacred Wind !Soft and sacred will we name thee,Whosoever the sire that claim thee —Whether old Auster's dusky child,Or the loud son of Eurus wild ;Or his* who o'er the darkling deeps.From the bleak North, in tempest sweeps ;Still shalt thou seem as dear to usAs flower-crowned Zephyrus,When, through twilight's starry dew,Trembling, he hastes his nymph f to woo !2.Lo ! our silver censers swinging.Perfumes o'er thy path are flinging, —Boreas. t Flora.POMPEII. 35Ne'er o'er Tempe's breathless valleys,Ne'er o'er Cyprian's cedar alleys, —Or the Rose-isle's * moonlit sea,Floated sweets more worthy thee.Lo ! around our vases sendingMyrrh and nard with cassia blending ;Paving air with odours meetFor thy silver-sandall'd feet !3.August and everlasting Air !The source of all that breathe and be,From the mute clay before thee bearThe seeds it took from thee !Aspire, bright flame ! aspire !Wild wind ! — awake, awake !Thine own, O solemn Fire!O Air, thine own retake !4.It comes, it comes ! Lo ! it sweeps.The Wind we invoke the while !And crackles, and darts, and leapsThe light on the holy pile !Rhodes.36 THE LAST DAYS OFIt rises ! its wings interweaveWith the flames, — how they howl and heave !Tossed, whirled to and fro,How the flame-serpents glow !Rushing higher and higher,On — on, fearful Fire !Thy giant limbs twinedWith the arms of the Wind !Lo ! the Elements meet on the ThroneOf Death — to reclaim their own !5.Swing, swing the censer round —Tune the strings to a softer sound !From the chains of thy earthly toil.From the clasp of thy mortal coil.From the prison where clay confined thee,The hands of the Flame unbind thee !O, Soul! thou art free — all free !As the winds in their ceaseless chase ;When they rush o'er their airy sea,Thou may'st speed through the realms of space.No fetter is forged for thee !POMPEII. 37Rejoice! o'er the sluggard tideOf the Styx thy bark can glide,And thy steps evermore shall roveThrough the glades of the happy grove ;Where, far from the loath'd Cocytus,The loved and the lost invito us.Thou art slave to the earth no more !O, soul thou art freed ! — and we? —Ah ! when shall oui toil be o'er ?Ah ! when shall we rest with thee ?And now high and far into the dawning skiesbroke the fragrant fire : it flashed luminouslyacross the gloomy cypresses, — it shot above themassive walls of the neighbouring city ; and theearly fisherman started to behold the blaze reddeningon the waves of the creeping sea.But lone sat down apart and alone, and, leaningher face upon her hands, saw not the flame, norheard the lamentation or the music : she felt onlyone sense of loneliness, — she had not yet arrived to38 THE LAST DAYS OFthat hallowing sense of comfort, when we knowthat we are not alone — that the dead are withus !The breeze rapidly aided the effect of the combustiblesplaced within the pile. By degrees theflame wavered, lowered, dimmed, and slowly, byfits and unequal starts, died away — emblem oflife itself; where, just before, all was restlessnessand flame, now lay the dull and smoulderingashes.The last sparks were extinguished by the attendants— the embers were collected. Steeped inthe rarest wine and the costliest odours, the remainswere placed in a silver urn, which wassolemnly stored in one of the neighbouring sepulchresbeside the road ; and they placed within itthe vial full of tears, and the small coin whichpoetry still consecrated to the grim boatman.And the sepulchre was covered with flowers andchaplets, and incense kindled on the altar, andthe tomb hung round with many lamps.But the next day, when the priest returned withPOMPEII. 39"fresh offerings to the tomb, he found, that to therelies of heathen superstition some unknownhands had added a green palm-branch. He sufferedit to remain, unknowing that it was thesepulchral emblem of Christianity.When the above ceremonies were over, one ofthe Prseficse three times sprinkled the mournersfrom the purifying branch of laurel, uttering thelast word, '' Ilicet!" — Depart! — and the rite wasdone.But first they paused to utter — weepingly andmany times — the affecting farewell, " Salve inter-num! " And as lone yet lingered, they woke theparting strain.1.Farewell, O soul departed !Farewell, sacred urn !Bereaved and broken-hearted,To earth the mourners turn !40 THE LAST DAYS OFTo the dim and dreary shore,Thou art gone our steps before !But thither the swift Hours lead us,And thou dost but awhile precede us ISalve — salve!Loved urn, and thou solemn cell,Mute ashes! — farewell, farewell !Salve — salve !2.Ilicet — ire licc< —Ah, vainly would we part !Thy tomb is the faithful heart.About evermore we bear thee ;For who from the heart can tear thee ?Vainly we sprinkle o'er usThe drops of the cleansing stream ;^ And vainly bright before usThe lustral fire shall beam.For where is the charm expellingThy thought from its sacred dwelling ?Our griefs are thy funeral feast,And Memory thy mourning priest.Salve — salve!POMPEII. 413.Ilicet — ire licet!The spark from the hearth is goneWherever the air shall bear it ;The elements take their own —The shadows receive thy spirit.It will soothe thee to feel our grief,As thou glides by the Gloomy River :If love may in life be brief,In death it is fixed for ever.Salve — salve !In the hall which our feasts illume.The rose for an hour may bloom ;But the cypress that decks the tomb —The cypress is green for ever !Salve — salve !42 THE LAST DAYS OPCHAPTER VIII.IN WHICH AK ADVENTURE HAPPENS TO lONE.While some stayed behind to share with thepriests the funeral banquet, lone and her handmaidstook homeward their melancholy way. Andnow (the last duties to her brother performed)her mind awoke from its absorption, and shethought of her affianced, and the dread chargeagainst him. Not — as we have before said —attaching a momentary belief to the unnaturalaccusation, but nursing the darkest suspicionagainst Arbaces, she felt that justice to herlover and to her murdered relative, demandedher to seek the praetor, and communicate herimpression, unsupported as it might be. Ques-pompeii.43turning her maidens, who had hitherto — kindlyanxious, as I have said, to save her the additionalagony — refrained from informing her ofthe state of Glaucus, she learnt that he hadbeen dangerously ill ; that he was in custody,under the roof of Sallust ; that the day of histrial was appointed.Averting gods !" she exclaimed ; " and haveI been so long forgetful of him ? Have I seemedto shun him ? O ! let me hasten to do himjustice — to shew that I, the nearest relative ofthe dead, believe him innocent of the charge.Quick ! quick ! — let us fly. Let me soothe — tendcheer him ! and if they will not believe me ; ifthey will not yield to my conviction • if they sentencehim to exile or to death, let me share thesentence with him ! "Instinctively she hastened her pace, confusedand bewildered, scarce knowing whither shewent ; now designing first to seek the praetor,and now to rush to the chamber of Glaucus.She hurried on — she passed the gate of the city44 THE LAST DAYS OFshe was in the long street leading up the town.The houses were opened, but none were yet astirin the streets : the life of the city was scarceawake — when, lo ! she came suddenly upon asmall knot of men standing beside a coveredlitter. A tall figure stepped from the midstof them, and lone shrieked aloud to beholdArbaces.Fair lone !" said he, gently, and appearingnot to heed her alarm ; " my ward, my pupil !forgive me if I disturb thy pious sorrows ; butthe praetor, solicitous of thy honour, and anxiousthat thou mayst not rashly be implicated in thecoming trial ; knowing the strange embarrassmentof thy state (seeking justice for thy brother, butdreading punishment to thy betrothed) — sympathising,too, with thy unprotected and friendlesscondition, and deeming it harsh that thou shouldstbe suffered to act unguided and mourn alone —hath wisely and paternally confided thee to thecare of thy lawful guardian. Behold the writingwhich intrusts thee to my charge ! "POMPEII. 45Dark Egyptian !" cried lone, drawing herselfproudly aside ; " begone ! It is thou that hastslain my brother ! Is it to thy care, thy handsyet reeking with his blood, that they will givethe sister 1 Ha ! thou turned pale ! thy consciencesmites thee ! thou trembles at the thunderbolt ofthe avenging God ! Pass on, and leave me tomy wo ! "Thy sorrows unstring thy reason, lone," saidArbaces, attempting in vain his usual calmness oftone. " I forgive thee. Thou wilt find me now,as ever, thy surest friend. But the public streetsare not the fitting place for us to confer — for meto console thee. Approach, slaves! Come, mysweet charge, the litter awaits thee."The amazed and terrified attendants gatheredround lone, and clung to her knees.'* Arbaces," said the eldest of the maidens,this is surely not the law ! For nine days afterthe funeral, is it not written, that the relativesof the deceased shall not be molested in theirhomes, or interrupted in their solitary grief?"4b THE LAST DAYS OF'^ Woman!" returned Arbaces, imperiouslywaving his hand, '^ to place a ward under theroof of her guardian is not against the funerallaws. 1 tell thee, I have the fiat of the praetor.This delay is indecorous. Place her in thelitter!"So saying, he threw his arm firmly round theshrinking form of lone. She drew back, gazedearnestly in his face, and then burst into hystericallaughter : —Ha, ha! this is well — well! Excellent guardianpaternal law ! Ha, ha !" — and, startled herselfat the dread echo of that shrill and maddenedlaughter, she sunk, as it died away, lifelessupon the ground A minute more, andArbaces had lifted her into' the litter. Thebearers moved swiftly on, and the unfortunatelone was soon borne from the sight of her weeping-handmaids.POMPEII. 47CHAPTER IX.WHAT BECOMES OF NYDIA IN THE HOUSE OF Graces— =THE EGYPTIAN FEELS COMPASSION FOR GLAUCUS —COMPASSION IS OFTEN A VERY USELESS VISITOR TO THEGUILTY.It will be remembered that at the command ofArbaces, Lydia followed the Egyptian to hishome, and, conversing there with her, he learned,from the confession of her despair and remorse,that her hand, and not Julia's, had administeredto Glaucus the fatal potion. At another time theEgyptian might have conceived a philosophicalinterest in sounding the depths and origin of thestrange and absorbing passion which, in blindnessand in slavery, this singular girl had daredto cherish ; but at present he spared no thought48 THE LAST DAYS OFfrom himself. As, after her confession, the poorLydia threw herself on her knees before him, andbesought him to restore the health and save thelife of Glaucus — for in her youth and ignoranceshe imagined the dark magician all-powerful toeffect both — Arbaces, with unheeding ears, wasnoting only the new expediency of detaining Lydiaa prisoner until the trial and fate of Glaucus weredecided. For if, when he judged her merely theaccomplice of Julia in obtaining the philter, hehad felt it was dangerous to the full success of hisvengeance to allow her to be at large — to appear,perhaps, as a witness — to avow the manner inwhich the sense of Glaucus had been darkened,and thus win indulgence to the crime of which hewas accused — how much more was she likely tovolunteer her testimony when she herself hadadministered the draught, and, inspired by love,would be only anxious, at any expense of shame,to retrieve her error and preserve her beloved?Besides, how unworthy of the rank and repute ofArbaces to be implicated in the disgrace of pan-pompeii.49during to the passion of Julia, and assisting inthe unholy rites of the Saga of Vesuvius! Nothingless, indeed, than his desire to induceGlaucus to own the murder of Apsecides, as apolicy evidently the best both for his own permanentsafety, and his successful suit with lone,could ever have led him to contemplate the confessionof Julia.As for Lydia, who was necessarily cut off byher blindness from much of the knowledge ofactive life, and who, a slave and a stranger, wasnaturally ignorant of the perils of the Roman law,she thought rather of the illness and delirium ofher Athenian, than the crime of which she hadvaguely heard him accused, or the chances of theimpending trial. Poor wretch that she was,whom none addressed, none cared for, whatdid she know of the senate and the sentence —the hazard of the law — the ferocity of the peoplethe arena and the lion's den ? She was accustomedonly to associate with the thought ofGlaucus every thing that was prosperous andVOL. III. D50 THE LAST DAYS OFlofty — she could not imagine that any peril, savefrom the madness of her love, could menace thatsacred head. He seemed to her set apart for theblessings of life. She only had disturbed thecurrent of his felicity ; she knew not, she dreamtnot, that the stream, once so bright, was dashingon to darkness and to death. It was therefore torestore the brain that she had marred, to save thelife that she had endangered, that she imploredthe assistance of the great Egyptian.'' Daughter," said Arbaces, waking from hisreverie, " thou must rest here ; it is not meet forthee to wander along the streets, and be spurnedfrom the threshold by the rude foot of slaves. Ihave compassion on thy soft crime — I will do allto remedy it. Wait here patiently for some days,and Glaucus shall be restored." So saying, andwithout waiting for her reply, he hastened fromthe room, drew the bolt across the door, andconsigned the care and wants of his prisoner tothe slave who had the charge of that part of themansion.POMPEII. 51Alone, then, and musingly, he waited themorning light, and with it repaired, as we haveseen, to possess himself of the person of lone.His primary object with respect to the unfortunateNeapolitan was that which he had reallystated to Clodius, viz. to prevent her interestingherself actively in the trial of Glaucus, and alsoto guard against her accusing him (which shewould doubtless have done) of his former act ofperfidy and violence towards her, his ward —denouncing his causes for vengeance againstGlaucus — unveiling the hypocrisy of his characterand casting any doubt upon his veracity in thecharge which he had made against the Athenian.Not till he had encountered her that morningtill he had heard her loud denunciations, washe aware that he had also another danger toapprehend in her suspicion of his crime. Hehugged himself now in the thought that theseobjects Averse effected ; that one, at once the creatureof his passion and his fear, was in his power.He believed more than ever the flattering proseTHE LAST DAYS OFmises of the stars ; and when he sought lone inthat chamber in the inmost recesses of his mysteriousmansion to which he had consigned her,when he found her overpowered by blow uponblow, and passing from fit to fit, from violence totorpor, in all the alternations of hysterical disease —he thought more of the loveliness, which no frenzycould distort, than of the wo which he had broughtupon her. In that sanguine vanity common tomen who through life have been invariably successful,whether in fortune or love, he flatteredhimself that when Glaucus had perished, whenhis name was solemnly blackened by the award ofa legal judgment, his title to her love for everforfeited by condemnation to death for the murderof her own brother — her affection would be changedto horror ; and that his tenderness and his passion,assisted by all the arts with which he well knewhow to dazzle woman's imagination, might electhim to that throne in her heart from which hisrival would be so awfully expelled. This was hishope ; but should it fail, his unholy and fervidPOMPEII. 53passion Whispered, " At the worst, novo she is inmy power !"Yet, withal, he felt that uneasiness and apprehensionwhich attend upon the chance of detectioneven when the criminal is insensible to the?voice of conscience — that vague terror of the consequencesof crime, which is often mistaken forremorse at the crime itself. The buoyant air ofCampania weighed heavily upon his breast; helonged to hurry from a scene where danger mightnot sleep eternally with the dead ; and havinglone now in his possession, he secretly resolved,as soon as he had witnessed the last agony of hisrival, to transport his wealth — and her, the costliesttreasure of all — to some distant shore.Yes," said he, striding to and fro his solitarychamber; " yes, the law that gave me the personof my ward gives me the possession of my bride.Far across the broad main will we sweep on oursearch after novel luxuries and inexperiencedpleasure. Cheered by my stars, supported by theomens of my soul, we will penetrate to those vast54 THE LAST DAYS OFand glorious worlds which my wisdom tells melie yet untracked in the recesses of the circlingsea. There may this heart, possessed of love, growat length alive to ambition — there, amongst nationscrushed by the Roman yoke, and to whose earthe name of Rome has not yet been wafted, Imay found an empire, and transplant my ancestralcreed ; renewing the ashes of the deadTheban rule, continuing in yet grander shoresthe dynasty of my crowned fathers, and wakingin the noble heart of lone the grateful consciousnessthat she shares the lot of one who, far fromthe aged rottenness of this slavish civilisation,restores the primal elements of greatness, andunites in one mighty soul the attributes of theprophet and the king."From this exultant soliloquy, Arbaces wasawakened to attend the trial of the Athenian.The worn and pallid cheek of his victim touchedhim less than the firmness of his nerves and thedauntlessness of his brow ; for Arbaces was onewho had little pity for what was unfortunate, butPOMPEII. 65a strong sympathy for what was bold. The con-generalitiesthat bind us to others ever assimilate tothe qualities of our own nature. The hero weepsless at the reverses of his enemy than at the fortitudewith which he bears them. All of us arehuman, and Arbaces, criminal as he was, had hisshare of our common feeling's and our mother-clay.Had he but obtained from Glaucus thewritten confession of his crime, which would,better than even the judgment of others, havelost him with lone, and removed the chance offuture detection from Arbaces, he would havestrained every nerve to save him. Even now hishatred was over — his desire of revenge was slaked ;he crushed his prey, not in enmity, but as anobstacle in his path. Yet was he not the less resolved,the less crafty and persevering in the coursehe pursued for the destruction of one whose doomwas become necessary to the attainment of hisobjects ; and while, with apparent reluctance andcompassion, he gave against Glaucus the evidencewhich condemned him, he secretly, and through56 THE LAST DAYS OFthe medium of the priesthood, fomented thatpopular indignation which made an effectualobstacle to the pity of the Senate. He had soughtJulia; he had detailed to her the confession ofLydia ; he had easily, therefore, lulled any scrupleof conscience which might have led her to extenuatethe offence of Glaucus by avowing her sharein his frenzy ; and the more readily, for her vainheart had loved the fame and the prosperity ofGlaucus — not Glaucus himself; she felt no affectionfor a disgraced man — nay, she almost rejoicedin a disgrace that humbled the hated lone. IfGlaucus could not be her slave, neither could hebethe adorer of her rival. This was sufficientconsolation for any regret at his fate. Volatileand fickle, she began already to be moved by thesudden and earnest suit of Clodius, and was notwilHno; to hazard the loss of an alliance with thatbase but high-born noble by any public exposureof her past weakness and immodest passion foranother. All things then smiled upon Arbaces —all things frowned upon the Athenian.POMPEII. 57CHAPTER X.NYDIA AFFECTS THE SORCERESS.When the Thessalian found that Arbacesreturned to her no more — when she was left, hourafter hour, to all the torture of that miserablesuspense which was rendered by blindness doublyintolerable, she began, with outstretched arms, tofeel around her prison for some channel of escape ;and finding the only entrance secure, she calledaloud, and with the vehemence of a tempernaturally violent, and now sharpened by impatientagony.Ho, girl!" said the slave in attendance,opening the door, '^ art thou bit by a scorpion? ord258 THE LAST DAYS OFthickest thou that we are dying of silence here,and only to be preserved, like the infant Jupiter,by a hullabaloo ?"Where is thy master? and wherefore am Icaged here ? I want air and liberty ; let me goforth!"Alas ! little one, hast thou not seen enoughof Arbaces to know that his will is imperial ? Hehath ordered thee to be caged ; and caged thouart, and I am thy keeper. Thou canst not haveair and liberty ; but thou mayst have what aremuch better things — food and wine."Pro Jupiter !" cried the girl, wringing herhands; " and why am I thus imprisoned? whatcan the great Arbaces want with so poor a thingas I am?"That I know not, unless it be to attend onthy new mistress, who has been brought hitherthis day.""What! lone here?"Yes, poor lady ; she liked it little, I fear. Yet,POMPEII. 59by the Temple of Castor I Arbaces is a gallantman to the women. Thy lady is his ward, thouknowest."Wilt thou take me to her?"She is ill — frantic with rage and spite. Besides,I have no orders to do so ; and I neverthink for myself. When Arbaces made me slaveof these chambers,* he said, ' I have but one lessonto give thee — while thou serves me, thou musthave neither ears, eyes, nor thought ; thou mustbe but one quality — obedience.' "But what harm is there in seeing lone ?"*' That I know not ; but if thou wanted a companion,I am willing to talk to thee, little one, forI am solitary enough in my dull cubiculum; and,by the way, thou art Thessalian — knowest thounot some cunning amusement of knife and shears,some pretty trick of telling fortunes, as most ofthy race do, in order to pass the time ?"Tush, slave! hold thy peace ! or, if thou wiltIn the houses of the great, each suite of chambers had itspeculiar slave.60 THE LAST DAYS OFspeak, what hast thou heard of the state ofGlaucus ?"Why, my master has gone to the Athenian'strial ; Glaucus will smart for it!"*' For what?"'^ The murder of the priest Apsecides.""Ha!" said Lydia, pressing her hands to herforehead, " something of this I have indeed heated,but understand not. Yet who will dare to touch ahair of his head?"That will the lion, I fear."Averting gods ! what wickedness dost thouutter?"*' Why only that, if he be found guilty, thelion, or maybe the tiger, will be his executioner."-IVydia leapt up, as if an arrow had entered herheart : she uttered a piercing scream ; then, fallingbefore the feet of the slave, she cried in a tonethat melted even his rude heart, —Ah! tell me thou justest — thou interest notthe truth — speak, speak !"*' Why, by my faith, blind girl, I know nothingPOMPEII. 61of the law ; it may not be so bad as I say. ButArbaces is his accuser, and the people desire avictim for the arena. Cheer thee ! But whathath the fate of the Athenian to do with thine ?"No matter, no matter — he has been kind tome:thou knowest not, then, what they will do?Arbaces his accuser! O fate! The people — thepeople ! Ah! they can look upon his face — whowill be cruel to the Athenian? — yet was not loveitself cruel to him?"So saying, her head drooped upon her bosom ;she sunk into silence ; scalding tears flowed downher cheeks ; and all the kindly efforts of the slavewere unable either to console her or distract theabsorption of her reverie.When his household cares obliged the ministrantto leave her room, Lydia began to re-collect herthoughts : Arbaces was the accuser of Glaucus ;Arbaces had imprisoned her here ; was not thata proof that her liberty might be serviceable toGlaucus? Yes, she was evidently inveigled intosome snare ; she was contributing: to the destruc-62 THE LAST DAYS OFtion of her beloved! Oh, how she panted for release! Fortunately for her sufferings, all sense ofpain became merged in the desire of escape ; andas she began to revolve the possibility of deliverance,she grew calm and thoughtful. She possessedmuch of the craft of her sex, and it had beenincreased in her breast by her early servitude.What slave was ever destitute of cunning ? Sheresolved to practise upon her keeper ; and, callingsuddenly to mind his superstitious query as to herThessalian art, she hoped by that handle to workout some method of release. These doubts occupiedher mind during the rest of the day and thelong hours of night ; and accordingly, when Sosiavisited her the following morning, she hastened todivert his garrulity into that channel in which ithad before evinced a natural disposition to flow.She was aware, however, that her only chanceof escape was at night ; and accordingly she wasobliged, with a bitter pang at the delay, to defertill then her purposed attempt.The night," said she, " is the sole time inPOMPEII. 63which we can well decipher the decrees of fate —then it is thou must seek me. But Vvhat desiresthou to learn?" .By Pollux, I should like to know as much asmy master; but that is not to be expected. Letme know, at least, whether I shall save enough topurchase my freedom, or whether this Egyptianwill give it me for nothing. He does such generousthings sometimes. Next, supposing that betrue, shall I possess myself of that snug tavernamong the Myropolia* which I have long had inmy eye ? 'Tis a genteel trade that of a perfumer,and suits a retired slave who has something of agentleman about him !" . >Ay ! so you would have precise answers tothose questions : there are various ways of satisfyingyou. There is the Lithomanteia, or Speaking-stone,which answers your prayer with an infant'svoice ; but then we have not that precious stonewith us — costly is it, and rare. Then there is theThe shops of the perfumers.64 THE LAST DAYS OFGastromanteia, whereby the demon casts pale andghastly images upon water, prophetic of thefuture. But this art requires also glasses of apeculiar fashion, to contain the consecrated liquid,which we have not. I think, therefore, that thesimplest method of satisfying your desire would beby the Magic of Air."I trust," said Sosia, tremulously, " that thereis nothing very frightful in the operation ? I haveno love for apparitions."Fear not; thou wilt see nothing; thou wiltonly hear by the bubbling of water whether or notthy suit prospers. First, then, be sure, from therising of the evening-star, that thou leaves thegarden-gate somewhat open, so that the demonmay feel himself invited to enter therein ; andplace fruits and water near the gate as a sign ofhospitality ; then, three hours after twilight, comehere with a bowl of the coldest and purest water,and thou shalt learn all, according to the Thessalianlore my mother taught me. But forgetnot the garden-gate — all rests upon that ; it mustPOMPEII. 65be open when you come, and for three hours previously."Trust me," replied the unsuspecting Sosia ;I know what a gentleman's feelings are whena door is shut in his face, as the cook-shop's hathbeen in mine many a day ; and I know also, thata person of respectability, as a demon of courseis, cannot but be pleased, on the other hand,with any little mark of courteous hospitality.Meanwhile, pretty one, here is thy morning'smeal."And what of the trial ?"O, the lawyers are still at it — talk, talk — itwill last over till tomorrow."'' To-morrow — you are sure of that?"'' So I hear."'' And lone?"By Bacchus ! she must be tolerably well,for she was strong enough to make my masterstamp and bite his lip this morning. I saw himquit her apartment with a brow like a thunderstorm."66 THE LAST DAYS OF'^ Lodges she near this ?"No — in the upper apartments. But I mustnot stay prating here longer — vale!"POMPEII. 67CHAPTER XLA WASP VENTURES INTO THE SPIDER's WEB.The second night of the trial had set in ; andit was nearly the time in which Sosia was tobrave the dread unknown, when there entered,at that very garden-gate which the slave had leftajar — not, indeed, one of the mysterious spiritsof earth or air, but the heavy and most humanform of Calenus, the priest of Isis. He scarcelynoted the humble offerings of indifferent fruit,and still more indifferent wine, which the piousSosia had deemed good enough for the invisiblestranger they were intended to allure. " Sometribute," thought he, " to the garden god. Bymy father's head ! if his deityship were never68 THE LAST DAYS OFbetter served, he would do well to give up thegodly profession. Ah ! were it not for us priests,the o-ods would have a sad time of it. And nowfor Arbaces — I am treading a quicksand, but itought to cover a mine. I have the Egyptian'slife in my power — what will he value it at?"As he thus soliloquised, he crossed through theopen court into the peristyle, where a few lampshere and there broke upon the empire of thestarlit night; and, issuing from one of the chambersthat bordered the colonnade, suddenly encounteredArbaces.'sho! Calenus — meekest thou me?" said theEgyptian ; and there was a little embarrassmentin his voice.Yes, wise Arbaces — I trust my visit is notunseasonable?"Nay — it was but this instant that my f reed-manCallias sneezed thrice at my right hand ; Iknew, therefore, some good fortune was in storefor me — and, lo ! the gods have sent me Calenus."POMPEII. 69Shall we within to your chamber, Arbaces ?"As you will ; but the night is clear and balmyI have some remains of languor yet lingeringon me from my recent illness — the air refreshesme — let us walk in the garden — we are equallyalone there."With all my heart," answered the priest;and the two friends passed slowly to one of themany terraces which, bordered by marble vasesand sleeping flowers, intersected the garden.It is a lovely night," said Arbaces — " blueand beautiful as that on which, twenty years ago,the shores of Italy first broke upon my view. MyCalenus, age creeps upon us — let us at least feelthat we have lived."*' Thou, at least, mayst arrogate that boast,"said Calenus, beating about, as it were, for anopportunity to communicate the secret whichweighed upon him, and feeling his usual awe ofArbaces still more impressively that night, fromthe quiet and friendly tone of dignified condescensionwhich the Egyptian assumed — '' Thou,70 THE LAST DAYS OFat least, mayst arrogate that boast. Thou hasthad countless wealth — a frame on whose close-wovenfibres disease can find no space to enter —prosperous love — inexhaustible pleasure — and,even at this hour, triumphant revenge."Thou alludes to the Athenian. Ay, tomorrow'ssun the fiat of his death will go forth. Thesenate does not relent. But thou mistakes — hisdeath gives me no other gratification than that itreleases me from a rival in the affections of lone.I entertain no other sentiment of animosity againstthat unfortunate homicide."Homicide!" repeated Calenus slowly andmeaningly ; and, halting as he spoke, he fixedhis eyes upon Arbaces. The stars shone pale andsteadily on the proud face of their prophet, butthey betrayed there no change ; the eyes of Calenusfell disappointed and abashed. He continuedrapidly — '' Homicide! it is well to charge himwith that crime ; but thou, of all men, knowestthat he is innocent."*' Explain thyself," said Arbaces, coldly — forPOMPEII. 71he had prepared himself for the hint his secretfears had foretold.Arbaces," answered Calenus, sinking his voiceinto a whisper, " I was in the sacred grove, shelteredby the chapel and the surrounding foliage.I overheard — I marked the whole. I saw thyweapon pierce the heart of Apsecides. I blamenot the deed — it destroyed a foe and an apostate."Thou safest the whole!" said Arbaces, drily;so I imagined — thou wert alone."Alone!" returned Calenus, surprised at theEgyptian's calmness.And wherefore wert thou hid behind thechapel at that hour?"Because I had learnt the conversion of Appetitesto the Christian faith — because I knew thaton that spot he was to meet the fierce Olinthus —because they were to meet there to discuss plansfor unveiling the sacred mysteries of our goddessto the people — and I was there to detect, in orderto defeat, them."72 THE LAST DAYS OFHast thou told living ear what thou didstwitness ?"No, my master; the secret is locked in thyservant's breast."What! even thy kinsman Burho guesses itnot? Come, the truth !"By the gods "Hush! we know each other — what are thegods to us VBy the fear of thy vengeance, then, no !"And why hast thou hitherto concealed fromme this secret? why hast thou waited till the eveof the Athenian's condemnation before thou hastventured to tell me that Arbaces is a murderer?And, having tarried so long, why revealed thounow that knowledge ?"Because — because" — stammered Calenus,colouring and in confusion.Because," interrupted Arbaces, with a gentlesmile, and tapping the priest on the shoulder witha kindly and familiar gesture, " Because, my Calenus— (see now, I will read thy heart and explainPOMPEII. 73its motives) — because thou didst wish thoroughlyto commit and entangle me in the trial, so that Imight have no loop-hole of escape — that I mightstand firmly pledged to perjury and to malice, aswell as to homicide — that having myself whettedthe appetite of the populace to blood, no wealth,no power, could prevent my becoming their victim: and thou tallest me thy secret now, ere thetrial be over, and the innocent condemned, toshew what a dexterous web of villany thy wordtomorrow could destroy — to enhance, in this,the ninth hour, the price of thy forbearance — toshew that my own arts in arousing the popularwrath, would, at thy witness, recoil upon myself ;and that, if not for Glaucus, for me would gapethe jaws of the lion ! Is it not so ?"'' Arbaces," replied Calenus, losing all thevulgar audacity of his natural character, " verilythou art a Magian ; thou readiest the heart as itwere a scroll."It is my vocation," answered the Egyptian,VOL. III. E74 THE LAST DAYS OFlaughing gently. " Well, then, forbear ; and whenall is over I will make three rich."Pardon me," said the priest, as the quicksuggestion of that avarice which was his master-passionbade him trust to no future chance ofgenerosity. " Pardon me ; thou saidst right —we know each other. If thou wouldst have mesilent, thou must pay something in advance, as anoffer to Hippocrates.* If the rose, sweet emblemof discretion, is to take root firmly, water her thisnight with a stream of gold."Witty and poetical!" answered Arbaces, stillin that bland voice which lulled and encouraged,when it ought to have alarmed and checked hisgriping comrade. " Wilt thou not wait the morrow?"Why this delay ? Perhaps when I can nolonger give my testimony without shame for nothaving given it ere the innocent man suffered,thou wilt forget my claim ; and, indeed, thy presThe God of Silence.POMPEII. 75sent hesitation is a bad omen of thy future gratitude."f, /,: , r. .j ■ .V yr , ':Well then, Calenus, what would st thou haveme pay thee?" ,,; , , , ,, .*' Thy life is very precious, and thy wealth isvery great," returned the priest, grinning.Wittier and more witty. But speak out —what shall be the sum ?"Arbaces, I have heard that in thy secret treasurybelow, beneath those rude Oscan arches whichprop thy stately halls, thou hast piles of gold, ofvases, and of jewels, which might rival the receptaclesof the wealth of the deified Nero. Thoumay St easily spare out of those piles enough tomake Calenus among the richest priests of Pompeii,and yet not miss the loss."Come, Calenus," said Arbaces, winningly, andwith a frank and generous air, " thou art an oldfriend, and hast been a faithful servant. Thoucanst have no wish to take away my life, nor I adesire to stint thy reward : thou shalt descendwith me to that treasury thou referred to ; thou76 THE LAST DAYS OFshalt feast thine eyes with the blaze of uncountedgold, and the sparkle of priceless gems ; and thoushalt, for thy own reward, bear away with theethis night as much as thou canst conceal beneaththy robes. Nay, when thou hast once seen whatthy friend possesses, thou wilt learn how foolish itwould be to injure one who has so much to bestow.When Glaucus is no more, thou shalt pay thetreasury another visit. Speak I frankly and as afriend?"'' O, greatest, best of men!" cried Calenus,almost weeping with joy. " Canst thou thus forgivemy injurious doubts of thy justice, thy generosity?"Hush! one other turn, and we will descendto the Oscan arches."POMPEII. 77CHAPTER XII.THE SLAVE CONSULTS THE ORACLE — THEY AVHO BlindTHEMSELVES THE BLIND MAY FOOL — TWO NEW PrisonersMADE IN ONE NIGHT.Impatiently Lydia awaited the arrival of theno less anxious Sosia. Fortifying his courage byplentiful potations of a better liquor than thatprovided for the demon, the credulous ministrantstole into the blind girl's chamber.Well, Sosia, and art thou prepared? Hastthou the bowl of pure water ? "Verily, yes ; but I tremble a little. You aresure I shall not see the demon. I have heardthat those gentlemen are by no means of a handsomeperson, or a civil demeanour."Be assured ! And hast thou left the garden-gategently open ?"/O THE LAST DAYS OFYes ; and placed some beautiful nuts andapples on a little table close by."That's well. And the gate is open now, sothat the demon may pass through it ?"Surely it is."*' Well, then, open this door; there — leave itjust ajar. And now, Sosia, give me the lamp."What ! you will not extinguish it?"No j but I must breathe my spell over itsray. There is a spirit in fire. Seat thyself."The slave obeyed ; and Lydia, bending forsome moments silently over the lamp, now rose,and in a low voice chanted the following rude anddoggerelII5?5"^®(g,^'2rE©S?r T© "iFIIIIl gIP31©'5?2E31 ©W ^SIEoLoved alike by Air and WaterAye must be Thessaly's daughter ;To us, Olympian hearts, are givenSpells that draw the moon from heaven.All that Egypt's learning wrought —All that Persia's Magian taught ;POMPEII. 79Won from song, or wrung from flowers,Or whispered low by fiend — are ours.Spectre of the viewless air,Hear the blind Thessalian's prayer ;By Jericho's art, that shedDews of life when life was fled ; —By lone Ithaca's wise king.Who could wake the crystal springTo the voice of prophecy ; —By the lost Eurydice,Summoned from the shadowy throng,At the muse-son's magic song —By the Coachman's awful charms,When fair-haired Jason left her arms ; —Spectre of the airy halls,One who owns thee duly calls ! " "Breathe along the brimming bowl,And instruct the fearful soulIn the shadowy things that lieDark in dim futurity.Come, wild Demon of the air.Answer to thy votary's prayer !80 THE LAST DAYS OFCome ! oh, come !And no god on heaven or earth —Not the Paphian Queen of Mirth,Nor the vivid Lord of Light,Nor the triple Maid of Night,Nor the Thunderer's self shall beBlest and honoured more than thee !Come ! — oh, come !The spectre is certainly coming," said Sosia ;I feel him running along my hair !"*' Place thy bowl of water on the ground.Now, then, give me thy napkin, and let me foldup thy face and eyes."Ay ! that's always the custom with thesecharms. Not so tight, though ; gently — gently !"There — thou canst not see VSee, pe?' Jove ! No ! nothing but darkness."Address, then, to the spectre whatever questionthou wouldst ask him, in a low-whisperedvoice, three times. If thy question is answered inPOMPEII. 81the affirmative, thou-wilt hear the water fermentand bubble before the demon breathes upon it ;if in the negative, the water will be quite silent."But you will not play any trick with thewater, eh ? ""■ Let me place the bowl under thy feet — so.Now thou wilt perceive that I cannot touch itwithout thy knowledge."Very fair. Now, then. O, Bacchus! befriendme. Thou knowest that I have always lovedthee better than all the other gods, and I willdedicate to thee that silver cup I stole last yearfrom the burly Captor (butler), if thou wilt butbefriend me with this water-loving demon. Andthou, O Spirit ! listen and hear me. Shall I beenabled to purchase my freedom next year ? Thouknowest ; for, as thou livest in the air, the birds*have doubtless acquainted thee with every secretof this house, thou knowest that I have filchedWho were supposed to know all secrets. The same superstitionprevails in the East, and is not without example, also, inour northern legends.e2THE LAST DAYS OFand pilfered all that I honestly — that is, safely —could lay finger upon for the last three years,and I yet want two thousand sesterces of the fullsum. Shall I be able, O good Spirit! to makeupthe deficiency in the course of this year ?Speak ! Ha ! does the water bubble ? No ; all isstill as a tomb. Well, then, if not this year — intwo years ? Ah ! I hear something ; the demonis scratching at the door ; he'll be here presently.In two years, my good fellow : come now, two ; —that's a very reasonable time. What ! dumb still !Two years and a half — three — four? Ill fortuneto you, friend demon ! You are not a lady, that'sclear, or you would not keep silence so long.Five — six — sixty years? and may Pluto seize you !I'll ask no more." And Sosia, in a rage, kickeddown the water over his legs. He then, aftermuch fumbling and more cursing, managed toextricate his head from the napkin in which itwas completely folded — stared round — and discoveredthat he was in the dark.What, ho! Lydia! the lamp is gone. Ah,POMPEII. 83traitress ! and thou art gone too ; but I'll catchthee — thou shalt smart for this !"The slave groped his way to the door ; it wasbolted from without : he was a prisoner insteadof Lydia. What could he do ? He did not dareto knock loud — to call out — lest Arbaces shouldoverhear him, and discover how he had beenduped ; and Lydia, meanwhile, had probablyalready gained the garden-gate, and was fast onher escape.But," thought he, '* she will go home, orat least be somewhere in the city. To-morrowat dawn, when the slaves are at work in the peristyle,I can make myself heard ; then I can goforth and seek her. I shall be sure to find andbring her back, before Arbaces knows a word ofthe matter. Ah ! that's the best plan. Littletraitress, my fingers itch at thee ; and to leaveonly a bowl of water, too ! had it been wine, itwould have been some comfort."While Sosia, thus entrapped, was lamentinghis fate, and revolving his schemes to repossess84 THE LAST DAYS OFhimself of Lydia; the blind girl, with that singularprecision, and dexterous rapidity of motion,which, we have before observed, was peculiarto her, had passed lightly along the peristyle,threaded the opposite passage that led into thegarden, and, with a beating heart, was aboutto proceed towards the gate, when she suddenlyheard the sound of approaching steps, and distinguishedthe dreaded voice of Arbaces himself.She paused for a moment in doubt andterror; then suddenly it flashed across her recollectionthat there was another passage, which waslittle used except for the admission of the fair partakersof the Egyptian's secret revels, and whichwound along the basement of that massive fabrictowards a door, which also communicated withthe garden. By good fortune it might be open.At that thought she hastily retraced her steps,descended the narrow stairs at the right, and wassoon at the entrance of the passage. Alas ! thedoor at that entrance was closed and secured.While she was yet assuring herself that it was,POMPEII. 85indeed, locked, she heard behind her the voiceof Calenus, and a moment after that of Arbaces,in low reply. She could not stay there ; theywere probably passing to that very door. Shesprang onward, and felt herself in unknownground. The air grew damp and chill ; this reassuredher. She thought she might be amongthe cellars of the luxurious mansion, or at leastin some rude spot not likely to be visited by itshaughty lord, when, again, her quick ear caughtsteps and the sound of voices. On, on, she turned,extending her arms, which now frequentlyencountered pillars of thick and massive form.With a tact doubled in acuteness by her fear,she escaped these perils, and continued her way,the air growing more and more damp as she proceeded; yet, still, as she ever and anon paused forbreath, she heard the advancing steps, and theindistinct murmur of voices. At length she wasabruptly stopped by a wall that seemed thelimit of her path. Was there no spot in whichshe could hide ? No aperture? no cavity? There86 THE LAST DAYS OFwas none ! She stopped, and wrung her handsin despair ; then, again, nerved as the voicesneared upon her, she hurried on by the side ofthe wall ; and, coming suddenly against one ofthe sharp buttresses, that here and there juttedboldly forth, she fell to the ground. Thoughmuch bruised, her senses did not leave her.She uttered no cry ; nay, she hailed the accidentthat had led her to something like ascreen; and creeping close up to the angleformed by the buttress, so that on one side atleast she was sheltered from view, she gatheredher slight and small form into its smallest compass,and breathlessly awaited her fate.Meanwhile, Arbaces and the priest were takingtheir way to that secret chamber whose storeswere so vaunted by the Egyptian. They were inavast subterranean atrium or hall ; the low roofwas supported by short thick pillars of an architecturefar remote fi'om the Grecian graces ofthat luxuriant period. The single and pale lamp,which Arbaces bore, shed but an imperfect rayPOMPEII. 87over the bare and rugged walls, in which thehuge stones, without cement, were fitted curiouslyand uncouthly into each other. The disturbedreptiles glared dully on the intruders, and thencrept into the shadow of the walls.Calenus shivered, as he looked around andbreathed the damp unwholesome air.Yet," said Arbaces, with a smile, perceivinghis shudder, " it is these rude abodes that furnishthe luxuries of the halls above. They are likethe labourers of the world, — we despise theirruggedness, yet they feed the very pride thatdisdains them."And whither goes yon dim gallery to theleft ?" asked Calenus ; *' in this depth of gloomit seems without limit, as if winding into Hades."On the contrary, it does but conduct to theupper day," answered Arbaces, carelessly ; 'Mt isto, the right that we steer to our bourne."The hall, like many in the more habitableregions of Pompeii, branched ofi" at the extremityinto two wings or passages ; the length of which,88 THE LAST DAYS OFnot really great, was to the eye considerably exaggeratedby the sullen gloom against which thelamp so faintly struggled. To the right of thesealcB the two comrades now directed their steps.The gay Glaucus will be lodged tomorrow inapartments not much dryer, and far less spaciousthan this," said Calenus, as they passed by thevery spot where, completely wrapt in the shadowof the broad projecting buttress, cowered the Thessalian.Ay, but then he will have dry room, andample enough, in the arena on the following day.And to think," continued Arbaces, slowly, andvery deliberately, " to think that a word of thinecould save him, and consign Arbaces to hisdoom !"^' That word shall never be spoken," saidCalenus.Right, my Calenus! it never shall," returnedArbaces, familiarly leaning his arm on the priest'sshoulder; "and, now, halt — we are at thedoor."POMPEII. 89The light trembled against a small door deepset in the wall, and guarded strongly by manyplates and bindings of iron, that intersected therough and dark wood. From his girdle Arbacesnow drew a small ring, holding three or fourshort but strong keys. Oh, how beat the gripingheart of Calenus, as he heard the rusty wardsgrowl, as if resenting the admission to the treasuresthey guarded !Enter, my friend," said Arbaces, " while Ihold the lamp on high that thou mayst glut thineeyes on the yellow heaps."The impatient Calenus did not wait to be twiceinvited ; he hastened towards the aperture.Scarce had he crossed the threshold whenthe strong hand of Arbaces plunged him forwards.The word shall never he spoken .'" said he,with a loud exultant laugh, and closed the doorupon the priest.Calenus had been precipitated down severalstepS; but not feeling at the moment the pain of90 THE LAST DAYS OFhis fall, he sprung up again to the door, andbeating at it fiercely with his clenched fist, hecried aloud in what seemed more a beast's howlthan a human voice, so keen was his agony anddespair, " Oh, release me, release me, and I willask no gold ! "The words but imperfectly penetrated the massivedoor, and Arbaces again laughed. Then,stamping his foot violently, rejoiced, perhaps, togive vent to his long stifled passions —All the gold of Dalmatia," cried he, " willnot buy thee a crust of bread. Starve, wretch !thy dying groans will never wake even the echoof these vast halls. Nor will the air ever reveal,as thou knowest, in thy desperate famine, thyflesh from thy bones, that so perishes the manwho threatened, and could have undone, Arbaces !Farewell!"Oh, pity — mercy! Inhuman villain! was itfor this "The rest of the sentence was lost to the ear ofArbaces, as he passed backward along the dimPOMPEII. 91hall. A toad, plump and bloated, lay unmovingbefore his path ; the rays of the lamp fell uponits shaped hideousness and red upward eye.Arbaces turned aside that he might not harm it.Thou art loathsome and obscene," he muttered," but thou canst not injure me ; thereforethou art safe in my path."The cries of Calenus, dulled and choked by thebarrier that confined him, yet faintly reached theear of the Egyptian. He paused and listenedintently.This is unfortunate," thought he ; " for Icannot sail till that voice is dumb for ever. Mystores and treasures lie, not in yon dungeon, it istrue, but in the opposite wing. My slaves, as theymove them, must not hear his voice. But whatfear of that ? In three days, if he still survive, hisaccents, by my father's beard, must be weakenough, then! — no, they could not pierce eventhrough his tomb. By Isis, it is cold ! — I long foradeep draught of the spiced Valerian."92 THE LAST DAYS OFWith that the remorseless Egyptian drew hisgown closer round him, and besought the upperair.POMPEII. 93CHAPTER XIII.NYDIA ACCOSTS Calends.What words of terror, yet of hope, had Lydiaoverheard! The next day Glaucus was to becondemned ; yet there lived one who couldsave him, and adjudge Arbaces to his doom,and that one breathed within a few steps of herhiding-place ! She caught his cries and shrieks —his imprecations — his prayers, though they fellchoked and muffled on her ear. He was imprisoned,but she knew the secret of his cell :could she but escape — could she but seek theprsetor, he might yet in time be given to light,and preserve the Athenian. Her emotions almoststifled her ; her brain reeled — she felt her94 THE LAST DAYS OFsense give way — but by a violent eiSbrt shemastered herself; and, after listening intently forseveral minutes, till she was convinced thatArbaces had left the space to solitude and herself,she crept on till her ear guided her to the verydoor that had closed upon Calenus. Here shemore distinctly caught his accents of terror anddespair. Thrice she attempted to speak, andthrice her voice failed to penetrate the folds of theheavy door. At length, finding the lock, sheapplied her lips to its small aperture, and theprisoner distinctly heard a soft tone breathe hisname.His blood curdled — his hair stood on end.That awful solitude what mysterious and preternaturalbeing could penetrate! " Who's there?"he cried, in new alarm ; " what spectre — whatdread larva, calls upon the lost Calenus?"Priest," replied the Thessalian, " unknownto Arbaces, I have been, by the permission of thegods, a witness to his perfidy. If I myself canescape from these walls, I may save thee. ButPOMPEII. 95let thy voice reach my ear through this narrowpassage, and answer what I ask."Ah, blessed spirit!" said the priest, exultingly,and obeying the suggestion of Lydia ; " save me,and I will sell the very cups on the altar to paythy kindness."I want not thy gold — I want thy secret.Did I hear aright ? — canst thou save the AthenianGlaucus from the charge against his life ? "I can — I can! — therefore — (may the furiesblast the foul Egyptian!) — hath Arbaces snaredme thus, and left me to starve and rot ! "They accuse the Athenian of murder ; canstthou disprove the accusation?"Only free me, and the proudest head ofPompeii is not more safe than his. I saw thedeed done — I saw Arbaces strike the blow ; I canconvict the true murderer and acquit the innocentman. But if I perish, he dies also. Dost thouinterest thyself for him ? Oh, blessed stranger, inmy heart is the urn which condemns or freeshim!"96 THE LAST DAYS OFAnd thou wilt give full evidence of whatthou knowest?""Will! — Oh! were hell at my feet — yes!Revenge on the false Egyptian — revenge ! revenge! revenge I"As through his ground teeth Calenus shriekedforth those last words, Lydia felt that in his worstpassions was her certainty of his justice to theAthenian. Her heart beat : was it — was it to beher proud destiny to preserve her idolised — heradored? " Enough," said she; ** the powersthat conducted me hither will carry me throughall. Yes, I feel that I shall deliver thee. Waitin patience and in hope."But be cautious, be prudent, sweet stranger.Attempt not to appeal to Arbaces — he is marble.Seek the prsetor — say what thou knowest — obtainhis writ of search ; bring soldiers, and smithsof cunning — these locks are wondrous strong !Time flies — I may starve — starve! if you are notquick! Go — go! Yet stay — it is horrible to bealone — the air is like a charnel — and the score97pions — ha ! and the pale larvae ! Oh ! stay,stay !"Nay," said Lydia, terrified by the terror ofthe priest, and anxious to confer with herself, —Nay, for thy sake I must depart. Take hopefor thy companion — farewell!"So saying, she glided away, and felt with extendedarms along the pillared space until shehad gained the farther end of the hall and themouth of the passage that led to the upper air.But there she paused ; she felt that it would bemore safe to wait awhile until the night was so farblended with morning that the whole house wouldbe buried in sleep, and so that she might quit itunobserved. She therefore once more laid herselfdown, and counted the weary moments. In hersanguine heart joy was the predominant emotion.Glaucus was in deadly peril — but she should savehim !VOL. III.98 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER XIV.Graces AND lOVE — NYDIA GAINS THE GARDEN — WILLSHE ESCAPE AND SAVE THE ATHENIAN?When Arbaces had warmed his veins by largedraughts of that spiced and perfumed wine sovalued by the luxurious, he felt more than usuallyelated and exultant of heart. There is a pridein triumphant ingenuity, not less felt, perhaps,though its object be guilty. Our vain humannature hugs itself in the consciousness of superiorcraft and self-obtained success — afterwards comesthe horrible reaction of remorse.But remorse was not a feeling which Arbaceswas likely ever to experience for the fate of thebase Calenus. He swept from his remembrance thethought of the priest's agonies and lingering death.POMPEII. 99He felt only that a great danger was passed, anda possible foe silenced ; all left to him now wouldbe to account to the priesthood for the disappearanceof Calenus ; and this he imagined it wouldnot be difficult to do. Calenus had often beenemployed by him in various religious missions tothe neighbouring cities. On some such errandhe could now assert that he had been sent, withofferings to the shrines of Isis at Stage andAnnapolis, placatory of the goddess for the recentmurder of her priest, Appetites. When Calenushad expired, his body might be thrown, previousto the Egyptian's departure from Pompeii,into the deep stream of the Sarnus ; and whendiscovered, suspicion would probably fall uponthe Nazarene atheists, as an act of revenge forthe death of Olinthus at the arena. After rapidlyrunning over these plans for screening himself,Arbaces dismissed at once from his mind all recollectionof the wretched priest ; and, animatedby the success which had lately crowned all hisschemes, he surrendered his thoughts to lone.100 THE LAST DAYS OFThe last time he had seen her, she had drivenhim from her presence by a reproachful and bitterscorn, which his arrogant nature was unable toendure. He now felt emboldened once more torenew that interview ; for his passion for her waslike similar feelings in other men — it made himrestless for her presence, even though in that presencehe was exasperated and humbled. Fromdelicacy to her grief, he laid not aside his darkand festive robes, but, renewing the perfumeson his raven locks, and arranging his tunic in itsmost becoming folds, he sought the chamber ofthe Neapolitan. Accosting the slave in attendancewithout, he inquired if lone had yet retiredto rest ; and learning that she was still up, andunusually quiet and composed, he ventured intoher presence. He found his beautiful ward sittingbefore a small table, and leaning her face uponboth her hands in the attitude of thought. Yetthe expression of the face itself possessed notits wonted bright and Psyche-like expression ofsweet intelligence; the lips were apart — the eyePOMPEII. 101vacant and unheeding — and the long dark hair,falling neglected and dishevelled upon her neck,gave by the contrast additional paleness to acheek which had already lost the roundness ofits contour.Arbaces gazed upon her a moment ere he advanced.She, too, lifted up her eyes ; and whenshe saw who was the intruder, shut them with anexpression of pain, but did not stir.'' Ah !" said Arbaces, in a low and earnesttone, as he respectfully, nay, humbly, advancedand seated himself at a little distance from thetable — "Ah! that my death could remove thyhatred, then would I gladly die ! Thou wrongestme, lone ; but I will bear the wrong without amurmur, only let me see thee sometimes. Chide,reproach, scorn me, if thou wilt — I will learnmyself to bear it. And is not even thy bitteresttone sweeter to me than the music of the mostartful lute? In thy silence the world seems tostand still — a stagnation curdles up the veins ofthe earth — there is no earth, no life, without the102 THE LAST DAYS OFlight of thy countenance and the melody of thyvoice."Give me back my brother and my betrothed,"said lone, with a calm and imploring tone, anda few large tear's rolled unheeded down hercheeks.'^ Would that I could restore the one and savethe other," returned Arbaces with apparent emotion." Yes, to make thee happy I would renouncemy ill-fated love, and gladly join thyhand to the Athenian's. Perhaps he will yet comeunscathed from his trial — (Arbaces had preventedher learning that the trial had already commenced); if so, thou art free to judge or condemnhim thyself. And think not, oh, lone ! that Iwould follow thee longer with a prayer of love. Iknow it is in vain. Suffer me only to weep — tomourn with thee. Forgive a violence deeply repented,and that shall offend no more. Let mebe to thee only what I once was — a friend, afather, a protector. Ah, lone ! spare me andforgive." ^POMPEII. 103'' I forgive thee. Save but Glaucus, and I willrenounce him. Oh, mighty Arbaces ! thou artpowerful in evil or in good : save the Athenian,and the poor lone will never see him more." Asshe spoke, she rose with weak and tremblinglimbs, and falling at his feet, she clasped his knees ;Oh! if thou really lowest me — if thou arthuman — remember my father's ashes, remembermy childhood, think of all the hours we passedhappily together, and save my Glaucus ! "Strange convulsions shook the frame of theEgyptian ! his features worked fearfully — heturned his face aside, and said in a hollow voice,If I could save him, even now, I would ; butthe Roman law is stern and sharp. Yet if Icould succeed — if I could rescue and set him freewouldst thou be mine — my bride?""Thine?" repeated lone, rising; " Thine — thybride ! My brother's blood is unavenged : whoslew him ? O, Nemesis ! can I even sell, for thelife of Glaucus, thy solemn trust ? Arbaces —thine ? Never ! "104 THE LAST DAYS OF*' lone, lone!" cried Arbaces, passionately, —why these mysterious words — why dost thoucouple my name with the thought of thy brother'sdeath?"My dreams couple it — and dreams are fromthe gods."Vain fantasies all ! Is it for a dream thatthou wouldst wrong the innocent, and hazard thysole chance of saving thy lover's life ? "Hear me ! " said lone, speaking firmly, andwith a deliberate and solemn voice ; " if Glaucusbe saved by thee, I will never be borne to hishome a bride. But I cannot master the horror ofother rites : I cannot wed with thee. Interruptme not ; but mark me, Arbaces ! — if Glaucus die,on that same day I basile thine arts, and leave tothy love only my dust! Yes, — thou mayst putthe knife and the poison from my reach — thoumayst imprison — thou mayst chain me; but thebrave soul resolved to escape, is never withoutmeans. These hands, naked and unarmed thoughthey be, shall tear away the bonds of life. FetterPOMPEII. 105tliein, and these lips shall firmly refuse the air.Thou art learned — thou hast read how womenhave died rather than meet dishonour. If Glaucusperish, I will not unworthily linger behind him.By all the gods of the Heaven, and the Ocean, andthe Earth, I devote myself to death ! — I havesaid ! "High, proud, dilating in her stature like oneinspired, the air and voice of lone struck an aweinto the breast of her listener.Brave heart!" said he, after a short pause,thou art indeed worthy to be mine. Oh ! thatI should have dreamt of such a sharer to my highdoom, and never found it but in thee. lone," hecontinued rapidly, " dost thou not see that wewere born for each other? Canst thou not recognisesomething kindred to thine own energythine own courage — in this high and self-dependentsoul? We were formed to unite oursympathies — formed to breathe a new spirit intothis hackney and gross world — formed for themighty destinies, which my soul, sweeping downf2106 THE LAST DAYS OFthe gloom of time, foresees with a prophet's vision.With a resolution equal to thine own, I defy thythreats of an inglorious suicide. I hail thee asmy own I Queen of climes un darkened by theeagle's wing, ravaged by his beak, / howbefore thee in homage and in awe — but / claimthee in worship and in love ! Together will wecross the ocean — together will we found ourrealm ; and far-distant ages shall acknowledgethe long race of kings born from the marriage-bedof Arbaces and lone ! "Thou rarest ! These mystic declamations aresuited rather to some palsied crone selling charmsin the market-place, than to the wise Arbaces.Thou hast heard my resolution, — it is fixed asthe Fates themselves. Orcus has heard my vow,and it is written in the book of the forgetfulHades. Atone, then, O, Arbaces! — atone thepast : convert hatred into regard — vengeance intogratitude ; preserve one who shall never be thyrival. These are acts suited to thy originalnature, which gives forth sparks of somethingPOMPEII. 107high and noble. They weigh in the scales of theKings of Death ; they turn the balance on thatday when the embodied soul stands shivering anddismayed between Tartarus and Elysium : theyglad the heart in life, better and longer than thereward of a momentary passion. Oh, Arbaces !hear me, and be swayed ! "Enough, lone. All that I can do for Glaucusshall be done ; but blame me not if I fail. Inquireof my foes, even, if I have not sought, if Ido not seek, to turn aside the sentence from hishead, and judge me accordingly. Sleep then,lone. Night wanes ; I leave thee to its rest, — andmayst thou have kinder dreams of one who hasno existence but in thine."Without waiting a reply, Arbaces hastily withdrew; afraid, perhaps, to trust himself farther tothe passionate prayer of lone, which racked himwith jealousy, even while it touched him to compassion.But compassion itself came too late.Had lone even pledged him her hand as his reward,he could not now — his evidence given —108 THE LAST DAYS OFthe populace excited — have saved the Athenian.Still, made sanguine by his very energy of mind,he threw himself on the chances of the future,and believed he should yet triumph over thewoman that had so entangled his passions.As his attendants assisted to unrobe him for thenight, the thought of Lydia flashed across him.He felt it was necessary that lone should neverlearn of her lover's frenzy, lest it might excusehis imputed crime; and it was possible that herattendants might inform her that Lydia wasunder his roof, and she might desire to see her.As this idea crossed him, he turned to one of hisfreedmen —'' Go, Callias," said he, " forthwith to Sosia,and tell him, that on no pretence is he to sufferthe blind slave Lydia out of her chamber. But,stay — first seek those on attendance upon my ward,and caution them not to inform her that the blindgirl is under my roof. Go — quick !"The slave hastened to obey. After having dischargedhis commission with respect to lone'sPOMPEII. 109attendants, he sought the worthy Sosia. Hefound him not in the little cell which was apportionedfor his cubiculum ; he called his namealoud, and from Lydia's chamber, close at hand,he heard the voice of Sosia reply, —Oh, Callias, is it you that I hear? — the godsbe praised ! Open the door, I pray you ! "The slave withdrew the bolt, and the ruefulface of Sosia hastily obtruded itself."What! — in the chamber with that younggirl, Sosia ! Pro jmdor ! Are there not fruitsripe enough on the wall, but that thou musttamper with such green "Name not the little witch!" interrupted Sosiaimpatiently ; " she will be my ruin ! " and he forthwithimparted to Callias the history of the AirDemon, and the escape of the Thessalian.Hang thyself, then, unhappy Sosia I I amjust charged from Arbaces with a message to theeon no account art thou to suffer her, even for amoment, from that chamber ! "Me misery!" exclaimed the slave. '^ What110 THE LAST DAYS OFcan I do ? — by this time she may have visited halfPompeii. But tomorrow I will undertake tocatch her in her old haunts. Keep but my counsel,dear Callias."'^ I will do all that friendship can, consistentwith my own safety. But are you sure she hasleft the house? — she may be hiding here yet."'^ How is that possible ? She could easily havegained the garden, and the door, as I told thee,was open."Nay, not so ; for, at that very hour thou specifies,Arbaces was in the garden with the priestCalenus. I went there in search of some herbsfor my master's bath tomorrow. I saw the tableset out, but the gate I am sure was shut : dependupon it, that Calenus entered by the garden, andnaturally closed the door after him."But it was not locked."Yes ; for I myself, angry at a negligencewhich might expose the bronzes in the peristyleto the mercy of any robber, turned the key, tookit away, and — as I did not see the proper slavePOMPEII. Illto whom to give it, or I should have rated himfinely — here it actually is, still in my girdle."Oh, merciful Bacchus ! I did not pray tothee in vain, after all. Let us not lose a moment !Let us to the garden instantly — she may yet bethere!"The good-natured Callias consented to assist theslave; and, after vainly searching the chambersat hand, and the recesses of the peristyle, theyentered the garden.It was about this time that Lydia had resolvedto quit her hiding-place, and venture forth on herway. Lightly, tremulously, holding her breath,which ever and anon broke forth in quick convulsivegasps, — now gliding by the flower-wreathedcolumns that bordered the peristyle, — now darkeningthe still moonshine that fell over its tessellatedcentre, — now ascending the terrace of the garden,now gliding amidst the gloomy and breathlesstrees, she gained the fatal door — to find it locked!We have all seen that expression of pain, of uncertainty,of fear, which a sudden disappointmentil THE LAST DAYS OFof touch, if I may use the expression, casts overthe face of the blind. But what words can paintthe intolerable wo, the sinking of the wholeheart, which was now visible on the features ofthe Thessalian ! Again and again her small, quiveringhands wandered to and fro the inexorabledoor. Poor thing that thou wert ! — in vain hadbeen all thy noble courage, thy innocent craft,thy doubling to escape the hound and huntsman !Within but a few yards from thee, laughing at thyendeavours — thy despair — knowing thou wert nowtheir own, and watching with cruel patience theirown moment to seize their prey — thou art savedfrom seeing thy pursuers!Hush, Callias! — let her go on. Let us seewhat she will do when she has convinced herselfthat the door is honest."'' Look ! — she raises her face to the heavens —she mutters — she sinks down despondent ! No !by Pollux, she has some new scheme ! She willnot resign herself! Per Jove, a tough spirit!See, she springs up — she retraces her steps — shePOMPEII. 113thinks of some other chance ! I advise thee, Sosia,to delay no longer : seize her ere she quit thegarden — now! "'ah! runaway! I have thee — eh?" said Sosia,seizing upon the unhappy Lydia.As a hare's last human cry in the fangs of thedogs — as the sharp voice of terror uttered by asleep-walker suddenly awakened — broke the shriekof the blind girl, when she felt the abrupt gripeof her gaoler. It was a shriek of such utteragony, such entire despair, that it might haverung hauntingly in your ears for ever. She feltas if the last plank of the sinking Glaucus weretorn from his clasp. It had been a suspense oflife and death; — and death had now won thegame.Gods! that cry will alarm the house! Ar-facessleeps full lightly. Gag her !" cried Callias.Ah! here is the very napkin with which theyoung witch conjured away my reason ! Come,that's right ; now thou art dumb as well asblind."114 THE LAST DAYS OFAnd, catching the light weight in his arms,Sosia soon gained the house, and reached thechamber from which Lydia had escaped. There,removing the gag, he left her to a solitude soracked and terrible, that out of Hades its anguishcould scarcely be exceeded.POMPEII. IjOCHAPTER XV.THE SORROW OF BOON Companions FOR OUR AFFLICTIONSTHE DUNGEON AND ITS VICTIMS.It was now late on the third and last day of thetrial of Glaucus and Olynthus. A few hours afterthe court had broke up and judgment been given,a small party of the fashionable youth at Pompeiiwere assembled round the fastidious board ofLepidus.*' So, Glaucus denies his crime to the last," saidClodius.Yes; but the testimony of Arbaces was convincing; he saw the blow given," answered Lepidus.What could have been the cause?"Why, the priest was a gloomy and sullenfellow. He probably rated Glaucus soundly aboutTHE LAST DAYS OFhis gay life and gaming habits, and ultimatelyswore he would not consent to his marriage withlone. High words arose ; Glaucus seems to havebeen full of the passionate god, and struck insudden exasperation. The excitement of wine,the desperation of abrupt remorse, brought on thedelirium under which he suffered for some days ;and I can readily imagine, poor fellow ! that, yetconfused by that delirium, he is even now unconsciousof the crime he committed ! Such, atleast, is the shrewd conjecture of Arbaces, whoseems to have been most kind and forbearing inhis testimony."Yes ; he has made himself generally popularby it. But, in consideration of these extenuatingcircumstances, the Senate should have relaxed thesentence."And they would have done so, but for thepeople ; but they were outrageous. The priestshad spared no pains to excite them ; and theyimagined — the ferocious brutes ! — because Glaucuswas a rich man and a gentleman, that he wasPOMPEII. 117likely to escape ; and therefore they were inveterateagainst him, and doubly resolved upon hissentence. The Senate did not dare refuse to striphim of the rights of citizenship, and so pass judgmentof death; though, after all, there was but amajority of three against him. Ho ! the Chian !"*' He looks sadly altered ; but how composedand fearless!"Ay, we shall see if his firmness will lastover tomorrow. But what merit in courage,when that atheistical hound Olinthus manifestedthe same ?"** The blasphemer! Yes," said Lepidus, withpious wrath, " no wonder that one of the Decurionswas, but two days ago, struck dead bylightning in a serene sky.* The gods feel vengeanceagainst Pompeii while the vile desecrator isalive within its walls."Pliny says, that, immediately before the irruption of Vesuvius,one of the Doctrines IMunicipales was — though the heavenwas unclouded — struck dead by lightning.118 THE LAST DAYS OFYet SO lenient was the Senate, that had he butexpressed his penitence, and scattered a few grainsof incense on the altar of Cybele, he would haveIjeen let off. I doubt whether these Nazarenes,had they the state religion, would be as tolerantto UP, supposing we had kicked down the imageof their deity, blasphemed its rites, and denied itsfaith."They give Glaucus one chance, in considerationof the circumstances ; they allow him, againstthe lion, the use of the same stiles wherewith hesmote the priest."Hast thou seen the lion? hast thou looked athis teeth and fangs, and wilt thou call that achance? Why, sword and buckler would bemere reed and papyrus against the rush of themighty beast! ]\o — I think the true mercy hasbeen, not to leave him long in suspense ; and it wastherefore fortunate for him that our benign laws areslow to pronounce, but swift to execute ; and thatthe games of the amphitheatre had been, by a sortPOMPEII. 119of providence, so long since fixed for tomorrow.He who awaits death dies twice."As for the atheist," said Clodius, " he is tocope the grim tiger naked-handed. Well, thesecombats are past betting on. Who will take theodds?"A peal of laughter announced the ridicule ofthe question.Poor Clodius !" said the host ; ''to lose afriend is something ; but to find no one to bet onthe chance of his escape is a worse misfortune tothee."Why, it is provoking ; it would have beensome consolation to him and to me to think hewas useful to the last."The people," said the grave Pansa, " are alldelighted with the result. They were so muchafraid the sports at the amphitheatre would gooff without a criminal for the beasts ; and now, toget two such criminals is indeed a joy for thepoor fellows ! They work liard ; they ought tohave some amusement."120 THE LAST DAYS OFThere speaks the popular Pansa, who nevermoves without a string of clients as long as anIndian triumph. He is always prating about thepeople. Gods ! he will end by being a Gracchus !"Certainly I am no insolent aristocrat," saidPansa, with a generous air.Well," observed Lepidus, " it would havebeen assuredly dangerous to have been mercifulat the eve of a beast-fight. If ever come to betried, pray Jupiter there may be either no beastsin the vivaria, or plenty of criminals in the jail."And pray," said one of the party, " whathas become of the poor girl whom Glaucus wasto have married ? A widow without being a bridethat is hard !"Oh," returned Clodius, " she is safe under theprotection of her guardian, Arbaces. It was naturalshe should go to him when she had lostboth lover and brother."By sweet Venus, Glaucus was fortunateamong the women ! They say the rich Julia wasin love with him."POMPEII. 121A mere fable, my friend," said Clodius, economically; "I was with her to-day. If anyfeeling of the sort she ever conceived, I flattermyself that / have consoled her."Hush, gentlemen !" said Pansa ; " do you notknow that Clodius is employed at the house ofDiomed in blowing hard at the torch 1 It beginsto burn, and will soon shine bright on the shrineof Hymen."Is it so?" said Lepidus. 'what! Clodiusbecome a married man ? — Fie ! "Never fear," answered Clodius ; '^ old Diomedis delighted at the notion of marrying hisdaughter to a nobleman, and will come downlargely with the sesterces. You will see that Ishall not lock them up in the Atrium. It will beawhite day for his jolly friends when Clodiusmarries an heiress."Say you so?" cried Lepidus ; " come, then, afull cup to the health of the fair Julia !"While such was the conversation — one notdiscordant to the tone of mind common amongVOL. III. G122 THE LAST DAYS OFthe dissipated of that day, and which might, perhaps,a century ago, have found an echo in thelooser circles of Paris — while such, I say, was theconversation in the gaudy triclinium of Lepidus,far different the scene which scowled before theyoung Athenian.After his condemnation, Glaucus was admittedno more to the gentle guardianship of Sallust,the only friend of his distress. He was led alongthe forum, till the guards stopped at a small doorby the side of the temple of Jupiter. You maysee the place still. The door opened in the centrein a somewhat singular fashion, revolving roundon its hinges, as it were, like a modern turnstile,so as only to leave half the threshold open at thesame time. Through this narrow aperture theythrust the prisoner, placed before him a loaf anda pitcher of water, and left him to darkness, and,as he thought, to solitude. So sudden had beenthat revolution of fortune which had prostratedhim from the palmy height of youthful pleasureand successful love, to the lowest abyss of igno-POMPEII. 123many, and the horror of a most bloody death, thathe could scarcely convince himself that he wasnot held in the meshes of some fearful dream.His elastic and glorious frame had triumphedover a potion, the greater part of vrhich hehad fortunately not drained. He had recoveredsense and consciousness, but still a dim andmisty depression clung to his nerves, and darkenedhis mind. His natural courage, and theGreek nobility of pride, enabled him to vanquishall unbecoming apprehension, and, in the judgmentcourt, to face his awful lot with a steadymien and unavailing eye. But the consciousnessof innocence scarcely sufficed to support him whenthe gaze of men no longer excited his haughtyvalour, and he was left to loneliness and silence.He felt the damps of the dungeon sink chillinglyinto his enfeebled frame. He — the fastidious,the luxurious, the refined — he who had hithertobraved no hardship and known no sorrow ! Beautifulbird that he was ! why had he left his farand sunny clime — the olive groves of his native124 THE LAST DAYS OF -hills — the music of immemorial streams? Whyhad he wantoned on his glittering plumage amidstthese harsh and ungenial strangers, dazzling theeye with his gorgeous hues, charming the earwith his blithesome song — thus suddenly to bearrested — caged in darkness — a victim and aprey — his gay flights for ever over — his hymnsof gladness for ever stilled ! The poor Athenian !his very faults the exuberance of a gentle andjoyous nature, how little had his past career fittedhim for the trials he was destined to undergo !The hoots of the mob, amidst whose plaudits hehad so often guided his graceful car and boundingsteed, still rung gratingly in his ear. The coldand stony faces of his former friends (the co-matesof his merry revels) still rose before his eye.None now were by to soothe, to sustain, theadmired, the adulated stranger. These wallsopened but on the dread arena of a violent andshameful death. And lone ! of her, too, he hadheard nought; no encouraging word, no pityingmessage ; she, too, had forsaken him ; she be-pompeii.125lived him guilty — and of what crime? — themurder of a brother ! He ground his teeth — hegroaned aloud — and ever a sharp fear shot acrosshim. In that fell and fierce delirium which had80 unaccountably seized his soul, which had soravaged the disordered brain, might he not, indeed,unknowing to himself, have committed thecrime of which he was accused? Yet, as thethought flashed upon him, it was as suddenlychecked ; for, amidst all the darkness of the past,he thought distinctly to recall the dim grove ofCybele, the upward face of the pale dead, thepause that he had made beside the corpse, andthe sudden shock that felled him to the earth.He felt convinced of his innocence ; and yet who,to the latest time, long after his mangled remainswere mingled with the elements, would believehim guiltless, or uphold his fame ? As he recalledhis interview with Arbaces, and the causes ofrevenge which had been excited in the heart ofthat dark and fearful man, he could not butbelieve that he was the victim of some deep-laid126 THE LAST DAYS OFand mysterious snare — the clue and train of whichhe was lost in attempting to discover : and lone —Arbaces loved her — might his rival's success befounded upon his ruin? That thought cut himmore deeply than all ; and his noble heart wasmore stung by jealousy than appalled by fear.Again he groaned aloud.A voice from the recess of the darkness answeredthat burst of anguish. " Who (it said)is my companion in this awful hour? AthenianGlaucus, is it thou ?"'* So, indeed, they called me in mine hour offortune ; they may have other names for me now.And thy name, stranger ?"*' Is Olinthus, thy co-mate in the prison as thetrial."What! he whom they call the atheist? Isit the injustice of men that hath taught thee todeny the providence of the gods?"Alas!" answered Olinthus j " thou — not I —art the true atheist, for thou denies the sole trueGod — the Unknown One — to whom thy AthenianPOMPEII. 127fathers erected an altar. It is in this hour that Iknow my God. He is with me in the dungeon ;his smile penetrates the darkness ; on the eve ofdeath my heart whispers immortality, and earthrecedes from me but to bring the weary soulnearer unto heaven."Tell me," said Glaucus, abruptly, " did Inot hear thy name coupled with that of Apsecidesin my trial ? Dost thou believe me guilty ?"God alone reads the heart ; but my suspicionrested not upon thee."On whom, then ?"*' Thy accuser, Arbaces?"Ha ! thou clearest me ; — and wherefore ?"Because I know the man's evil breast, andhe had cause to fear him who is now dead."With that, Olinthus proceeded to inform Glaucusof those details which the reader already knows —the conversion of Apsecides, the plan they hadproposed for the detection of the impostures ofthe Egyptian priestcraft, and of the seductionspractised by Arbaces upon the youthful weakness128 THE LAST DAYS OFof the proselyte. " Had, therefore," concludedOlinthus — " had the deceased encountered Ar-faces,reviled his treasons, and threatened detection,the place, the hour, might have favouredthe wrath of the Egyptian, and passion and craftalike dictated the fatal blow."It must have been so!" cried Glaucus, joyfully; " I am happy."'' Yet, what, O unfortunate, avails to thee nowthe discovery ? Thou art condemned and fated ;and in thine innocence thou wilt perish."But I shall know Tw^/seZ/" guiltless ; and in mymysterious madness I had fearful, though momentarydoubts ; yet, tell me, man of a strange creed,thickest thou that for small errors, or for ancestralfaults, we are ever abandoned and accursedby the Powers above, whatever name thou allottedto them."God is just, and abandons not his creaturesfor their mere human frailty. God is merciful,and curses none but the wicked who repentnot."POMPEII. 129Yet it seemeth to me as if, in the divineanger, I had been smitten by a sudden madness —a supernatural and solemn frenzy, wrought not byhuman means."There are demons on earth," answered theNazarene, fearfully, " as well as there are Godand his Son in heaven ; and since thou acknowledgesnot the last, the first may have had powerover thee."Glaucus did not reply, and there was a silencefor some minutes. At length the Athenian said,in a changed, and soft, and half-hesitating voice,Christian, believes thou, among the doctrinesof thy creed, that the dead live again — that theywho have loved here are united hereafter — thatbeyond the grave our good name shines pure fromthe mortal mists that unjustly dim it in the gross-eyedworld — and that the streams which are dividedby the desert and the rock meet in thesolemn Hades, and flow once more into one?"Believe I that, O Athenian ? No ; I do notbelieve — I knoic ! — and it is that beautiful andg2130 THE LAST DAYS OFblessed assurance which supports me now — OCollege !" continued Olynthus, passionately, " bi-ideof my heart ! torn from me in the first month ofour nuptials, shall I not see thee yet, and eremany days be past? Welcome, welcome death,that will bring me to Heaven and thee !"There was something in this sudden burst ofhuman affection which struck a kindred chord onthe soul of the Greek. He felt, for the first time,a sympathy greater than mere affliction betweenhim and his companion. He crept nearer towardsOlinthus ; for the Italians, fierce in some points,were not unnecessarily cruel in others : they sparedthe separate cell and the superfluous chain, andallowed the victims of the arena the sad comfortof such freedom and such companionship as theprison would afford.'' Yes," continued the Christian, with holyfervour, " the immortality of the soul — the resurrection— the re-union of the dead — is the greatprinciple of our creed — the great truth a Godsuffered death itself to attest and proclaim. NoPOMPEII. 131fabled Elysium — no poetic Orcus ; but a pureand radiant heritage of heaven itself, is the portionof the good."*' Tell me, then, thy doctrines, and expound tomethy hopes," said Glaucus, earnestly.Olinthus was not slow to obey that prayer ;and there — as oftentimes in the early ages of theChristian creed — it was in the darkness of thedungeon, and over the approach of death, thatthe dawning Gospel shed its soft and consecratingrays.132 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER XVI.A CHANCE FOn GLAUCUS.The hours passed in lingering torture over thehead of Lydia from the time in which she hadbeen replaced in her cell.Sosia, as if afraid he should be again outwitted,had refrained from visiting her until latein the morning of the following day, and then hebut thrust in the periodical basket of food andwine, and hastily closed the door. That dayrolled on, and Lydia felt herself pent — barred —inexorably confined, when that day was the of Glaucus, and when her release wouldhave saved him ! Yet, knowing that, almostimpossible as seemed her escape, the sole chancePOMPEII. 133for the life of Glaucus rested on her, this younggirl, frail, passionate, and acutely susceptible asshe was, resolved not to give way to a despairthat would disable her from seizing whateveropportunity might occur. She kept her senseswhenever beneath the whirl of intolerable thoughtthey reeled and tottered ; nay, she took food andwine that she might sustain her strength — thatshe might he pi-spared!She revolved scheme after scheme of escape,and was forced to dismiss all. Yet Sosia was heronly hope, the only instrument with which shecould tamper. He had been superstitious in thehope of ascertaining whether he could eventuallypurchase his freedom. Blessed gods ! might henot be won by the bribe of freedom itself? — wasshe not nearly rich enough to purchase it ? Herslender arms were covered with bracelets, thepresents of lone ; and on her neck she yet worethat very chain which, it may be remembered,had occasioned her jealous quarrel with Glaucus,and which she had afterwards promised vainly to134 THE LAST DAYS OFwear for ever. She waited burningly till Sosiashould again appear ; but as hour after hourpassed, and he came not, she grew impatient.Every nerve beat with fever ; she could endurethe solitude no longer — she groaned, she shriekedaloud — she beat herself against the door. Hercries echoed along the hall, and Sosia, in peevishanger, hastened to see what was the matter, andsilence his prisoner if possible.'sho! ho! what is this?" said he, surlily.Young slave, if thou screamed out thus wemust gag thee. My shoulders will smart for it ifthou art heard by my master."Kind Sosia, chide me not — I cannot endureto be so long alone," answered Lydia ; "the.solitude appals me. Sit with me, I pray, a littlewhile. Nay, fear not that I should attempt toescape ; place thy seat before the door — keepthine eye on me — I will not stir from this spot."Sosia, who was a considerable gossip himself,was moved by this address. He pitied one whohad nobody to talk with — it was his case too ; hePOMPEII. 135pitied, — and resolved to relieve himself! He tookthe hint of Lydia, placed a stool before the door,leant his back against it, and replied —*' I am sure I do not wish to be churlish ; andso far as a little innocent chat goes, I have noobjection to indulge you. But, mind, no tricks —no more conjuring."'' No, no; tell me, dear Sosia, what is thehour?"It is already evening — the goats are goinghome."*' O gods ! How went the trial ?"'' Both condemned!"Lydia repressed the shriek. " Well — well, Ithought it would be so. When do they suffer?"To-morrow, in the amphitheatre : if it were notfor thee, little wretch ! I should be allowed to gowith the rest and see it."Lydia leant back for some moments — naturecould endure no more — she had fainted away.But Sosia did not perceive it, for it was the duskof eve, and he was full of his own privations ; he136 THE LAST DAYS OFwent on lamenting the loss of so delightful a show,and accusing the injustice of Arbaces for singlinghim out from all his fellows to be converted into ajailor ; and ere he had half finished, Lydia, witha deep sigh, recovered the sense of life.Thou highest, blind one, at my loss ! well,that is some comfort ; so long as you acknowledgehow much you cost me, I will endeavour notto grumble — it's hard to be ill-treated and yet notpitied."Sosia, how much dost thou require to makeupthe purchase of thy freedom ?""How much? — why about two thousand sesterces."The gods be praised ! not more ? Seest thouthese bracelets and this chain — they are wellworth double that sum. I will give them theeif "Tempt me not ; I cannot release thee : Ar-facesis a severe and awful master. Who knowsbut I might feed the fishes of the Sarnus ? Alas !all the sesterces in the world would not buy mePOMPEII. 137back into life. Better a live dog than a deadlion."Sosia, thy freedom ! Think well ; if thou wiltlet me out — only for one little hour ! — let me outat midnight, I will return ere tomorrow's dawn ;nay, thou canst go with me.""No," said Sosia, sturdily; " a slave once disobeyedArbaces, and he was never more heard of."But the law gives a master no power over thelife of his slave."The law is very obliging, but more polite thanefficient : I know that Arbaces always gets thelaw on his side. Besides, if I am once dead, whatlaw can bring me to life again ?"Lydia wrung her hands : — " Is there no hope,then?" said she, convulsively.None of escape, till Arbaces give the word."Well, then," said Lydia, quickly, " thou wiltnot at least refuse to take a letter for me ; thymaster cannot kill thee for that."To whom?"The prsetor."138 THE LAST DAYS OFTo a magistrate ? — no ! jot I — I should bemade a witness in court for what I know ; andthe way they cross-examine a slave is by thetorture."'' Pardon ; I meant not the prsetor — it was aword that escaped me unawares ; I meant quiteanother person — the gay Sallust."Oh ! and what want you with him ?"Glaucus was my master ; he purchased me froma cruel lord ; he alone has been kind to me ; he isto die. I shall never live happily if I cannot, inhis hour of trial and doom, let him know that oneheart is grateful to him. Sallust is his friend — hewill convey my message."I am sure he will do no such thing. Glaucuswill have enough to think of between this and tomorrow,without troubling his head about a blindgirl.Man," said Lydia, rising, " wilt thou becomefree ? — thou hast the osier in thy power ; tomorrowit will be too late. Never was freedom morecheaply purchased : thou canst easily and un-pompeii.. 139missed leave home ; less than half an hour willsuffice for thine absence. And for such a triflewilt thou refuse liberty ? "Sosia was greatly moved. It was true, therequest was remarkably silly ; but what was thatto him ? So much the better ; he could lock thedoor on Lydia ; and, if Arbaces should learn hisabsence, the offence was venial, and would meritbut a reprimand. Yet, should Lydia's letter containsomething more than what she had said —should it speak of her imprisonment, as he shrewdlyconjectured it would do — what then? It neednever be known to Arbaces that he had carriedthe letter. At the worst, the bribe was enormous ;the risk light ; the temptation irresistible. Hehesitated no longer — he assented to the proposal.'^ Give me the trinkets, and I will take theletter : yet stay — thou art a slave — thou hast noright to these ornaments — they are thy master's."They were the gifts of Glaucus; he is mymaster ; what chance hath he to claim them ?who else will know they are in my possession ? "140 THE LAST DAYS OFEnough — I will bring thee the papyrus."In a few minutes Lydia had concluded herletter, which she took the precaution to write inGreek, the language of her childhood, and whichalmost every Italian of the higher ranks was thensupposed to know. She carefully wound roundthe epistle the protecting thread, and covered itsknot with wax ; and ere she placed it in the handsof Sosia, she thus addressed him :Sosia, I am blind and in prison ; thou maystthink to deceive me ; thou mayst pretend only totake this letter to Sallust ; thou mayst not fulfilthy charge. But here I solemnly dedicate thyhead to vengeance — thy soul to the infernal powersif thou wrongest thy trust ; and I call upon theeto place thy right hand of faith in mine, and repeatafter me these words — ' By the ground on whichwe stand ! by the elements which contain life andcan curse life ! by Orcus, the all-avenging ! bythe Olympian Jupiter, the all-seeing! — I swearthat I will honestly discharge my trust, and faithfullydeliver into the hands of Sallust this letter.POMPEII. 141And if I perjure myself in this oath, may the fullcurses of heaven and hell be wreaked upon me !' —Enough — I trust thee; take thy reward. It isalready dark — depart at once."Thou art a strange girl, and thou hast frightenedme terribly ; but it is all very natural ; andif Sallust is to be found, I give him this letter as Ihave sworn. By my faith, I may have my littlepeccadilloes ; but perjury — no ! I leave that to mybetters."With this Sosia withdrew, carefully passingathwart Lydia's door the heavy bolt — carefullylocking its wards ; and, hanging the key to hisgirdle, he retired to his own den, enveloped himselffrom head to foot in a huge disguising cloak, andslipped out by the back way undisturbed andunseen.The streets were thin and empty — he soongained the house of Sallust. The porter bade himleave his letter, and begone ; for Sallust was sogrieved at the condemnation of Glaucus, that hecould not on any account be disturbed.142 THE LAST DAYS OFNevertheless, I have sworn to give this letterinto his own hands, do so I must ; " and Sosia, wellknowing by experience that Cerberus loves a sop,thrust some half-a-dozen sesterces into the handof the porter.Well, well," said the last, relenting, " youmay enter if you will ; but, to tell you the truth,Sallust is drinking himself out of his grief. It ishis way when any thing disturbs him. He ordersa capital supper, the best wine, and does not giveover till every thing is out of his head — but theHquor."An excellent plan — excellent! Ah, what itis to be rich! If I were Sallust, I would havesome grief or another every day. But just say akind word for me with the atriensis — I see himcoming."Sallust was too sad to receive company. Hewas too sad also to drink alone; so, as was his wont,he admitted his favourite freedman to his entertainment,and a stranger banquet never was held.For ever and anon the kind-hearted epicure sighed,POMPEII. 143whimpered, wept outright, and then turned withdouble zest to some new dish, or his refilled goblet.'' My good fellow," said he to his companion,** it was a most awful judgment — height! — it isnot bad that kid, eh ? Poor, dear, Glaucus ! —what a jaw the lion has, too ! Ah, ah, ah !"And Sallust sobbed loudly — the fit was stoppedby a counteraction of hiccups.Take a cup of wine," said the freedman.A thought too cold ; but then how coldGlaucus must be ! Shut up the house tomorrownot a slave shall stir forth — none of my peopleshall honour that cursed arena — No, no!"A cup of wine — your grief distracts you. Bythe gods it does! — a piece of that cheesecake."It was at this auspicious moment that Sosiawas admitted to the presence of the disconsolatecarouser.Ho!— what art thou?"Merely a messenger to Sallust. I give himthis billet, from a young lady. There is no answerthat I know of. May I withdraw ? "144 THE LAST DAYS OPThus said the discreet Sosia, keeping his facemuffled in his cloak, and speaking with a feignedvoice, so that he might not hereafter be recognised.By the gods — a pimp! Unfeeling wretch!do you not see my sorrows ? Go ! — and thecurses of Pandarus with you !"Sosia lost not a moment in retiring.'' Will you read the letter, Sallust?" said thefreedman."Letter! — which letter!" said the epicure,reeling, for he began to see double. " A curse onthese wenches, say I ! Am I a man to think ofhiccup) — pleasure, when — when — my friendis going to be eat up?"Eat another tartlet!"*' No, no ! My grief chokes me !"Take him to bed," said the freedman ; and,Sallust's head now declining fairly on his breast,they bore him off to his cubiculum, still mutteringlamentations for Glaucus, and imprecations onthe unfeeling invitations of ladies of pleasure.POMPEII. 145Meanwhile Sosia strode indignantly homeward.Pimp, indeed !" quoth he to himself. '' Pimp !a scurvy-tongued fellow that Sallust ! Had Ibeen called knave, or thief, I could have forgivenit ; but pimp ! Faugh ! there is something in theword which the toughest stomach in the worldwould rise against. A knave is a knave for hisown pleasure, and a thief a thief for his ownprofit ; and there is something honourable andphilosophical in being a rascal for one's own sake :that is doing things upon principle — upon a grandscale. But a pimp is a thing that defiles itselffor another ! a pipkin, that is put on the fire foranother man's pottage ! a napkin, that everyguest wipes his hands upon ! and the scullionsays ' by your leave' to ! A pimp ! I wouldrather he had called me parricide ! But the manwas drunk, and did not know what he said ; and,besides, I disguised myself. Had he seen it hadbeen Sosia who addressed him, it would havebeen, ' honest Sosia !' and, ' worthy man ! I war-vol.III. H146 THE LAST DAYS OFrant. Nevertheless, the trinkets have been woneasily — that's some comfort; and, O goddessVerona ! I shall be a freedman soon ! and thenI should like to see who'll call me pimp ! —unless, indeed, he pay me pretty handsomelyfor it !"While Sosia was soliloquising in this high-mindedand generous vein, his path lay along a narrowlane that led towards the amphitheatre and itsadjacent palaces. Suddenly, as he turned a sharpcorner, he found himself in the midst of a considerablecrowd. Men, women, and children,all were hurrying on, laughing, talking, gesticulating; and, ere he was aware of it, the worthySosia was borne away with the noisy stream.What now?" he asked of his nearest neighbour,a young artificer; " what now? Whereare all these good folks thronging? Does anyrich patron give away alms or viands to-night ?"*' Not so, man — better still," replied the artificer;" the noble Pansa — the people's friend —POMPEII. 147has granted the public leave to see the beasts intheir vivaria. By Hercules ! they will not be seenso safely by some persons tomorrow !"'Tis a pretty sight," said the slave, yieldingto the throng that impelled him onward ; •' andsince I may not go to the sports tomorrow, Imay as well take a peep at the beasts to-night."You will do well," returned his new acquaintance; "a lion and a tiger are not to be seen atPompeii every day."The crowd had now entered a broken and widespace of ground, on which, as it was only lightedscantily and from a distance, the press becamedangerous to those whose limbs and shoulderswere not fitted for a mob. Nevertheless, thewomen especially — many of them with childrenin their arms, or even at the breast — were themost resolute in forcing their way ; and their shrillexclamations of complaint or objurgation wereheard loud above the more jovial and masculinevoices. Yet, amidst them was a young and girlishvoice, that appeared to come from one too happy148 THE LAST DAYS OFin her excitement to be alive to the inconvenienceof the crowd.Aha!" cried the young woman, to some ofher companions, " I always told you so ; I alwayssaid we should have a man for the lion ; and nowwe have one for the tiger, too ! I wish tomorrowwere come !"Ho ! ho ! for the merry merry show,With a forest of faces in every row ;Lo ! the swordsmen bold as the son of Alcmsena,Sweep, side by side, o'er the hushed arena.Talk while you may, you will hold your breathWhen they meet in the grasp of the glowing death !Tramp ! tramp ! how gaily they go !Ho ! ho ! for the merry merry show ! "A jolly girl!" said Sosia.Yes," replied the young artificer, a curly-headed,handsome youth. " Yes I" replied he,enviously; " the women love a gladiator. If Ihad been a slave, I would have soon found myschoolmaster in the Lanista !"POMPEII. 149Would you, indeed !" said Sosia, with a sneer.People's notions differ!"The crowd had now arrived at the place ofdestination ; but as the cell in which the wildbeasts were confined was extremely small and narrow,tenfold more vehement than it hitherto hadbeen was the rush and press of the aspirants to obtainadmittance. Two of the officers of the amphitheatre,placed at the entrance, very wisely mitigatedthe evil by dispensing to the foremost onlya limited number of tickets at a time, and admittingno new visitors till their predecessors hadsated their curiosity. Sosia, who was a tolerablystout fellow, and not troubled with any remarkablescruples of diffidence or good-breeding, contrivedto be among the first of the initiated.Separated from his companion the artificer,Sosia found himself in a narrow cell of oppressiveheat and atmosphere, and lighted by several rankand flaring torches.The animals, usually kept in different vivaria,or dens, were now, for the greater entertainment150 THE LAST DAYS OFof the visitors, placed in one, but equally indeeddivided from each other by strong cages protectedby iron bars.There they were, the fell and grim wanderersof the desert — who have now become almost theprincipal agents of this story! The lion, who,as being the more gentle by nature than hisfellow-beast, had been more incited to ferocityby hunger, stalked restlessly and fiercely to andfro his narrow confines : his eyes were lurid withrage and famine ; and as, every now and then, hepaused and glared around, the spectators fearfullypressed backward, and drew their breath morequickly. But the tiger lay quiet, and extended atfull length in his cage, and only by an occasionalplay of his tail, or a long impatient yawn, testifiedany emotion at his confinement, or at the crowdwhich honoured him with their presence.I have seen no fiercer beast than yon lioneven in the amphitheatre of Rome," said a giganticand sinewy fellow who stood at the right hand ofSosia.POMPEII. » 151'•' I feel humbled when I look at his limbs,"replied, at the left of Sosia, a slighter and youngerfigure, with his arms folded on his breast.The slave looked first at one, and then at theother. " Virtus in medio I — Virtue is ever in themiddle," muttered he to himself; " a goodlyneighbourhood for thee, Sosia — a gladiator oneach side !"That is well said, Lydon," returned the hugergladiator; " I feel the same."And to think," observed Lydon, in a tone ofdeep feeling, " to think that the noble Greek, hewhom we saw but a day or two since before us, sofull of youth, and health, and joyousness, is tofeast yon monster ! "Why not?" growled Niger, savagely ; " manyan honest gladiator has been compelled to a likecombat by the Emperor — why not a wealthymurderer by the law?"Lydon sighed, shrugged his shoulders, and remainedsilent. Meanwhile the common gazerslistened with staring eyes and lips apart ; the152 THE LAST DAYS OFgladiators were objects of interest as well as thebeasts — they were animals of the same species ;so the crowd glanced from one to the other — themen and the brutes ; — whispering their commentsand anticipating the morrow.*' Well !" said Lydon, turning away, " I thankthe gods that it is not the lion or the tiger / am tocontend with ; even you, Niger, are a gentlercombatant than they."But equally dangerous," said the gladiator,with a fierce laugh ; and the bystanders, admiringhis vast limbs and ferocious countenance,grinned too.That as it may be," answered Lydon, carelessly,as he pressed through the throng and quittedthe den.'' I may as well take advantage of his shoulders,"thought the prudent Sosia, hastening to follow him ;the crowd always give way to a gladiator, so Iwill keep close behind, and come in for a share ofhis consequence."The son of Medon strode quickly through thePOMPEII. 153mob, many of whom recognised his features andprofession.That is young Lydon, a brave fellow ; hefights tomorrow," said one."Ah! I have a bet on him," said another;see how firmly he walks !"Good luck to thee, Lydon !" said a third.Lydon, you have my wishes!" half-whispereda fourth, smiling — (a comely woman of the middleclasses) — " and if you win, why, you may hearmore of me."A handsome man, by Venus !" cried a fifth,who was a girl scarce in her teens. " Thankyou," returned Sosia, gravely taking the complimentto himself.However strong the purer motives of Lydon,and certain though it be that he would neverhave entered so bloody a calling but from thehope of obtaining his father's freedom, he wasnot altogether unmoved by the notice he excited.He forgot that the voices now raised in commendationmight, on the morrow, be shouting overh2154 THE LAST DAYS OFhis death-pangs. Fierce and reckless, as well asgenerous and warm-hearted, by nature, he wasalready imbued with the pride of a professionthat he fancied he disdained, and affected by theinfluence of a companionship that in reality heloathed. He saw himself now a man of importance; his step grew yet lighter, and his mienmore elate.Niger," said he, turning suddenly, as he hadnow threaded the crowd, " we have often quarrelled; we are not matched against each other,but one of us, at least, may reasonably expect tofall — give us thy hand ! "Most readily," saidSosia, extending his palm.Ha ! what fool is this? why, I thought Nigerwas at my heels !"I forgive the mistake," replied Sosia, condescendingly;"don't mention it; the error waseasy — I and Niger are somewhat of the samebuild!"Ha! ha! that is excellent! Niger wouldhave slit thy throat had he heard thee !"POMPEII. 155You gentlemen of the arena have a mostdisagreeable mode of talking," said Sosia ; "letus change the conversation."Val ! val r said Lydon, impatiently; " Iam in no humour to converse with thee !"Why, truly," returned the slave, " you musthave serious thoughts enough to occupy yourmind ; tomorrow is, I think, your first essay inthe arena. Well, I am sure you will die bravely !"May thy words fall on thine own head!" saidLydon, superstitiously, for he by no means likedthe blessing of Sosia. " Die! No — I trust mishour is not yet come !"He who plays at dice with death must expectthe dog's throw," replied Sosia, maliciously ;but you are a strong fellow, and I wish you allimaginable luck, and so vale .'"With that the slave turned on his heel, andtook his way homeward.I trust the rogue's words were not ominous,"said Lydon musingly. " In my zeal for myfather's liberty, and my confidence in my own156 THE LAST DAYS OFthews and sinews, I have not contemplated thepossibility of death. My poor father ! I am thyonly son ! — If I were to fall "As the thought crossed him, the gladiatorstrode on with a more rapid and restless pace,when suddenly, in an opposite street, he beheldthe very object of his thoughts. Leaning on hisstick, his form bent by care and age, his eyesdowncast, and his steps trembling, the grey-hairedMedon slowly approached towards the gladiator.Lydon paused a moment ; he divined at once thecause that brought forth the old man at that latehour.Be sure, it is I whom he seeks," thought he ;he is horror-struck at the condemnation of Olin-thus— he more than ever esteems the arena criminaland hateful — he comes again to dissuade mefrom the contest. I must shun him — I cannotbrook his prayers — his tears!"These thoughts, so long to recite, flashed acrossthe young man like lightning. He turned abruptly,and fled swiftly in an opposite direction.POMPEII. 157He paused not till, almost spent and breathless,lie found himself on the summit of a small acclivitywhich overlooked the most gay and splendidpart of that miniature city ; and as he therepaused, and gazed along the tranquil streets,glittering in the rays of the moon (which hadjust arisen, and brought partially and picturesquelyinto light the crowd around the amphitheatreat a distance, murmuring, and swaying toand fro), the influence of the scene affected him,rude and unimaginative though his nature. Hesat himself down to rest upon the steps of adeserted portico, and felt the calm of the hourquiet and restore him. Opposite and near at hand,the lights gleamed from a palace, in which themaster now held his revels. The doors were openfor coolness, and the gladiator beheld the numerousand festive group gathered round the tablesin the atrium ;* while behind them, closing thelong vista of the illumined rooms beyond, theIn the atrium, as I have elsewhere observed, a larger partyof guests than ordinary was frequently entertained.158 THE LAST DAYS OFspray of the distant fountain sparkled in themoonbeams. There were the garlands wreathedround the columns of the hall — there gleamedstill and frequent the marble statue — there,amidst peals of jocund laughter, rose the musicand the lay.31IFn(gWIEIlJ\.Sf SOS??©.Away with your stories of Hades,Which the Flamen has forged to affright us ! —We laugh at your three Maiden Ladies,Your Fates, — and your sullen Cocytus.Poor Jove has a troublesome life, sir,Could we credit your tales of his portals —In shutting his ears on his wife, sir.And opening his eyes upon mortals.Oh, blest be the bright Epicurus !Who taught us to laugh at such fables ;On Hades they wanted to moor us,And his hand cut the terrible cables.POMPEII. 159If, then, there's a Jove or a Juno,They vex not their heads about us, man ;Besides, if they did, I and yon know'Tis the life of a god to live thus, man !What think you the gods place their bliss — eh ? —In playing the spy on a sinner ?In counting the girls that we kiss — eh ?Or the cups that we empty at dinner ?Content with the soft lips that love us,This music, this wine, and this mirth, boys,We care not for gods up above us, — •We know there's no god for this earth, boys !While Ly don's piety (which, accommodating asit might be, was in no slight degree disturbed bythese verses, which embodied the fashionable philosophyof the day,) slowly recovered itself fromthe shock it had received, a small party of meninplain garments and of the middle class, passed160 THE LAST DAYS OFby his resting-place. They were in earnest conversation,and did not seem to notice or heed thegladiator as they moved on.O horror on horrors ! " said one ; " Olinthusis snatched from us ! our right arm is loppedaway ! When will Christ descend to protect hisown ?"Can human atrocity go farther?" said another,to sentence an innocent man to the same arenaas a murderer ! But let us not despair : thethunder of Sinai may yet be heard, and the Lordpreserve his saint. ' The fool has said in hisheart there is no God.' "At that moment out broke again, from theillumined palace, the burden of the revellers'song,We care not for gods up above us, —We know there's no god for this earth, boys !" (a)Ere the words died away, the Nazarenes, movedby sudden indignation, caught up the echo, and,POMPEII. 161in the words of one of their favourite hymns,shouted aloud :Around — about — for ever near thee,God — OUR God — shall mark and hear thee !On his car of storm he sweeps !Bow, ye heavens, and shrink, ye deeps !Wo, to the proud ones who defy him ! —Wo, to the dreamers who deny him !Wo to the wicked, wo !The proud stars shall fail —The sun shall grow pale —The Heavens shrivel up like a scroll —Hell's Ocean shall bearIts depths of despair.Each wave an eternal soul !For the only thing, then,That shall not live agenIs the Corpse of the giant Time !Hark, the trumpet of thunder !Lo, Earth rent asunder !162 THE LAST DAYS OFAnd, forth, on his Angel-throne,He comes thro' the gloomThe Judge of the TombTo summon and save his own !Oh joy to Care, and wo to Crime,He comes to save his own !Wo, to the proud ones, who defy him !Wo, to the dreamers, who deny him !Wo to the wicked, wo !A sudden silence from the startled hall of revelsucceeded these ominous Avoids ; the Christiansswept on, and were soon hidden from the sight ofthe gladiator. Awed, he scarce knew why, by themystic denunciations of the Christians, Lydon,after a short pause, now rose to pursue his wayhomeward.Before him, how serenely slept the starlighton that lovely city ! — how breathlessly its pillaredstreets reposed in their security ! — howsoftly rippled the dark-green waves beyond ! —POMPEII. 163how cloudless spread, aloft and blue, the dreamingCampaniann skies ! Yet this was the Last Night forthe gay Pompeii ! the colony of the hoar Chaldean! the fabled city of Hercules ! the delightof the voluptuous Roman! Age after age hadrolled, destructive, unheeded, over its head ;and now the last ray quivered on the dial-plate ofits doom ! The gladiator heard some light stepsbehind — a group of females were wending homewardfrom their visit to the amphitheatre. As heturned, his eye was arrested by a strange and suddenapparition. From the summit of Vesuvius,darkly visible at the distance, there shot a pale,meteoric, livid light — it trembled an instant, andwas gone. And at the same moment that his eyecaught it, the voice of one of the youngest of thewomen broke out hilariously and shrill :Tramp, tramp ! how gaily they go !Ho, HO ! FOR THE MORROw's MERRY SHOW !"164 THE LAST DAYS OFNOTE TO BOOK IV.(a) Page 160. — " We care not for gods up above us, —We know there's no god for this earth, boys ! "The doctrines of Epicurus himself are pure and simple. Farfrom denying the existence of diviner powers, Villeins (the defenderand explainer of his philosophy in Cicero's dialogue on theNature of the Gods) asserts " that Epicurus was the first whosaw that there were gods, from the impression which Nature herselfmakes on the minds of all men." He imagined the belief ofthe Deity to be an innate or antecedent notion (7r^oXfi-~pis) of themind — a doctrine of which modern metaphysicians (certainly notEpicurean) have largely availed themselves ! He believed thatworship was due to the divine powers from the veneration whichfelicity and excellence command, and not from any dread of theirvengeance, or awe of their power : a sublime and fearless philosophy,suitable perhaps to half a dozen great and refined spirits,but which would present no check to the passions of the mass ofmankind. According to him, the gods were far too agreeablyemployed, in contemplating their own happiness, to troubletheir heads about the sorrows and the joys, the quarrels andthe cares, the petty and transitory affairs, of man. For thisearth they were unsympathising abstractions :Wrapt up in majesty divine,Can they regard on what we dine ?"Cotta, who, in the dialogue referred to, attacks the philosophyof Epicurus with great pleasantry, and considerable, though notPOMPEII. 165uniform, success, draws the evident and practical corollary fromthe theory that asserts the non-interference of the gods. " How,"says he, " can there be sanctity, if the gods regard not humanaffairs ? — if the deity shew no benevolence to man, let us dismisshim at once. Why should I entreat him to be propitious ? Hecannot be propitious, — since, according to you, favour and benevolenceare only the effects of imbecility." Cotta, indeed, quotesfrom Poisonous (De Natura Decorum), to prove that Epicurus didnot really believe in the existence of a God ; but that his concessionof a being wholly nugatory was merely a precautionagainst accusations of atheism. " Epicurus could not be such afool," says Cotta, " as sincerely to believe that a deity has themembers of a man without the power to use them ; a thin pellucidity,regarding no one, and doing nothing." And, whether thisbetrue or false concerning Epicurus, it is certain that, to alleffects and purposes, his later disciples were but refining atheists.The sentiments uttered in the song in the text are preciselythose professed in sober prose by the graceful philosophers of theGarden, who, as they had wholly perverted the morals of Epicurus,which are at once pure and practical, found it a mucheasier task to corrupt his metaphysics, which are equally dangerousand visionary.END OF BOOK IV.BOOK V.Stat ecce ad aras hostis, expectant manumService prone. SenecaMutatis ordo est — see nil propria janet,Sed acta retro cuncta. Ibid.Tempore quanquam illo tellus quoque, et sequora ponte,Signa dabant. . .Virgil. Georgic, lib. i.CHAPTER I.THE DREAM OF Graces — A VISITOR AND A WARNINGTO THE EGYPTIAN.The awful night preceding the fierce joy of theamphitheatre rolled drearily away, and gaylybroke forth the dawn of the last day ofPompeii ! The air was uncommonly calm andsultry — a thin and dull mist gathered over thevalleys and hollows of the broad Campaniann fields.But yet it was remarked in surprise by the earlyfisherman, that, despite the exceeding stillness ofthe atmosphere, the waves of the sea were agitated,and seemed, as it were, to run disturbedback from the shore ; while along the blue andstately Sarnus, whose ancient breadth of channelthe traveller now vainly seeks to discover, thereVOL. III. I170 THE LAST DAYS OFcrept a hoarse and sullen murmur, as it glidedby the laughing plains and gaudy villas of thewealthy citizens. Clear above the low mist rosethe time-worn towers of the immemorial town,the red-tiled roofs of the bright streets, the solemncolumns of many temples, and the statue-crownedportals of the Forum and the Arch ofTriumph. Far in the distance, the outline ofthe circling hills soared above the vapours, andmingled with the changeful hues of the morningsky. The cloud that had so long rested over thecrest of Vesuvius had suddenly vanished, and itsrugged and haughty brow looked without a frownover the beautiful scenes below.Despite the earliness of the immature hour, thegates of the city were opened. Horseman uponhorseman, vehicle after vehicle, poured rapidlyin ; and the voices of numerous pedestrian groups,clad in holyday attire, rose high in joyous andexcited merriment ; the streets were crowded withcitizens and strangers from the populous neighbourhoodof Pompeii; and noisily, — fast, — con-pompeii.171fuseclly swept the many streams of life towardsthe fatal show.Despite the vast size of the amphitheatre, seeminglyso disproportioned to the extent of the city,and formed to include nearly the whole populationof Pompeii itself, so great, on extraordinary occasions,was the concourse of strangers from allparts of Campania, that the space before it wasusually crowded for several hours previous to thecommencement of the sports, by such persons aswere not entitled by their rank to appointed andspecial seats. And the intense curiosity whichthe trial and sentence of two criminals so remarkablehad occasioned, increased the crowd onthis day to an extent wholly unprecedented.While the common people, with the lively vehemenceof their Campaniann blood, were thuspushing — scrambling — hurrying on, — yet, amidstall their eagerness, preserving, as is now the wontwith Italians in such meetings, a wonderful orderand quarrelsome good humour, — a strangevisitor to Arbaces was threading her way to his172 THE LAST DAYS OFsequestered mansion. At the sight of her quaintand primaeval garb — of her wild gait and gestures— the passengers she encountered touchedeach other and smiled ; but as they caught aglimpse of her countenance, the mirth was hushedat once, for the face was as the face of the dead ;and, what with the ghastly features and obsoleterobes of the stranger, it seemed as if one longentombed had risen once more amongst the living.In silence and awe each group gave way as shepassed along, and she soon gained the broadporch of the Egyptian's palace.The black porter, like the rest of the world,astir at an unusual hour, started as he opened thedoor to her summons.The sleep of the Egyptian had been unusuallyprofound during the night ; but as the dawnapproached, it was disturbed by strange andunquiet dreams, which impressed him the moreas they were coloured by the peculiar philosophyhe embraced.POMPEII. 173He thought that he was transported to thebowels of the earth, and that he stood alone in amighty cavern, supported by enormous columns ofrough and primaeval rock, lost, as they ascended,in the vastness of a shadow, athwart whose eternaldarkness no beam of day had ever glanced. Andin the space between these columns were hugewheels, that whirled round and round unceasingly,and with a rushing and roaring noise. Only tothe right and left extremities of the cavern, thespace between the pillars was left bare, and theapertures stretched away into galleries — not whollydark, but dimly lighted by wandering and erraticfires, that, meteor-like, now crept (as the snakecreeps) along the rugged and dank soil ; and nowleapt fiercely to and fro, darting across the vastgloom in wild gambols — suddenly disappearing,and as suddenly bursting into ten-fold brilliancyand power. And while he gazed wonderinglyupon the gallery to the left, thin, mist-like, aerialshapes passed slowly up ; and when they hadgained the hall they seemed to rise aloft, and to174 THE LAST DAYS OFvanish, as the smoke vanishes, in the measurelessascent.He turned in fear towards the opposite extremity,— and behold ! there came swiftly fromthe gloom above, similar shadows, which swepthurriedly along the gallery to the right, as if borneinvoluntarily adown the tides of some invisiblestream ; and the faces of these spectres were moredistinct than those that emerged from the oppositepassage ; and on some was joy, and on otherssorrow — some were vivid with expectation andhope, some unutterably dejected by awe and horror.And so they passed swift and constantly on, tillthe eyes of the gazer grew dizzy and blinded withthe whirl of an ever varying succession of things,impelled by a power apparently not their own.Arbaces turned away ; and, in the recess of thehall, he saw the mighty form of a giantess seatedupon a pile of skulls, and her hands were busyupon a pale and shadowy woof; and he saw thatthe woof communicated with the numberlesswheels, as if it guided the machinery of theirPOMPEII. 175movements. He thought his feet, by some secretagency, were impelled towards the female, andthat he was borne onwards till he stood beforeher, face to face. The countenance of the giantesswas solemn, and hushed, and beautifully serene.It was as the face of some colossal sculpture ofhis own ancestral sphinx. No passion — no humanemotion disturbed its brooding and unwrinkledbrow; there — was neither sadness, nor joy, normemory, nor hope ; it was free from all withwhich the wild human heart can sympathise.The mystery of mysteries rested on its beauty, — itawed, but terrified not ; it was the Incarnation ofthe Sublime. And Arbaces felt the voice leavehis lips, without an impulse of his own; and thevoice asked,Who art thou, and what is thy task ? "'' I am That which thou hast acknowledged,"answered, without desisting from its work, themighty phantom. '' My name is Nature ! Theseare the wheels of the world, and my hand guidesthem for the life of all things."176 THE LAST DAYS OFAnd what," said the voice of Arbaces, '' arethese galleries, that, strangely and fitfully illumined,stretch on either hand into the abyssof gloom ?"'' That," answered the giant-mother, " whichthou beholds to the left, is the gallery of the Unborn.The shadows that flit onward and upwardinto the world are the souls that pass from thelong eternity of being, to their destined pilgrimageon earth. That which thou beholds to thyright, wherein the shadows descending from abovesweep on, equally unknown and dim, is the galleryof the Dead!"And wherefore," said the voice of Arbaces,yon wandering lights that so wildly break thedarkness, but only hreah, not reveal?"'dark fool of the human sciences! dreamer ofthe stars, and would-be decipherer of the heartand origin of things ! those lights are but theglimmerings of such knowledge as is vouchsafedto Nature to work her way, to trace enough ofthe past and future to give providence to herPOMPEII. 177designs. Judge, then, puppet as thou art, whatlights are reserved for thee !"Arbaces felt himself tremble as he asked again,'* Wherefore am I here ?"'' It is the forecast of thy soul — the prescienceof thy rushing doom — the shadow of thy fatelengthening into eternity as it declines fromearth."Ere he could answer, Arbaces felt a rushingWIND sweep down the cavern, as the wings of agiant god. Borne aloft from the ground, andwhirled on high as a leaf in the storms of autumn,he beheld himself in the midst of the Spectres ofthe Dead, and hurrying with them along thelength of gloom. As in vain and impotent despairhe struggled against the impelling power, hethought the wind grew into something like ashape — a spectral outline of the wings and talonsof an eagle, with limbs floating far and indistinctlyalong the air, and eyes that, alone clearly andvividly seen, glared stonily and remorselessly onhis own.i2178 THE LAST DAYS OFWhat art thou ?" again said the voice of theEgyptian.'' I am that which thou hast acknowledged;"and the spectre laughed aloud — "■ and my nameis Necessity."To what dost thou bear me?"To the Unknown."To happiness or to wo?"As thou hast sown, so shalt thou reap."Dread thing, not so ! If thou art the Rulerof life, thine are my misdeeds, not mine."I am but the breath of God!" answered themighty Wind.*' Then is my wisdom vain !" groaned thedreamer.The husbandman accuses not fate, when,having sown thistles, he reaps not corn. Thouhast sown crime, accuse not fate if thou respectnot the harvest of virtue."The scene suddenly changed. Arbaces was inaplace of human bones; and, lo! in the midst ofthem was a skull, and the skull, still retaining itsPOMPEII. 179fleshless hollows, assumed slowly, and in the mysteriousconfusion of a dream, the face of Appetites ;and forth from the grinning jaws there crept asmall worm, and it crawled to the feet of Arbaces.He attempted to stamp on it, and crush it ; but itbecame longer and larger with that attempt. Itswelled and bloated till it grew into a vast serpent; it coiled itself round the limbs of Arbaces ;it crunched his bones ; it raised its glaring eyesand poisonous jaws to his face. He writhed invain; he withered — he gasped — beneath the influenceof the blighting breath — he felt himselfblasted into death. And then a voice came fromthe reptile, which still bore the face of Apsecides,and rang in his reeling ear —Thy victim is thy judge! the worm thouwouldst crush becomes the serpent thatdevours thee."With a shriek of wrath, and wo, and despairingresistance, Arbaces awoke — his hair on end —his brow bathed in dew — his eyes glazed andstaring — his mighty frame quivering as an in-180 THE LAST DAYS OFsant's, beneath the agony of that dream. Heawoke — he collected himself — he blessed the godswhom he disbelieved, that he was in a dream ! —he turned his eyes from side to side — he sawthe dawning light break through his small butlofty window — he was in the Precincts of Dayhe rejoiced — he smiled; — his eyes fell, andopposite to him he beheld the ghastly features,the lifeless eye, the livid lip — of the Hag ofVesuvius !Ha !" he cried, placing his hands before hiseyes, as to shut out the grisly vision, " do I dreamstill? — am I with the dead?"*' Mighty Hermes — No! Thou art with onedeathlike, but not dead. Recognise thy friendand slave."There was a long silence. Slowly the shuddersthat passed over the limbs of the Egyptian chasedeach other away, saintlier and saintlier dying tillhe was himself again.It was a dream, then!" said he. " lyell —let me dream no more, or the day cannot com-POMPEII. 181senate for the pangs of night. Woman, howearnest thou here, and wherefore?"I came to warn thee," answered the sepulchralvoice of the Saga.*' Warn me ! the dream hed not, then? Of whatperil?"'^ Listen to me. Some evil hangs over thisfated city. Fly while it he time. Thou knowestthat I hold my home on that mountain beneathwhich old tradition saith there yet burn the firesof the River of Phlegethon ; and in my cavern isa vast abyss, and in that abyss I have of latemarked a red and dull stream creep slowly,slowly on ; and heard many and mighty sounds,hissing and roaring through the gloom. Butlast night, as I looked thereon, behold the streamwas no longer dull, but intensely and fiercelyluminous;* and while I gazed, the beast thatliveth with me, and was cowering by my side,uttered a shrill howl, and fell down and died,We may suppose that the exhalations were similar in effectto those in the Grotto del Cane.182 THE LAST DAYS OFand the slaver and froth were round his lips. Icrept back to my lair ; but I distinctly heard , allthe night, the rock shake and tremble ; and,though the air was heavy and still, there were thehissing of pent winds, and the grinding as ofwheels, beneath the ground. So, when I rose thismorning at the very birth of dawn, I looked againdown the abyss, and I saw vast fragments of stoneborne black and floatingly over the lurid stream ;and the stream itself was broader, fiercer, redderthan the night before. Then I went forth, andascended to the summit of the rock ; and in thatsummit there appeared a sudden and vast hollow,which I had never perceived before, from whichcurled a dim faint smoke ; and the vapour wasdeathly, and I gasped and sickened, and nearlydied. I returned home. I took my gold and mydrugs, and left the habitation of many years ; forI remembered the dark Etruscan prophecy whichsaith, ' When the mountain opens, the city shallfall — when the smoke crowns the Hill of theParched Fields, there shall be wo and weepingPOMPEII. 183in the hearths of the Children of the Sea.' Dreadmaster, ere I leave these walls for some moredistant dwelling, I come to thee. As thou livest,know I in my heart that the earthquake thatsixteen years ago shook this city to its solid baseis but the forerunner of more deadly doom. Thewalls of Pompeii are built above the fields of theDead and the rivers of the sleepless Hell. Bewarned and fly!"Witch, I thank thee, for thy care of one notungrateful. On yon table stands a cup of gold ;take it, it is thine. I dreamt not that there livedone, out of the priesthood of Isis, who would havesaved Arbaces from destruction. The signs thouhast seen in the bed of the extinct volcano," continuedthe Egyptian, musingly, " surely tell ofsome coming danger to the city ; perhaps anotherearthquake fiercer than the last. Be that as itmay, there is a new reason for my hastening fromthese walls. After this day I will prepare mydeparture. Daughter of Etruria, whither eldestthou ?"184 THE LAST DAYS OFI shall cross over to Herculaneum this day,and, wandering thence along the coast, shall seekout a new home. I am friendless ; my two companions,the fox and the snake, are dead. GreatHermes, thou hast promised me twenty additionalyears of life!"Ay," said the Egyptian, '^ I have promisedthee. But, woman," he added, lifting himselfupon his arm, and gazing curiously on her face,tell me, I pray thee, wherefore thou wishesto live ? What sweets dost thou discover in existence? "It is not life that is sweet, but death that isawful," replied the hag, in a sharp, impressivetone, that struck forcibly upon the heart of thevain star-seer. He winced at the truth of thereply ; and, no longer anxious to retain so uninvitinga companion, he said, " Time wanes ; Imust prepare for the solemn spectacle of this day.Sister, farewell ! enjoy thyself as thou canst overthe ashes of life."The hag, who had placed the costly gift ofPOMPEII. 185Arbaces in the loose folds of her vest, now rose todepart. When she had gained the door shepaused, turned back, and said, " This may bethelast time we meet on earth ; but whither lieththe flame when it leaves the ashes? — Wanderingto and fro, up and down, as an exhalationon the morass, the flame may be seen in themarshes of the lake below ; and the witch andthe magian, the pupil and the master, thegreat one and the accursed one, may meet again.Farewell ! "Out, croaker," muttered Arbaces, as the doorclosed on the hag's tattered robes ; and, impatientof his own thoughts, not yet recovered from thepast dream, lie hastily summoned his slaves.It was the custom to attend the ceremonials ofthe amphitheatre in festive robes, and Arbacesarrayed himself that day with more than usualcare. His tunic was of the most dazzling white ;his many fibula were formed from the mostprecious stones ; over his tunic flowed a looseeastern robe, half gown, half mantle, glowing in186 THE LAST DAYS OFthe richest hues of the Tyrian dye ; and the sandals,that reached half way up the knee, were studdedwith gems, and inlaid with gold. In the quackeriesthat belonged to his priestly genius, Arbacesnever neglected, on great occasions, the artswhich dazzle and impose upon the vulgar ; andon this day, that was for ever to release him,by the sacrifice of Glaucus, from the fear ofa rival and the chance of detection, he felt thathe was arraying himself as for a triumph or anuptial feast.It was customary for men of rank to be accompaniedto the shows of the amphitheatre by a processionof their slaves and freed men ; and the longfamily" of Arbaces were already arranged inorder, to attend the litter of their lord.Only, to their great chagrin, the slaves in attendanceon lone, and the worthy Sosia, as jailerto Lydia, were condemned to remain at home.Callias," said Arbaces, apart, to his freedman,who was buckling on his girdle, " I amweary of Pompeii ; I propose to quit it in threePOMPEII. 187days, should the wind favour. Thou knowest thevessel that lies in the harbour, and belongs toNurses, of Alexandria; I have purchased it ofhim. The day after tomorrow we shall begin toremove my stores."So soon ! 'Tis well. Arbaces shall be obeyed ;and his ward, lone ?"Accompanies me. Enough! — Is the morningfair ?"Dim and oppressive; it will probably be intenselyhot in the forenoon."'' The poor gladiators, and more wretchedcriminals ! Descend, and see that the slaves aremarshalled."Left alone, Arbaces stepped into his chamber ofstudy, and thence upon the portico without. Hesaw the dense masses of men pouring fast into theamphitheatre, and heard the cry of the assistants,and the cracking of the cordage, as they werestraining aloft the huge awning under whichthe citizens, molested by no discomforting ray,were to behold, at luxurious ease, the agonies of188 THE LAST DAYS OFtheir fellow-creatures. Suddenly a wild, strangesound went forth, and as suddenly died away — itwas the roar of the lion. There was a silence inthe distant crowd ; but the silence was followedby joyous laughter — they were making merry atthe hungry impatience of the royal beast."*' Brutes !" muttered the disdainful Arbaces,*' are ye less homicides than I am? / slay but inself-defence — ye make murder pastime."He turned, with a restless and curious eye, towardsVesuvius. Beautifully glowed the greenvineyards round its breast, and tranquil as eternitylay in the breathless skies the form of themighty hill.We have time yet, if the earthquake be nurs-iii,"thought Arbaces ; and he turned from thespot. He passed by the table which bore hismystic scrolls and Chaldean calculations.August art!" he thought, " 1 have not consultedthy decrees since I past the danger andthe crisis they foretold. What matter ? — I knowthat henceforth all in my path is bright andPOMPEII. 189smooth. Have not events already proved it?Away, doubt ! — away, pity ! Mirror, O myheart, — mirror, for the future but two imagesEmpire and lone!"190 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER II.THE AMPHITHEATRE.Lydia, assured by the account of Sosia on hisreturn home, and satisfied that her letter was inthe hands of Sallust, gave herself up once more tohope. Sallust would surely lose no time in seekingthe Praetor — in coming to the house of theEgyptian — in releasing her — in breaking the prisonof Calends. That very night Glaucus would befree. Alas! the night passed — the dawn broke;she heard nothing but the hurried footsteps of theslaves along the hall and peristyle, and their voicesin preparation for the show. By and by, the commandingvoice of Arbaces broke on her ear — aflourish of music rung out cheerily : the long processionwere sweeping to the amphitheatre to gluttheir eyes on the death-pangs of the Athenian !POMPEII. 191The procession of Arbaces moved along slowlyand with much solemnity, till now, arriving at theplace where it was necessary for such as came inlitters or chariots to alight, Arbaces descendedfrom his vehicle, and proceeded to the entranceby which the more distinguished spectators wereadmitted. His slaves, mingling with the humblercrowd, were stationed by officers who receivedtheir tickets (not much unlike our modern Operaones), in places in the jwpularia (the seats apportionedto the vulgar). And now, from the spotVv^here Arbaces sat, his eye scanned the mightyand impatient crowd that filled the stupendoustheatre.On the upper tier (but apart from the male spectators)sat the women, their gay dresses resemblingsome gaudy flower-bed ; it is needless toadd that they were the most talkative part of theassembly, and many were the looks directed up tothem, especially from the benches appropriated tothe young and the unmarried men. On the lowerseats round the arena sat the more high-born and192 THE LAST DAYS OFwealthy visitors, — the magistrates, and those ofsenatorial or equestrian* dignity : the passageswhich, by corridors at the right and left, gaveaccess to these seats, at either end of the ovalarena, were also the entrances for the combatants.Strong palings at these passages prevented anyunwelcome eccentricity in the movements of thebeasts, and confined them to their appointed prey.Around the parapet which was raised above thearena, and from which the seats gradually rose,were gladiatorial inscriptions, and paintingswrought in fresco, typical of the entertainmentsfor which the place was designed. Throughout thewhole building wound invisible pipes, from which,as the day's advanced, cooling and fragrant showerswere to be sprinkled over the spectators. Theofficers of the amphitheatre were still employedin the task of fixing the vast awning (or malaria)which covered the whole, and which luxurious inventionthe Companions arrogated to themselves :The equites sat immediately behind the senators.POMPEII. 193it was woven of the whitest Appian wool, andvariegated with broad stripes of crimson. Owingeither to some inexperience on the part of theworkmen, or to some defect in the machinery,the awning, however, was not arranged that dayso happily as usual ; indeed, from the immensespace of the circumference, the task was alwaysone of great difficulty and art — so much so, thatit could seldom be adventured in rough or windyweather. But the present day was so remarkablystill that there seemed to the spectators no excusefor the awkwardness of the artificers ; and whena large gap in the back of the awning was stillvisible, from the obstinate refusal of one part ofthe malaria to ally itself with the rest, the murmursof discontent were loud and general.The-stile Pansa, at whose expense the exhibitionwas given, looked particularly annoyed atthe defect, and vowed bitter vengeance on thehead of the chief officer of the show, who, fretting,puffing, perspiring, busied himself in idle ordersand unavailing threats.VOL. III. K194 THE LAST DAYS OFThe "hubbub ceased suddenly — the operatorsdesisted — the crowd were stilled — the gap wasforgotten — for now, with a loud and warlikeflourish of trumpets, the gladiators, marshalled inceremonious procession, entered the arena. Theyswept round the oval space very slowly and deliberately,in order to give the spectators full leisureto admire their stern serenity of feature — theirbrawny limbs and various arms, as well as toform such wagers as the excitement of the momentmight suggest.'*0h!" cried the widow Fulvia to the wife ofPansa, as they leant down from their lofty bench,do you see that gigantic gladiator? how drolly heis dressed !"*' Yes," said the senile's wife with complacentimportance, for she knew all the names and qualitiesof each combatant; "he is a retiarius, orbetter ; he is armed only, you see, with a three-prongedspear like a trident, and a net ; he wearsno armour, only the fillet and the tunic. He is amighty man, and is to fight with Sporus, yon thick-pompeii.195set gladiator with the round shield and drawnsword, but without body-armour ; he has not hishelmet on now, in order that you may see his face :how fearless it is ! — by and by he will fight withhis visor down."But surely a net and a spear are poor armsagainst the shield and sword ?"That shews how innocent you are, my dearFulvia ; the retiarius generally has the best of it."But who is yon handsome gladiator, nearlynaked — is it not quite improper? By Venus, buthis limbs are beautifully shaped ! "It is Lydon, a young untried man ; he has therashness to fight yon other gladiator similarlydressed, or rather undressed — Tetraides. Theyfight first in the Greek fashion, with the cestus ;afterwards they put on armour, and try sword andshield."He is a proper man, this Lydon ; and thewomen, I am sure, are on his side."So are not the experienced betters : Clodiusoffers three to one against him."196 THE LAST DAYS OF'' Oh, Jove! how beautiful!" exclaimed thewidow, as two gladiators, armed cap-a-pie, roderound the arena on light and prancing steeds.Resembling much the combatants in the tilts ofthe middle ages, they bore lances and roundshields, beautifully inlaid ; their armour waswoven intricately with bands of iron, but it coveredonly the thighs and the right arms ; short cloaks,extending to the seat, gave a picturesque andgraceful air to their costume ; their legs werenaked, with the exception of sandals, which werefastened a little above the ankle. " Oh, beautiful! who are these?" asked the widow.The one is named Berbix — he has conqueredtwelve times ; the other assumes the arrogantname of Nobilior. They are both Gauls."While thus conversing, the first formalities ofthe show were over. To these succeeded a feignedcombat with wooden swords between the variousgladiators matched against each other. Amongthese, the skill of two Roman gladiators, hiredfor the occasion, was the most admired ; and nextPOMPEII. 197to them the most graceful combatant was Lydoii.This sham contest did not last above an hour, nordid it attract any very lively interest, except amongthose connoisseurs of the arena to whom art waspreferable to more coarse excitement: the bodyof the spectators were rejoiced when it was over ;and when the sympathy rose to terror. The combatantswere now arranged in pairs, as agreed beforehand; their weapons examined ; and the gravesports of the day commenced amidst the deepestsilence — broken only by an exciting and preliminaryblast of warlike music.It was often customary to commence the sportsby the most cruel of all, and some Nestorius, orgladiator appointed to the beasts, was slain first,as an initiatory sacrifice. But in the presentinstance, the experienced Pansa thought it betterthat the sanguinary drama should progress — notdecrease — in interest ; and, accordingly, theexecution of Olinthus and Glaucus was reservedfor the last. It was arranged that the two horsemenshould first occupy the arena ; that the foot198 THE LAST DAYS OFgladiators, paired off, should then he loosed indiscriminatelyon the stage ; that Glaucus and thelion should next perform their part in the bloodyspectacle ; and the tiger and the Nazarene be thegrand finale. And, in the spectacles of Pompeii,the reader of Roman history must limit his imagination,nor expect to find those vast and wholesaleexhibitions of magnificent slaughter withwhich a Nero or a Caligula regaled the inhabitantsof the Imperial City. The Roman shows, whichabsorbed the more celebrated gladiators, and thechief proportion of foreign beasts, were indeedthe very reason why, in the lesser towns of theempire, the sports of the amphitheatre were comparativelyhumane and rare; and in this, as inother respects, Pompeii was but the miniature,the microcosm of Rome. Still, it was an awfuland imposing spectacle, with which modern timeshave, happily, nothing to compare ; — a vast theatre,rising row upon row, nearly five hundredfeet in height, and swarming with human beingsfrom fifteen to eighteen thousand in number —POMPEII. 199intent upon no fictitious representation — no tragedyof the stage ; but the actual victory ordefeat — the exultant life or the bloody death ofeach and all who entered the arena !The two horsemen were now at either extremityof the lists (if so they might be called) ; and, at agiven signal from Pansa, the combatants startedsimultaneously as in full collision, each advancinghis round buckler, each poising on high his lightyet sturdy javelin ; but, just when within threepaces of his opponent, the steed of Berbix suddenlyhalted, wheeled round, and, as Nobilior wasborne rapidly by, his antagonist stirred uponhim. The buckler of Nobilior, quickly and skilfullyextended, received a blow which otherwisewould have been fatal.Well done, Nobilior !" cried the Preetor, givingthe first vent to the popular excitement."Bravely struck, my Berbix!" answered CIo-diesfrom his seat.And the wild murmur, swelled by many a shout,echoed from side to side.200 THE LAST DAYS OFThe visors of both the horsemen were completelyclosed (like those of the knights in after-times),but the head was, nevertheless, the greatpoint of assault ; and Nobilior, now wheelinghis charger with no less adroitness than his opponent,directed his spear full on the helmet of hisfoe. Berbix raised his buckler to shield himself;and his quick-eyed antagonist, suddenly loweringhis weapon, pierced him through the breast.Berbix reeled and fell.''Nobilior! Nobilior!" shouted the populace.I have lost ten sententia"* said Clodius betweenhis teeth.Habet! he has it," said Pansa, deliberately.The populace, not yet hardened into cruelty,made the signal of mercy ; but as the attendantsof the arena approached, they found the kindnesscame too late — the heart of the Gaul had beenpierced, and his eyes were set in death. It washis life's blood that flowed so darkly over the sandand sawdust of the arena.• A little more than 80/.POMPEII. 201It is a pity it was so soon over — there waslittle enough for one's trouble," said the widowFulvia.Yes, I have no compassion for Berbix. Anyonemight have seen that Nobilior did but feint.Mark, they fix the fatal hook to the body — theydrag him away to the spoliarium- — they scatternew sand over the stage — Pansa regrets nothingmore than that he is not rich enough to strew thearena with borax and cinnabar, as Nero used."Well, if it has been a brief battle, it is quicklysucceeded — see my handsome Lydon on the arenaay, and the net-bearer too — and the swordsmen!Oh, charming!"There were now on the arena six combatantsNiger and his net, matched against Sporuswith his shield and his short broadsword — Lydonand Tetraides, naked save by a cincture roundthe waist, each armed only with a heavy Greekcestus — and two gladiators from Rome, clad incompletesteel, and evenly matched with immensebucklers and pointed swords.K 2"!■202 THE LAST DAYS OFThe initiatory contest between Lydon andTetraides being less deadly than that betweenthe other combatants, no sooner had they advancedto the middle of the arena than, as bycommon consent, the rest held back, to see howthat contest should be decided, and wait tillfiercer weapons might replace the cestus, ere theythemselves commenced hostility. They stoodleaning on their arms and apart from each other,gazing on the show, which, if not bloody enoughthoroughly to please the populace, they were stillinclined to admire, because its origin was of theirancestral Greece.No persons could, at first glance, have seemedless evenly matched than the two antagonists.Tetraides, though not taller than Lydon, weighedconsiderably more ; the natural size of his muscleswas increased, to the eyes of the vulgar, by massesof solid flesh ; for, as it was a notion that thecontest of the cestus fared easiest with him whowas plumpest, Tetraides had encouraged to theutmost his hereditary predisposition to the portly.POMPEII. 203His shoulders were vast and his limbs thickset,double-jointed, and slightly curved outward, inthat formation which takes so much from beautyto give so largely to strength. But Lydon, exceptthat he was slender even almost to meagreness,was beautifully and delicately proportioned, andthe skilful might have perceived that, with muchless compass of muscle than his foe, that whichhe had was more seasoned — iron and compact.In proportion, too, as he wanted flesh, he waslikely to possess activity ; and a haughty smileon his resolute face, which strongly contrasted thestolid heaviness of his enemy's, gave assuranceto those who beheld it, and united their hope totheir pity. So that, despite the disparity of theirseeming strength, the cry of the multitude wasnearly as loud for Lydon as for Tetraides.Whoever is acquainted with the modern prize-ring— whoever has witnessed the heavy and disablingstrokes which the human fist, skilfullydirected, hath the power to bestow — may easilyunderstand how much that happy facility would204 THE LAST DAYS OFbe increased by a band carried, by thongs of leatherround the arm, as high as the elbow, and terriblystrengthened about the knuckles by a plate ofiron and sometimes a plummet of lead. Yet this,which was meant to increase, perhaps ratherdiminished the interest of the fray — for it necessarilyshortened its duration ; ■ — a very few blows,successfully and scientifically planted, might sufficeto bring the contest to a close ; and the battledid not, therefore, often allow full scope for thatenergy, fortitude, and dogged perseverance, whichwe technically style iiluck, which not unusuallywins the day against superior science, and whichheightens, to so painful a delight, the interest inthe battle and the sympathy for the brave.'* Guard thyself!" growled Tetraides, moving-nearerand nearer to his foe, who rather shiftedround him than receded.Lydon did not answer, save by a scornful glanceof his quick, vigilant eye. Tetraides struck — itwas as the blow of a smith on a vice : Lydonsank suddenly on one knee — the blow passed overPOMPEII. 205his head. Not so harmless was Lydon's retaliation.He quickly sprung to his feet, and aimedhis cestus full on the broad breast of his antagonist.Tetraides reeled — the populace shouted.You are unlucky to-day," said Lepidus toClodius ; *' you have lost one bet — you will loseanother."By the gods ! my bronzes go to the auctioneerif that is the case. 1 have no less than a hundredsententia* upon Tetraides. Ha, ha ! See — see howhe rallies ! That was a home stroke ; he hascut open Lydon's shoulder. — A Tetraides! — aTetraides !"But Lydon is not disheartened. By Pollux!how well he keeps his temper. See how dexterouslyhe avoids those hammer-like hands ;dodging now here — now there — circling roundand round — ah, poor Lydon ! he has it again."Three to one still on Tetraides ! What sayyou, Lepidus ?''Well — nine sententia to three ; be it so.Above 800/.206 THE LAST DAYS OFWhat! again, Lydoriv He stops — he gasps forbreath. By the gods, he is down ! No ; — is heagain on his legs ? Brave Lydon ! Tetraides isencouraged — he laughs loud — he rushes on him."Fool! success blinds him — he should becautious. Lydon's eye is like a lynx's ! " saidClodius, between his teeth.Ha, Clodius! saw you that? your man totters!— another blow — he falls — he falls!"Earth revives him, then. He is once moreup ; but the blood rolls down his face."'' By the Thunderer ! Lydon wins it. See howhe presses on him. That blow on the templewould have crushed an ox ; it has crushed Te-trades.He falls again — he cannot move — habet !habet l""Habet r repeated Pansa. " Take them outand give them the armour and swords,"Noble Editor," said the officers, " we fearthat Tetraides will not recover in time ; howbeit,we will try."Do so."POMPEII. 207In a few moments the officers, who had draggedoff the stunned and insensible gladiator, returnedwith rueful countenances. They feared for hislife ; he was utterly incapacitated from re-enteringthe arena.In that case," said Pansa, " hold Lydon a sub-cities; and the first gladiator that is vanquished,let Lydon supply his place with the victor."The people shouted their applause at this sentence; then they again sunk into deep silence.The trumpets sounded loudly. The four combatantsstood each against each, in prepared andstern array.Dost thou recognise the Romans, my Claudius? Are they among the celebrated, or arethey merely ordinarii ?"Eumolpus is a good second-rate swordsman,my Lepidus. Nepimus, the lesser man, I havenever seen before ; but he is the son of one of theimperial Fiscales,* and brought up in a properschool ; doubtless they will shew sport. But I• Gladiators maintained by the emperor.208 THE LAST DAYS OFhave no heart for the game ; I cannot win backmy money — I am undone. Curses on that Lydon!who could have supposed he was so dexterous, orso lucky !"Well, Clodius, shall I take compassion onyou, and accept your own terms with these Romans?"An even ten sententia on Eumolpus, then ?"What ! when Nepimus is untried ? Nay,nay ; that is too bad."Well — ten to eight?"Agreed."While the contest in the amphitheatre had thuscommenced, there was one in the loftier benchesfor whom it had assumed, indeed, a poignant — astifling interest. The aged father of Lydon, despitehis Christian horror of the spectacle, in hisagonised anxiety for his son, had not been able toresist being the spectator of his fate. One amidsta fierce crowd of strangers — the lowest rabble ofthe populace — the old man saw, felt nothing, butthe form — the presence, of his brave son! Not aPOMPEII. 209sound had escaped his Hps when twice he hadseen him fall to the earth ; — only he had turnedpaler, and his limbs trembled. But he had utteredone low cry when he saw him victorious ; —unconscious, alas ! of the more fearful battle towhich that victory was but a prelude.My gallant boy !" said he, and wiped his eyes.Is he thy son?" said a brawny fellow to theright of the Nazarene ; "he has fought well :let us see how he does by and by. Hark ! he isto fight the first victor. Now, old boy, pray thegods that that victor be neither of the Romans ;nor, next to them, the giant Niger."The old man sat down again and covered hisface. The fray for the moment was indifferent tohim — Lydon was not one of the combatants. Yetyet — the thought flashed across him — the fraywas indeed of deadly interest — the first who fellwas to make way for Lydon ! He started up,and bent down, with straining eyes and claspedhands, to view the encounter.The first interest was attracted towards the210 THE LAST DAYS OFcombat of Niger with Sporus ; for this species ofcontest, from the fatal result which usually attendedit, and from the great science it requiredin either antagonist, was always peculiarly invitingto the spectators.They stood at a considerable distance from eachother. The singular helmet which Sporus Adore(the visor of which was down) concealed his face ;but the features of Niger attracted a fearful anduniversal interest from their compressed and vigilantferocity. Thus they stood for some moments,each eyeing each, until Sporus began slowly, andwith great caution, to advance, holding his swordpointed, like a modern fencer's, at the breast of hisfoe. Niger retreated as his antagonist advanced,gathering up his net with his right hand, andnever taking his small glittering eye from themovements of the swordsman. Suddenly, whenSporus had approached nearly at arm's length, theretiarius threw himself forward, and cast his net.A quick inflection of body saved the gladiatorfrom the deadly snare : he uttered a sharp cry ofPOMPEII. 211joy and rage, and rushed upon Niger ; but Nigerhad already drawn in his net, thrown it acrosshis shoulders, and now fled round the lists with aswiftness which the sector * in vain endeavouredto equal. The people laughed and shouted aloud,to see the ineffectual efforts of the broad-shoulderedgladiator to overtake the flying giant ; when, atthat moment, their attention was turned fromthese, to the two Roman combatants.They had placed themselves at the onset face toface, at the distance of modern fencers from eachother ; but the extreme caution which both evincedat first had prevented any warmth of engagement,and allowed the spectators full leisure to interestthemselves in the battle between Sporus and hisfoe. But the Romans were now heated into fulland fierce encounter : they pushed — returned —advanced on — retreated from each other — withallthat careful yet scarcely perceptible cautionSo called, from the office of that tribe of gladiators, in followingthe foe the moment the net was cast, in order to smitehim ere he could have time to re-arrange it.212 THE LAST DAYS OFwhich characterises men well experienced andequally matched. But at this moment, Eumolpus,the elder gladiator, by that dexterous back-strokewhich was considered in the arena so difficult toavoid, had wounded Nepimus in the side. Thepeople shouted ; Lepidus turned pale.Ho !" saidClodius, " the game is nearly over.If Eumolpus fights now the quiet fight, the otherwill gradually bleed himself away.But, thank the gods! he does not fight thebackward fight. See, — he presses hard uponNepimus ! By Mars ! but Nepimus had himthere! the helmet rang again! — Clodius, I shallwm!Why do I ever bet but at the dice!" groanedClodius to himself; — " or why cannot one cog agladiator ? ""A Sporus! — a Sporus!" shouted the populace,as Niger, having now suddenly paused, had againcast his net, and again unsuccessfully. He hadnot retreated this time with sufficient agility — thesword of Sporus had inflicted a severe woundPOMPEII. 213upon his right leg ; and, incapacitated to fl',he was pressed hard by the fierce swordsman.His great height and length of arm still continued,however, to give him no despicable advantages; and steadily keeping his trident at thefront of his foe, he repelled him successfully forseveral minutes. Sporus now tried, by greatrapidity of evolution, to get round his antagonist,who necessarily moved with pain and slowness.In so doing, he lost his caution — he advanced toonear to the giant — raised his arm to strike, andreceived the three points of the fatal spear full inhis breast ! He sank on his knee. In a momentmore, the deadly net was cast over him, — hestruggled against its meshes in vain ; again —again — again he writhed mutely beneath thefresh strokes of the trident ! — his blood flowedfast through the net and redly over the sand !He lowered his arms in acknowledgment of defeat.The conquering retiarius withdrew his net, andleaning on his spear, looked to the audience for214 THE LAST DAYS OFtheir judgment. Slowly, too, at the same moment,the vanquished gladiator rolled his dimand despairing eyes around the theatre. Fromrow to row, from bench to bench, there glaredupon him but merciless and unpitying eyes !Hushed was the roar — the murmur ! The silencewas dread, for in it was no sympathy ; not ahand — no, not e'en a woman's hand — gave thesignal of charity and life ! Sporus had never beenpopular in the arena; and, lately, the interest ofthe combat had been excited on behalf of thewounded Niger. The people were warmed intoblood — the mimic fight had ceased to charm,the interest had mounted up to the desire ofsacrifice and the thirst of death !The gladiator felt that his doom was sealed : heuttered no prayer — no groan. The people gavethe signal of death ! In dogged but agonisedsubmission, he bent his neck to receive the fatalstroke. And now, as the spear of the retiariuswas not a weapon to inflict instant and certaindeath, there stalked into the arena a grim andPOMPEII. 215fatal foi, brandishing a short, sharp sword, andwith features utterly concealed beneath its visor.With slow and measured steps, this dismal headsmanapproached the gladiator, still kneeling —laid his left hand on his humbled crest — drewthe edge of the blade across his neck — turnedround to the assembly, lest, in the last moment,remorse should come upon them ; — the dreadsignal continued the same : the blade glitteredbrightly in the air — fell — and the gladiatorrolled upon the sand; his limbs quivered — werestill, — he was a corpse! *His body was dragged at once from the arenathrough the gate of death, and thrown into thegloomy den termed technically the spoliation.And ere it had well reached that destination, thestrife between the remaining combatants was decided.The sword of Eumolpus had inflictedthe death-wound upon the less experienced com-See the engraving from the friezes at Pompeii, in the workon that city, published in the Library of Entertaining Knowledge,vol. ii. p. 311.216 THE LAST DAYS OFblatant. A new victim was added to the receptacleof the slain.Throughout that mighty assembly there nowran a universal movement, the people breathedmore freely, and re-settled themselves in theirseats. A grateful shower was cast over everyrow, from the concealed conduits. Tn cool andluxurious pleasure they talked over the late spectacleof blood. Eumolpus removed his helmet,and wiped his brows ; his close-curled hair andshort beard, his noble Roman features and brightdark eye, attracted the general admiration. Hewas fresh, unwounded, unfatigued.The Editor paused, and proclaimed aloud that,as Niger's wound disabled him from again enteringthe arena, Lydon was to be the successor tothe slaughtered Nepimus, and the new combatantof Eumolpus.Yet, Lydon," added he, " if thou wouldst declinethe combat with one so brave and tried,thou may est have full liberty to do so. Eumolpusis not the antagonist that was originally decreedPOMPEII. 217for thee. Thou knowest best how far thou canstcope with hin. If thou fairest, thy doom ishonourable death ; if thou conquered, out of myown purse I will double the stipulated prize."The people shouted applause. Lydon stoodin the lists, he gazed around ; high above, hebeheld the pale face, the straining eyes of hisfather. He turned away irresolute for a moment.No! the conquest of the cestus was not sufficienthe had not yet won the price of victory — hisfather was still a slave !"Noble senile!" he replied, in a firm anddeep tone. " I shrink not from this combat.For the honour of Pompeii, I demand that onetrained by its long-celebrated Lanista shall dobattle with this Roman."The people shouted louder than before.Four to one against Lydon ! " said Clodiusto Lepidus.I would not take twenty to one ! Why, is a very Achilles, and this poor fellow isbut a tiro !"VOL. III. L218 THE LAST DAYS OFEumolpus gazed hard on the face of Lydon ;he smiled ; yet the smile was followed by a slightand scarce audible sigh — a touch of compassionateemotion, which custom conquered the momentthe heart acknowledged it.And now both, clad in complete armour, thesword drawn, the visor closed, the two last combatantsof the arena (ere man, at least, wasmatched with beast), stood opposed to each other.It was just at this time that a letter was deliveredto the Praetor by one of the attendants ofthe arena; he removed the cincture — glancedover it for a moment — his countenance betrayedsurprise and embarrassment. He re-read theletter, and then muttering, — "Tush! it is impossible! — the man must be drtmk, even in themorning, to dream of such follies!" — threw itcarelessly aside, and gravely settled himself oncemore, in the attitude of attention to the sports.The interest of the public was wound up veryhigh. Eumolpus had at first won their favour;but the gallantly of Lydon, and his well-timedPOMPEII. 219allusion to the honour of the Pompeii Lanista,had afterwards given the latter the preference intheir eyes.Holla, old fellow!" said Medon's neighbourto him. " Your son is hardly matched ; but,never fear, the Editor will not permit him to beslain, — no, nor the people neither; he has behavedtoo bravely for that. Ha ! that was a homethrust ! — well averted, by Pollux ! At him again,Lydon ! — they stop to breathe ! What art thoumuttering, old boy?"Prayers !" answered Medon, with a more calmand hopeful mien than he had yet maintained.Prayers ! — trifles ! The time for gods to carrya man away in a cloud is gone now. Ha, Jupiter !what a blow! Thy side — thy side! — takecare of thy side, Lydon ! "There was a convulsive tremor throughout theassembly. A fierce blow from Eumolpus, full onthe crest, had brought Lydon to his knee.Habet! — he has it!" cried a shrill femalevoice ; " he has it ! — huzza !"220 THE LAST DAYS OFIt was the voice of the girl who had so anxiouslyanticipated the sacrifice of some criminal to thebeasts.Be silent, child!" said the wife of Pansa,haughtily. " Non habet ! — he is not wounded!"I wish he were, if only to spite old surlyMedon," muttered the girl.Meanwhile Lydon, who had hitherto defendedhimself with great skill and valour, began to giveway before the vigorous assaults of the practisedRoman ; his arm grew tired, his eye dizzy, hebreathed hard and painfully. The combatantspaused again for breath.Young man," said Eumolpus, in a low A^oice,desist; I will wound thee slightly — then lowerthy arms; thou hast propitiated the Editor andthermo — thou wilt be honourably saved ! "And my father still enslaved," groaned Lydonto himself. " No! death or his freedom."At that thought, and seeing that, his strengthnot being equal to the endurance of the Roman,every thing depended on a sudden andPOMPEII. 221desperate effort, he threw himself fiercely onEumolpus ; the Roman warily retreated — Lydonthrust again — Eumolpus drew himself aside —the sword grazed his cuirass — Lydon's breastwas exposed — the Roman plunged his swordthrough the joints of the armour, not meaning,however, to inflict a deep wound ; Lydonweak and exhausted, fell forward — fell righton the point : it passed through and through,even to the back ! Eumolpus drew forth hisblade; Lydon still made an effort to regain hisbalance — his sword left his grasp — he struckmechanically at the gladiator with his nakedhand, and fell prostrate on the arena. Withone accord Editor and assembly made the signalof mercy — the officers of the arena approached —they took off the helmet of the vanquished. Hestill breathed ; his eyes rolled fiercely on his foe ;the savageness he had acquired in his calling-glaredfrom his gaze, and lowered upon the browdarkened already with the shades of death; then,with a convulsive groan, with a half start, he222 THE LAST DAYS OFlifted his eyes above. They rested not on theface of the Editor, nor on the pitying brows ofhis relenting judges. He saw them not ; theywere as if the vast space was desolate and bare ;one pale agonising face alone was all he recognised— one ciy of a broken heart was all that,amidst the murmurs and the shouts of the populace,reached his ear. The ferocity vanished fromhis brow ; a soft, a tender expression of sanctifyingbut despairing filial love played over his features —played — waned — darkened! His face suddenlybecame locked and rigid, resuming its formerfierceness. He fell upon the eai'th.Look to him," said the iEdile, " he has donehis duty ! "The officers dragged him off to the spoliation."A true type of glory, and of its fate!" murmuredArbaces to himself; and his eye, glancinground the amphitheatre, betrayed so much of disdainand scorn, that whoever encountered it felt hisbreath suddenly arrested, and his emotions frozeninto one sensation of abasement and of awe.POMPEII. 223Again rich perfumes were wafted around thetheatre ; the attendants sprinkled fresh sand overthe arena.Bring forth the Lion, and Glaucus the Athenian,"said the Editor.And a deep and breathless hush of overwroughtinterest, and intense (yet, strange to say, notunpleasing) terror lay, like a mighty and awfuldream, over the assembly.THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER III.SALLUST, AND Lydia's LETTER.Thrice had Sallust wakened from his morningsleep, and thrice, recollecting that his friend wasthat day to perish, had he turned himself with adeep sigh once more to court oblivion. His soleobject in life was to avoid pain ; and where hecould not avoid — at least to forget it.At length, unable any longer to steep his consciousnessin slumber, he raised himself from hisincumbent posture, and discovered his favouritefreedman sitting by his bedside as usual ; forSallust, who, as I have said, had a gentlemanliketaste for the polite letters, was accustomed to beread to for an hour or so previous to his rising inthe morning.POMPEII. 225No books to-day! no more Tibullus ! no morePindar for me! Pindar! alas, alas! the veryname recalls those games to which our arena isthe savage successor. Has it begun — the amphitheatre?are its rites commenced?"Long since, O Sallust! Did you not hearthe trumpets and the trampling feet?"Ay, ay; but, the gods be thanked, I Alasdrowsy, and had only to turn round to fall asleepagain."The gladiators must have been long in thering."The wretches! none of my people have goneto the spectacle."Assuredly not ; your orders were too strict."' That is well — would the day were over !What is that letter yonder on the table VThat ! O the letter brought to you last nightwhen you were too — too — "Drunk to read it, I suppose. No matter; Itcannot be of much importance."Shall I open it for you, Sallust?"l2226 THE LAST DAYS OFDo ; any thing to divert my thoughts. PoorGlaucus !"The freedman opened the letter. " What !Greek?" said he ; " some learned lady, I suppose."He glanced over the letter, and his countenanceexhibited sudden emotion and surprise.Good gods! noble Sallust! what have we done,not to attend to this before ? Hear me read !"' Lydia the slave, to Sallust the friend ofGlaucus ! I am a prisoner in the house of Arbaces.Hasten to the Praetor! procure my release, andwe shall yet save Glaucus fi-om the lion ! Thereis another prisoner within these walls whose witnesscan exonerate the Athenian from the chargeagainst him ; — one who saw the crime — whocan prove the criminal in a villain hitherto unsuspected.Fly! hasten! quick! quick! Bringwith you armed men, lest resistance be made, —and a cunning and dexterous smith ; for thedungeon-door of my fellow-prisoner is thick andstrong. Oh ! by thy right hand, and thy father'sashes, lose not a moment ! ' "POMPEII. 227Great gods !" exclaimed Sallust, starting,and this day — nay, within this hour, perhapshe dies. What is to be done ? I will instantly tothe Preetor."Nay ; not so. The Praetor — (as well as Pansa,the Editor himself ) — is the creature of the mob;and the mob will not hear of delay ; they willnot be balked in the very moment of expectation.Besides, the publicity of the appeal wouldforewarn the cunning Egyptian. It is evidentthat he has some interest in these concealments.No ; fortunately thy slaves are in thy house."I seize thy meaning," interrupted Sallust ;arm the slaves instantly. The streets are empty.We will ourselves hasten to the house of Arbaces,and release the prisoners. Quick! quick! Whatho ! Davis there ! My gown and sandals, thepapyrus and a reed.* I will write to the PraetorThe reed calamus) was used for writing on papyrus andparchment ; the sikhs for writing on waxen tablets, plates ofmetal, &c. Letters were written sometimes on tablets, sometimeson papyrus.228 THE LAST DAYS OFto beseech him to delay the sentence of Glaucus,for that, within an hour, vre may yet provehim innocent. So, so ; that is well. Hastenwith this, Davis, to the Praetor at the amphitheatre.See it given to his own hand. Now,then, O, ye gods! whose providence Epicurusdenied, befriend me, and I will call Epicurus aliar!"POMPEII. ■ 229CHAPTER IV.THE AMPHITHEATRE ONCE MORE.Glaucus and Olynthus had been placed togetherin that gloomy and narrow cell in which thecriminals of the arena awaited their last andfearful struggle. Their eyes, of late accustomedto the darkness, scanned the faces of each otherin this awful hour, and by that dim light, thepaleness, which chased away the natural huesfrom either cheek, assumed a yet more ashen andghastly whiteness. Yet their brows were erectand dauntless — their limbs did not tremble — theirlips were compressed and rigid. The religion ofthe one, the pride of the other, the consciousinnocence of both, and, it may be, the supportderived from their mutual companionship, elevatedthe victim into the hei'o !230 THE LAST DAYS OFHark! hearest thou that shout? They aregrowling over their human hood," said Olinthus.I hear ; my heart grows sick ; but the godssupport me."The gods! O, rash young man! in this hourrecognise only the One God. Have I not taughtthee in the dungeon, wept for thee, prayed forthee? — in my zeal and in my agony, have I notthought more of thy salvation than my own !"Brave friend!" answered Glaucus solemnly,I have listened to thee with awe, with wonder,and with a secret tendency towards conviction.Had our lives been spared, I might graduallyhave weaned myself from the tenets of my owtfaith, and inclined to thine ; but, in this last hour,it were a craven thing, and a base, to yield tohasty terror what should be only the result oflengthened meditation. Were I to embrace thycreed, and cast down my father's gods, should Inot be bribed by thy promise of heaven, or awedby thy threats of hell ? Olinthus, no ! Think weof each other with equal charity — I honouringPOMPEII. 231thy sincerity — thou pitying my blindness, or myobdurate courage. As have been my deeds, suchwill be my reward ; and the Power or Powersabove will not judge harshly of human error,Mien it is linked with honesty of purpose andtruth of heart. Speak we no more of this. Hush!Dost thou hear them drag yon heavy bodythrough the passage; — such as that clay will beours soon."O Heaven! O Christ! already I behold ye!"cried the fervent Olinthus, lifting up his hands ;I tremble not — I rejoice that the prison-houseshall be soon broken."Glaucus bowed his head in silence. He feltthe distinction between his fortitude and that ofhis fellow sufferer. The heathen did not tremble ;but the Christian exulted.The door swung gratingly back — the gleam ofspears shot along the walls.Glaucus, the Athenian, thy time has come,"said a loud and clear voice; " the Lion awaitsthee."232 THE LAST DAYS OFI am ready," said the Athenian. " Brotherand co-mate, one last embrace! Bless me — and,farewell !"The Christian opened his arms — he clasped theyoung heathen to his breast — he kissed his foreheadand cheek — he sobbed aloud — his tearsflowed fast and hot over the features of hisfriend.O! could I have converted thee, I had notwept. O ! that I might say to thee, ' We twoshall sup this night in paradise !' "It may be so yet," answered the Greek, witha tremulous voice. " They whom death partednot, may meet yet beyond the grave. On theEarth — on the Beautiful, the Beloved Earth —farewell for ever! — Worthy officer, I am ready."Glaucus tore himself away ; and when he cameforth into the air, its breath, which, though sunless,was hot and arid, smote witheringly uponhim. His frame, not yet restored from the effectsof the deadly draught, shrunk and trembled.The officers supported him.POMPEII. 233Courage !" said one ; " thou art young, active,well-knit. They give thee a weapon ; despairnot, and thou mayest yet conquer."Glaucus did not reply ; but, ashamed of hisinfirmity, he made a desperate and convulsiveeffort, and regained the firmness of his nerves.They anointed his body, completely naked, saveby a cincture round the loins, placed the stiles(vain weapon !) in his hand, and led him into thearena.And now, when the Greek saw the eyes ofthousands and tens of thousands upon him, he nolonger felt that he was mortal. All evidence offear— all fear itself — was gone. A red andhaughty flush spread over the paleness of hisfeatures — he towered aloft to the full of his gloriousstature. In the elastic beauty of his limbsand form — in his intent but frowning brow —in the high disdain, and in the indomitable soul,which breathed visibly — which spake audibly —from his attitude, his lip, his eye, — he seemedthe very incarnation, vivid and corporeal, of the234 THE LAST DAYS OFvalour of his land — of the divinity of its worshipat once a Hero and a God !The murmur of hatred and horror at his crime,which had greeted his entrance, died into thesilence of involuntary admiration and half-compassionaterespect ; and, with a quick and convulsivesigh, that seemed to move the whole massof life as if it were one body, the gaze of the spectatorsturned from the Athenian to a dark uncouthobject in the centre of the arena. It was thegrated den of the lion !"By Venus, how warm it is!" said Fulvia ;yet there is no sun. Would those stupidsailors* could have fastened up that gap in theawning."Oh! it is warm, indeed. I turn sick — Ifaint!" said the wife of Pansa; even her experiencedstoicism giving way at the struggle aboutto take place.The lion had been kept without food for twenty-sailorswere generally employed in fastening the malaria ofthe amphitheatre.POMPEII. 236four hours, and the animal had, during the wholemorning, testified a singular and restless uneasiness,which the keeper had attributed to the pangsof hunger. Yet its bearing seemed rather that offear than of rage ; its roar was painful and distressed; it hung its head — snuffed the air throughthe bars — then lay down — started again — andagain uttered its wild and far-resounding cries.And now, in its den, it lay utterly dumb andmute, with distending nostrils forced hard againstthe grating, and disturbing, with a heaving breath,the sand below on the arena.The Editor's lip quivered and his cheek grewpale; he looked anxiously around — hesitated —delayed ; the crowd became impatient. Slowlyhe gave the sign ; the keeper, who was behindthe den, cautiously removed the grating, and thelion leaped forth with a mighty and glad roar ofrelease. The keeper hastily retreated throughthe grated passage leading from the arena, andleft the lord of the forest — and his prey.Glaucus had bent his limbs so as to give himself236 THE LAST DAYS OFthe firmest posture at the expected rush of the lion,with his small and shining weapon raised on high,in the faint hope that one well-directed thrust(for he knew that he should have time but forone), might penetrate through the eye to thebrain of his grim foe.But to the unutterable astonishment of all, thebeast seemed not even aware of the presence ofthe criminal. At the first moment of its releaseit halted abruptly in the arena, raised itself halfon end, snuffing the upward air with impatientsighs; then suddenly it sprung forward, but noton the Athenian. At half-speed it circled roundand round the space, turning its vast head fromside to side with an anxious and perturbed gaze,as if seeking only some avenue of escape ; onceor twice it endeavoured to leap up the parapetthat divided it from the audience, and on failing,uttered rather a baffled howl than its deep-tonedand kingly roar. It evinced no sign either ofwrath or hunger ; its tail drooped along the sandinstead of lashing its gaunt sides ; and its eye,POMPEII. 237though it wandered at times to Glaucus, rolledagain listlessly from him. At length, as if tiredof attempting to escape, it crept with a moaninto its case, and once more laid itself downto rest.The first surprise of the assembly at the apathyof the lion soon grew converted into resentmentat its cowardice, and the populace already mergedtheir pity for the fate of Glaucus into angry compassionfor their own disappointment.The Editor called to the keeper :How is this? Take the goad, prick himforth, and then close the door of the den".As the keeper, with some fear but more astonishment,was preparing to obey, a loud cry washeard at one of the entrances of the arena ; therewas a confusion, a bustle — voices of remonstrancesuddenly breaking forth, and suddenly silenced atthe reply. All eyes turned, in wonder at theinterruption, towards the quarter of the disturbance; the crowd gave way, and suddenly Sallustappeared on the senatorial benches, his hair dishesTHE LAST DAYS OFveiled — breathless — heated — half-exhausted. Hecast his eyes hastily round the ring. " Removethe Athenian !" he cried ; " haste — he is innocent !Arrest Arbaces the Egyptian — he is the murdererof Apsecides ! "Art thou mad, O Sallust!" said the Praetor,rising from his seat. " What means this raving ?"Remove the Athenian ! — Quick ! or his bloodbe on your head : Preetor, delay, and you answerwith your own life to the Emperor ! I bring withme the eye-witness to the death of the priestApsecides. Room there! — stand back! — giveway ! People of Pompeii, fix every eye uponArbaces — there he sits! Room there — for thepriest Calenus ! "Pale — haggard — fresh from the jaws of famineand of death — his face fallen, his e^^es dull as avulture's, his broad frame gaunt as a skeleton, —Calenus was supported into the very row in whichArbaces sat. His releases had given him sparinglyof food ; but the chief sustenance thatnerved his feeble limbs was revenge !POMPEII. 239"The priest Calenus ! — Galena!" cried themob ; " Is it he ! No — it is a dead man !"It is the priest Calenus," said the Praetor,gravely. " What hast thou to say?"Arbaces of Egypt is the murderer of Apsecides,the priest of Isis ; these eyes saw him deal theblow. It is from the dungeon in which he plungedme — it is from the darkness and horror of a deathby famine — that the gods have raised me to proclaimhis crime ! Release the Athenian — he isinnocent !"It is for this, then, that the lion spared him —a miracle ! a miracle !" cried Pansa.A miracle! a miracle!' shouted the people;remove the Athenian — Arbaces to the lion !"And that shout echoed from hill to vale — fromcoast to sea — " Graces to the lion!"Officers, remove the accused Glaucus — remove,but guard him yet," said the Praetor. " Thegods lavish their wonders upon this day."As the Praetor gave the word of release, therewas a cry of joy — a female voice — a child's voice240 THE LAST DAYS OFand it was of joy ! It rang through the heart ofthe assembly with electric force — it was touching —it was holy — that child's voice! And the populaceechoed it back with a sympathising granulation !Silence!" said the grave Praetor — " who isthere?"The blind girl — Lydia," answered Sallust;"it is her hand that has raised Calenus from thegrave, and delivered Glaucus from the lion."Of this hereafter," said the Praetor. " Calenus,priest of I sis, thou accuses Arbaces of the murderof Apsecides?""I do!"Thou didst behold the deed?"Praetor — with these eyes — "Enough at present — the details must be reservedfor more suiting time and place. Arbacesof Egypt, thou hearest the charge against thee —thou hast not yet spoken — what hast thou tosay?The gaze of the crowd had been long rivetedon Arbaces. But not until the confusion whichPOMPEII. 241he had betrayed at the first charge of Sallust andthe entrance of Calenus had subsided. — At theshout, " Arbaces to the Hon!" he had indeedtrembled, and the dark bronze of his cheek hadtaken a paler hue. But he had soon recoveredhis haughtiness and self-control. Proudly hereturned the angry glare of the countless eyesaround him ; and replying now to the questionof the Praetor, he said, in that accent, so peculiarlytranquil and commanding, which characterisedhis tones,Praetor, this charge is so mad that it scarcelydeserves reply. My first accuser is the nobleSallust — the most intimate friend of Glaucus!my second is a priest : I revere his garb andcalling — but, people of Pompeii! ye know somewhatof the character of Calenus — he is gripingand gold-thirsty to a proverb : the witness of suchmen is to be bought! Praetor — I am innocent!"Sallust," said the magistrate, " where foundyou Calenus?"In the dungeons of Arbaces."VOL. III. M242 THE LAST DAYS OFEgyptian," said the Praetor, frowning, " thoudidst, then, dare to imprison a priest of the gods —and wherefore?"Hear me," answered Arbaces, rising calmly,but with agitation visible in his face : " This mancame to threaten that he would make against methe charge he has now made, unless I would purchasehis silence with half my fortune : I remonstrated— in vain . Peace, there — let not the priestinterrupt me ! Noble Praetor — and ye, O people !I was a stranger in the land — I knew myselfinnocent of crime — but the witness of a priestagainst me might yet destroy me. In my perplexityI decoyed him to the cell whence he hasbeen released, on pretence that it was the coffeehouseof my gold. I resolved to detain him thereuntil the fate of the true criminal was sealed, andhis threats could avail no longer ; but I meantno worse. I may have erred — but who amongstye will not acknowledge the equity of self-preservation? Were I guilty, why was the witnessof this priest silent at the trial? — then I had notPOMPEII. 243detained nor concealed him. Wliy did he notproclaim my guilt when I proclaimed that ofGlaucus? Praetor, this needs an answer. Forthe rest, I throw myself on your laws. I demandtheir protection. Remove hence the accused andthe accuser. I will willingly meet, and cheerfullyabide by, the decision of the legitimate tribunal.This is no place for farther parley."He says right," said the Praetor. " Ho !guards — remove Arbaces — guard Calenus! Sallust,we hold you responsible for your accusation.Let the sports be resumed."What!" cried Calenus, turning round to thepeople, " shall Isis be thus contemned? Shallthe blood of Apsecides yet cry for vengeance ?Shall justice be delayed now, that it may befrustrated hereafter? Shall the lion be cheatedof his lawful prey? A god — a god ! — I feel thegod rush to my lips! To the lion — to the lionwith Arbaces!"His exhausted frame could support no longerthe ferocious malice of the priest ; he sank on the244 THE LAST DAYS OFsrounJ in strong: convulsions — the foam gatheredto his mouth — .he was as a man, indeed, whom asupernatural power had entered ! The people sawand shuddered."It is a god that inspires the holy man — tothe lion with the Egyptian ! "With that cry up sprang — on moved — thousandsupon thousands ! They rushed from theheights — they poured down in the direction of theEgyptian. In vain did the senile command — invain did the Praetor lift his voice and proclaimthe law. The people had been already renderedsavage by the exhibition of blood — they thirstedfor more — their superstition was aided by theirferocity. Aroused — inflamed by the spectacleof their victims, they forgot the authority oftheir rulers. It was one of those dread popularconvulsions common to crowds wholly ignorant,half free and half servile ; and which the peculiarconstitution of the Roman provinces so frequentlyexhibited. The power of the Praetor was as areed beneath the whirlwind ; still, at his word,POMPEII. 245the o-iiards had drawn themselves alone: the lowerbenches, on which the upper classes sat separatefrom the vulgar. They made but a feeble barrierthe waves of the human sea halted for a moment,to enable Arbaces to count the exact momentof his doom ! In despair, and in a terror whichbeat down even pride, he glanced his eyes over therolling and rushing crowd — when, right abovethem, through the wide chasm which had beenleft in the malaria, he beheld a strange and awfulapparition — he beheld — and his craft restoredhis courage !He stretched his hand on high ; over his loftybrow and royal features there came an expressionof unutterable solemnity and command.Behold!" he shouted with a voice of thunder,which stilled the roar of the crowd; " beholdhow the gods protect the guiltless ! The fires ofthe avenging Orcus burst forth against the falsewitness of my accusers ! "The eyes of the crowd followed the gesture ofthe Egyptian, and beheld with ineffable dismay246 THE LAST DAYS OFa vast vapour shooting from the summit of Vesuvius,in the form of a gigantic pine-tree ; * thetrunk, blackness, — the branches, fire; — a firethat shifted and wavered in its hues with everymoment, now fiercely luminous, now of a dulland dying red, that again blazed terrifically forthwithintolerable glare !There was a dead, heart - sunken silence —through which there suddenly broke the roar ofthe lion, which, from within the building, wasechoed back by the sharper and fiercer yells ofits fellow-beast. Dread seers were they of theBurden of the Atmosphere, and wild prophets ofrhe wrath to come!Then there rose on high the universal shrieksof women ; the men stared at each other, butwere dumb. At that moment they felt the earthshake beneath their feet ; the walls of the theatretrembled; and beyond, in the distance, they heardthe crash of falling roofs ; an instant more, andthe mountain-cloud seemed to roll towards them,• Pliny.POMPEII. 247turk and rapid, like a torrent ; at the same time,it east forth from its bosom a shower of ashesmixed with vast fragments of binding stone ! Overthe crushing vines, — over the desolate streets, —over the amphitheatre itself, — far and wide, —with many a mighty splash in the agitated sea,fell that awful shower!No longer thought the crowd of justice or ofArbaces ; safety for themselves was their solethought. Each turned to fly — each dashing, pressing,crushing, against the other. Trampling recklesslyover the fallen, — amidst groans, and oaths,and prayers, and sudden shrieks, the enormouscrowd vomited itself forth through the numerouspassages. Whither should they fly? Some anticipatinga second earthquake, hastened to theirhomes to load themselves with their more costlygoods, and escape while it was yet time ; others,dreading the showers of ashes that now fell fast,torrent upon torrent, over the streets, rushedunder the roofs of the nearest houses, or temples,or sheds — shelter of any kind — for prossTHE LAST DAYS OFsection from the terrors of the open air. Butdarker, and larger, and mightier, spread thecloud above them. It was a sudden and moreghastly Night rushing upon the realm of Noon !POMPEII.CHAPTER V.'THE CELL OF THE PRISONER AND THE DEN OF THEDEAD — GRIEF UNCONSCIOUS OF HORROR.Stunned by his reprieve, doubting that he wasawake, Glaucus had been led by the officers ofthe arena into a small cell within the walls of thetheatre. They threw a loose robe over his foi'ni,and crowded round in congratulation and wonder.There was an impatient and fretful cry withoutthe cell ; the throng gave way, and the blindgirl, led by some gentler hand, flung herself atthe feet of Glaucus.It is who have saved thee," she sobbed;now let me die!"Lydia, my child! — my preserver!"M 2250 THE LAST DAYS OFOh, let me feel thy touch — thy breath! Yes,yes, thou livest ! We are not too late ! That dreaddoor, — methought it would never yield ! andCalenus — Oh, his voice was as the dying windamong tombs: — we had to wait, — gods! it seemedhours, ere food and Vine restored to him somethingof strength ; but thou livest ! thou livestyet! and I — shave saved thee !"This affecting scene was soon interrupted bythe event just described.** The mountain ! the earthquake !" resoundedfrom side to side. The officers fled with the rest;they left Glaucus and Lydia to save themselvesas they might.As the sense of the dangers around them flashedon the Athenian, his generous heart recurred toOlinthus. He, too, was reprieved from the tigerby the hand of the gods ; should he be left to a noless fatal death in the neighbouring cell? TakingLydia by the hand, Glaucus hurried across thepassages ; he gained the den of the Christian.He found Olinthus kneeling, and in prayer.POMPEII. ■ 251Arise! arise! my friend," lie cried. " Savethyself, and fly ! See ! Nature is thy dread deliverer!"He led forth the bewildered Christian,and pointed to the cloud which advanced darkerand darker, disgorging forth showers of ashesand pumice stones ; — and bade him hearken tothe cries and trampling rush of the scatteredcrowd.This is the hand of God — God be praised I"said Olinthus, devoutly.Fly ! seek thy brethren ! Concert v/ith themthy escape. Farewell !"Olinthus did not answer, neither did he markthe retreating form of his friend. High thoughtsand solemn absorbed his soul ; and in the enthusiasmof his kindling heart, he exulted in themercy of God rather than trembled at the evidenceof His power.At length he roused himself, and hurried on ;he scarce knew whither.The open doors of a dark desolate cell suddenlyappeared on his path ; through the gloom within252 THE LAST DAYS OFthere flared and flickered a single lamp ; and byits light he saw three grim and naked formsstretched on the earth in death. . His feet weresuddenly arrested ; for, amidst the terrors ofthat drear recess — the spoliation of the arenahe heard a low voice calling on the name ofChrist !He could not resist lingering at that appeal;he entered the den, and his feet were dabbled inthe slow streams of blood that gushed from thecorpses over the sand.Who," said the Nazarene, " calls upon theSon of God VNo answer came forth ; and, turning round,Olinthus beheld, by the light of the lamp, an oldgrey-headed man sitting on the 'floor, and supportingin his lap the head of one of the dead.The features of the dead man were finely andrigidly locked in the last sleep ; but over the lipthere played a fierce smile — not the Christian'ssmile of hope, — but the dark sneer of hatred anddefiance. Yet on the face still lingered the beau-pompeii.253tiful roundness of early youth. The hair curledthick and glossy over the unwrinkled brow ; andthe down of manhood but slightly shaded themarble of the hueless, yet iron cheek. And overthis face bent one of such unutterable sadness —of such yearning tenderness — of such fond, andsuch deep despair ! The tears of the old man fellfast and hot, but he did not feel them ; and whenhis lips moved, and he mechanically uttered theprayer of his benign and hopeful faith, neither hisheart nor his sense responded to the words : itwas but the involuntary emotion that broke fromthe lethargy of his mind. His boy was dead, andhad died for him ! — and the old man's heart wasbroken !Medon ! " said Olinthus pityingly, " arise, andfly ! God is forth upon the wings of the elements! — the New Gomorrah is doomed! — fly,ere the fires consume thee !"He was ever so full of life!— he cannot bedead.! Come hither! — place your hand on hisheart ! — sure it beats yet I "254 THE LAST DAYS OFBrother, the soul has fled ! — we will rememberit in our prayers ! Thou canst notreanimate the dumb clay ! Come, come! — Hark!while I speak, yon crashing walls! — hark! yonagonising; cries ! Not a moment is to be lost ! —come ! "I hear nothing!" said Medon, shaking hisgrey hair. " The poor boy, his love murderedhim !"Come, come! — forgive this friendly force."What! Who would sever the father from theson?" and Medon clasped the body tightly in hisembrace — and covered it with passionate kisses.Go!" said he, lifting up his face for one moment." Go! — we must be alone!""Alas!" said the compassionate Nazarene, —Death hath severed ye already!"The old man smiled very calmly. " No, no,no!" he muttered, his voice growing lower witheach word, — " Death has been more kind!"With that, his head drooped on his son's breasthis arms relaxed their grasp. Olinthus caughtPOMPEII. 255him by the hand — the pulse had ceased to beat!The last words of the father were the words oftruth, — Death had been more hind!Meanwhile Glaucus and Lydia were pacingswift up the perilous and fearful streets. TheAthenian had learnt from his preserver, that lonewas yet in the house of Arbaces. Thither he fled,to release — to save her ! The few slaves that theEgyptian had left at his mansion when he hadrepaired in long procession to the amphitheatre,had been able to offer no resistance to the ai-medband of Sallust ; and when afterwards the volcanobroke forth, they had huddled together, stunnedand frightened, in the inmost recesses of the house.Even the tall Ethiopian had forsaken his post atthe door ; and Glaucus (who left Lydia withoutthe poor Lydia, jealous once more, even in suchan hour !), passed on through the vast hall withoutmeeting one fi'om whom to learn the chamber oflone. Even as he passed, ho vv ever, the darknessthat covered the heavens increased so rapidly,that it was with difficulty he could guide his256 THE LAST DAYS OFSteps. The flower-wreathed columns seemed toreel and tremble ; and with every instant he heardthe ashes fall searchingly into the roofless peristyle.Breathless he paced along, shouting outaloud the name of lone ; and at length he heard,at the end of a gallery, a voice — her voice, inwondering reply ! To rush forward — to shatterthe door — to seize lone in his arms — to hurryfrom the mansion — seemed to him the work of aninstant! Scarce had he gained the spot whereLydia was, than he heard steps advancing towardsthe house, and recognised the voice ofArbaces, — who had' returned to seek his wealthand lone, ere he fled from the doomed Pompeii.But so dense was already the reeking atmosphere,that the foes saw not each other, thoughso near, — save that, dimly in the gloom, Glaucuscaught the moving outline of the snowy robes ofthe Egyptian.They hastened onward — those three ! Alas !whither? They now saw not a step beforethem — the blackness became utter. They werePOMPEII. 257encompassed with doubt and horror; — and thedeath he had escaped seemed to Glaucus onlyto have changed its forms and augmented itsvictims.258 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VI.Calends AND Bubo — Dished And Clovis — THE GIRLOF THE AMPHITHEATRE AND JULIA.The sudden catastrophe which had, as it were,riven the very bonds of society, and left prisonerand jailor alike free, had soon rid Calendsof the guards to whose care the Praetor had consignedhim. And when the darkness and thecrowd separated the priest from his attendants, hehastened, with trembling steps, towards the templeof his goddess. As he crept along, and ere the darknesswas complete, he felt himself suddenly caughtby the robe, and a voice muttered in his ear, —Hist! — Calenus! — an awful hour!"Ay! by my father's head! Who art thou?thy face is dim, and thy voice is strange!"Not know thy Burbo ? — fie!"POMPEII. 259Gods! — how the darkness gathers! Ho, ho !by yon terrific mountain, what sudden blazes oflightning!* — How they dart and quiver! Hadesis loosed on earth ! "Tush! — thou believes not these things, Calenus! Now is (he time to make our fortune !"Ha!"Listen! — thy temple is full of gold and preciousmummers! — let us load ourselves withthem, and then hasten to the sea, and embark !None will ever ask an account of the doings ofthis day ! "Burbo, thou art right! Hush! — and followme into the temple. Who cares now — who seesnow — whether thou art priest or not? Followand we will share ! "In the precincts of the temple were many priestsgathered around the altars, praying, weeping,grovelling in the dust. Impostors in safety, theyVolcanic lightnings. These phenomena were especially thecharacteristic of the long subsequent eruption of 177!^, and theirevidence is visible in the tokens of that more awful one, now soimperfectly described.260 THE LAST DAYS OFwere not the less superstitious in danger! Calenuspassed them, and entered the chamber yet to beseen in the south side of the court. Burbo followedhim — the priest struck a light. Wine andviands strewed the table — the remains of a sacrificialfeast.A man who has hungered forty-eight hours,"muttered Calenus, " has an appetite even in sucha time." He seized on the food, and devoured itgreedily. Nothing could, perhaps, be more unnaturallyhorrid than the selfish baseness of thesevillains ; for there is nothing more loathsomethan the valour of avarice ! Plunder and sacrilege,while the pillars of the world tottered toand fro ! What an increase to the terrors ofnature can be made by the vices of man!Wilt thou never have done?" said Burboimpatiently ; " thy face purples, and thine eyesstart already."It is not every day one has such a right to behungry. O, Jupiter! what sound is that? —the hissing of fiery water! What! — does thePOMPEII. 261cloud give rain as Avell as flame! Ha — what!shrieks ? And, Burbo, how silent all is now !Look forth."Amidst the other horrors, the mighty mountainnow cast up columns of boiling water. Blent andkneaded with the half-burning ashes, the streamsfell like seething mud over the streets in frequentintervals. And full, where the priests of Isis hadnow cowered around the altars, on wdiicli they hadvainly sought to kindle fires and pour incense, oneof the fiercest of those deadly torrents, mingledwith immense fragments of scoria, had poured itsrage. Over the bended forms of the priests itdashed : that cry had been of death — that silencehad been of eternity! The ashes — the pitchystream — sprinkled the altars, covered the pavement,and half concealed the quivering corpses ofthe priests !They are dead," said Burbo, terrified for thefirst time, and hurrying back into the cell ; "' Ithought not the danger was so near and fatal."The two wretches stood staring at each other —262 THE LAST DAYS OFyou might have heard their hearts beat ! Alexius,the less bold by nature, but the more griping, recoveredfirst.We must to our task and away !" he said, inalow whisper, frightened at his own voice. Hestepped to the threshold, paused, crossed over theheated floor and his dead brethren to the sacredchapel, and called to Burbo to follow. But thegladiator quaked and drew back.So much the better," thought Calenus, " themore aauII be any booty." Hastily he loaded himselfwith the more portable treasures of the temple; and thinking no more of his comrade,hurried from the sacred place. A sudden flash oflightning from the Mount shewed Burbo, miostood motionless at the threshold, the flying andladen form of the priest. He took heart — hestepped forth to join him, when a tremendousshower of ashes fell right before his feet. Thegladiator shrank back once more. Darknessclosed him in. But the shower continued fast —fast ; its heaps rose high and suffocatingly —POMPEII. 263deathly vapours steamed from them. The wretchgasped for breath — he sought in despair again tofly — the ashes had blocked up the threshold — heshrieked as his feet shrank from the boiling fluid.How could he escape? — he could not climb tothe open space — nay, were he able, he could notbrave its horrors. It were best to remain in thecell, protected, at least, from the fatal air. Hesat down, and clenched his teeth. By degrees,the atmosphere from without — stifling and venomous— crept into the chamber. He could endureit no longer. His eyes glaring round, restedon a sacrificial axe which some priest had left inthe chamber : he seized it. With the desperatestrength of his gigantic arm, he attempted to hewhis way through the walls.Meanwhile, the streets were already thinned ;the crowd had hastened to disperse itself undershelter — the ashes began to fill up the lowerparts of the town ; but, here and there, you heardthe steps of fugitives crunching them warily, orsaw their pale and haggard faces by the blue264 THE LAST DAYS OFglare of the lightning, or the more unsteady glareof torches, by which they endeavoured to steertheir steps. But ever and anon the boiling water,the straggling ashes, or mysterious and gustywinds rising and dying in a breath, extinguishedthese wandering lights, and with them the lastliving hope of those who bore them.In the street that leads to the gate of Herculaneum,Clodius now bent his perplexed anddoubtful way. " If I can gain the open country,"thought he, " doubtless there will be variousvehicles beyond the gate, and Herculaneum isnot far distant. Thank Mercury ! I have little tolose, and that little is about me ! "Holla! — help there — help!" cried a querulousand frightened voice. " I have fallendown — my torch is gone out — my slaves havedeserted me : I am Diomed — the rich Diomed, —ten thousand sesterces to him who helps me ! "At the same moment Clodius felt himself caughtby the feet. " 111 fortune to thee, — let me go,fool ! " said the gambler.POMPEII. 265Oh, help me up — give me thy hand!"There — rise!"Is this Clodius? I know the voice! Whitherflies thou?"Towards Herculaneum."Blessed be the gods! our way is the same,then, as far as the gate. Why not take refuge inmy villa ? Thou knowest the long range of subterraneancellars beneath the basement, — thatshelter, what shower can penetrate?"You speak well," said Clodius, musingly ;and by storing the cellar with food, we canremain there even some days, should these wondrousstorms endure so long."O, blessed be he who invented gates to acity!" cried Diomed. " See! — they have placeda light within yon arch ; by that let us guide oursteps."The air was now still for a few minutes — thelamp from the gate streamed out far and clear :the fugitives hurried on — they gained the gate —they passed by the Roman sentry ; the lightningVOL. Ill, N266 THE LAST DAYS OFflashed over his livid face and polished helmet,but his stern features were composed even intheir awe ! He remained erect and motionlessat his post. That hour itself had not animatedthe machine of the ruthless Majesty of Romeinto the reasoning and self-acting man ! Therehe stood amidst the crashing elements : he hadnot received the permission to desert his stationand escape !*Diomed and his companion hurried on, — when,suddenly, a female form rushed athwart theirway. It was the girl whose ominous voice hadbeen raised so often and so gladly in anticipationof " the merry show !"Oh, Diomed!" she cried, " shelter! shelter!See" — pointing to an infant clasped to her breast" see this little one I it is mine! the child ofshame! I have never owned it till this hour!But now I remember I am a mother! I haveplucked it from the cradle of its nurse ; she hadThe skeletons of more than one sentry were found at theirposts.POMPEII. 267fled! Who could think of the babe in such tinhour but she who bore it ! Save it ! save it ! "Curses on thy shrill voice! Away, harlot!"muttered Clodius, between his ground teeth.Nay, girl," said the more humane Diomed ;follow if thou wilt. This way — this way — tothe vaults ! "They hurried on — they arrived at the house ofDiomed — they laughed aloud as they crossed thethreshold, for they deemed the danger over.Diomed ordered his slaves to carry down intothe subterranean gallery, before described, a profusionof food, and oil for lights ; and there Julia,Clodius, the mother and her babe, the greaterpart of the slaves, and some frightened visitorsand clients of the neighbourhood, sought theirshelter.268 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VII.THE PROGRESS OF THE DESTRUCTION.The cloud which had scattered so deep amurkiness over the day had now settled into asolid and impenetrable mass. It resembled lesseven the thickest gloom of a night in the openair than the close and blind darkness of somenarrow room.* But, in proportion as the blacknessgathered, did the lightnings around Vesuviusincrease in their vivid and scorching glare. Norwas their horrible beauty confined to the usualhues of fire ; no rainbow ever rivalled theirvarying and prodigal dies. Now brightly blue asthe most azure depth of a southern sky — now ofa livid and snakelike green, darting restlessly toPliny.POMPEII. 269and fro as the folds of an enormous serpent —now of a lurid and intolerable crimson, gushingforth through the columns of smoke, far and wide,and lighting up the whole city from arch to arch,then suddenly dying into a sickly paleness, likethe ghost of its own life !In the pauses of the showers, you heard therumbling of the earth beneath, and the groaningwaves of the tortured sea; or, lower still, andaudible but to the watch of interest fear, thegrinding and hissing murmur of the escapinggases through the chasms of the distant mountain.Sometimes the cloud appeared to breakfrom its solid mass, and, by the lightning, to assumequaint and vast mimicries of human or of monstershapes, striding across the gloom, hurtling oneupon the other, and vanishing swiftly into theturbulent abyss of shade ; so that, to the eyes andfancies of the affrighted wanderers, the unsubstantialvapours were as the bodily forms ofgigantic foes, — the agents of terror and of death.*Dion Cassius.270 THE LAST DAYS OFThe ashes in many places were already knee-sleep; and the boiling showers which came fromthe steaming breath of the volcano forced theirway into the houses, bearing with them a strongand suffocating vapour. In some places, immensefragments of rock, hurled upon the house-roofs,bore down along the streets masses of confusedruin, which yet more and more, with every hour,obstructed the Away ; and, as the day advanced,the motion of the earth was more sensibly felt —the footing seemed to slide and creep — nor couldchariot or litter be kept steady, even on the mostlevel ground.Sometimes the huger stones, striking againsteach other as they fell, broke into countless fragments,emitting sparks of fire which caught whateverwas combustible within their reach ; andalong the plains beyond the city the darkness wasnow terribly relieved ; for several houses, andeven vineyards, had been set on flames ; and atvarious intervals the fires rose sullenly andfiercely against the solid gloom. To add to thisPOMPEII. 271partial relief of the darkness, the citizens had,here and there, in the more public places, suchas the porticos of temples, and the entrances tothe forum, endeavoured to place rows of torches ;but these rarely continued long ; the showers andthe winds extinguished them, and the suddendarkness into which their sudden birth was converted,had something in it doubly terrible anddoubly impressing on the impotence of humanhopes — the lesson of despair.Frequently, by the momentary light of thesetorches, parties of fugitives encountered eachother, some hurrying towards the sea, othersflying from the sea back to the land ; for theocean had retreated rapidly from the shore — anutter darkness lay over it, and, upon its groaningand tossing waves, the storm of cinders and rock fellwithout the protection which the streets and roofsafforded to the land. Wild — haggard — ghastlywith supernatural fears, these groups encounteredeach other, but without the leisure to speak, toconsult, to advise ; for the showers fell now freeTHE LAST DAYS OFquietly, though not continuously, extinguishingthe lights which shewed to each band the deathlikefaces of the other, and hurrying all to seekrefuge beneath the nearest shelter. The wholeelements of civilisation were broken up. Everand anon, by the flickering lights, you saw thethief hastening by the most solemn authorities ofthe law, laden with, and fearfully chuckling over,the produce of his sudden gains. If, in the darkness,wife was separated from husband, or parentfrom child, vain was the hope of reunion. Eachhurried blindly and confusedly on. Nothing inall the various and complicated machinery ofsocial life Meas left, save the primal law of self-preservation!Through this awful scene did the Athenianwade his way, accompanied by lone and the blindgirl. Suddenly a rush of hundreds, in their pathto the sea, swept by them. Lydia was torn fromthe side of Glaucus, who, with lone, was bornerapidly onward ; and when the crowd (whose formsthey saw not, so thick was the gloom) were gone,POMPEII. 273Lydia was still separated from their side. Glaucusshouted her name. No answer came. Theyretraced their steps — in vain ; they could not discoverher — it was evident that she had beenswept along some opposite direction by the humancurrent. Their friend, their preserver, was lost!And hitherto Lydia had been their guide. Herblindness rendered to her alone the scene familiar .Accustomed through a perpetual night to threadthe windings of the city, she led them unerringlytowards the sea-shore, by which they had resolvedto hazard an escape. Now, which way could theywend? all was rayless to them — a maze withouta clue. Wearied, despondent, bewildered, they,however, passed along, the ashes falling upontheir heads, the fragmentary stones dashing upits sparkles before their feet.Alas! alas!" murmured lone, " I can go nofarther ; my steps sink among the scorchingcinders. Fly, dearest! — beloved, fly! and leaveme to my fate ! "Hush, my betrothed ! my bride ! Death withn2274 THE LAST DAYS OFthee is sweeter than life without thee ! Yet,whither — oh! whither can we direct ourselvesthrough the gloom ? Already it seems that wehave made but a circle, and are in the very spotwhich we quitted an hour ago."O Gods! yon rock — see, it hath riven theroof before us. It is death to move through thestreets I "Blessed lightning! See, lone — see I theportico of the Temple of Fortune is before us.Let us creep beneath it ; it will protect us fromthe showers."He caught his beloved in his arms, and, withdifficulty and labour, gained the temple. Hebore her to the remoter and more sheltered partof the portico, and leant over her, that he mightshield her, with his own form, from the lightningand the showers! The beauty and the unselfishnessof love could hallow even that dismaltime.Who is there?" said the trembling and hollowvoice of one who had preceded them in theirPOMPEII. 275place of refuge. " Yet what matters! the crushof the ruined world forbids to us friends or foes."lone turned at the sound of the voice, and,with a faint shriek, cowered again beneath thearms of Glaucus ; and he, looking in the directionof the voice, beheld the cause of her alarm.Through the darkness glared forth two burningeyes — the lightning flashed and lingered athwartthe temple — and Glaucus, with a shudder, perceivedthe Lion to which he had been doomedcouched beneath the pillars ; — and, close besidehim, unwitting of the vicinity, lay the giant formof him who had accosted them — the gladiatorNiger.That lightning had revealed to each other theform of beast and man ; yet the instinct of bothwas quelled. Nay, the lion crept near and nearerto the gladiator, as for companionship ; and thegladiator did not recede or tremble. The revolutionof Nature had dissolved her lighter terrorsand her wonted ties.While they were thus terribly protected, a276 THE LAST DAYS OFgroup of men and women, bearing torches, passedby the temple. They were of the congregation ofthe Nazarenes; and a sublime and unearthlyemotion had not, indeed, quelled their awe, but ithad robbed awe of fear. They had long believed,according to the error of the early Christians,that the Last Day was at hand ; they imaginednow that the Day had come."Wo !wo!" cried, in a shrill and piercingvoice, the elder at their head. " Behold ! theLord descended to judgment! He maketh firecome down from heaven in the sight of men !Wo ! wo ! ye strong and mighty ! Wo to ye ofthe fasces and the purple ! Wo to the idolaterand the worshipper of the beast ! Wo to ye whopour forth the blood of saints, and gloat over thedeath-pangs of the sons of God ! Wo to theharlot of the sea ! — wo ! wo ! "And with a loud and deep clovis, the troopchanted forth along the wild horrors of the air: —Wo to the harlot of the sea ! — wo ! wo ! "The Nazarenes paced slowly on, their torchesPOMPEII. 277still flickering in the storm, their voices stillraised in menace and solemn warning, till, lostamid the windings in the streets, — the darkness ofthe atmosphere, and the silence of death, againfell over the scene.There was one of the frequent pauses in theshowers, and Glaucus encouraged lone once moreto proceed. Just as they stood, hesitating, on thelast step of the portico, an old man, with a bagin his right hand and leaning upon a youth, totteredby. The youth bore a torch. Glaucus recognisedthe two as father and son — miser andprodigal.Father," said the youth, " if you cannotmove more swiftly, I must leave you, or we bothperish ! "Fly! boy, then, and leave thy sire."But I cannot fly to starve ; give me thy bagof gold ! " And the youth snatched at it.Wretch ! wouldst thou rob thy father?""Ay! who can tell the tale in this hour?Miser, perish !"278 THE LAST DAYS OFThe boy struck the old man to the ground,plucked the bag from his relaxing hand, and fledonward with a shrill yell.Ye gods!" cried Glaucus ; " are ye blind,then, even in the dark ? Such crimes may wellconfound the guiltless with the guilty in one commonruin. lone, on ! on !"POMPEII. - 279CHAPTER VIII.Graces ENCOUNTERS Glaucus AND lONE.Advancing, as men grope for escape in a dungeon,lone and her lover continued their uncertainway. At the moments when the volcanic lightningslingered over the streets, they were enabled,by that awful light, to steer and guide their progress: yet, little did the view it presented tothem cheer or encourage their path. In partswhere the ashes lay dry and unconfined withthe boiling torrents cast upward from the mountain,at capricious intervals — the surface of theearth presented a leprous and ghastly white.In other places, cinder and rock lay matted inheaps, from beneath which might be seen the280 THE LAST DAYS OFhalf hid limbs of some wished and mano-ledfugitive. The groans of the dying were brokenby wild shrieks of women's terror — now near,now distant— which, when heard in the utterdarkness, were rendered doubly appalling by thecrushing sense of helplessness and the uncertaintyof the perils around ; and clear and distinctthrough all were the mighty and variousnoises from the Fatal Mountain ; its rushingwinds ; its whirling torrents ; and, from timeto time, the burst and roar of some more fieryand fierce explosion. And ever as the windsswept howling along the street, they bore sharpstreams of burning dust, and such sickening andpoisonous vapours, as took away, for the instant,breath and consciousness, followed by a rapidrevulsion of the arrested blood, and a tinglingsensation of agony trembling through every nerveand fibre of the frame.Oh! Glaucus, my beloved — my own, takeme to thy arms! One embrace — let me feel thyPOMPEII. 281arms around me — and In that embrace let medie — I can no more ! "For my sake, for my life — courage, yet,sweet lone — my life is linked with thine ; and seetorches — this way! Lo ! how they brave thewind ! Ha ! they live through the storm — doubtless,fugitives to the sea! — we will join them."As if to inspire the lovers, the winds and showerscame to a sudden pause ; the atmosphere wasprofoundly still — the mountain seemed at rest,gathering, perhaps, fresh fury for its next burst :the torch-bearers moved quickly on. " We arenearing the sea," said, in a calm voice, the personat their head ; " liberty and wealth to each slavewho survives this day! Courage! — I tell you,that the gods themselves have assured me ofdeliverance — on ! "Redly and steadily the torches flashed full onthe eyes of Glaucus, and lone who lay tremblingand exhausted on his bosom. Several slaveswere bearing, by the light, panniers and coffers,heavily laden ; in front of them, — a drawn282 THE LAST DAYS OFsword in his hand, — towered the lofty form ofArbaces.By my fathers!" cried the Egyptian, " Fatesmiles upon me even through these horrors, and,amidst the greatest aspects of wo and death,bodes me happiness and love. Away, Greek !I claim my ward lone ! "Traitor and murderer !" cried Glaucus, glaringupon his foe, " Nemesis hath guided thee tomy revenge! — a just sacrifice to the shades ofHades, that now seem loosed on earth. Approachtouch but the hand of lone, and thy weaponshall be as a reed — I will tear thee limb fromlimb!"Suddenly, as he spoke, the place became lightedwith an intense and lurid glow. Bright and giganticthrough the darkness, which closed aroundit like the walls of hell, the Mountain shone — apile of fire ! Its summit seemed riven in two ;or rather above its surface there seemed to risetwo monster-shapes, each confronting each, asDemons contending for a World. These werePOMPEII. 283of one deep blood-red hue of fire, which lightedup the whole atmosphere far and wide ; but he-low,the nether part of the mountain was stilldark and shrouded, — save in three places, adownwhich flowed, serpentine and irregular, (a) riversof the molten lava. Darkly red through theprofound gloom of their banks, they flowedslowly on, as towards the devoted city. Over thebroadest there seemed to spring a cragged andstupendous arch, from which, as from the jaws ofhell, gushed the sources of the sudden Phlegethon.And through the stilled air was heard the rattlingof the fragments of rock, hurtling one upon anotheras they were borne down the fiery cataracts —darkening, for one instant, the spot where theyfell, and suffused, the next, in the burnished huesof the flood along which they floated !The slaves shrieked aloud, and, cowering, hidtheir faces. The Egyptian himself stood transfixedto the spot, the glow lighting up his commandingfeatures and jewelled robes. High behind himrose a tall Column that supported the bronze284 THE LAST DAYS OFstatue of Augustus; and the imperial image seemedchanged to a shape of fii'e !With his left hand circled round the form oflone — with his right arm raised in menace, andgrasping the stiles which was to have been hisweapon in the arena, and which he still fortunatelybore about him — with his brow knit — his lipsapart — the wrath and menace of human passionsarrested, as by a charm, upon his features, —Glaucus fronted the Egyptian !Muttering to himself, Arbaces turned his eyesfrom the Mountain — they rested on the form ofGlaucus ! He paused a moment : " Why," hemuttered, " should I hesitate? Did not the starsforetell the only crisis of imminent peril to whichI was subjected ? — Is not that peril past ?The soul," cried he aloud, " can brave thewreck of worlds and the wrath of imaginary gods !By that soul will I conquer to the last ! Advance,slaves ! — Athenian, resist me, and thy blood be onthine own head ! Thus, then, I regain lone ! "He advanced one step — it was his last on earth !POMPEII. 285The ground shook beneath him with a convulsionthat cast all around upon its surface. A simultaneouscrash resounded through the city, as downtoppled many a roof and pillar! — the lightning,as if caught by the metal, lingered an instant onthe Imperial Statue — then shivered bronze andcolumn ! Down fell the ruin, echoing along thestreet, and riving the solid pavement where itcrashed! — The prophecy of the stars was fulfilled!The sound — the shock, stunned the Athenianfor several moments. When he recovered, thelight still illumined the scene — the earth stillslid and trembled beneath ! lone lay senselesson the ground ; but he saw her not yet — his eyeswere fixed upon a ghastly face that seemed toemerge, without limbs or trunk, from the hugefragments of the shattered column — a face ofunutterable pain, agony, and despair ! The eyesshut and opened rapidly as if sense were notyet fled ; the lips quivered and grinned — thensudden stillness and darkness fell over the fearTHE LAST DAYS OFturns, yet retaining that aspect of horror never tobe forgotten !So perished the wise Magian — the great Arbacesthe Hermes of the Burning Belt — the last ofthe royalty of Egypt !POMPEII. 287CHAPTER IX.THE DESPAIR OF THE LOVERS — THE CONDITION OF THEMULTITUDE.Glaucus turned in gratitude but in awe, caughtlone once more in his arms, and fled along thestreet, that was yet intensely luminous. But suddenlya duller shade fell over the air. Instinctivelyhe turned to the Mountain, and behold !one of the two gigantic crests, into which thesummit had been divided, rocked and wavered toand fro ; and then, with a sound the mightinessof which no language can describe, it fell from itsburning base, and rushed, an avalanche of fire,down the sides of the mountain ! At the sameinstant gushed forth a volume of blackest smokerolling on, over air, sea, and earth.Another — and another — and another shower288 THE LAST DAYS OFof ashes, far more profuse than before, scatteredfresh desolation along the streets. Darkness oncemore wrapt them as a veil ; and Glaucus, his boldheart at last quelled and despairing, sunk beneaththe cover of an arch, and, clasping lone to hisheart — a bride on that couch of ruin — resign-nedhimself to die !Meanwhile Lydia, when separated by the throngfrom Glaucus and lone, had in vain endeavouredto regain them. In vain she raised thatplaintive cry so peculiar to the blind ; it was lostamidst a thousand shrieks of more selfish terror.Again and again she returned to the spot wheretlie}^ had been divided — to find her companionsgone, to seize every fugitive — to inquire of Glaucusto be dashed aside in the impatience of distraction.Who in that hour spared one thought tohis neighbour ! Perhaps, in scenes of universalhorror, nothing is more horrid than the unnaturalselfishness they engender ! At length it occurredto Lydia, that, as it had been resolved to seekPOMPEII. ' 289the sea-shore for escape, her most probable chanceof rejoining her companions would be to perseverein that direction. Guiding her steps, then,by the staff which she always carried, she continued,with incredible dexterity, to avoid themasses of ruin that encumbered the path — tothread the streets — and unerringly (so blessed nowwas that accustomed darkness, so afflicting in ordinarylife !) to take the nearest direction to thesea-side.Poor girl ! her courage was beautiful to behold !and Fate seemed to favour one so helpless ! Theboiling torrents touched her not, save by thegeneral rain which accompanied them ; the hugefi-agents of scoria shivered the pavement beforeand beside her, but spared that frail form ; andwhen the lesser ashes fell over her, she shookthem away with a slight tremor,* and dauntlesslyresumed her course." A heavy shower of ashes rained upon us, which everynow and then we were obliged to shake off, otherwise we shouldhave been crushed and buried in the heap." Pliny.VOL. III. O290 THE LAST DAYS OFWeak, exposed, yet fearless, supported but by-onewish, she was a very emblem of Psyche inher wanderings ; — of Hope, walking through theValley of the Shadow ; — of the Soul itself — lonebut undaunted, amidst the dangers and the snaresof life!Her path was, however, constantly impeded bythe crowds that now groped amidst the gloom,now fled in the temporary glare of the lightningsacross the scene ; and, at length, a group of torchbearers,rushing full against her, she was throwndown with some violence.What !" said the voice of one of the party,is this the brave blind girl ? By Bacchus,she must not be left here to die ! Up Imy Thessalian ! So — so. Are you hurt ?That's well ! Come on with us ! we are forthe shore !"O, Sallust ! it is thy voice ! The gods bethanked ! Glaucus ! Glaucus ! have ye seenh'nn ?"Not I! He is doubtless out of the city byPOMPEII. 291this time. The gods who saved him from theLion will save him from the burning Mountain."As the kindly epicure thus encouraged Lydia,he drew her along with him towards the sea,heeding not her passionate entreaties, that hewould linger yet awhile to search for Glaucus ;and still, in the accent of despair, she continuedto shriek aloud that beloved name, which, amidstall the roar of the convulsed elements, kept alivea music at her heart.The sudden illumination, the burst of the floodsof lava, and the earthquake, which we have alreadydescribed, chanced when Sallust and his party hadjust gained the direct path leading from the cityto the port; and here they were arrested by animmense crowd, more than half the population ofthe city. They spread along the field without thewalls, thousands upon thousands, uncertain whitherto fly. The sea had retired far from the shore ;and they who had fled to it had been so terrifiedby the agitation and preternatural shrinking ofthe element, the gasping forms of the uncouth292 THE LAST DAYS OFsea things which the waves had left upon thesand, and by the sound of the huge stones castfrom the mountain into the deep, that they hadreturned again to the land, as presenting the lessfrightful aspect of the two. Thus the two streamsof human beings, the one seaward, the other growthe sea, had met together, feeling a sad comfortin numbers, arrested in despair and doubt.The world is to be destroyed by fire," said anold man in long loose robes, a philosopher of theStoic school, " Stoic and Epicurean wisdom havealike agreed in this prediction ; and the hour iscome ! "Yea! the hour is come!" cried aloud voice,solemn but not fearful.Those around turned in dismay. The voicecame from above them. It Alas the voice of Olin-thus,who, surrounded by his Christian friends,stood upon an abrupt eminence on which the oldGreek colonists had raised a temple to Apollo,now time-worn and half in ruin.As he spake, there came that sudden illumines293tion which had heralded the death of Arbaces,and glowing over that mighty multitude, awed,crouching, breathless — never on earth had thefaces of men seemed so haggard ! — never hadmeeting of mortal beings been so stamped withthe horror and sublimity of dread ! — never, till thelast trumpet sounds, shall such meeting be seenagain ! And above rose the form of Olinthus, withoutstretched arm and prophet brow, girt with theliving fires. And the crowd knew the face of himthey had doomed to the fangs of the beast — thentheir victim, novo their warner ; and through thestillness again came his ominous voice —The hour is come!"The Christians repeated the cry. It was caughtup — it was echoed from side to side — woman andman — - childhood and old age — repeated, notaloud, but in a smothered and dreary murmur —The hour is come !"At that moment, a wild yell burst through theair, — and, thinking only of escape, whither itknew not, the terrible Tiger of the African desert294 THE LAST DAYS OFleapt amongst the throng, and hurried throughits parted streams. And so came the Earthquake,and so Darkness once more fell over the earth!And now new fugitives arrived. Grasping thetreasures no longer destined for their lord, theslaves of Arbaces joined the throng. One only ofall their torches yet flickered on. It was borneby Sosia, and its light falling on the face of Lydia,he recognised the Thessalian.What avails thy liberty now, blind girl?" saidthe slave.Who art thou? canst thou tell me of Glaucus?"Ay ; I saw him but a few minutes since."Blessed be thy head! where?"Couched beneath the arch of the Forum —dead, or dying! — gone to rejoin Arbaces, who isno more ! "Lydia uttered not a word ; she slid fi'om theside of Sallust ; silently she glided through thosebehind her, and retraced her steps to the city.She gained the Forum — the arch ; she stoopedPOMPEII. 295down — she felt around — she called on the nameof Glaucus.A weak voice answered — " Who calls on me iIs it the voice of the Shades ? Lo ! I am prepared!"Arise! follow me! Take my hand I Glaucus,thou shalt be saved ! "In wonder and sudden hope, Glaucus arose —Lydia still ! Ah ! thou, then, art safe !"The tender joy of his voice pierced the heartof the poor Thessalian, and she blessed him for histhought of her.Half leading, half carrying lone, Glaucus followedhis guide. With admirable discretion, sheavoided the path which led to the crowd she hadjust quitted, and, by another route, sought theshore.After many pauses, and incredible perseverance,they gained the sea, and joined a group,who, bolder than the rest, resolved to hazard anyperil rather than continue in such a scene. Indarkness they put forth to sea ; but, as they296 THE LAST DAYS OFcleared the land and caught new aspects of theMountain, its channels of molten fire threw apartial redness over the waves.Utterly exhausted and worn out, lone slept onthe breast of Glaucus, and Lydia lay at his feet.Meanwhile the showers of dust and ashes, stillborne aloft, fell into the wave — and scatteredtheir snows over the deck. Far and wide, borneby the winds, those showers descended upon theremotest climes, startling even the swarthy Africa ;and whirled along the antique soil of Syria andof Egypt ! *Dion Cassius.POMPEII. ^ 297CHAPTER X.THE NEXT MORNING — THE FATE OF NYDIA.And meekly, softly, beautifully, dawned at lastthe light over the trembling deep! — the windswere sinking into rest — the foam died from theglowing azure of that delicious sea. Around theEast, thin mists caught gradually the rosy huesthat heralded the morning ; light was about toresume her reign. Yet, still, dark and massive iathe distance, lay the broken fragments of thedestroying cloud, from which red streaks, burningoilier and more dim, betrayed the yet rollingfires of the Mountain of the '^ Scorched Fields."The white walls and gleaming columns that hadadorned the lovely coast were no more. Sulleno2298 THE LAST DAYS OFand dull were the shores so lately crested bythe cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii. Thedarlings of the Deep were snatched from her embrace! Century after century shall the mightyMother stretch forth her azure arms, and knowthem not — moaning round the sepulchres of theLost !There was no shout from the mariners at thedawning light — it had come too gradually, andthey were too wearied for such sudden bursts ofjoy — but there was a low, deep murmur of thankfulnessamidst those watchers of the long night.They looked at each other and smiled — they tookheart — they felt once more that there was a worldaround, and a God above, them ! And in thefeeling that the worst was past, the over-weariedones turned round, and fell placidly to sleep. Inthe growing light of the skies there came thesilence which night had wanted ; and the barkdrifted calmly onward to its port. A few othervessels, bearing similar fugitives, might be seenin the expanse, apparently motionless, yet glidingPOMPEII. 299also on. There was a sense of security, ofcompanionship, and of hope, in the sight oftheir slender masts and white sails. Whatbeloved friends, lost and missed in the gloom,might they not bear to safety and to shelter !In the silence of the general sleep, Lydia rosegently. She bent over the face of Glaucus — sheinhaled the deep breath of his heavy slumber —timidly and sadly she kissed his brow — his lips;she felt for his hand — it was locked in that oflone ; she sighed deeply, and her face darkened.Again she kissed his brow, and with her hairwiped from it the damps of night. " May thegods bless you, Athenian !" she murmured — " Mayyou be happy with your beloved one ! — may yousometimes remember Lydia ! Alas ! she is of nofarther use on earth !"With these words she turned away. Slowlyshe crept along by the fori, or platforms, to thefarther side of the vessel, and, pausing, bent lowover the deep ; the cool spray dashed upward onher feverish brow. " It is the kiss of death," she300 THE LAST DAYS OFsaid — " it is welcome." The balmy air playedthrough her waving tresses — she put them fromher face, and raised those eyes — so tender, thoughso lightness — to the sky, whose soft face she hadnever seen !No, no!" she said, half aloud, and in a musingand thoughtful tone, " I cannot endure it ; thisjealous, exacting love — it shatters my whole soulin madness ! I might harm him again — wretchthat I was! I have saved him — twice saved himhappy, happy thought — why not die happy? —it is the last glad thought I can ever know. O !sacred Sea! I hear thy voice invitingly — it hatha freshening and joyous call. They say that in thyembrace is dishonour — that thy victims cross notthe fatal Styx — be it so! — I would not meet himin the Shades, for I should meet him still withher! Rest — rest — rest! — there is no other elysiumfor a heart like mine !"A sailor, half dozing on the deck, heard a slightsplash on the waters. Drowsily he looked up,and behind, as the vessel merrily bounded on, hePOMPEII. 301fancied he saw something white above the waves ;but it vanished in an instant. He turned roundagain, and dreamed of his home and children.When the lovers awoke, their first thought wasof each other — their next of Lydia! She was notto be found — none had seen her since the night.Every crevice of the vessel was searched — therewas no trace of her. Mysterious from first tolast, the blind Thessalian had vanished for everfrom the living world ! They guessed her fate insilence; and Glaucus and lone, while they drewnearer to each other — (feeling each other theworld itself) — forgot their deliverance, and weptas for a departed sister.302 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER THE LAST,WHEREIN ALL THINGS CEASE.LETTER FROM Glaucus TO SALLUST — TEN YEARS AFTERTHE DESTRUCTION OF POMPEII.Athens.Glaucus to his beloved Sallust — greeting andhealth ! — You request me to visit you at Rome —no, Sallust, come rather to me at Athens ! I haveforsworn the Imperial City, its mighty tumult andhollow joys. In my own land henceforth I dwellfor ever. The ghost of our departed greatness isdearer to me than the gaudy life of your loudprosperity. There is a charm to me which noother spot can supply, in the porticos hallowedstill by holy and venerable shades. In the olivegroves of Missus I still hear the voice of Poetry —POMPEII. 303on the heights of Phyle, the clouds of twilightseem yet the shrouds of departed Freedom — theherald — the herald — of the morrow that shallcome! You smile at my enthusiasm, Sallust!better be hopeful in chains than resigned to theirglitter. You tell me you are sure that I cannotenjoy life in these melancholy haunts of a fallenmajesty. You dwell with rapture on the Romansplendours, and the luxuries of the imperial court.My Sallust — " non sum qualis era" — I am notwhat I was ! The events of my life have soberedthe bounding blood of my youth. My health hasnever quite recovered its Mounted elasticity ere itfelt the pangs of disease, and languished in thedamps of a criminal's dungeon. My mind hasnever shaken off the dark shadow of the Last Dayof Pompeii — the horror and the desolation ofthat awful ruin! — our beloved, our rememberedLydia ! I have reared a tomb to her shade, andI see it every day from the window of my study.It keeps alive in me a tender recollection — a notunpleasing sadness — which are but a fitting304 THE LAST DAYS OFhomage to her fidelity, and the mysteriousness ofher early death. lone gathers the flowers, butmy own hand wreathes them daily around thetomb. — She was worthy of a tomb in Athens !You speak of the growing sect of the Christiansin Rome. Sallust, to you I may confide mysecret: I have pondered much over that faith —I have adopted it. After the destruction OfPompeii, I met once more with Olinthus —saved, alas! only for a day, and falling afterwardsa martyr to the indomitable energy of hiszeal. In my preservation from the lion and theearthquake, he taught me to behold the handof the Unknown God! I listened — believed —adored! My own, my more than ever belovedlone, has also embraced the creed ! — a creed,Sallust, which, shedding light over this world,gathers its concentrated glory, like a sunset, overthe next! We know that we are united in thesoul, as in the flesh, for ever and for ever! Agesmay roll on, our very dust be dissolved, the earthPOMPEII. 305shrivelled like a scroll ; but round and roundthe circle of eternity rolls the wheel of life —imperishable — unceasing ! And as the earth fromthe sun, so immortality drinks happiness fromvirtue, chick is the smile upon the face of God!Visit me, then, Sallust ; bring with you thelearned scrolls of Epicurus, Pythagoras, Diogenes: arm yourself for defeat ; and let us,amidst the groves of Academies, dispute, under asurer guide than any granted to our fathers, onthe mighty problem of the true ends of life andthe nature of the soul.lone — at that name my heart yet beats ! — loneis by my side as I write ; I lift my eyes, and meether smile. The sunlight quivers over Hymettus ;and along my garden I hear the hum of thesummer bees. Am I happy, ask you? Oh, whatcan Rome give me equal to what I possess atAthens ! Here, every thing awakens the souland inspires the affections, — the trees, the waters,the hills, the skies, are those of Athens ! — • fair,though mourning — mother of the Poetry and306 THE LAST DAYS OFthe Wisdom of the World. In my hall I seethemarble faces of my ancestors. In the Cera-mucus,I survey their tombs! In the streets, Ibehold the hand of Phidias and the soul ofPericles. Harmonious, Aristogiton — they are everywhere— but in our hearts! — in mine, at least,they shall not perish! If any thing can makeme forget that I am Athenian and not free, it ispartly the soothing — the love — watchful, vivid,sleepless — of lone :^ — a love that has taken a newsentiment in our new creed {h) — a love whichnone of our poets, beautiful though they be, hadshadowed forth in description ; for, mingled withreligion, it partakes of religion ; it is blended withpure and unworldly thoughts ; it is that whichwe may hope to carry through eternity, and keep,therefore, white and unsullied, that we may notblush to confess it to our God ! This is the truetype of the dark fable of our Grecian Eros andPsyche — it is, in truth, the soul sleeping in thearms of love. And if this, our love, support mepartly against the fever of the desire for freedom —POMPEII. 307my religion supports me more ; for whenever Iwould grasp the sword, and sound the shell, andrush to a new Marathon (but Marathon withoutvictory), I feel my despair at the chilling thoughtof my country's impotence — the crushing weightof the Roman yoke, comforted, at least, by thethought, that earth is but the beginning of life —that the glory of a few years matters little in thevast space of eternity — that there is no perfectfreedom till the chains of clay fall from the soul,and all space — all time — become its heritageand domain. Yet, Sallust, some mixture of thesoft Greek blood still mingles with my faith. Ican share not the zeal of those who see crime andeternal wrath in men who cannot believe asthey. I shudder not at the creed of others. Idare not curse them — I pray the Great Father toconvert. This lukewarmness exposes me to somesuspicion amongst the Christians ; but I forgiveit ; and not offending openly the prejudices ofthe crowd, I am thus enabled to protect mybrethren from the danger of the law, and the308 THE LAST DAYS OFconsequences of their own zeal. If moderationseem to me the natural creature of benevolence,it gives, also, the greatest scope to beneficence.Such, then, O Sallust ! is my life — such myopinions. In this manner I greet existence, andawait death. And thou, glad-hearted and kindlypupil of Epicurus, thou but, come hither,and see what enjoyments — what hopes are ours,and not the splendour of imperial Banquets, —nor the shouts of the crowded Circus, — nor thenoisy Forum, — nor the glittering Theatre, — northe luxuriant Gardens, — nor the voluptuous Baths,of Rome, —-shall seem to thee to constitute a lifeof more vivid and uninterrupted happiness thanthat which thou so unreasonably pities as thecareer of Glaucus the Athenian ! — Farewell !- # # * * ■POMPEII. 309Nearly Seventeen Centuries had rolled away,when the City of Pompeii was disinterred from itssilent tomb,* all vivid with undimmed hues ; itswalls fresh as if painted yesterday, — not a huefaded on the rich mosaic of its floors, — in itsForum the half-finished columns as left by theworkman's hand, — before the trees in its gardensthe sacrificial tripod, — in its halls the chest oftreasure, — in its baths the strigil, — in its theatresthe counter of admission, — in its saloons the furnitureand the lamp, — in its triclinia the fragmentsof the last feast, — in its cubical the perfumesand the rouge of fated beauty, — and, everywhere,the bones and skeletons of those (c) who oncemoved the springs of that minute yet gorgeousmachine of luxury and of life !In the house of Diomed, in the subterraneanvaults, twenty skeletons (one of a babe) were discoveredin one spot by the door, covered by a fineDestroyed ad. 79; first discovered ad. 1750.310 TnE LAST DAYS OFashen dust that had evidently been wafted slowlythrough the apertures, until it had filled the wholespace. There were jewels and coins, candelabrafor unavailing light, and wine hardened in thealphonse for a prolongation of agonised life. Thesand, consolidated by damps, had taken the formsof the skeletons as in a cast ; and the traveller mayyet see the impression of a female neck andbosom of young and round proportions — the traceof the fated Julia! It seems to the inquirer as ifthe air had been gradually changed into a sulphureousvapour ; the inmates of the vaultshad rushed to the door, to find it closed andblocked by the scoria without, and, in theirattempts to force it, had been suffocated withthe atmosphere.In the garden was found a skeleton with a keyby its bony hand, and near it a bag of coins.This is believed to have been the master of thehouse -^ the unfortunate Diomed, who had probablysought to escape by the garden, and beendestroyed either by the vapours, or some frag-pompeii.311ment of stone. Beside some silver vases layanother skeleton, probably of a slave.The houses of Sallust and of Pansa, the Templeof Isis, with the juggling concealments behind thestatues — the lurking-place of its holy oracles, —are now bared to the gaze of the curious. In oneof the chambers of that Temple was found a hugeskeleton with an axe beside it : two walls hadbeen pierced by the axe — the victim could penetrateno farther. In the midst of the city wasfound another skeleton, by the side of which wasa heap of coins, and many of the mystic ornamentsof the fane of Isis. Death had fallen uponhim in his avarice, and Calenus perished simultaneouslywith Burbo ! As the excavators cleared onthrough the mass of ruin, they found the skeletonof a man literally severed in two by a prostrateColumn ; the skull was of so striking a conformation,so boldly marked in its intellectual, as wellas its worse physical developments, that it hasexcited the constant speculation of every itinerantbeliever in the theories of Spurzheim who has312 THE LAST DAYS OFgazed upoii that ruined palace of the mind.Still, after the lapse of ages, the traveller maysurvey that airy hall, within whose cunning galleriesand elaborate chambers once thought, reasoned,dreamed, and sinned — the soul of Arbacesthe Egyptian !Viewing the various witnesses of a social systemwhich has passed from the world for ever — astranger from that remote and barbarian Islewhich the imperial Roman shivered when henamed, paused amidst the delights of the softCampania — and composed this history !NOTES TO BOOK V.rt ) P. 283. " Rivers of the molten Java."Various theories as to the exact mode by which Pompeii wasdestroyed have been invented by the ingenious ; I have adoptedthat M'hich is the most generally received, and which, upon inspectingthe strata, appears the only one admissible by commonsense;namely, a destruction by showers of ashes and boiling water,mingled with frequent irruptions of large stones, and aidedby partial convulsions of the earth. Herculaneum, on the contrary,appears to have received not only the showers of ashes, butalso inundations from molten lava ; and the streams referred toin the text must be considered as destined for that city, ratherthan for Pompeii. The volcanic lightnings introduced in mydescription were evidently among the engines of ruin at Pompeii.Papyrus, and other of the more inflammable materials, arefound in a l)urnt state. Some substances in metal are partiallymelted ; and a bronze statue is completely shivered, as by lightning.Upon the whole, I believe my description of the Destructionis very little assisted by invention, and will be fotmd notthe less accurate for its appearance in a Romance.6 ) P. 306. " A love that has taken a new sentiment inour new creed."^V'hat we now term, and feel to be, sentiment in love, was verylittle known amongst the ancients, and at this day is scarcelyVOL. III. P314 THE LAST DAYS OFacknowledged out of Christendom. It is a feeling intimately connectedwith — not a belief, but a conviction, that the passion is ofthe soul, and, like the soul, immortal. Chateaubriand, in thatwork so full both of error and of tnith, his essay on " TheGenius of Christianity," has referred to this sentiment with hisusual eloquence. It makes, indeed, the great distinction betweenthe amatory poetry of the moderns and that of theancients. And I have thought that I might, with some consonanceto truth and nature, attribute the consciousness of thissentiment to Glances after his conversion to Christianity, thoughhe is only able vaguely to guess at, rather than thoroughly toexplain, its cause.c ) P. 309. " And, every where, the bones and skeletons ofthose who once moved the springs of that minute yet gorgeousmachine of luxury and of life."At present there have been about 350 or 400 skeletons discoveredin Pompeii ; I)ut as a great part of the city is yet to be disinterred,we cadi scarcely calculate the number of those who perishedin the Destruction. Still, however, we have every reason to concludethat they were very few in proportion to those who escaped.The ashes had been evidently cleared away from many of thehouses, no doui)t for the purpose of recovering whatever treasureshad been left behind. The mansion of our friend Sallustis one of those thus re-visited. The skeletons which, re-animatedfor awhile, the reader has seen play their brief parts uponthe stage, under the names of Burbo, Calenus, Diomed, Julia,and Arbaces, were found exactly as described in the text; —may they have been re-animated more successfully for the pleasureof the reader than they have been for the solace of thePOMPEII. 315author, who has vainly endeavoured, in the work which he nowconcludes, to beguile the most painful, gloomy, and despondentperiod of a life, in the web of which has been woven less ofwhite than the world may deem. But, like most other friends,the Imagination is capricious, and forsakes us often at themoment in which we most need its aid. As we grow older, webegin to learn that, of the two, our more faithful and steadfastcomforter is — Custom. But I should apologise for this suddenand unseasonable indulgence of a momentary weakness — it isbut for a moment. With returning health, returns also thatenergy, without which the soul were given us in vain, and whichenables us calmly to face the evils of oiir being, and resolutelyto fulfil its objects. There is but one philosophy (though thereare a thousand schools), and its name is Fortitude :TO BEAR IS TO CONQUER OUR FATE !"THE END.LONDON:Printed BY .1. Moves, Caster STRRRT, (.ETCRSTKR SQITARR.