THELAST DAYSOFPOMPEII.BY THE AUTHOR OF " PELHAM,"EUGENE ARAM," " ENGLAND, AND THE ENGLISH."cst. &C.Such is Vesuvius ! and these things take place in it every year. But alleruptions which have happened since would be trifling, even if all summed intoone, compared to what occurred at the period we refer to. * • * * »• * ******Day was turned into night, and night into darkness — an inexpressible quantityof dust and ashes was poured out, deluging land, sea, and air, and burying twoentire cities, Herculaneum and Pompeii, while the people were sitting in thetheatre !" Dion Cassius, lib. Lxvi.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET ;SUCCESSOR TO HENRY Colour.1834.AUG 1 7 1066THELAST DAYS OF POMPEII.ERRATA.— VOL. II.Page 159, line 18, for " iu the gaping rustics" read " to thegaping rustics."169, line 3, for " commission" read " commutator."237, line 7, for " xMidss" read " Minos."Theocritus.VOL. II.p/^y -o ^1100*^75THELAST DAYS OF POMPEII.BOOK III.AXXa, 2£Xavfl5Tee, ^ffovia 3-' Ewara Ta xcii crxriXaKts, ■r^of/i.iovTiEppi^ffiivav viKveov ave r vi^ia, xa) fiiXuv aifio,-'S.kIo Extra %a.<rTX.riri, xai ifs TsXss a,iji,fii,iv oTodu,Theocritus.VOL. II.THE LAST DAYSPOMPEII.CHAPTER I.THE FORUM OF THE POMPEIANS ; — THE FIRST RUDEMACHINERY BY WHICH THE NEW ERA OF THE WORLDWAS WROUGHT.It was early noon, and the form was crowdedalike with the busy and the idle. As at Paris atthis day, so at that time in the cities of Italy, menlived almost wholly out of doors — the public buildings— the forum — the porticos — the baths — thetemples themselves — might be considered their realhomes ; it was no wonder that they decorated sogorgeously these favourite places of resort, theyfelt for them a sort of domestic affection as well asapublic pride. And animated was indeed the aspectof the Forum of Pompeii at that time ! AlongB 24 THE LAST DAYS OFits broad pavement, composed of large flags of marble,sere assembled various groups conversing inthat energetic fashion which appropriates a gestureto every word, and which is still the characteristicof the people of the South. Here, in seven stallson one side the colonnade, sate the money-changers,with their glittering heaps before them, and merchantsand seamen in various costumes crowdinground their stalls. On one side, several men in longtogas* Avere seen bustling rapidly up to a statelyedifice where the magistrates administered justice —these were the lawyers — active, chattering, joking,and punning, as you may find them at this dayin Westminster. In the centre of the space, pedestalssupported various statues, of which the mostremarkable was the stately form of Cicero. Aroundthe court ran a regular and symmetrical colonnadeof Doric architecture, and there several, whosebusiness drew them early to the place, were takingthe slight morning repast which made an Italianbreakfast, talking vehemently on the earthquake• For the lawyers, and the clients when attending on theirpatrons, retained the toga after it had fallen into disuse amongthe rest of the citizens.of the preceding night, as they clipped pieces ofbread in their cups of dilated wine. In the openspace, too, you might perceive various petty tradersexercising the arts of their calling. Here one manwas holding out ribands to a fair dame from thecountry; another man was vaunting to a stout farmer,the excellence of his shoes ; a third, a kind ofstall-restaurateur, still so common in the Italiancities, was supplying many a hungry mouth with hotmesses from his small and itinerant stove. While —contrast strongly typical of the mingled hustle andintellect of the time — close by, a schoolmasterwas expounding to his puzzled pupils the elementsof the Latin grammar.* A gallery above the portico,which was ascended by small wooden staircases,had also its throng, though, as here the immediatebusiness of the place was mainly carried on,its groups wore a more quiet and serious air.In the Museum at Naples is a picture little known, but representingone side of the forum at Pompeii as then existing,to which I am much indebted in the present description.It may afford a learned consolation to my younger readers toknow that the ceremony of hoisting (moi-e honoured in thebreach than the observance) is of high antiquity, and seems tohave been performed with all legitimate and public vigour inthe forum of Pompeii.THE LAST DAYS OFEvery now and then the crowd below respectfullygave way as some senator swept along to thetemple of Jupiter, (which filled up one side of theforum, and was the senators' hall of meeting,) noddingwith ostentatious condescension to such of hisfriends or clients as he distinguished amongst thethrong. Mingling amidst the gay dresses of thebetter orders you saw the hardy forms of theneighbouring farmers, as they made their way tothe public granaries. Hard by the temple youcaught a view of the Triumphal Arch and the longstreetbeyond swarming with inhabitants ; in oneof the niches of the arch a fountain played, cheerilysparkling in the sunbeams ; and above its cornice,strongly contrasting the gay summer skies, gloomedthe bronzed and equestrian statue of Caligula.Behind the stalls of the money-changers Alas thatbuilding now called the Pantheon, and a crowd ofthe poorer Pompeians passed through the smallvestibule which admitted to the interior, with panniersunder their arms, pressing on towards aplatform, placed between two columns, where suchprovisions as the priests had rescued from sacrificewere exposed for sale.POMPEII.At one of the public edifices appropriated to thebusiness of the city, workmen were employed uponthe columns, and you heard the noise of their labor*every now and then rising above the hinof the multitude; — the columns are unfinished tothis day !All, then, united, nothing could exceed in varietythe costumes, the ranks, the manners, the occupationsof the crowd ; nothing could exceed the bustle,the gaiety, the animation, the flow and flush of lifeall around. You saw there all the myriad signs ofa heated and feverish civilization ; where pleasureand commerce, idleness and labour, avarice andambition, mingled in one gulf their motley, rushing,yet harmonious streams.Facing the steps of the temple of Jupiter, withfolded arms and a knit and contemptuous brow,stood a man of about fifty years of age. His dresswas remarkably plain, not so much from its material,as from the absence of all those ornamentswhich were worn by the Pompeians of every rank,partly from the love of show, partly also becausethey were chiefly wrought into those shapes deemedmost efficacious in resisting the assaults of mao-ic8 THE LAST DAYS OFand the influence of the evil eye. (a) His foreheadwas high and bald, the few locks that remained atthe back of the head were concealed by a sort ofcowl, which made a part of his cloak, to be raised orlowered at pleasure, and was now drawn half-wayover the head, as a protection from the rays of thesun. The colour of his garments was brown, nopopular hue with the Pompeians ; all the usualadmixtures of scarlet or purple seemed carefullyexcluded. His belt, or girdle, contained a smallreceptacle for ink, which hooked on to the girdle,a stylus (or implement of writing), and tablets ofno ordinary size. What was rather remarkable,the cincture held no purse, which was the almostindispensable appurtenances of the girdle, — evenwhen that purse had the misfortune to be empty!It was not often that the gay and egotisticalPompeians busied themselves with observing thecountenances and actions of their neighbours ; butthere was that in the lip and eye of this bystanderso remarkably bitter and disdainful, as he surveyedthe religious procession sweeping up the stairs ofthe temple, that it could not fail to arrest thenotice of many.POMPEII. 9Who is yon cynic ?" asked a merchant of hiscompanion, a jeweller.It is Olinthus," replied the jeweller, "a reputedNazarene."The merchant shuddered. "A dread sect !'" said!he, in a whispered and fearful voice. " It is saidthat, when they meet at nights they always commencetheir ceremonies by the murder of a newbornbabe : they profess a community of goodstoo — the wretches ! — a community of goods ! whatwould become of merchants or jewellers either, ifsuch notions were in fashion ?''"'That is very true," said the jeweller; "besides,they wear no jewels — they mutter imprecationswhen they see a serpent, and at Pompeii all ourornaments are serpentine."Do but observe," said a third, who was afabricate of bronze, " how yon Nazarene scowlsat the piety of the sacrificial procession. He ismurmuring curses on the temple, be sure. Do youknow, Celsus, that this fellow, passing by my shopthe other day, and seeing me employed on a statueof Minerva, told me, with a frown, that, hadit been marble, he would have broken it ; but theb510 THE LAST DAYS OFbronze was too strong for him. 'Break a goddess!'said I. 'A goddess!' answered the atheist, 'it is ademon, an evil spirit'' Then he passed on hisway, cursing. Are such things to be borne 'tWhat marvel that the earth heaved so fearfullylast night, anxious to reject the atheist from herbosom. An atheist do I say .^ worse still — ascorner of the fine arts ! — Woe to us fabricate ofbronze, if such fellows as this give the law tosociety !""These are the incendiaries that burnt Rome,under Nero"" groaned the jeweller.While such were the friendly remarks provokedby the air and faith of the Nazarene, Olinthus himselfbecame sensible of the effect he was producing ;he turned his eyes round, and observed the intentfaces of the accumulating throng, whisperingas they gazed ; and surveying them for a momentwith an expression, first of defiance and afterwardsof compassion, he gathered his cloak round him,and passed on, muttering audibly, " Deluded idolaters! — did not last night's convulsion warn yc ?Alas I how will ye meet the Last Day !""The crowd that heard these boding words gavePOMPEII. 11them diiFereiit interpretations, according to their differentshades of ignorance and of fear ; all, however,concurred in imagining them to convey some awfulimprecation. They regarded the Christian as theenemy of mankind ; the epithets they lavishedupon him, of which 'Atheist'' was the most favouredand frequent, may serve, perhaps, to warn us, believersof that same creed now triumphant, howwe indulge the persecution of opinion Olinthus*then underwent, and how we apply to those whosenotions differ from our own, the terms, at thatday prodigality on the fathers of our faith.As Olinthus stalked through the crowd, andgained one of the more private places of egressfrom the forum, he perceived gazing upon him apale and earnest countenance, which he was notslow to recognize.Wrapped in a pallium that partially concealed hissacred robes, the yoimg Apsecides surveyed thedisciple of that new and mysterious creed, to whichat one time he had been half a convert.Is he too an impostor ? Does this man, soplain and simple in life, in garb, in mien — does hetoo, like Arbaces, make austerity the robe of the12 THE LAST DAYS OFsensualist ? Does the veil of Vesta hide the vicesof the prostitute ?"Olinthus, accustomed to men of all classes, andcombining with the enthusiasm of his faith aprofound experience of his kind, guessed, perhapsby the index of the countenance, something ofwhat passed within the breast of the priest. Hemet the survey of Appetites with a steady eye,and a brow of serene and open candour.Peace be with thee l'"' said he, saluting Ascites.Peace !" echoed the priest, in so hollow atone, that it went at once to the heart of theNazarene.In that wish," continued Olinthus, " all goodthings are combined — without virtue thou canstnot have peace. Like the rainbow, Peace restsupon the earth, but its arch is lost in heaven !Heaven bathes it in hues of light — it springs upamidst tears and clouds, — it is a reflection of theEternal Sun, — it is an assurance of calm, it is thesign of a great covenant between Man and God.Such peace, O young man ! is the smile of thePOMPEII. 13soul ; it is an emanation from the distant orb ofimmortal light. Peace be with you VAlas !"" began Appetites, when he caught thegaze of the curious loiterers, inquisitive to knowwhat could possibly be the theme of conversationbetween a reputed Nazarene and a priest ofIsis. He stopped short, and then added in a lowtone — "We cannot converse here, I will follow theeto the banks of the river ; there, is a walk whichat this time is usually deserted and solitary''Olinthus bowed assent. He passed through thestreets with a hasty step, but a quick and observanteye. Every now and then he exchanged a significantglance, a slight sign, with some passenger,whose garb usually betokened the wearer to belongto the humbler classes. For Christianity was in thisthe type of all other and less mighty revolutions —the grain of mustard-seed was in the hearts of thelowly. Amidst the huts of poverty and labour,the vast stream which afterwards poured its broadwaters beside the cities and palaces of earth, tookits neglected source.14 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER 11.THE Noonday EXCURSION ON THE CABIPAXIAN SEAS.But tell me, Glaucus," said lone, as theyglided down the rippling Sarnus in their boat ofpleasure, " how earnest thou with Appetites toray rescue from that bad man ?''"'Ask Nydia yonder," answered the Athenian,pointing to the blind girl, who sate at a littledistance from them, leaning pensively over her lyre" She must have thy thanks, not we. It seemsthat she came to my house, and finding me fromhome, sought thy brother in his temple ; he accompaniedher to Arbaces ; on their way they encounteredme, with a company of friends whom thy kindletter gave me a spirit cheerful enough to join. Herquick ear detected my voice — a few words sufficedto make me the companion of Appetites ; I told notPOMPEII. 15my associates why I left them — could I trust thyname to their light tongues and gossiping opinion ?Nydia led us to the garden gate, by which weafterwards bore thee — we entered, and were aboutto plunge into the mysteries of that evil house, whenwe heard thy cry in another direction. Thouknowest the rest !"lone blushed deeply. She then raised her eyesto those of Glaucus, and he felt all the thanksshe could not utter. " Come hither, my Nydia,"said she tenderly to the Thessalian. " Did I nottell thee thou shouldst be my sister and friend ?Hast thou not already been more — my guardian,my preserver !""It is nothing," answered Nydia coldly, andwithout stirring'*Ah ! I forgot," continued lone, " I shouldcome to thee ;" and she moved alone' the benchestill she reached the place where Nydia sate, andflinging her arms caressingly round her, covered hercheeks with Idsses.Nydia was that morning paler than her wont, andher countenance grew even more wan and colourlessas she submitted to the embrace of the beautiful16 THE LAST DAYS OFNeapolitan. "But how comest thou, Nydia," whisperedlone, " to surmise so faithfully the danger Iwas exposed to. Didst thou know aught of theEgyptian ?"Yes, I knew of his vices."And how ?"Noble lone, I have been a slave to the vicious— those whom I served were his minions""And thou hast entered his house, since thouknowest so well that private entrance ?"I have played on my lyre to Arbaces," answeredthe Thessalian with embarrassment.And thou hast escaped the contagion fromwhich thou hast saved lone?" returned the Neapolitan,in a voice too low for the ear of Glaucus.Noble lone, I have neither beauty nor station; I am a child, and a slave, and blind. Thedespicable are ever safe""It was with a pained, and proud, and indignanttone that Nydia made this humble reply, and lonefelt that she only wounded Nydia by pursuing thesubject. She remained silent, and the bark nowfloated into the sea.Confess that I was right, lone," said Glaucus,POMPEII. 17in prevailing on thee not to waste this beautifulnoon in thy chamber — Confess that I was right.""Thou wert right, Glaucus," saidNydia abruptly.The dear child speaks for thee"" returned theAthenian. " But permit me to move opposite tothee, or our light boat will be overbalanced."So saying, he took his seat exactly opposite tolone, and leaning forward, he fancied that it washerbreath, and not the winds of summer, that flungfragrance over the sea.Thou wert to tell me," said Glaucus, " whyfor so many days thy door was closed to me ?"Oh, think of it no more !" answered lonequickly; " I gave my ear to what I now know wasthe malice of slander."And my slanderer was the Egyptian ?''''Tone's silence assented to the question.His motives are sufficiently obvious."Talk not of him," said lone, covering her facewith her hands, as if to shut out his very thought.Perhaps, he may be already by the banks ofthe slow Styx," resumed Glaucus, " yet in thatcase we should probably have heard of his death.Thy brother, methinks, hath felt the dark in-18 THE LAST DAYS OFfluence of his gloomy soul. Alien we arrived lastnight at thy house, he left me abruptly. Will heever vouchsafe to be my friend ?''"'He is consumed with some secret care," answeredlone tearfully. " Would that we could lurehim from himself! Let us join in that tenderoffice."■' He shall be my brother," returned the Greek.How calmly," said lone, rousing herself fromthe gloom into which her thoughts of Appetites hadplunged her — " How calmly the clouds seem to reposein heaven ; and yet you tell me, for I knewit not myself, that the earth shook beneath us lastnight."It did, and more violently, they say, thanit has done since the great convulsion sixteenyears ago : the land we live in yet nurses mysteriousterror, and the reign of Pluto, which spreadsbeneath our burning fields, seems rent with unseencommotion. Didst thou not feel the earth quake,Nydia, where thou wert seated last night, and wasit not the fear it occasioned thee that made theeweep ?'I felt the soil creep and heave beneath me.POMPEII. 19like some monstrous serpent," answered Nydia,but as I saw nothing, I did not fear; I imaginedthe convulsion to be a spell of the Egyptian's.They say he has power over the elements."Thou art a Thessalian, my Nydia," replied Glaucus," and hast a national right to believe in magical"*Magic — who doubts it.''" answered Nydia,simply, " dost thou?"Until last night, (when a necromantic prodigydid indeed appal me,) methinks I was not credulousin any other magic save that of love !" saidGlaucus, in a tremulous voice, and fixing his eyeson lone.Ah !" said Nydia, with a sort of shiver, andshe woke mechanically a few pleasing notes fromher lyre : the sound suited well the tranquillity ofthe waters, and the sunny stillness of the noon.Play to us, dear Nydia," said Glaucus — " play,and give us one of thine old Thessalian songs ;whether it be of magic or not, as thou wilt — let it,at least, be of love!"Of love!" repeated Nydia, raising her large,wandering eyes, that ever thrilled those who sawthem ^viih a mingled fear and pity ; you could20 THE LAST DAYS OPnever familiarize yourself to their aspect ; sostrange did it seem, that those dark, wild orbswere ignorant of the day, and either so fixed wastheir deep, mysterious gaze, or so restless and perturbedtheir glance, that you felt, when you encounteredthem, that same vague, and chilling, andhalf-preternatural impression, which comes overyou in the presence of the insane, — of those who,having a life outwardly like your own, have a lifewithin life — dissimilar — unsearchable — unguessed !Will you that I should sing of love 't'' saidshe, fixing those eyes upon Glaucus.Yes!" replied he, looking down.She moved a little way from the arm of lone,still cast round her, as if that soft embrace embarrassed; and placing her light and graceful instrumenton her knee, after a short prelude, she sangthe following strain : —1.The Wind and the Beam loved the Rose,And the Rose loved one;For who rocks the wind where it blows?Or loves not the sun ?POMPEII. 21None knew whence the humble Wind stole,Poor sport of the skies —None dreamt that the Wind had a soul,In its mournful sighs !3.Oh I happy Beam — how canst thou prove, 'That blight love of thine?In thy light is the proof of thy love,Thou hast but — to shine !4.How its love can the Wind reveal ?Unwelcome its sigh ;Mute — mute to its Rose let it steal —Its proof is — to die !Thou finest but sadly, sweet girl"" saidGlaucus ; " thy youth only feels as yet the darkshadow of love; far other inspiration doth hewake, when he himself bursts and brightensupon us."I sing as I was taught," replied Nydia, sighing.'■ Thy master was love-crossed then — try thyTHE LAST DAYS OFhand at a gayer air. Nay, girl, give the instrumentto me." As Nydia obeyed, her hand touchedhis, and, with that slight touch, her breast heaved —her cheek flushed. lone and Glaucus, occupiedwith each other, perceived not those signs ofstrange and premature emotions, which preyedupon a heart that, nourished by imagination, dispensedwith hope.And now, broad, hie, bright before them,spread that halcyon sea, fair as at this moment,seventeen centuries from that date, I behold itrippling on the same divinest shores. Clime, thatyet enervates With a soft and Circe spell —that moulds us insensibly, mysteriously into harmonywith thyself, banishing the thought of austerelabour, the voices of wild ambition, the contestsand the roar of life; — filling us with gentle andsubduing dreams, making necessary to our naturethat which is its least earthly portion, so that thevery air inspires us with the yearning and thirstof love ! Whoever visits thee, seems to leaveearth and its harsh cares behind — to enter by theIvory Gate into the Land of Dreams. The youngand laughing Hours of the present — the Hours,rOMPEII,those children of Saturn, which he hungers everto devour, seem snatched from his grasp. Thepast — the future — are forgotten ; we enjoy butthe breathing time. Flower of the world's gardenFountain of Delight — Italy of Italy — beautiful,benign Campania ! — vain were, indeed, the Titans,if, on this spot, they yet struggled for anotherheaven ! Here, if God meant this working-day lifefor a perpetual holyday, who would not sigh todwell for ever — asking nothing, hoping nothing,fearing nothing, while thy skies shone over him —while thy seas sparkled at his feet — while thine airbrought him sweet messages from the' violet andthe orange — and while the heart, resigned to — beatingwith — but one emotion, could find the lips andthe eyes, that flatter it (vanity of vanities !) thatlove can defy custom, and be eternal ?It was then in this clime — on those seas, thatthe Athenian gazed upon a face that might havesuited the njonph, the spirit of the place ; feedinghis eyes on the changeful roses of that softestcheek, happy beyond the happiness of commonlife, loving, and knowing himself beloved.In the tale of human passion, in past ages, there24 THE LAST DAYS OFis something of interest even in the remoteness ofthe time. We love to feel within ns the bondwhich unites the most distant eras — men, nations,customs, perish; the affections are immortal!they are the sympathies which unite the ceaselessgenerations. The past lives again, when welook upon its emotions — it lives in our own I Thatwhich was, ever is ! The magician's gift, thatrevives the dead — that animates the dust of forgottengraves, is not in the author's skill, it is inthe heart of the reader !Still vainly seeking the eyes of lone, as halfdowncast, half averted, they shunned his own,the Athenian, in a low and soft voice, thus expressedthe feelings inspired by happier thoughtsthan those which had coloured the song of Nydia.instil ©OSS'© ©IF ©ILi^W©WS.1.As the bark floated on o'er the summer-lit sea,Floats my heart o'er the deeps of its passion for thee ;All lost in the space, without terror it glides,For, bright with thy soul is the face of the tides.POMPEII. 25Now heaving, now hush'd, is that passionate oceanAs it catches thy smile, or thy sighs ;And the twin-stars* that shine on the wanderer'sdevotion,Its guide and its god — are thine eyes !2.The bark may go down, should the cloud sweepabove,For its being is bound to the light of thy love.As thy faith and thy smile are its life and its joy,So thy frown or thy change are the storms thatdestroy.Ah ! sweeter to sink while the sky is serene,If time hath a change for thy heart IIf to live be to weep over what thou hast been,Let me die while I know what thou art !As the last words of the song trembled over thesea, lone raised her looks, they met those of herlover. Happy Nydia ! — happy in thy affliction,In allusion to the Dioscuri, or twin-stars, the guardian deityof the seaman.26 THE LAST DAYS OFthat thou couldst not see that fascinated andcharmed gaze, that said so much — that made theeye, the voice of the soul — that promised the impossibilityof change !But, though the Thessahan coukl not detect thatgaze, she divined its meaning by their silence — bytheir sighs. She pressed her hands tightly acrossher breast, as if to keep down its bitter and jealousthoughts; and then she hastened to speak — for thatsilence was intolerable to her.After all, O Glaucus !"" said she, " there isnothing very mirthful in your strain .'*''''Yet I meant it to be so, when I took up thylyre, pretty one. Perhaps happiness will not permitus to be mirthful."How strange is it !" said lone, changing aconversation that oppressed her while it charmed ;that for the last several days yonder cloud hashung motionless over Vesuvius, yet not indeedmotionless, for sometimes it changes its form ; and)how methinks it looks like some vast giant, Withan arm outstretched over the city. Dost thou seethelikeness — or is it only to my fancy ?"POMPEII. 27Fair lone ! I see it also. It is astonishing jdistinct. The giant seems seated on the brow oithe mountain, the different shades of the cicadabody forth a white and sweeping robe over its vastbreast and limbs ; it seems to gaze with a steadyface upon the city below, to point with one hand,as thou sayest, over its glittering streets, and toraise the other (dost thou note it ?) towards thehigher heaven. It is like the ghost of some hut^eTitan brooding over the beautiful world he lost ;sorrowful for the past — yet with something ofmenace for the future."Could that mountain have any connection vvitiithe last night's earthquake ? They say that agesago, almost in the earliest era of tradition, it gaveforth fires as etna still. Perhaps the flames yetlurk and dart beneath."It is possible," said Glaucus, musingly.Thou sayest thou art slow to believe in magic?" said Nydia, suddenly. " I have heard that apotent witch dwells amongst the scorched cavernsof the mountain, and yon cloud may be the dimshadow of the demon she confers with."c 228 THE LAST DAYS OFThou art full of the romance of thy nativeThessaly," said Glaucus, " and a strange mixtureof sense and all conflicting superstitions."We are ever superstitious in the dark," repliedNydia. " Tell me," she added, after a slightpause, " tell me, O Glaucus ! do all that arebeautiful resemble each other ; they say you arebeautiful, and lone also. Are your faces then thesame .'' I fancy not, yet it ought to be so !"Fancy no such grievous M'rong to lone,"answered Glaucus, laughing. " But we do not,alas ! resemble each other as the homely and thebeautiful sometimes do. lovers hair is dark, minelight ; lone's eyes are — what colour, lone, I cannotsee, turn them to me .'' Oh, are they black ? No,they are too soft. Are they blue .'' no, they aret(»o dec) ; they change with every ray of thesun — 1 know not their colour; but mine, sweetNydia, are grey, and bright only when lone shinesoil them ! Ione's cheek is "I do not understand one word of thy description."interrupted Nydia, peevishly. " I compressoily that you do not resemble each other,and I am glad of it."roMPEJi. 29Why, Nydia ?" said lone.Nydia coloured slightly. " Because,''"' she re-plied coolly, " I have always imagined you underdifferent forms, and one likes to know one isright."And what hast thou imagined Glaucus to resemble?"" asked lone, softly.Music !" replied Nydia, looking down.Thou art right," thought lone.And what likeness hast thou ascribed tolone ?"I cannot tell yet," answered the blind girl ;I have not yet known her long enough to find ashape and sign for my guesses."I will tell thee, then," said Glaucus, passionately; " she is like the sun that warms — like theAvave that refreshes."The sun sometimes scorches, and the wavesometimes drowns," answered Nydia.Take then these roses," said Glaucus, " lettheir fragrance suggest to thee lone."Alas, the roses will fade !" said the Neapolitan,archly.Thus conversing they wore away the hours,30 THE LAST DAYS OFthe lovers conscious only of the brightness andsmiles of love ; the blind girl feeding only its darkness— its tortures; — the fierceness of jealousy andits woe !And now, as they drifted on, Glaucus once moreresumed the lyre, and woke its strings with acareless hand to a strain, so wildly and gladlybeautiful, that even Nydia was aroused from herreverie, and uttered a cry of admiration.Thou seest, my child's"' cried Glaucus, " thatT can yet redeem the character of love's music,and that I was wrong in saying happiness couldnot be gay. Listen, Nydia ! listen, dear lone !and hear1.Like a Star in the seas above,Like a Dream to the waves of sleep — -Up up THE INCARNATE LOVEShe rose from the charmed deep !And over the Cyprian IsleThe skies shed their silent smile ;• Suggested by a ]picture of A'^eniis rising from the sea, takenfrom Pompeii, and now in the museum at Naples.Pompeii. uplandthe Forest's green heart was rifeWith the stir of the gushing Hfe —The Hfe that had leapt to birth,In the veins of the happy earth !Hail ! oh, hail !The dimmest sea-cave below thee,The farthest sky-arch above,In their innermost stillness know thee,Hurrah ! for the Birth of Love !Gale I soft Gale !Thou com'st on thy silver ringlets,From thy home in the tender west ;*Now fanning her golden ringlets,Now hushed on her heaving breast.And afar on the murmuring sand,The Seasons wait hand in handTo welcome thee, Birth Divine,To the Earth, which is henceforth thine.2.Behold I how she kneels in the shell,Bright pearl in its floating cell !• According to the ancient mythologists, Venus rose from thesei near Cyprus, to which island she was wafted by the Zephyrs.The Seasons waited to welcome her on the sea-shore.32 THE LA!-T DAYS OFBehold ! how the shell's rose-huesThe cheek and the breast of snow,And the delicate limbs suffuseLike a blush, with a bashful glow.Sailing on, slowly sailingO'er the wild water ;All hail ! as the fond Light is hailingHer daughter,All hail !We are thine, all thine evermore,Not a leaf on the laughing shore,Not a wave on the heaving sea,Nor a single sighIn the boundless sky.But is vowed evermore to thee I,Vnd thou, my beloved one — thou,As I gaze on thy soft eyes now,Methinks from their depths I viewThe holy Birth born anew ;POMPEII. 8SThy lids are the gentle cellWhere the young Love blushing lies:See I she breaks from the mystic shell,She comes from thy tender eyes!Hail :— all hail !She comes, as she came from the seaTo my soul as it looks on thee :She comes, she comes .'She comes, as she came from the seaTo my soul as it looks on thee IHail— all hail :Si THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER III.THE CONtiUEGATIOy.Followed Ly Appetites, the Nazarene gainedthe side of the Sarnus ; — that river, which nowhas shrink into a petty stream, then rushed gailyinto the sea, covered with countless vessels, andreflecting on its waves the gardens, the vines, thepalaces, and the temples of Pompeii. From itsmore noisy and frequented hanks, Olinthus directedhis steps to a path which ran amidst a shady vistaof trees, at the distance of a few paces from theriver. This walk was in the evening a favouriteresort of the Pompeians, hut during the heat andbusiness of the day was seldom visited, save hysome groups of playful children, some meditative]poet, or some disputative philosophers. At theside farthest from the river, frequent copses of boxinterspersed the more delicate and evanescent fogS5liege, and these were cut into a thousand quaintshapes, sometimes into the forms of fauns andsatyrs, sometimes into the mimicry of Egyptian pyramids,sometimes into the letters that composedthe name of a popular or eminent citizen. Aliusthe false taste is ecpially ancient as the pure ;and the retired traders of Hackney and Padding-ton,a century ago, were little aware, perhaps, thatin their tortured yews and sculptured box, theyfound their models in the most polished period ofRoman antiquities the gardens of Pompeii, andthe villas of the fastidious Pliny.This walk now, as the noon-day sun shoneperpendicularly through the chequered leaves,was, entirely deserted ; at least no other formsthan those of Olinthus and the priest infringedupon the solitude. They sate themselves on oneof the benches, placed at intervals between thetrees, and facing the faint breeze that came languidlyfrom the river, whose waves danced andsparkled before them ; — a singular and contrastedpair I — the believer in the latest — the priest of themost ancient — worship of the world !Since thou leftst me so abruptly," said Olinthus,36 THE LAST DAYS OFhast thou been happy ? has thy heart foundcontentment under these priestly robes ? hastthou, still yearning for the voice of God, heard itwhisper comfort to thee from the oracles of I sis ?That sigh, that averted countenance, give me theanswer my soul predicted."Alas!" answered Appetites, sadly, " thouseest before thee a wretched and distracted man !From my childhood upward I have idolized thedreams of virtue ; I have envied the holiness ofmen, who, in caves and lonely temples, have beenadmitted to the companionship of beings abovethe world ; my days have been consumed withfeverish and vague desires ; my nights with mockingbut solemn visions. Seduced by the mysticprophecies of an impostor, I have indued theserobes ; — my nature — (I confess it to thee frankly)my nature has revolted at what I have seen andbeen doomed to share in ! Searching after truth,I have become but the minister of falsehoods. Onthe evening in which we last met, I was buoyed byhopes, created by that same impostor, whom I oughtalready to have better kno\A n. I have — no matterno matter ! — suffice it, 1 have added perjury audroMPEii. 37sill to rashness and to sorrow. The veil is novrent for ever from my eyes — I behold a villainwhere I obeyed a demi-god ; the earth darkens inmy sight — I am in the deepest abyss of gloom ;I know not if there be gods above — if we are thethings of chance — if beyond the bounded and melancholypresent, there is annihilation or an hereafter— tell me, then, thy faith ; solve me thesedoubts, if thou hast indeed the power ?""I do not marvel," answered the nazarene, " thatthou hast thus erred, or that thou art thus sceptic.Eighty years ago, there was no assurance tomanof God, or of a certain and definite futurebeyond the grave. New laws are declared tohim who has ears — a heaven, a true Olympus, isrevealed to him who has eyes — heed then, andlisten."And with all the earnestness of a man believingardently himself, and zealous to convert, the Nazarenepoured forth to Appetites the assurances ofscriptural promise. He spoke first of the sufferingsand miracles of Christ — he wept as he spoke;he turned next to the glories of the Saviour's ascension— to the clear predictions of Revelation. He05 THE LAST DAYS OFdescribed that pure and sensual Heaven destinedto the virtuous — those fires and torments that werethe doom of guilt.The doubts Avliicli spring up to the mind oflater reasoners, in the immensity of the sacrificeof God to man, were not such as Avould occur toan early heathen. He had been accustomed tobelieve that the gods had lived upon earth, andtaken upon themselves the forms of men, hadshared in human passions, in human labours, andin human misfortunes. What was the travail ofhis own AlcmfBua's son, whose altars now smokedwith the incense of countless cities, but a toil forthe human race ? Had not the great DorianApollo expiated a mystic sin by descending tothe gave ? Those who were the deities of heavenhad been the lawgivers or benefactors onearth, and gratitude had led to worship. It seemed,therefore, to the heathen, a doctrine neither newnor strange, that Christ had been sent from heaven,that an innnortal had indued mortality, and tastedthe bitterness of death : And the end for which hethus toiled, and thus suffered — how far moreglorious did it seem to Apa'cides than that forPompeii. 89which the deities of old had visited the netherwork], and passed through the gates of death !Was it not worthy of a God, to descend to thesedim valleys, in order to clear np the clouds gatheredover the dark mount beyond — to satisfy the doubtsof sages — to convert speculation into certainty —by example to point out the rules of life — by revelation,to solve the enigma of the grave — and toprove that the soul did not yearn in vain, when itdreamed of an immortality? In this last was thegreat argument of those lowly men destined toconvert the earth. As nothing is more flatteringto the pride and the hopes of man, than the beliefin a future state, so nothing could be more vagueand confused than the notions of the heathensages upon that mystic subject.Appetites had already learned that the faith ofthe philosophers was not that of the herd ; thatif they secretly professed a creed in some divinerpower, it was not the creed which they thoughtit wise to impart to the community. He had alreadylearned, that even the priest ridiculed whathe preached to the people — that the notions of thefe^v and the many were never united. But, inTHE LAST DAYS OFthis new faith, it seemed to him that philosopher,priest, and people, the expounders of the religionand its followers, were alike accordant : they didnot speculate and debate upon immortality, theyspake of it as a thing certain, and assured ; themagnificence of the promise dazzled him — its consolationssoothed. For the Christian faith made itsearly converts among sinners ! many of its fathersand its martyrs were those who had felt thebitterness of vice, and who were therefore nolonger tempted by its false aspect from the pathsof an austere and uncompromising virtue. All theassurances of this healing faith invited to repentance— they were peculiarly adapted to the bruisedand sore of spirit ; the very remorse which Ascitesfelt for his late excesses, made him inclineto one who found holiness in that remorse, andwho whispered of the joy in heaven over onesinner that repented.Come," said the Nazarene, as he perceivedthe effect he had produced, " come to the humblehall in which we meet — a select and a chosen few;listen there to our prayers; note the sincerity ofour repentant tears ; mingle in our simple sacrificePOMPEII. 41not of victims, nor of garlands, but offered bywhite-robed thoughts upon the altar of the heart :the flowers that we lay there are imperishable —they bloom over us when we are no more ; nay,they accompany us beyond the grave, they springlip beneath our feet in heaven, they delight uswith an eternal odour, for they are of the soul, theypartake its nature ; these offerings are temptationsovercome, and sins repented. Come, oh come ! losenot another moment ; prepare already for the great,the awful journey, from darkness to light, fromsorrow to bliss, from corruption to immortality!This is the day of the Lord the Sun, a day that wehave set apart for our devotions. Though wemeet usually at night, yet some amongst us aregathered together even now. What joy, what triumph,will be with us all, if Ave can bring onestray lamb into the sacred fold !"There seemed to Apsecides, so naturally pure ofheart, something ineffably generous and benign inthat spirit of conversion which animated Olinthus —a spirit that found its own bliss in the happiness ofothers — that sought in its wide sociality to makecompanions for eternity. He was touched, soft-theLAST DAYS OFened, and subdued. He-was not in that moodwhich can bear to be left alone ; curiosity, too,mingled with his purer stimulants — he was anxiousto see those rites of which so many dark and contradictoryrumours were afloat. He paused a moment,looked over his garb, thought of Arbaces,shuddered with horror, lifted his eyes to the broadbrow of the Nazarene, intent, anxious, watchfulbut for In's benefit, for his salvation ! He drewhis cloak round him, so as wholly to conceal hisrobes, and said, " Lead on, I follow thee."Olinthus pressed his hand joyfully, and thendescending to the river-side, hailed one of theboats that plyed there constantly ; they entered it,an awning overhead, ^\■hile it sheltered them fromthe sun, screened also their persons from observation: they rapidly skimmed the wave. From oneof the boats that passed them, floated a soft music,and its prow was decorated with flowers — it wasgliding towards the sea.So," said Olinthus sadly, " unconscious andmirthful in their delusions, sail the votaries of luxuryinto the gi-eat ocean of storm and shipwreck ;roMPEii. 43we pass them, silent and unnoticed, to gain theland."Appetites, lifting his eyes, caught through theaperture in the awning a glimpse of the face ofone of the inmates of that gay bark — it was theface of lone. — The lovers were embarked on theexcursion to which we have been made present.The priest sighed, and once more sunk back uponhis seat. They reached the shore where, in thesuburbs, an alley of small and mean houses stretchedtowards the bank ; they dismissed the boat,landed, and Olinthus, preceding the priest, threadedthe labyrinth of lanes, and arrived at last at theclosed door of a habitation somewhat larger thanits neighbours. He knocked thrice — the doorwas opened and closed again, as Appetites followedhis guide across the threshold.They passed a deserted atrium, and gained aninner chamber of moderate size, which, when thedoor was closed, received its only light from asmall window cut over the door itself. But, haltingat the threshold of this chamber, and knockingat the door, Olinthus said, " Peace be with you !''44 THE LAST DAYS OPa voice from within returned, "Peace with whom?^'The faithful !'" answered Olynthus, and the dooropened ; twelve or fourteen persons were sitting inasemicircle, silent, and seemingly absorbed inthought, and opposite to a crucifix rudely carved inwood.They lifted up their eyes when Olinthus entered,without speaking ; the Nazarene himself, before heaccosted them, knelt suddenly down, and by hismoving lips, and his eyes fixed Steadfastly on thecrucifix, Appetites saw that he prayed inly. Thisrite performed, Olinthus turned to the congregation— " Men and brethren"' said he, "start not tobehold amongst you a priest of Isis ; he hath sojournedwith the Wind, but the spirit hath fallenon him — he desires to see, to hear, and to understands"""Let him"" said one of the assembly; and Apa?-cites beheld in the speaker a man still youngerthan himself, of a countenance equally worn andpallid, of an eye which equally spoke of the restlessand fiery operations of a Working mind."Let him'' repeated a second voice, and he whothus spoke was in the prime of manhood ; hispoMi'Eir. 4-5bronzed skin and Asiatic features bespoke bini ason of Syria — he had been a robber in his youth."Let him," said a third voice; and the priest,again turning to regard the speaker, saw an othmanwith a long grey beard, whom he recognizedas a slave to the wealthy Doomed.Let him," repeated simultaneously the rest —men who, with two exceptions, were evidently ofthe inferior rank. Li these exceptions, Appetitesnoted an officer of the guard, and an Alexandrianmerchant.We do not"" recommenced Olintlms — " we donot bind you to secrecy ; we impose on you nooaths, (as some of our weaker brethren would do,)not to betray us. It is true, indeed, that there isno absolute law against us, but the multitude, moresavage than their rulers, thirst for our lives. So, myfriends, when Pilate would have hesitated, it wasthe people who shouted, ' Christ to the cross I' Butwe bind you not to our safety — no ! Betray us tothe crowd — impeach, calumniate, malign us if youwill : — we are above death, we should walk cheerfullyto the den of the lion, or the rack of the torturer— we can trample down the darkness of the46 THE LAST DAYS OFgrave, and ^^■llat is death to a criminal is eternityto the Christian'A low and applauding murmur ran through theassembly.*' Thou comest amongst us an examiner, mayestthou remain a convert ! Our religion ? you beholdit ! Yon cross our sole image, yon scroll themysteries of our Care and Eleusis ! Our morality ?it is in our lives < — sinners we all have been; whonow can accuse us of a crime ? we have baptized ourselvesfrom the Past. Think not that this is of us,it is of God. Approach, Melons"" beckoning to theold slave who had spoken third for the admissionof Appetites, " thou art the sole man amongst us\\-ho is not free. But in heaven, the last shall befirst : so with us. Unfold your scroll, read, andexplain."Useless Avould it be for us to accompany the lectureof Medon, or the comments of the congregation.Familiar now are those doctrines thenstrange and new. Eighteen centuries have left uslittle to expound upon the lore of scripture ur thelife of Christ. To us, too, there would seemlittle congenial in the doubts that occurred to aPOMPEII. 47heathen priest, and httlc k'arneil in the answered"*they received from men, uneducated, rude, andsimple, possessing only the knowledge that theywere greater than they seemed.There was one thing that greatly touched theNeapolitan ; when the lecture was concluded, theyheard a very gentle knock at the door ; the passwordwas given, and replied to ; the door opened,and two young children, the eldest of whom mighthave told its seventh year, entered timidly ; theywere the children of the master of the house, thatdark and hardy Syrian, whose youth had beenspent in pillage and bloodshed. The eldest of thecongregation (it Alas that old slave) opened tothem his arms; they fled to the shelter — theycrept to his breast — and his hard features smiledas he caressed them. And then these bold and ferventmen, nursed in vicissitude, beaten by therough winds of life — men of mailed and imperviousfortitude, ready to affront a world, prepared fortorment and armed for death — men, who presentedall imaginable contrast to the weak nerves, thelight hearts, the tender fragility of childhood ;crowded round the infants, smoothing their rugsTHE LAST DAYS OFget brows, and composing their bearded lips tokindly and fostering smiles : and then the oldman opened the scroll, and he taught the infantsto repeat after him that beautiful prayer, which westill dedicate to the Lord, and still teach to ourchildren ; and then he told them, in simple phrase,of God's love to the young, and how not a sparrowfalls but His eye sees it. This lovely custom ofinfant initiation was long cherished by the earlychurch, in memory of the words which said.Suffer the little children to come unto me, andforbid them not ;" and was perhaps the origin ofthe superstitious calumny which ascribed to theNazarenes the crime which the Nazarene, when victorious,attributed to the Jew, viz : the decoyingchildren to hideous rites, at which they were secretlyimmolated.And the stern paternal penitent seemed to feelin the innocence of his children a return into earlylife — life ere yet it sinned : he followed the motionof their young lips with an earnest gaze ; he smiled,as they repeated, with hushed and reverent looks,the holy words ; and when the lesson was done,and they ran, released, and gladly to his knee, heroMPEii. 49clasped them to his breast, kissed them again andagain, and tears flowed fast down his cheek — tears,of Which it woukl have been impossible to tracethe som'ce, so mingled they were with joy andsorrow, penitence and hope, remorse for himselfand love for them !Something, I say, there was in this scene whichpeculiarly affected Appetites ; and, in truth, it isdifficult to conceive a ceremony more appropriateto the Religion of Benevolence, more appealing tothe household and every-day affections, striking amore sensitive chord in the human breast.It was at this time that an inner door openedgently, and a very old man entered the chamber,leaning on a staff. At his presence, the wholecongregation rose ; there was an expression ofdeep affectionate respect upon every countenance;and Appetites, gazing on his countenance, feltattracted towards him by an irresistible sympathy.No man ever looked upon that face without love ;for there had dwelt the smile of the Deity, theIncarnation of divinest Love ; — and the glory of thesmile had never past away !My children, God be with you !" said the oldVOL. II. D50 THE LAST DAYS OFman, stretching bis arms ; aud as he spoke, theinfants ran to his knee. He sate down, and theynestled fondling to his bosom. It was beautifulto see ! that mingling of the extremes of life — therivers gushing from their early source — the majesticstream gliding to the ocean of eternity. As thelight of declining day seems to mingle earth andheaven, making the outline of each scarce visible,and blending the harsh mountain-tops with thesky ; even so did the smile of that benign old ageappear to hallow the aspect of those around, to blendtogether the strong distinctions of varying years,and to diffuse over infancy and manhood the lightof that heaven into which it must so soon vanishand be lost.Father," said Olinthus, " thou on whose formthe miracle of the Redeemer worked ; thou whowert snatched from the grave to become theliving witness of His mercy and His power ;behold ! a stranger in our meeting — a new Lambgathered to the fold !"Let me bless him," said the old man ; thethrong gave way. Apa?cides approached him asbv an instinct ; he fell on his knees before him —POMPEII. 51the old man laid his hand on the priest's head, andblessed him, but not aloud. As his lips moved,his eyes were upturned, and tears — those tears thatgood men only shed in the hope of happiness toanother — flowed fast down his cheeks.The children were on either side of the convert ;his heart was as theirs — he had become as one ofthem — to enter into the kingdom of heaven Id252 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER IV.THE STREAM OF LOVE RUNS ON. — WHITHER?Days are like years in the love of the young,when no bar, no obstacle, is between their heartswhen the sun shines, and the course runs smooth^^'hen their love is prosperous and confest.Tone no longer concealed from Glaucus the attachmentshe felt for him, and their talk now was onlyof their love. Over the rapture of the present,the hopes of the future glowed, like the heaven,above the gardens of spring. They went in theirtrustful thoughts far down the stream of time —they laid out the chart of their destiny to come —they suffered the light of to-day to suffuse themorrow. In the youth of their hearts, it seemedas if care, and cluuig(\ and death, were as thingsunknown. Perhaps they loved each other thePOMPEII. 53more, because the condition of the work left toGlaucus no aim and no wish but love; — becausethe distractions common in free states to menesaffection, existed not for the Athenian — becausehis country wooed him not to the bustle of civillife — because ambition furnished no counterpoiseto love : And, therefore, over their schemes andtheir projects, love only reigned. In the iron age,they imagined themselves of the golden, doomedonly to live and to love.To the superficial observer who interests himselfonly in characters strongly marked and broadlycoloured, both the lovers may seem of too slightand commonplace a mould : in the delineation ofcharacters purposely subdued, the reader sometimesimagines that there is a want of character ;perhaps, indeed, I wrong the real nature of thesetwo lovers, by not painting more impressively theirstronger individuality. But in dwelling so muchon their bright and birdlike existence, I am influencedalmost insensibly by the forethought ofthe changes that await them, and for which theywere so ill prepared. It was this very softnessand gaiety of life that contrasted most strongly54 THE LAST DAYS OFthe vicissitudes of their coming fate. For the oakwithout fruit or blossom, whose hard and ruggedheart is fitted for the storm, there is less fear thanfor the delicate branches of the myrtle, and thelaughing clusters of the vine.They had now entered far upon August — thenext month their marriage was fixed, and thethreshold of Glaucus was already wreathed withgarlands ; and nightly, by the door of lone, hepoured forth the rich libations. He existed nolonger for his gay companions ; he was ever withlone. In the mornings they beguiled the sunwith music ; in the evenings they forsook thecrowded haunts of the gay, for excursions onthe water, or along the fertile and vine-clad plainsthat lay beneath the fatal mount of Vesuvius.The earth shook no more ; the lively Pompeiansforgot even that there had gone forth so terrible awarning of their approaching doom. Glaucus imaginedthat convulsion, in the vanity of his heathenreligion, an especial interposition of the gods,less in behalf of his own safety, than that of lone. Heoffered up the sacrifices of gratitude at the templesof his faith ; and even the altar of Isis was coveredPOMPEII. 55with his votive garlands : — as to the prodigy of theanimated marble, he blushed at the effect it hadproduced on him. He believed it, indeed, to havebeen wrought by the magic of man ; but the resultconvinced him, that it betokened not the angerof a goddess.Of Arbaces, they heard only that he still lived ;stretched on the bed of suffering, he recoveredslowly from the effect of the shock he had sustained— he left the lovers unmolested — but it was onlyto brood over the hour and the method of revenge.Alike in their mornings at the house of lone,and in their evening excursions, Nydia was usuallytheir constant, and often their sole, companion.They did not guess the secret fires which consumedher : — the abrupt freedom with which shemingled in their conversation — her capriciousand often her peevish moods, found ready indulgencein the recollection of the service they owedher, and their compassion for her affliction. Theyfelt, perhaps, the greater and more affectionateinterest for her, from the very strangeness andwaywardness of her nature, her singular alternationsof passion and softness — the mixture of ignorance66 THE LAST DAYS OFand genius — of delicacy and rudeness — of the quickhumours of the child, and the proud calmness ofthe woman. Although she refused to accept offreedom, she was constantly suffered to be free ;she went where she listed ; no curb was puteither on her words or actions; they felt for oneso darkly fated, and so susceptible of everywound, the same pitying and compliant indulgencethe mother feels for a spoiled and sicklychild, — dreading to impose authority, even wherethey imagined it for her benefit. She availedherself of this licence, by refusing the companionshipof the slave, whom they wished to attendher. With the slender staff by which she guidedher steps, she went now, as in her former unprotectedstate, along the populous streets ; it wasalmost miraculous to perceive how quickly andhow dexterously she threaded every crowd, avoidedevery danger, and could find her benightedway through the most intricate windings of thecity. But her chief delight was still in visitingthe few feet of ground which made the garden ofGlaucus; — in tending the flowers that at least repayedher love. Sometimes she entered the chnm-POMPEII. 57ber where he sat, and sought a conversation,which she nearly always broke off" abruptly — forconversation with Glaucus only tended to onesubject — lone ; and that name from his lips inflictedagony upon her. Often she bitterly repentedthe service she had rendered to lone ; oftenshe said inly, " If she had fallen, Glaucus couldhave loved her no longer !" and then dark andfearful thoughts crept into her breast.She had not experienced fully the trials thatwere in store for her, when she had been thusgenerous. She had never been present when Glaucusand lone were together ; she had never heard thatvoice so kind to her so much softer to another.The shock that crushed her heart w^tli the tidingsthat Glaucus loved, had at first only saddened andbenumbed; — by degrees, jealousy took a wilderand fiercer shape; it partook of hatred — it whisperedrevenge. As you see the wind only agitatethe green leaf upon the bough, Awhile theleaf which has lain withered and seared on theground, bruised and trampled upon, till the sapand life are gone, is suddenly whirled aloft — nowhere— now there — without stay — and without rest;D 558 THE LAST DAYS OFSO the love which visits the happy and thehopeful, hath hut freshness on its wings ; its violenceis but sportive : But the heart that hathfallen from the green things of life, that is withouthope, that hath no summer in its fibres, is tornand Whirled by the same wind that but caressesits brethren ; — it hath no bough to cling to — it isdashed from path to path — till the winds fall, andit is crushed into the mire for ever.The friendless childhood of Nydia had hardenedprematurely her character ; perhaps, the heatedscenes of profligacy through which she had passed,seemingly unscathed, had ripened her passions,though they had not sullied her purity. The orgiesof Turbo might only have disgusted, the banquets ofthe Egyptian might only have terrified, at the moment; but, perhaps, those winds of pollution left seedsin the breast over Which they passed so lightly. Asdarkness too favours the imagination, so, perhaps,her very blindness contributed to feed A\ith Avildand delirious visions the love of the unfortunategirl. The voice of Glaucus had been the fii-st thathad sounded musically to her ear; his kindnessmade a deep impression upon her mind ; when hePOMPEII. 59had left Pompeii iu the former year, she had treasuredup in her heart every word he had uttered;and when any one told her, that this friend andpatron of the poor flower girl was the most brilliantand the most graceful of the young revellersof Pompeii, she had felt a pleasing pride in nursinghis recollection. Even the task which sheimposed upon herself, of tending his flowers, servedto keep him in her mind; she associated him withallthat was most charming to her impressions ; andwhen she had refused to express what image shefancied lone to resemble, it was partly, perhaps,that whatever was bright and soft in nature shehad already combined with the thought of Glaucus.If any of my readers ever loved at an age whichthey would now smile to remember — an age inwhich fancy forestalled the reason ; let them saywhether that love, among all its strange and complicateddelicacies, was not above all other andlater passions susceptible of jealousy .'' 1 seeknot here the cause ; I know that it is commonlythe fact.When Glaucus returned to Pompeii, Nydiahad told another year of life ; that year, with itsTHE LAST DAYS OFsorrows, its loneliness, its trials, had greatlydeveloped her mind and heart ; and when theAthenian drew her unconsciously to his breast,deeming her still in soul as in years, a child —when he kissed her smooth cheek, and wound hisarm round her trembling frame, Nydia felt suddenly,and as by revelation, that those feelingsshe had long and innocently cherished, were oflove. Doomed to be rescued from tyranny byGlaucus — doomed to take shelter under his roof —doomed to breathe, but for so brief a time, the sameair, and doomed, in the first rush of a thousandhappy, grateful, delicious sentiments of an overflowingheart, to hear that he loved another ; tobe commissioned to that other, the messenger,the minister ; to feel all at once that utter nothingnesswhich she was — which she ever mustbe, but which, till then, her young mind had nottaught her, — that utter nothingness to him whowas all to her ; what wonder, that in her wildand passionate soul, all the elements jarred discordant; that if love reigned over the whole, itwas not the love which is born of the more sacredPOMPEII. 61and soft emotions. Sometimes she dreaded onlylest Glaucus should discover her secret ; sometimesshe felt indignant that it was not suspected ;it was a sign of contempt — could he imaginethat she presumed so far ? Her feelings to loneebbed and flowed with every hour ; now sheloved her because he did ; now she hated herfor the same cause. There were moments whenshe could have murdered her unconscious mistress;moments when she could have laid down life forher. These fierce and tremulous alternations ofpassion were too severe to be borne long. Herhealth gave way, though she felt it not — her cheekpaled — her step grew feebler — tears came to hereyes more often, and relieved her less.One morning, when she repaired to her usual taskin the garden of the Athenian, she found Glaucusunder the columns of the peristyle, with a merchantof the town; he was selecting jewels for his destinedbride. He had already fitted up her apartment;the jewels he bought that day were placed alsowithin it — they were never fated to grace thefair form of lone, they may be seen at this dayTHE LAST DAYS OFamong the disinterred treasures of Pompeii, in thechambers of the studio at Naples.*Come hither, Nydia, put down thy vase, andcome hither. Thou must take this chain from me —stay — there I have put it on — There, Services,does it not become her ?""Wonderfully!" answered the jeweller — torjewellers were lyell-bred and flattering men, evenat that day. — " But Avhen these ear-rings glitterin the ears of the noble lone, then, by Bacchus ! youwill see whether my art adds anything to beauty."lone ?'"'' repeated Nydia, who had hithertoacknowledged by smiles and blushes the gift ofGlaucus.Yes," replied the Athenian, carelessly toyingwith the gems ; " I am choosing a present for lone,but there are none worthy of her."He was startled as he spoke by an abrupt gestureof Nydia ; she tore the chain violently fromher neck, and dashed it on the ground.How is this? AVhat, Nydia, dost thou not likethe bauble ? art thou offended ?"Several bracelets, chains, and jewels, were found in thehouse.POMPEII. 63You treat me ever as a slave and as a child,"replied the Tressilian, with a breast heaving withill-suppressed sobs, and she turned hastily away tothe opposite corner of the garden.Glaucus did not attempt to follow, or to soothe;he was offended ; he continued to examine thejewels and to comment on their fashion — to objectto this and to praise that, and finally to be talkedby the merchant into buying all ; the safest planfor a lover, and one that any one will do right toadopt, provided — always that he can obtain an lone !When he had completed his purchase, and dismissedthe jeweller, he retired into his chamber,dressed, mounted his chariot, and went to lone. Hethought no more of the blind girl, or her offence;he had forgotten both the one and the other.He spent the forenoon with his beautiful Neapolitan,repaired thence to the baths, supped (if, aswe have said before, we can justly so translate thethreeo''clockc6e7jaof the Romans) alone, and abroad,I'or Pompeii had its restaurateurs : — and returninghome to change his dress ere he again repaired to thehouse of lone, he passed the peristyle, but with the64f THE LAST DAYS OFabsorbed reverie and absent eyesof a man in love, anddid not note the form of the poor blind girl, bendingexactly in the same place where he had left her.But though lie saw her not, her ear recognized atonce the sound of his step. She had been countingthe moments to his return. He had scarcelyentered his favourite chamber which opened on theperistyle, and seated himself musingly on hiscouch, when he felt his robe timorously touched,and turning he beheld Nydia kneeling before him,and holding up to him a handful of flowers — a gentleand an appropriate peace offering ; — her eyes,darkly upheld to his own, streamed with tears.I have offended thee," said she, sobbing, " andfor the first time. I would die rather than causethee a moment's pain — say that thou wilt forgiveme. See ! I have taken up the chain, I have put iton ; I will never part from it, it is thy gift."My dear Nydia," returned Glaucus, and raisingher, he kissed her forehead ; " think of it nomore ! But why, my child, wert thou so suddenlyangry ; I could not divine the cause !"'•Do not ask !" said she, colouring violently ; " Iam a thing full of faults and humours ; you know 1POMPEII. 65am but a child, you say so often ; is it from achild that you can expect a reason for everyfolly ?"But, prettiest, you will soon be a child nomore ; and if you would have us treat you as awoman, you must learn to govern these singularimpulses and gales of passion. Think not I chide ;no, it is for your happiness only I speak."It is true," said Nydia, " I must learn togovern myself; I must hide, I must suppress, myheart. This is a woman's task and duty ; methinksher virtue is hypocrisy."Self-control is not deceit, my Nydia," returnedthe Athenian, " and that is the virtue necessaryalike to man and to woman; it is the truesenatorial toga, the badge of the dignity it covers."Self-control, self-control ! Well, well, whatyou say is right ! When I listen to you, Glaucus,my wildest thoughts grow calm and sweet, anda delicious serenity falls over me. Advise, ah! guideme ever, my preserver !"Thy affectionate heart will be thy best guide,Nydia, when thou hast learned to regulate itsfeelings."6G THE LAST DAYS OFAll I that will be never," sighed Nydia, wipinga\'v^ay her tears.Say not so, the first effort is the only difficult one'I have made many first efforts," answeredNydia, innocently. " But you, my mentor, do youfind it so easy to controul yourself? Can you conceal— can you even regulate — your love for lone?"Love, dear Nydia, ah ! that is (suite anothermatter," answered the young preceptor.I thought so !" returned Nydia, with a melancholysmile. " Glaucus, wilt thou take my poorflowers? Do with them as thou wilt — thou canstgive them to lone, if thou wilt," added she with alittle hesitation.Nay, Nydia," answered Glaucus kindly, diviningsomething of jealousy in her language, thoughhe imagined it only the jealousy of a vain and susceptiblechild ; " I will not give thy pretty flowersto any one. Sit here and weave them into a garland; I will wear it this night ; it is not the firstthose delicate fingers have woven for me."The poor girl delightedly sat down beside Glaucus.She drew from her girdle a ball of the many-colouredthreads, or rather slender ribands, used inPOMPEII. 67the weaving of garlands, and which (for it washerprofessional occupation) she carried constantlywith her, and began quickly and gracefully tocommence her task. Upon her young cheeks thetears were already dried, a faint but happy smileplayed round her lips; — childlike indeed, she wassensible only of the joy of the present hour :she was reconciled to Glaucus : he had forgivenher — she was beside him — he played caressinglywith her silken hair — his breath fanned her cheek,lone, the cruel lone, was not by — none otherdemanded, divided, his care. Yes, she was happyand forgetful ; it was one of the few moments inher brief and troubled life that it was sweet totreasure, to recall. As the butterfly, allured bythe winter sun, basks for a little while in the suddenlight, ere yet the wind awakes and the frostcomes on, which shall blast it before the eve, — sherested beneath a beam, which, by contrast withthe wonted skies, was not chilling ; — and the instinctwhich should have warned her of its briefness,bade her only gladden in its smile.Thou hast beautiful locks," said Glaucus.They were once, I ween well, a mother's delight."G8 THE LAST DAYS OFNydia sighed ; it would seem that she had notbeen born a slave ; but she ever shunned the mentionof her parentage, and whether obscure or noble, certainit is that her birth was never known by herbenefactors, or by any one in those distant shores,even to the last. The child of sorrow and of mystery,she came and went as some bird that entersour chamber for a moment ; we see it flutter whilebefore us, we know not whence it flew or to whatregion it escapes.Nydia sighed, and after a short pause, withoutanswering the remark, said :But do I weave too many roses in thy wreath,Glaucus ? they tell me it is thy favourite flower''And ever favoured, my Nydia, be it by thosewho have the soul of poetry — it is the flower of love,of festivals ; it is also the flower we dedicate toSilence and to Death ; it blooms on our brows inlife, while life be worth the having ; it is scatteredabove our sepulchre when we are no more."Ah ! would," said Nydia, " instead of thisperishable wreath, that I could take thy web fromthe hand of the Fates, and insert the roses therePretty one ! thy wish is worthy of a voice soPOMPEII. 69attuned to song, it is uttered in the spirit of sony-andwhatever my doom, I thank thee."Whatever thy doom ! is it not already destinedto all things bright and fair ? My wish was vain.The Fates will be as tender to thee as I should."It might not be so, Nydia, were it not for love !While youth lasts, I may forget my country forawhile. But what Athenian, in his graver manhood,can think of Athens as she was, and be contentedthat he is happy, while she is fallen — fallen,and for ever."And why for ever ?""As ashes cannot be rekindled — as love oncedead never can revive, so freedom departed from apeople is never regained. But talk we not of thesematters unsuited to thee .''"To me, oh ! thou arrest. I, too, have my sighsfor Greece ; my cradle was rocked at the feet ofOlympus ; the gods have left the mountain, buttheir traces may be seen — seen in the hearts of theirworshippers, seen in the beauty of their clime ;they tell me it is beautiful, and / have felt its airs,to which even these are harsh — its smi, to whichthese skies are chill. Oh ! talk to me of Greece !Poor fool that I am, I can comprehend thee! and70 THE LAST DAYS OFmethinks, had I yet lingered on those shores, hadI been a Grecian maid, whose happy fate it wasto love and to be loved, I myself could havearmed my lover for another Marathon, a new plataea.Yes, the hand that now weaves the roses,should have woven thee the olive crown '"If such a day could come !" said Glaucus, catchingthe enthusiasm of the blind Thessalian, andhalf rising. — " But no ! the sun has set, and thenight only bids us be forgetful, — and in forgetfulnessbe gay ; — weave still the roses !"But it was with a melancholy tone of forcedgaiety that the Athenian uttered the last words, andsinking into a gloomy reverie, he was only wakenedfrom it, a few minutes afterwards, by the voiceof Nydia, as she sang in a low tone the followingwords which he had once taught her.1.Who will assume the baysThat the hero wore?Wreaths on the Tomb of DaysGone evermore !POMPEII. 71Who shall disturb the Brave,Or one leaf on their holy grave ?The laurel is vowed to them,Leave the bay on its sacred stem IBut this, the rose, the fading rose,Alike for slave and freeman grows I2.If Memory sits beside the deadWith tombs her only treasure ;If Hope is lost and Freedom fled.The more excuse for Pleasure.Come, weave the wreath, the roses weave,The rose at least is ours ;To feeble hearts our fathers leave,In pitying scorn, the flowers !3.On the summit, worn and hoary,Of Phyle's solemn hill,The tramp of the brave is still !And still in the saddening Mart,The pulse of that mighty HeartWhose very blood was glory I72 THE LAST DAYS OFGlaucopis forsakes her own,The angry gods forget us,But yet, the blue streams along,Walk the feet of the silver Song.And the night-bird wakes the moon ;And the bees in the blushing noonHaunt the heart of the old Hymettus IWe are fallen, but not forlorn,If something is left to cherish ;As Love was the earliest born,So Love is the last to perish.4.Wreath then the roses, wreath !The Beautiful still is ours,While the stream shall flow, and the sky shall glow.The Beautiful still is ours !Whatever is fair, or soft, or bright.In the lap of day or the arms of night,Whispers our soul of Greece — of Greece,And hushes our care with a voice of peace.Wreath then the roses, wreath IThey tell me of earlier hours.And I hear the heart of my Country breatheI'Vom the lips of the Stranger's flowers.POMPEII,CHAPTER V.Lydia ENCOUNTERS JULIA.— INTERVIEW OF THE HEATHENSISTER AND CONVERTED BROTHER. AN ATHENIANSNOTION OF CHRISTIANITY.What happiness to lone ! Avliat bliss to beever by the side of Glaucus, to hear his voice —and she too can see him VSuch was the soliloquy of the blind girl, as shewalked alone and at twilight to the house of hernew mistress, whither Glaucus had already precededher. Suddenly she was interrupted in herfond thoughts by a female voice —Blind flower girl, whither goes thou ? there isno panier under thine arm ; hast thou sold all thyflowers .^"The person thus accosting Nydia, was a lady ofa handsome, but a bold and maiden countenance ;it was Julia, the daughter of Diomed. Her veilwas half raised as she spoke ; she was accompaniedVOL. II. E<■* THE LAST DAYS OFby Divorced himself, and by a slave carrying alantern before them — the merchant and hisdaughter Avere returning home from a supper atoneof their neighbours.Dost thou not remember my voice ?" continuedJulia ; " I am the daughter of Diomcd theWealthy."Ah ! forgive me ; yes, I recall the tones ofyour voice. No, noble Julia, I have no flowersto sell !"I heard that thou wert purchased by the beautifulGreek, Glaucus; is that true, pretty slave?"asked Julia.I serve the Neapolitan, lone," replied Nydia,evasively.Ha ! and it is true then — "Come ! come !" interrupted Diomed, with hiscloak up to his mouth, " the night grows cold, Icannot stay here while you prate to that blindgirl ; come, let her follow you home, if you wishto speak to her."Do, child," said Julia, with the air of one notaccustomed to be refused; " I have much to ask ofthee ; come."POMPEII. 7^I cannot this night, it grows late," answeredNydia ; " I must be at home ; I am not free, nobleJulia."What, the meek lone will chide thee ? ay, Idoubt not she is a second Thalestris. But, comethen tomorrow : do remember, I have been thyfriend of old."I will obey thy wishes," answered Nydia —and Diomed again impatiently summoned hisdaughter; she was obliged to proceed, with themain question she had desired to put to Nydiaunasked.Meanwhile, we return to lone. The interval oftime that had elapsed that day between the firstand second visit of Glaucus, had not been toogaily spent ; she had received a visit from herbrother. Since the night he had assisted in savingher from the Egyptian, she had not before seen him.Occupied with his own thoughts — thoughts of soserious and intense a nature, the young priest hadthought little of his sister ; in truth, men perhapsof that fervent order of mind which is everaspiring above earth, are but little prone to theearthlier affections ; and it had been long sinceE 276 THE LAST DAYS OFApecciJes had sought those soft and friendly interchangesof thought, those sweet confidences,which in his earlier youth had bound him tolone, and Which are so natural to that endearingconnexion which existed between them.lone, however, had not ceased to regret hisestrangement ; she attributed it, at present, to theengrossing duties of his severe fraternity. Andoften, amidst all her bright hopes, and her newattachment to her betrothed often Avhen shethought of her brother's brow prematurely furrowed,his unsmiling lip, and bended frame, shesighed to think that the service of the gods couldthrow so deep a shadow over that earth which thegods created.But this day, when he visited her, there was astrange calmness on his features, a more quiet andself-possessed expression in his sunken eyes thanshe had marked for years. This apparent improvementwas but momentary — it :vas a falsecalm, which the least breeze could ruffle.May the gods bless thee, my brother .'"" saidshe, embracing him.POMPEII. 77The gods ! Speak not thus vaguely; perchancethere is but 07ie God !""My brother !"What if the sublime faith of the Nazarene betrue ? What if God be a monarch — One — Indivisible— Alone ? What if these numerous — countlessdeities, whose altars fill the earth, be but evildemons, seeking to Avean us from the true creed ?This may be the case, lone !''Alas ! can we believe it ? or if we believed,would it not be a melancholy faith ?" answeredthe Neapolitan. "What! all this beautiful worldmade only human ! — the mountain disenchanted ofit Oi'ead — the waters of their Nymph — that beautifulprodigality of faith, which makes everythingdivine, consecrating the meanest flowers, bearing celestialwhispers in the faintest breeze — wouldst thoudeny this, and make the earth mere dust andclay ? No, Apsecides ; all that is brightest in ourhearts, is that very credulity Which peoples theuniverse With gods."lone answered as a believer in the poesy of theold mythology would answer. We may judge by78 THE LAST DAYS OFthat reply how obstinate and hard the contestwhich Christianity had to endure among the heathens.The Graceful Superstition was never silent ;every, the most household, action of their lives wasentwined with it — it was a portion of life itself,as the flowers are a part of the thyrsus. At everyincident they recurred to a god, every cup of winewas prefaced by a libation ; the very garlands ontheir thresholds were dedicated to some divinity;their ancestors themselves, made holy, presided asLitres over their hearth and hall. So abundant wasbelief with them, that in their own climes, at thishour, idolatry has never thoroughly been outrooted; it changes but its objects of worship ; itappeals to innumerable saints where once it resortedto divinities ; and it pours its crowds, inlistening reverence, to oracles at the shrines ofSt. Aquarius or St. Dominic, instead of to thoseof Isis or Apollo.But these superstitions were not to the earlyChristians the object of contempt so much as ofhorror. They did not believe with the quietscepticism of the heathen philosopher, that thegods were inventions of the priests, nor even ^^•ithPOMPEII. 79the vulgar, that, according to the dim light of history,they had been mortals like themselves. Theyimagined the heathen divinities to be evil spirits —they transplanted to Italy and to Greece the gloomydemons of India and the East ; and in Jupiter orinMars they shuddered at the representative ofMoloch or of Satan.*Appetites had not yet adopted formally theChristian faith, but he was already on the brinkof it. He already participated the doctrines ofOlynthus — he already imagined that the lively imaginationsof the heathen were the suggestions ofthe arch enemy of mankind. The innocent andnatural answer of lone made him shudder. Hehastened to reply vehemently, and yet so confusedly,that lone feared for his reason, morethan she dreaded his violence.In Pompeii, a rough sketch' of Pkito delineates that fearfuldeity in the shape we at present ascribe to the Devil, anddecorates him with the paraphernalia of horns and a tail. Butinall probability, it was from the mysterious Pan — the haunterof solitary places — the inspirer of vague and soul-shaking terrorsthat we took the vulgar notion of the outward likeness of thefiend ; it corresponds exactly to the cloven-footed Satan. Andin the lewd and profligate rites of Pan, Christians might wellimagine they traced the deceptions of the Devil.80 THE LAST DAYS OFAll, my brother !" said she, " these hard dutiesof thine have shattered thy very sense. Come tome,Appetites, my brother, my own brother ; giveme thy hand, let me wipe the dear from thy brow ;chide me not now, I understand thee not; thinkonly that lone could not offend thee."lone," said Apjccides, drawing her towardshim and regarding her tenderly, " can I thiiJi thatthis beautiful form, this kind heart, may be destinedto an eternity of torment ?''''Dii melior ! the gods forbid !" said lone, inthe customary form of words by which her contemporariesthought an omen might be averted.The words, and still more the superstition theyimplied, wounded the car of Appetites. He rosemuttering to himself, turned from the chamber,then stopping halfway, gazed wistfully on lone,and extended his arms ;lone flew to them in joy, he Idssed her earnestly,and then he said :Farewell, my sister, when we next meet, thoumayest be to mc as nothing ; take thou, then, thisembrace ; full yet of all the tender reminiscences ofchildhood, when faith and hope, creeds, customs,POMPEII. 81interests, objects, wore the same to us. Now, thetie is to be broken !"With these strange words he left the house.The great and severest trial of the primitiveChristians was indeed this ; their conversion separatedthem from their dearest bonds. They couldnot associate with beings whose commonest actions,whose commonest forms of speech, were impregnatedwith idolatry. They shuddered at the blessingof love, to their ears it was uttered in a demon'sname. This, their misfortune, was their strength;if it divided them from the rest of the world, itwas to unite them proportionally to each other.They were men of iron who wrought forth theWord of God, and verily the bonds that boundthem were of iron also !Glaucus found lone in tears ; he had already assumedthe sweet privilege to console. He drewfrom her a recital of her iutei-view with her brother;but in her confused account of language, itself soconfused to one not prepared for it, he was equallyat a loss with lone to conceive the intentions orthe meaning of Appetites.Hast thou ever heard much," asked she, " ofE 582 THE LAST DAYS OFthis new sect of the Nazarenes, of which my brotherspoke."1 have often heard enough of the votaries"' returnedGlaucus, " but of their exact tenets know Inought, save that in their doctrine there seemethsomething preternaturally chilling and morose.They hive apart from their kind; they affect to boshocked even at our simple uses of garlands; theyhave no sympathies with the cheerful amusements oflife; they utter awful threats of the coming destructionof the world : they appear, in one word, to havebrought their unsmiling and gloomy creed out ofthe cave of Trophies. Yet," continued Glaucus,after a slight pause, " they have not wanted menof great power and genius, nor converts even amongthe Areopagites of Athens. Well do I rememberto have heard my father speak of one strange guestat Athens many years ago ; methinks his namewas Paul. My father was one amongst a mightycrowd, that gathered on one of our immemorialhills to hear this sage of the East expound ;through the wide throng there rang not a singlemurmur ! — the jest and the roar, with which our nativeorators are received, were hushed for him; — andPOMPEII. 08when on the loftiest summit of that hill, raisedabove the breathless crowd below, stood this mysteriousvisiter, his mien and his countenance awedevery heart even before a sound left his lips. Hewas a man, I have heard my father say, of no tallstature, but of noble and impressive mien ; his robeswere dark and ample ; the declining sun, for it wasevening, shone aslant upon his form, as it rose aloft,motionless and commanding ; his countenance wasmuch worn and marked, as of one avIio had bravedalike misfortune and the sternest vicissitude of manyclimes ; but his eyes were bright with an almostunearthly fire ; and when he raised his arm tospealv, it was with the majesty of a man into whomthe Spirit of a God hath rushed !' Men of Athens V he is reported to have said,I find amongst ye an altar with this inscription —TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Ye worship in ignorancethe same deity I serve. To you unknown till now,to you be it now revealed''Then declared that solemn man how this greatMaker of all things, who had appointed into manhis several tribes and his various homes — theLord of earth and the universal heaven, dwelt not in84 THE LAST DAYS OFteiiiples made with hands ; that His presence, Hisspirit, was in the air we breathed; — our ife and ourbeing was with Him. ' Think you,' he cried, ' thatthe Invisible is like your statues of gold and marble ?Think you that He needed sacrifice from you :He who made heaven and earth ?' Then spake he offearful and coming times, of the end of the world,of a second rising of the dead, whereof an assurancehad been given to man in the resurrection of themighty Being whose religion he came to preach.When he thus spoke, the long pent murmurwent forth, and the philosophers that were mingledwith the people muttered their sage contempt ;there might you have seen the chilling frown ofthe Stoic, and the Cynic's sneer; — andtheEpicmvanwho believeth not even in our own Elysium, muttereda pleasant jest, and swept laughing throughthe crowd ; but the deep heart of the Peoplewas touched and thrilled; and they trembled,though they knew not why, for verily the strangerhad the voice and majesty of a man to whom ' TheUnknown God "■ had committed the preaching ofHis faith."lone listened with rapt attention, and the seri-POMPEII. 85vous and earnest manner of the narrator betrayedthe impression that he himself had received fromone who had been amongst the audience, that onthe hill of the Heathen Mars had heard the firsttidings of the word of Christ !THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VI.THE PORTER. — THE GIRL AND THE GLADIATOR.The door of Diomed's house stood open, andMedon, the old slave, sat at the bottom of the stepsby which you ascended to the mansion. Thatluxurious mansion of the rich merchant of Pompeiiis still to be seen just without the gates of the city,at the commencement of the Street of Tombs ; itwas a gay neighbourhood, despite the dead. Onthe opposite side, but at some yards nearer thegate, was a spacious hostelry, at which thosebrought by business or by pleasure to Pompeiioften stopped to refresh themselves. In the spacebefore the entrance of the inn now stood waggons,and carts, and chariots, some just arrived, somejust quitting, in all the bustle of an animated andpopular resort of public entertainment. Before thePOMPEII. 87door, some farmers, seated on a bench by a smallcircular table, were talking, over their morning cups,on the affairs of their calling. On the side of thedoor itself was painted gaily and freshly the eternalsign of the chequers.* By the roof of the innisti-etched a terrace, on which some females, wives ofthe farmers abovementioned, were, some seated, someleaning over the railing, and conversing with theirfriends below. In a deep recess, at a little distance,was a covered seat, in which some two or threepoorer travellers were resting themselves, and shakingthe dust from their garments. On the other sidestretched a wide space, originally the burial groundof a more ancient race than the present denizens ofPompeii, and now converted into the Ustrinum, or-placefor the burning of the dead. Above this rosethe terraces of a gay villa, half hid by trees. Thetombs themselves, with their graceful and variedshapes, the flowers and the foliage that surroundedthem, made no melancholy feature in the prospect.Hard by the gate of the city, in a small niche, stoodthe still form of the well-disciplined Roman sentry,the sun shining brightly on his polished crest andThere is another inn within the walls similarly adorned.88 THE LAST DAYS OFthe lance on M'liich he leant. I'lie gate itself wasdivided into three arches, the centre one for vehicles,those at the side for the foot-passengers, and oneither side rose the massive walls which girt thecity, composed, patched, repaired at a thousanddifferent epochs, according as war, time, or theearthquake had shattered that vain protection. A tfrequent intervals rose square towers, whose summitsbroke in picturesque rudeness the regularline of the wall, and contrasted well with the modernbuildings gleaming whitely by.The curving road, which in that direction leadsfrom Pompeii to Herculaneum, wound out of sightamidst hanging vines, above which frowned the• sullen majesty of Vesuvius.Hast thou heard the news, old Medon ?""* saida young woman with a pitcher in her hand, as shepaused by Diomed's door to gossip a momentwith the slave, ere she repaired to the neighbouringinn to fill the vessel, and coquet with thetravellers.The news, what news ?" said the slave, raisinghis eyes moodily from the ground.Why, there passed through the gate this .89ii)o-, no doubt ere thou wert well awake, such avisiter to Pompeii I''Per Hercle !" said the slave indifferently.Yes, a present from the noble Pomponi-anus."A present ! I thought thou saidst a visiter ?'"It is both visiter and present. Know, O dull andstupid ! that it is a most beautiful young tiger forour approaching games in the amphitheatre. Hearyou that, Medon. Oh, what pleasure ! I declare Ishall not sleep a wink till I see it ; they say it hasuch a roar !""Poor fool !" said Medon sadly and critically.Fool me no fool, old churl ! It is a pretty thing,a tiger, especially if we could but find somebodyfor him to eat. We have now a lion and a tiger ;only consider that, Medon ! and for want of twogood criminals, perhaps we shall be forced to seethem eat each other. By the by, your son is agladiator, a handsome man and a strong, can youuot persuade him to fight the tiger ? Do now, youwould oblige me mightily ; nay, you would be abenefactor to the whole town."Yah, val !" said the slave with great assTHE LAST DAYS OFpurity ; " think of tliiue own danger, ere thouthus protest of my poor boy's death''My own danger !" said the girl, frightened andlooking hastily round — " Avert the omen ! let thywords fall on thine own head !" And the girl asshe spoke touched a talisman suspended round herneck. " ' Thine own danger !' what danger threatensme ?"Had the earthquake but a few nights since nowarning ?" said Medon. " Has it not a voice ? Didit not say to us all ' Prepare for Death, the end ofall things is at hand ?*" ""Bah, stuff!" said the young woman, settlingthe folds of her tunic. " Now thou tallest asthey say the Nazarenes talk — methinks thou artone of them. Well, I can prate with thee, greycroaker, no more, thou grows worse and worse —Vale ! O Hercules, send us a man for the Hon — andanother for the tiger !""Ho ! ho ! for the merry, merry show,With a forest of faces in every row !Lo the swordsmen, bold as the son of Alcmacna,Sweep, side by side, o'er the luishcd arena ;POMPEII. 91Talk while you may — you will hold your breathWhen they meet in the grasp of the glowing death.Tramp, tramp, how gaily they go !Ho ! ho ! for the merry, merry show I"Chanting in a silver and clear voice this feminineditty, and holding np her tunic from the dustyroad, the young woman stepped lightly across tothe crowded hostelry.My poor son !" said the slave, half aloud, " isit for things like this thou art to be butchered .''Oh ! faith of Christ, I could worship thee in allsincerity, were it but for the horror which tlioiTinspires for these bloody lists."The old man's head sank dejectedly on hisbreast. He remained silent and absorbed, butevery now and then sith the corner of his sleevehe wiped his eyes. His heart was with his son ;he did not see the figure that now approached fromthe gate with a quick step, and a somewhat fierceand reckless gait and carriage. He did not lift hiseyes till the figure paused opposite the place wherehe sat, and with a soft voice addressed him by thename of92 THE LAST DAYS OFFather !"My Loy, my Lyclon, is it indeed thou ?" saidthe old man joyfully. " Ah ! thou wert presentto my thoughts."I am glad to hear it, my father," said thegladiator, respectfully touching the knees andbeard of the slave ; " and soon may I be alwayspresent with thee, not in thought only."Yes, my son, — but not In this world," repliedthe slave mournfully.Talk not thus, O my sire ! look cheerfully,for I feel so — I am sure that I shall win the day,and then, the gold I gain buys thy freedom. Oh !my father, it was but a few days since, that I wastaunted, by one too whom I would gladly haveundeceived, for he is more generous than the restof his equals. He is not Roman — he is of Athensby him I was taunted with the lust of gain —when I demanded what sum was the prize of victory.Alas ! he little knew the soul of Lydon !"My boy ! my boy !" said the old slave, as,slowly ascending the steps, he conducted his sonto his own lltth' chamber, communicating With theentrance hall, (which in this villa was the j)eristyle,not the atrium;) — you may see it now; it is thePOMPEII. 53third door to the left on entering. (The first doorconducts to the staircase ; the second is but a falserecess, in which there stood a statue of bronze.)" Generous, affectionate, pious as are thy motives,"said Medon, when they were thus securedfrom observation, " thy deed itself is guilt — thouai-t to risk thy blood for thy father's freedom —that might be forgiven ; but the prize of victoryis the blood of another. Oh, that is a deadly sin ;no object can pm-ify it. Forbear ! forbear ! ratherwould I be a slave for ever, than purchase libertyon such terms !""Hush! my father !" replied Lydon, somewhatimpatiently ; " thou hast picked up in this newcreed of thine, of which I pray thee not to speakto me, for the gods that gave me strength deniedme wisdom, and I understand not one word ofwhat thou often preaches to me, — thou hastpicked up, I say, in this new creed, some singularphantasies of right and wrong. Pardon me, ifI offend thee : but reflect ! Against whom shall Icontend ? Oh ! couldst thou know those wretcheswith whom, for thy sake, I assort, thou wouldstthink I purified earth by removing one of them.94 THE LAST DAYS OFBeasts, whose very lips drop blood ; things allsavage, unprincipled in their very courage ; ferocious,heartless, senseless ; no tie of life can bindthem : they know not fear, it is true — but neitherknow they gratitude, or charity, or love ; they aremade but for their own career, to slaughter withoutpity, to die without dread ! Can thy gods,whosoever they be, look with Wrath on a conflictwith such as these, and in such a cause ? Oh,my father, wherever the Powers above gaze downon earth, they behold no duty so sacred, so sanctifying,as the sacrifice offered to an aged parent bythe piety of a grateful son !"The poor old slave, himself deprived of thelights of knowledge, and only late a convert tothe Christian faith, knew not with what argumentsto enlighten an ignorance at once so dark, and yetso beautiful in its error. His first impulse was tothrow himself on his son's breast — his next to startaway — to wring his hands; and in the attempt toreprove, his broken voice lost itself in weeping."And if," resumed Lydon, " if thy Deity (methinksthou wilt own but one ?) be indeed thatbenevolent and pitying power Which thou assertedPOMPEII. 95Him to be, He will know also that thy very faithin Him first confirmed me in that determinationthou blames."How ! what mean you ?" said the slave.Why, thou knowest that I, sold in my childhoodas a slave, was set free at Rome by the willof my master, whom I had been fortunate enoughto please. I hastened to Pompeii to see thee — Ifound thee, already aged and infirm, under theyoke of a capricious and pampered lord — thouhadst lately adopted this new faith, and itsadoption made thy slavery doubly painful to thee ;it took away all the softening charm of custom,which reconciles us so often to the worst. Didstthou not complain to me, that thou wert compelledto offices that were not odious to thee as a slave,but guilty as a Nazarene? Didst thou not tellme that thy soul shook with remorse, whenthou wert compelled to place even a crumb ofcake before the Lares that watch over yon ?that thy soul was torn by a perpetualstruggle ? Didst thou not tell me, that even bypouring wine before the threshold, and calling onthe name of some Grecian deity, thou didst fear9Q THE LAST DAYS OFthou wert incurring penalties worse than those ofTantalus — an eternity of torture more terriblethan those of the Tartarean fields ? Didst thounot tell me this ? I wondered — I could not comprehend! nor, by Hercules — can I now ; but I wasthy son, and my sole task was to compassionateand relieve. Could I hear thy groans, could INeatness thy mysterious horrors, thy constant anguish,and remain inactive ? No ! by the immortalgods ! the thought struck me like light fromOlympus ; I had no money, but I had strengthand youth — these were thy gifts — I could sellthese in my turn for thee ! I learned the amount ofthy ransom — I learned that the usual prize of avictorious gladiator A\'ould doubly pay it. I becamea gladiator — I linked myself with thoseaccursed men, scorning, loathing, while I joined —I acquired their skill —-blessed be the lesson! — itshall teach me to free my father !"Oh, that thou couldst hear Olinthus !" sighedthe old man, more and more affected by the virtueof his son, but not less strongly convinced of thecriminality of his piu-pose.I will hear the whole world talk, if thou wilt,"roMPEii. 97answered the gladiator gaily ; " but not till thouart a slave no more. Beneath thy own roof, myfather, thou shalt puzzle this dull brain all daylong, ay, and all night too, if it give thee pleasure.Oh, such a spot as I have chalked out for thee ! —it is one of the nine hundred and ninety-nine shopsof old Julia Felix, in the sunny part of the city,where thou mayest bask before the door in the dayand I will sell the oil and the wine for thee,my father — and then, please Venus, (or if it doesnot please her, since thou lovest not her name,it is all one to Lydon;) — then I say, perhapsthou mayest have a daughter too, to tend thy greyhairs, and hear shrill voices at thy knee, that shallcall thee ' Ly don's father !'' Ah ! we shall be sohappy — the prize can purchase all. Cheer thee !cheer up, my sire ! — And now I must away — daywears — the lanista waits me. Come ' thy blessing'"As Lydon thus spoke, he had already quittedthe dark chamber of his father; and speakingeagerly, though in a Whispered tone, they nowstood at the same place in which we introducedthe porter at his post.O bless thee ! bless thee ! my brave boy,"VOL. II. F98 THE LAST DAYS OFsaid Medon fervently; " and may the great Powerthat reads all hearts see the nobleness of thine,and forgive its error !"The tall shape of the gladiator passed swiftlydown the path ; the eyes of the slave followedits light, but stately steps, till the last glimpsewas gone ; and then sinking once more on hisseat, his eyes again fastened themselves on thegromid. His form, mute and removing, as athing of stone. His heart ! — who, in our happierage, can even imagine its struggles — its commotion !May I enter ?" said a sweet voice ; " is thymistress Julia within ?"The slave mechanically motioned to the visiterto enter, but she who addressed him couldnot see the gesture — she repeated her questiontimidly, but in a louder voice.Have I not told thee ?" said the slave, peevishly; " enter''Thanks," said the speaker, plaintively ; andthe slave, roused by the tone, looked up, and recognisedthe blind flower girl. Sorrow can sympathisewith affliction — he raised himself, andPOMPEII. 99guided her steps to the head of the adjacentstaircase, (by which you descended to Jura'sapartment,) where, summoning a female slave,he consigned to her the charge of the blindgirl.F 2100 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VII.THE Dressing-room OF A Pompeii BEAUTY. — IMPORTANTCONVERSATION BETWEEN JULIA AND Lydia.The elegant Julia sat in her chamber with herslaves around her : — like the eubienlum which adjoinedit, the room was small — but much largerthan the usual apartments appropriated to sleep,which were generally so diminutive, that few whohave not seen the bedchamber, even in the gayestmansions, can form any notion of the petty pigeon-holesin which the citizens of Pompeii evidentlythought it desirable to pass the night. But,in fact,bed"" with the ancients was not that grave, serious,and important part of domestic mysteries, whichit is with us. The couch itself was more like a verynarrow and small sofa, light enough to be transportedeasily, and by the occupant himself,* from" Take up thy bed and walk," was (as Sir W. Gell somewhereobserves) no metaphorical expression.POMPEII. 10]place to place ; and it was, no doubt, constantlyshifted from chamber to chamber, according to thecaprices of the inmate, or the changes of the season.For that side of the house, which was crowded inone month, might, perhaps, be carefully avoided inthe next ; so susceptible were the inhabitants ofthe most beautiful climate in the world of thosealternations of sun and breeze, which to our hardierframe, inured to the harsh skies of the north,would be scarcely perceptible. There was alsoamong the Italians of that period, a singular andfastidious apprehension of too much daylight ;their darkened chambers, which at first appear tousthe result of a negligent architecture, were theeffect of the most elaborate study. In their porticosand gardens, they courted the sun wheneverit so pleased their luxurious tastes. In the interiorof their houses, they sought rather the coolnessand the shade.Julia's apartment at that season was in the lowerpart of the house, immediately beneath the statrooms above, and looking upon the garden, withwhich it was on a level. The wide door, which wasglazed, alone admitted the morning rays ; yet her102 THE LAST DAYS OFeye, accustomed to a certain darkness, was sufficientlyacute to perceive exactly what colourswere the most becoming — what shade of thedelicate rouge gave the brightest beam to herdark glance, and the most youthful freshness toher cheek.On the table before which she sate, was a smalland circular mirror, of the most polished steel —round which, in precise order, were ranged the cosmeticsand the unguents — the perfumes and thepaints — the jewels and the combs — the ribandsand the gold pins, which were destined to add tothe natural attractions of beauty, the assistance ofart and the capricious allurements of-fashion.Through the dimness of the room glowed brightlythe vivid and various colourings of the wall in allthe dazzling frescos of Pompeian taste. Before thedressing-table, and under the feet of Julia, wasspread a carpet, woven from the looms of the East.Near at hand, on another table, was a silver basinand ewer — an extinguished lamp, of most exquisiteworkmanship), in which the artist had representeda Cupid reposing under the spreading branches ofa myrtle tree ; and a small roll of papyrus, containingthe softest elegies of Tibullus. Before thePOMPEII. 103door, wliicli communicated with the cublculum, 'hung a curtain, richly broidered with gold flowers.Such was the dressing-room of a beauty eighteencenturies ago.The fair Julia leaned indolently back on herseat, while the ornatrix (i. e. hair-dresser) slowlypiled one above the other a mass of small curls ;dexterously weaving the false with the true, andcarrying the Avhole fabric to a height that seemedto place the head rather at the centre than thesummit of the human form.Her tunic, of a deep amber, which well set offher dark hair and somewhat embroiled complexion,swept in ample folds to her feet, whichwere cased in slippers, fastened round theslender ankle by white thongs ; while a profusionof pearls were embroidered in the slipper itself,which was of purple, and turned slightly upward,as do the Turkish slippers at this day. An oldslave, skilled by long experience in all the arcanaof the toilette, stood beside the hair-dresser, withthe broad and studded girdle of her mistress overher arm, and giving from time to time, (mingledwith judicious flattery to the lady herself,) instructionsto the mason of the ascending pile.104 THE LAST DAYS OFPut that pin rather more to the right — lowerstupid one ! Do you not observe how eventhose beautiful eyebrows are ? — One would thinkyou Avere dressing Corunna, whose face is all of oneside. Now put in the flowers — what, fool ! — notthat dull pink — you are not suiting colours to thedim cheek of Coloris — it must be the brightestflowers that can alone suit the cheek of the youngJulia."Gently !"" said the lady, stamping her smallfoot violently; " you pull my hair as if you wereplucking up a weed."Dull thing !" continued the directress of theceremony, " do you not know how delicate is yourmistress ? — you are not dressing the coarse horsehairof the widow Fulvia. Now, then, the ribandthat's right. Fair Julia, look in the mirror —saw you ever anything so lovely as yourself ? '"When, after innumerable comments, difficulties,and delays, the intricate tower was at length completed,the next preparation was that of givingto the eyes the soft languish produced by a darkpowder applied to the lids and brows — a smallpatch cut in the form of a crescent, skilfullyPOMPEII. 105placed by the rosy lips, attracted attention to theirdimples, and to the teeth, to which already everyart had been applied in order to heighten the dazzleof their natural whiteness.To another slave, hitherto idle, was now consignedthe charge of arranging the jewels — theearrings of pearl, (two to each ear,) the massivebracelets of gold — the chain formed of rings of thesame metal, to which a talisman cut in crystalswas attached — the graceful buckle on the leftshoulder, in which was set an exquisite cameoof Psyche — the girdle of purple riband richlywrought with threads of gold, and clasped by interlacingserpents, and lastly, the various ringsfitted to every joint of the white and slender fingers.The toilette was now arranged, accordingto the last mode of Rome. The fair Julia regardedherself with a last gaze of complacent vanity,and reclining again upon her seat, she bade theyoungest of her slaves, in a listless tone, read toher the enamoured couplets of Tibullus. Thislecture was still proceeding, when a female slaveadmitted Nydia into the presence of the lady ofthe place.F 5106 THE LAST DAYS OFSalve, Julia," said the flower girl, arrestingher steps within a few paces from the spot whereJulia sat, and crossing her arms upon her breast ;I have obeyed your commands."You have done well, flower girl," answeredthe lady ; " approach, you may take a seat."One of the slaves placed a stool by Julia, andNydia seated herself.Julia looked hard at the Thessalian for somemoments in rather an embarrassed silence. Shethen motioned her attendants to withdraw, and toclose the door. When they were alone, she said,looking mechanically from Nydia, and forgetfulthat she was with one who could not observe hercountenance,You serve the Neapolitan, lone."I am with her, at present," answeredNydia.Is she as handsome as they say ?""I know not," replied Nydia, " how can /judge?"Ah ! I shoukl have remembered, but thouhast ears if not eyes. Do thy fellow slaves tellPOMPEII. 107thee she is handsome ? Slaves talking: with oneanother, forget to flatter even their mistresses''They tell me that she is beautifully''Hem ! — say they that she is tall ?''"'Yes."Why, so am I — Dark-haired .?"I have heard so.''''So am I. And doth Glaueus visit hermuch ?"Daily'' returned Nydia, with a half-suppressedsigh.Daily, indeed ! Does he find her handsome P'''I should think so, since they are so soon to bewedded.''"'Wedded !''' cried Julia, turning pale eventhrough the false roses on her cheek, and startingfrom her couch ; Nydia did not of comes perceivethe emotion she had caused. Julia remained along time silent ; but her heaving breast and flashingeyes would have betrayed to one who couldhave seen, the wound her vanity sustained.They tell me thou art a Thessalian,'''' said she,at last breaking silence.108 THE LAST DAYS OPAnd truly !"Thessaly is the land of magic and of witchesof talismans and of love philters," said Julia.It has ever been celebrated for its sorcerers""returned Nydia timidly.Knowest thou then, blind Thessalian, of anylove-charms ?"I V said the flower girl, colouring, " / .' howshould I ? No, assuredly not."The worse for thee ; I could have given theegold enough to have purchased thy freedom hadstthou been more wise."But what," asked Nydia, " can induce thebeautiful and wealthy Julia to ask that questionof her servant ? Has she not money and youth, andloveliness ? Are they not love charms enough todispense with magic !"To all but one person in the world," answeredJulia haughtily ; " but methinks thy blindness isinfectious — and — but no matter."And that one person ?" said Nydia eagerly.Is not Glaucus," replied Julia, with the customarydeceit of her sex. " Glaucus— no !"POMPEII. 109Nydia drew her breath more freely, and aftera short pause JuHa recommenced —But talking of Glaucus and his attachment tothis Neapolitan, reminded me of the influence oflove-spells, which, for aught I know or care, shemay have exercised upon him. Blind girl, I love,and — shall Julia live to say it ? — am loved not inreturn ! This humbles — nay not humbles — but itstings my pride. I would see this ingrate at myfeet — not in order that I might raise, but that Imight spurn him. When they told me thou wertThessalian, I imagined thy young mind mighthave learned the dark secrets of thy clime."Alas ! no"" murmured Nydia, " would ithad !"Thanks, at least, for that kindly wish'' saidJulia, unconscious of what was passing in thebreast of the flower girl.But tell me, thou hearest the gossip of slaves,always prone to these dim beliefs — always re-ladyto apply to sorcery for their own low loves, — hastthou ever heard of any Eastern magician in thiscity who possesses the art of which thou art igno-110 THE LAST DAYS OFrant ? No vain chiromancer, no juggler of themarket-place, hut some more potent and mightymagician of India or of Egypt !"Of Egypt, yes ;" said Nydia, shuddering ;what Pompeian has not heard of Arbaces!"Arbaces, true !" replied Julia, grasping at therecollection. " They say he is a man above allthe petty and false impostures of dull pretenders —that he is versed in the learning of the stars, andthe secrets of the ancient Nox ; why not in themysteries of love ?"If there be one magician living, whose art isabove that of others, it is that dread man," answeredNydia, and she felt her talisman while shespoke.He is too wealthy to divine for money !" continuedJulia sneeringly ; " can I not visit him ?"It is an evil mansion for the young and thebeautiful," replied Nydia. " I have heard toothat he languishes in "An evil mansion," said Julia, catching onlythe first sentence. " Why so ?"The orgies of his midnight leisure are impureand polluted — at least so says rumour."POMPEII.mBy Ceres, by Pan, and by Cybele, thou dostbut provoke my curiosity instead of exciting myfears," returned the wayward and pampered Pompeian." I will seek and question him of his love. Ifto these orgies love be admitted — why the morelikely that he knows its secrets""Nydia did not answer.I will seek him this very day," resumedJulia ; " nay, why not this very hour ?"At day-light, and in his present state, thouhast assuredly the less to fear," answered Nydia,yielding to her own sudden and secret wish tolearn if the dark Egyptian were indeed possessedof those spells to rivet and attract love, of whichthe Thessalian had so often heard.And who would dare insult the rich daughterof Diomed ?" said Julia, haughtily. " I will go."May I visit thee afterwards to learn the result?" asked Nydia, anxiously.Kiss me for thy interest in Julia's honour,"answered the lady. " Yes, assuredly. This evewe sup abroad — come hither at the same hour tomorrowand thou shalt know all ; I may have toemploy thee, too, but enough for the present.112 THE LAST DAYS OFStay, take this bracelet for the new thought thouhast inspired me with ; remember if thou servesJulia, she is grateful and she is generous."I cannot take thy present," said Nydia, juttingaside the bracelet ; " but young as I am Ican sympathize unsought with those who love —and love in vain."-' Mayest thou so .?" returned Julia ; " thouspeakest like a free woman — and thou shalt yet befree — farewell !"POMPEII. lisCHAPTER VIII.JULIA SEEKS Abates — THE RESULT OF THAT INTERVIEW.Arbaces was seated in a chamber, which openedon a kind of balcony or portico that fronted hisgarden. His cheek was pale and worn with thesufferings he had endured, but his iron frame hadalready recovered from the severest effects of thataccident which had frustrated his fell designs in themoment of victory. The air that came fragrantlyto his brow revived his languid senses, and theblood circulated more freely than it had done fordays through his shrunken veins.So, then," thought he, " the storm of Fatehas broken and blown over — the evil which mylove predicted, threatening life itself, has chancedand yet I live ! It came as the stars foretold —and now the long, bright, and prosperous careerwhich was to succeed that evil, if I survived it.THE LAST DAYS OFsmiles beyond — I have passed — I have subduedthe latest danger of my destiny. Now I have butto lay out the gardens of my future fate — intensifiedand secure. First, then, of all my pleasures —even before that of love — shall come revenge !This boy Greek — who has crossed my passion —thwarted my designs — baffled me even when theblade was about to drink his accursed blood — shallnot a second time escape me. But for the methodof my vengeance ? Of that let me ponder well !Oh, Ate, if thou art indeed a goddess, fill mewith thy fullest inspiration !" The Egyptian sankinto an intent reverie, which did not seem to presentto him any clear or satisfactory suggestions.He changed his position restlessly as he revolvedscheme after scheme, which no sooner occurredthan it was dismissed ; several times he struck hisbreast and gi-owned aloud, nth the desire of vengeance,and a sense of his impotence to accomplishit. While thus absorbed, a boy slave timidlyentered the chamber.A female, evidently of rank from her dress,and that of the single slave who attended her,POMPEII. 115waited below and sought an audience with Ar-faces."A female !" his heart beat quick. " Is sheyoung ?"Her face is concealed by her veil ; but herform is slight yet round, as that of youth."Admit her"" said the Egyptian ; for a momenthis vain heart dreamt the stranger might be lone.The first glance of the visiter now entering theapartment, sufficed to undeceive so erring a fancy.True, she was about the same height as lone, andperhaps the same age — true, she was finely andrichly formed — but where was that undulating andineffable grace which accompanied every motion ofthe peerless Neapolitan — the chaste and decorousgarb, so simple even in the care of its arrangement— the dignified, yet bashful step — the majestyof womanhood and its modesty ?Pardon me that I rise with pain," said Ar-faces,gazing on the stranger ; "I am still sufferingfrom recent illness."Do not disturb thyself, O great Egyptian !"returned Julia, seeking to disguise the fear she116 THE LAST DAYS OFalready experienced, beneath the ready resort offlattery ; " and forgive an unfortunate female whoseeks consolation from thy wisdom."Draw near, fair stranger," said Arbaces, " andspeak without apprehension or reserve."Julia placed herself on a seat beside the Egyptian,and wonderingly gazed round an apartmentwhose elaborate and costly luxuries shamed eventhe ornate enrichment of her father's mansion ;fearfully, too, she regarded the hieroglyphical inscriptionson the walls — the faces of the mysteriousimages, which at every corner gazed u|K)n her —the tripod at a little distance — and, above all, thegrave and remarkable countenance of Arbat-^shimself; a long white robe, like a veil, halfcovered his raven locks, and flowed to his feet ;his face was made even more impressive by itspresent paleness, and his dark and penetratingeyes seemed to pierce the shelter of her veil,and explore the secrets of her vain and unfemininesoul."And what," said his low deep voice, "brings thee,O maiden ! to the house of the eastern stranger ?"His fame," replied Julia.POMPEII. 117'■• In what ?" said he, with a strange and slightsmile.Canst thou ask, O wise Arbaces.'* Is not foreknowledgethe very gossip theme of Pompeii .''''''Some little lore have I, indeed, treasured up,"replied Arbaces ; " but in what can such seriousand sterile secrets benefit the ear of beauty ?"Alas !" said Julia, a little cheered by the accustomedaccents of adulation ; " does not sorrow-flyto wisdom for relief, and they who love unrequited,are not they the chosen victims of grief ?"Ha !" said Arbaces. " can unrequited love bethelot of so fair a form, whose modelled proportionsare visible even beneath the folds of thygraceful robe. Deign, O maiden ! to lift thy veil,that I may see at least if the face correspond inloveliness with the form."Not unwilling, perhaps, to exhibit her charms,and thinking they were likely to interest the magicianin her fate, Jura, after some slight hesitation,raised her veil, and revealed a beauty A^^hich,but for art, had been indeed attractive to the fixedgaze of the Egyptian.Thou comest to me for advice in unhappy love,"118 THE LAST DAYS OFsaid he ; " well, turn that face on the ungratefulone, what other love-charm can I give thee ?"Oh, cease these com-testes !" said Julia ; " itis a love-charm, indeed, that I would ask from thyskill !"Fair stranger," replied Arbaces, somewhatscornfully ; " love-spells are not among a portion ofthe secrets I have wasted the midnight oil to attain."Is it indeed so ? Then pardon me, great Ar-faces,and farewell !"Stay," said Arbaces, who, despite his passionfor lone, was not unmoved by the beauty of hisvisiter ; and had he been in the flush of a moreassured health, might have attempted to consolethe fair Julia by other means than those of supernaturalwisdom ;Stay, although I confess that I have left thewitchery of philters and potions to those whosetrade is in such knowledge, yet am I myself not sodull to beauty but that in earlier youth I may haveemployed them in my oa\ti behalf. I may give theeadvice at least, if thou wilt be candid with me ;tell me then, first, art thou unmarried, as thy dressbetokens ?'''POMPEII.]19Yes," said Julia.And being unblest with fortune, wouldst thouallure some wealthy suitor .^"I am richer than he who disdains me."Strange and more strange ; and thou lovesthim who loves not thee ?"I know not if I love him," answered Juliahaughtily ; " but I know that I would see myselftriumph over a rival — I would see him who rejectedme, my suitor — I would see her whom hehas preferred, in her turn despised."A natural ambition and a womanly," said theEgyptian, in a tone too grave for irony : " yetmore, fair maiden ; wilt thou confide to me thename of thy lover'* Can he be Pompeian, anddespise wealth, even if blind to beauty?""He is of Athens," answered Julia, lookingdowne.Ha !" cried the Egyptian impetuously, as theblood rushed to his cheek ; " there is but oneAthenian, young and noble, in Pompeii. Can it beGlaucus of whom thou speakest .^"Ah ! betray me not — so indeed they call him."The Egyptian sunk back, gazing vacantly on120 THE LAST DAYS OFthe averted face of the merchant's daughter, andmuttering inly to himself — this conference withwhich he had hitherto only trifled, amusing himselfat the credulity and vanity of his visiter —might it not minister to his revenge ?I see thou canst assist me not," said Julia,offended by his continued silence ; " guard atleast my secret — Once more, farewell !"Maiden," said the Egyptian, in an earnestand serious tone ; " thy suit hath touched meI ^\i\\ minister to thy will. Listen to me ; Ihave not myself dabbled in these lesser mysteriesbut I know one who hath. At the base ofVesuvius, less than a league from the city, theredwells a powerful witch ; beneath the rank dewsof the new moon, she has gathered the herbs whichpossess the virtue to chain love in eternal fetters.Her art can bring thy lover to thy feet. St^'kher, and mention to her the name of Arbaocs ;she fears that name, and will five thee her niostextent philters."Alas !" answered Julia, " I know not the roadto the home of her whom thou speakest of: theway, short though it be, is long to ti-averse forPOMPEII. 121a girl who leaves, unknown, the house of her father.The country is entangled with wild vines,and dangerous with precipitous caverns. I darenot trust to mere strangers to guide me — the reputationof women of my rank is easily tarnishedand though I care not who knows that I loveGlaucus, I would not have it imagined that 1obtained his love by a spell."Were I but three days advanced in health,"said the Egyptian, rising and walking (as if tothy his strength) across the chamber, but withirregular and feeble steps ; "I myself would accompanythee. — Well, thou must Avait."But Glaucus is soon to wed that hated Neapolitan."Wed !"Yes, in the early part of next month."So soon ; art thou well advised of this ?"From the lips of her own slave."It shall not be !" said the Egyptian, impetuously; " fear nothing, Glaucus shall be thine.Yet how, when thou obtained it, canst thouadminister to him this potion .''"My father has invited him, and, I believe, theVOL. II. Q122 THE LAST DAYS OFNeapolitan also, to a banquet, on the day followingtomorrow ; 1 shall then have the opportunity toadminister it."So be it !" said the Egyptian, with eyes flashingsuch fierce joy, that Julia's gaze sank tremblinglybeneath them.To-morrow eve, then, order thy litter ; thouhast one at thy command ?"""Surely — yes," returned the purse-proud Julia.Order thy litter — at two miles' distance fromthe city is a house of entertainment, frequented bythe wealthier Pompeians, from the excellence ofits baths, and the beauty of its gardens. Therecanst thou pretend only to shape thy course —there, ill or dying, I will meet thee by the statueof Silenus, in the copse that skirts the garden ;and I, myself. Mill guide thee to the witch. Letus wait till, with the evening star, the goats of theherdsman are gone to rest — when the dark twilightconceals us, and none shall cross our steps.Go home, and fear not. By Hades ! swears Ar-faces,the sorcerer of Egypt, that lone shall neverwed with Glaucus !"pompeii. 128"And that Glances shall be hie?" added Julia,filling up the incomplete sentence."Thou hast said it!" replied Arbaces — andJulia, half frightened at this unhallowed appointment,but urged on by jealousy and the pique ofrivalship, even more than love, resolved to fulfil it.Left alone, Arbaces burst forth —Bright stars that never lie, ye already beginthe execution of your promises — success in love,and victory over foes, for the rest of my smoothexistence ! In the very hour when my mindcould devise no clue to the goal of vengeance, haveye sent this fair fool for my guide !" — He pausedin deep thought. — " Yes," said he again, but in acalmer voice ; " I could not myself have given toher the poison that shall be indeed a philter! — hisdeath might be thus tracked to my door. Butthe witch — ay, there is the fit, the natural, agentof my designs !"He summoned one of his slaves, bade him hastento track the steps of Julia, and acquaint himselfwith her name and condition. This done, hestepped forth into the portico. The skies wereserene and clear — but he, deeply read in the signsG 2124 THE LAST DAYS OFof their vai-ioiis cliaiige, Beheld in one mass ofcloud, far on the horizon, which the wind beganslowly to agitate, that a storm was broodingabove.It is like my vengeance," said he, as he gazed ;the sky is clear, It the cloud moves on."por.iPEii. 125CHAPTER IX.A STORM IN THE SOUTH. — THE WITCH's CAVERN.It was when the heats of noon died graduallyaway from the earth, that Glaucus and One wentforth to enjoy the cooled and grateful air. Atthat time various carriages were in use amongRomans ; the one most used by the richercitizens, when they required no companion intheir excursions, was the higa^ already described inthe early portion of this work ; that appropriatedto the matrons, was termed ccn^pentum,^ whichhad commonly taro wheels; the Ancients usedalso a sort of litter, a vast sedan-chair, morecommodiously arranged than the modern, inasmuchas the occupant thereof could lie doAvn atFor public festivals and games, they used one more luxuriousand costly, called plenum, with four wheels.126 THE LAST DAYS OFease, instead of being perpendicularly and stifflyjostled np and down.* There was another carriageused both for travelling and for excursionsin the country; it was commodious, containingthree or four persons with ease, having a coveringwhich could be raised at pleasure; and, in short,answering very much the purpose of (though verydifferent in shape from) the modern brisk. Itwas a vehicle of this description, that the lovers,accompanied by one female slave of lone, nowused in their excursion. About ten miles fromthe city, there was at that day an old ruin, theremains of a temple, evidently Grecian ; and, as forGlaucus and lone everything Grecian possessedan interest, they had agreed to visit these ruins —it was thither they were now bound.Theirroad lay among vines and olive groves; till,winding more and more towards the higher groundof Vesuvius, the path grew rugged — the mulesmoved slowly, and with labour — and at everyopening in the wood, they beheld those grey andhorrent caverns indenting the parched rock, WhichStrabo has described ; but which the various revoltthey had also the xclla, or sedan, in which they sate aswe do.POMPEII. 127lotions of time and the volcano, have removed fromthe present aspect of the mountain. The sun,sloping towards his descent, cast long and deepshadows over the mountain ; here and there theystill heard the rustic reed of the shepherd amongstcopses of the beech wood and w wild oak. Sometimesthey marked the form of the silk-haired and gracefulcapella, with its wreathing horn and bright greyeye — Avhicli, still beneath Austrian skies, recallsthe eclogues of !Maro, browsing halfway up thehills ; and the grapes, already purple with thesmiles of the deepening summer, glowed out fromthe arched festoons, which hung pendent fromtree to tree. Above them, light clouds floatedin the serene heavens, sweeping so slowly athwartthe firmament, that they scarcely seemed to stir;while, on their right, they caught, ever and anon,glimpses of the waveless sea, with some lightbark skimming its sm-face ; and the sunlightbreaking over the deep in those countless andsoftest hues so peculiar to that delicious sea.How beautiful," said Glaucus, in a half-whisperedtone, " is that epithet by which wecall Earth our Mother ! With what a kindly and128 THE LAST DAYS OFequal love she pours her blessings upon her children ;and even to those sterile spots to which Naturehas denied beauty, she yet contrives to dispenseher smiles; witness the arbutus and the vine,which she wreathes over the arid and burning soilof yon extinct volcano. Ah ! in such an hourand scene as this ! — well might we imagine thatthe laughing face of the faun should peep forthfrom those green festoons ; or, that we mighttrace the steps of the mountain nymph throughthe thickest mazes of the glade. But thenymphs ceased — beautiful lone, when thou wastcreated!"There is no tongue that flatters like a lover's;and yet in the exaggeration of his feelings flatteryseems to him commonplace. Strange and prodigalexuberance, which soon exhausts itself by overflowing! They tell us, that the esteem whichfollows passion, is happier than passion itself: — itmay be true — the springs of fancy — of hope — ofambition — all urged into one channel, return totheir natural streams. Love is a revolution — thereis no harmony — no order — there is, therefore, nosettled happiness while it lasts ; but when the re-P03IPE1I. 129volution is over — we are astonished at our pastfrenzy : we may love still — we may Le beloved —but we are m love no more ! For my part, Ithink, there are some kinds of imperfect happiness,which are better than the perfect. Takeaway desire from the heart, and you take the airfrom the earth.They arrived at the Ruins : they examinedthem with that fondness with which we trace thehallowed and household vestiges of our own ancestry— they lingered there till Hesperus appeared inthe rosy heavens ; and then returning homewardin the twilight, they were more silent than theyhad been — for in the shadow and beneath thestars, they felt more oppressively their mutuallove.It was at this time that the storm which theEgyptian had predicted began to creep visibly overthem. At first, a low and distant thunder gavewarning of the approaching conflict of the elements;and then rapidly rushed above, the dark ranks ofthe serried clouds. The suddenness of storms inthat climate is something almost preternatural, andmight well suggest to early superstition the notiong5130 THE LAST DAYS OFof a divine agency — a few laj'ge drops broke heavilyamong the boughs that half overhung theirpath, and then, swift and intolerably bright, theforked lightning darted across their very eyes andwas swallowed up by the encreasing darkness.Swifter, good carrucarius,'''' cried Glaucus tothe driver ; " the tempest comes on apace."The slave urged on the mules — they went SAviftover the uneven and stony road — the clouds thickened,near and more near broke the thunder, andfast rushed the dashing rain.Dost thou fear ?" whispered Glaucus, as hesought excuse in the storm to come nearer to lone.Not with thee"" said she softly.At that instant the carriage — fragile and ill-contrived(as, despite their graceful shapes, were, forpractical uses, most of such inventions at that time)struck violently into a deep rut, over whichlay a log of fallen wood ; the driver with a cursestimulated his mules yet faster for the obstacle,the wheel was torn from the socket, and the carriagesuddenly overset.Glaucus quickly extricating himself from thevehicle, hastened to assist lone, who was forts131lately unhurt : with some difficulty they raisedthe carrack (or carriage), and found that it ceasedany longer even to afford them shelter ; the springsthat fastened the covering were snapped asunder,and the rain poured fast and fiercely into the interior.In this dilemma, what was to be done ? Theywere yet some distance from the city — no house,no aid seemed near.There is,'"' said the slave, " a smith about amile off; I could seek him, and he might fasten atleast the wheel to the carrack — but, Jupiter ! howthe rain beats ! my mistress will be wet before Icome back."Run thither at least," said Glaucus ; " wemust find the best shelter we can till you return."The lane was overshadowed with trees, beneaththe amplest of Which Glaucus drcAv lone.He endeavoured, by stripping his own cloak,to shield her yet more from the rapid rain ;but it descended with a fury that broke throughall puny obstacles ; and suddenly, while Glaucuswas yet whispering courage to his beautiful charge,the lightning struck one of the trees immediatelybefore them, and split with a mighty crash its132 THE LAST DAYS OFhuge trunk in twain. This awful incident apprisedthem of the danger they braved in their presentshelter, and Glaucus looked anxiously round forsome less perilous place of refuge. " We arenow," said he, " halfway up the ascent of Vesuvius; there ought to be some cavern, or hollowin the vine-clad rocks, could we but find it, inwhich the deserting nymphs have left a shelters''While thus saying, he moved from the trees, andlooking wistfully towards the mountain, discoveredthrough the advancing gloom, a red and tremulouslight at no considerable distance. " That mustcome," said he, " from the hearth of some shepherd,or vine-dresser — it ^\■ill guide us to somehospitable retreat. Wilt thou stay here, whileI — yet no — that would be to leave thee todanger."I will go with you cheerfully," said lone ;open as the space seems, it is better than thetreacherous shelter of these boughs."Half leading, half carrying lone, Glaucus accompaniedby the trembling slave, advanced towardsthe light which yet bm-ned blue and steadfastly.At length, the space was no longer open ; wildpompeii. 133vines entangled their steps, and laid from them,save by imperfect intervals, the guiding beam.But faster and fiercer came the rain, and the lightningassumed its most deadly and blasting form ;they were still, therefore, impelled onward, hopinglast, if the light eluded them, to arrive at somecottage, or some friendly cavern. The vines grewmore and more intricate — the light was entirelysnatched from them ; but a narrow path, whichthey ti-od with labour and pain, guided only' bythe constant and long lingering flashes of the storm,continued to lead them towards its direction. Therain ceased suddenly; precipitous and rough cragsof scorched lava frowned before them, renderedmore fearful by the lightning that illumined thedark and dangerous soil. Sometimes the blazelingered over the iron-grey heaps of scoria, coveredin part with ancient mosses or stunted trees, asif seeking in vain for some gentler product of earth,more worthy of its ire ; and sometimes leaving thewhole of that part of the scene in darkness, thelightning, broad and sheeted, hung redly over theocean tossing far below until its waves seemedglowing into fire ; and so intense was the blaze,134 THE LAST DAYS OFthat it brought vividly into view even the sharpoutline of the more distant windings of the hay,from the eternal Museum, with its lofty how, tothe beautiful Sorrentum and the giant hills behind.Our lovers stopped in perplexity and doubt, whensuddenly, as the darkness that gloomed betweenthe fierce flashes of lightning once more wrappedthem round, they saw near, but high, before them,the mysterious light. Another blaze, in which heavenand earth were reddened, made visible to themthe whole expanse; no house was near, but justwhere they had beheld the light, they thought theysaw in the recess of a cavern the outline of ahuman form. The darkness once more returned ;the light, no longer paled beneath the fires ofheaven, burnt forth again : they resolved to ascendtowards it; they had to wind their way amongvast fragments of stone, here and there overhungwith wild bushes ; but they gained nearer andnearer to the light, and at length they stood oppositethe mouth of a kind of cavern, apparentlyformed by huge splinters of rock that had fallentransversely athwart each other: And, looking intoPOMPEII. 135the gloom, each drew back involuntarily with asuperstitious fear and chill.A fire burned in the far recess of the cave — andoverit was a small caldron ; on a tall and thincolumn of Iron stood a rude lamp ; over thatpart of the wall, at the base of which burned thefire, hung in many rows, as if to dry, a profusionof herbs and weeds. A fox, couched before thefire, gazed upon the strangers with its bright andred eye — its hair bristling — and a low growl stealingfrom between its teeth ; in the centre of the cavewas an earthen statue, which had three heads of asingular and fantastic cast ; they were formed bythe real skulls of a dog, a horse, and a boar ; alow tripod stood before this wild representationof the popular Hecate.But it was not these appendages and appliancesof the cave that thrilled the blood of those whogazed fearfully therein — it was the face of its inmate.Before the fire, with the light shining fullupon her features, sate a woman of considerableage. Perhaps in no country are there seen somany hags as in Italy — in no country does beauty1-36 THE LAST DAYS OFSO awfully change, iu age, to hideousness the mostappalling and revolting. But the old woman nowbefore them was not one of these specimens ofthe extreme of human ugliness ; on the contrary —her countenance betrayed the remains of a regularbut high and aquiline order of feature ; — withstony eyes turned upon them — with a look thatmet and fascinated theirs — they beheld in thatfearful countenance the very image of a corpse ! —the same, the glazed and lustreless regard — theblue and shrunken lips — the drawn and hollowjaw — the dead — lank hair — of a pale grey — thelivid — green — ghastly skin — which seemed allsurely tinged and tainted by the grave !It is a dead thing !" said Glaucus.Nay — it stirs — it is a ghost or larvae"" Alteredlone, as she clung to the Athenians breast."Oh, away — away!" — groaned the slave ; "itis the Witch of Vesuvius."Who are ye ?" said a hollow and ghostlyvoice. " And what do ye here ?"The sound, terrible and death-like as it was —suiting M'cll the countenance of the speaker — andseeming rather the voice of some bodiless .137(leer of the Styx, than Having mortal — would havemade lone shrink back into the pitiless fury of thestorm — hut Glaucus — though not without somemisgiving — drew her into the cavern.We are storm-beaten wanderers from theneighbouring city," said he, " and, decoyed hitherby yon light, we crave shelter and the comfort ofyour hearth."As he spoke, the fox rose from the gi-ound, andadvanced towards the strangers, showing from endto end its white teeth — and deepening in its menacinggrowl.Down, slave !" said the witch ; and at thesound of her voice the beast dropped at once,covering its face with its bush, and keeping onlyits quick, vigilant eye fixed upon the invaders ofits repose. " Come to the fire, if ye will !" saidshe, turning to Glaucus and his companions. " Inever welcome living thing — save the owl, the fox,the toad, and the viper — so I cannot welcome ye ;but come to the fire without welcome — why standupon form .^"The language in which the hag addressed themwas a strange and barbarous Latin, interlarded138 THE LAST DAYS OFwith many words of some more rude and ancientdialect. She did not stir from her seat, hut gazedstonily upon them as Glaucus now released loneof her outer wrapping garments, and making herplace herself on a log of wood, which was the onlyother seat he perceived at hand — fanned with hisbreath the embers into a more elowino- flame.The slave, encouraged by the boldness of her superiors,divested herself also of her long pallas, andcrept timorously to the opposite corner of thehearth.We disturb you, I fear," said the silver voiceof lone in conciliation.The witch did not reply — she seemed like onewho has awakened for a moment from the dead,and then relapsed once more into the eternal slumber.Tell me," said she suddenly, and after a long-pause," are ye brother and sister ?"No;" said lone, blushing.Are ye married ?"Not so ;" replied Glaucus.Io, lovers ! — ha — ha — ha !" and the witchPOMPEII. 139laughed so loud and so long, that the caverns rangagain.The heart of lone stood still at that strangemirth. Glaueus muttered a rapid counter spell tothe omen —-and the slave turned as pale as thecheek of the witch herself.Why dost thou laugh — old crone P^' saidGlaueus, somewhat sternly, as he concluded his invocation.Did I laugh ?" said the hag absently.She is in her dotage," whispered Glaueus ;as he said thus — he caught the glance of thehag, who fixed upon him a malignant and vividglare.Thou lies !" said she abruptly.Thou art an uncourteous welcomer," returnedGlaueus.Hush ! provoke her not, dear Glaueus I"whispered lone.I \\i\\ tell thee why I laughed, when I discoveredye were lovers," said the old woman.It was because it is a pleasure to the old andwithered to look upon young hearts like yours —140 THE LAST DAYS OFand to know the time will come when ye willloathe each other — loathe — loathe — ha — ha — ha !""It was now Ione's turn to pray against the easing prophecy.Z)?V, advertise omen — the gods forbid !" saidshe. " Yet, poor woman, thou knowest little oflove, or thou wouldst know that it never changes''Was I young once, think ye 'f returned thehag, quickly ; " and am I old and hideous anddeathly now. Such as is the form, so is the heart."With these words she sank again into a stillnessprofound and fearful, as if the cessation of lifeitself.Hast thou dwelt here long ?" said Glaucus —after a pause — feeling uncomfortably oppressedbeneath a silence so appalling.Ah, long ! — yes."It is but a drear abode."Ha! thou mayst well say that — Hell is beneathus I" replied the hag, pointing her bonyfinger to the earth. " And, I will tell thee asecret — the dim things below are preparing wrathfor ye above — you, the young — and the thoughtless— and the beautiful."pompeii. 141Thou interest but evil Affords, ill becoming thehospitable," said Glaucus ; " and in future I willbrave the tempest rather than thy welcome."Thou wilt do well. None should ever seekme — save the "Wretched !"And why the wretchedness" asked the Athenian.I am the witch of the mountain," replied thesorceress, with a ghastly grin ; " my trade is togive hope to the hopeless ; for the crossed in love, Ihave philters ; for the avaricious, promises of treasure; for the malicious, potions of revenge ; forthe happy and the good, I have only what lifehas — curses ! — Trouble me no more."With this the grim tenant of the cave relapsedinto a silence so obstinate and sullen, that Glaucusin vain endeavoured to draw her into farther conversation.She did not evince by any alterationof her locked and rigid features, that she evenheard him. Fortunately, however, the storm, whichwas brief as violent, began now to relax ; therain grew less and less fierce — and at last — as theclouds parted, the moon burst forth in the purpleopening of heaven — and streamed clear and fullinto that desolate abode. Never had she shone,142 THE LAST DAYS OFperhaps, on a group more worthy of the painter'sart. The young — the all beautiful lone — seatedby that rude fire — her lover, already forgetful ofthe presence of the hag, at her feet — gazing upwardto her face, and whispering sweet words —the pale and affrighted slave at a little distance —and the ghastly hag resting her deadly eyes uponthem : Yet seemingly serene and fearless — (for thecompanionship of love hath such power) — werethese beautiful beings — things of another spherein that dark and unholy cavern A\ith itsgloomy quaintness of appurtenance. The foxregarded them from his corner with his keen andglowing eye — and as Glaucus now turned towardsthe Avitcli — he perceived, for the first time, justunder her seat, the bright gaze and crested headof a larQ:e snake — whether it was that the vividcolouring of the Athenian cloak, thrown over theshoulders of lone, attracted the reptile's anger — itscrest began to glow and rise, as if menacing andpreparing itself to spring upon the Neapolitan ; —Glaucus caught quickly at one of the half-burnedlogs upon the hearth — and, as if enraged at theaction, the snake came forth from its shelter, andPOMPEII. 143with a loud hiss raised itself on end till itsheight nearly approached that of the Greek.Witch!" cried Glaucus, " command thy creature,or thou wilt see it dead."It has been despoiled of its venom !" said thewitch, aroused at his threat ; but ere the wordshad left her lip, the snake had sprung upon Glaucus:quick and watchful, the agile Greek leaptlightly aside, and struck so fell and dexterous a blowon the head of the snake, that it fell prostrate andwrithing among the embers of the fire.The hag sprang up — and stood confrontingGlaucus with a face which would have befittedthe fiercest of the Furies, so utterly dire andwrathful was its expression — yet even in horrorand ghastliness preserving the outline and traceof beauty — and utterly free from that coarse grotesqueat which the imaginations of the North havesought the source of terror.Thou hast," said she in a slow and steadyvoice — which belied the expression of her face, somuch was it passionless and calm — " thou hasthad shelter under my roof, and warmth at myhearth — thou hast returned evil for good — thou144 THE LAST DAYS OFhast smitten and haply slain the thing that lovedme and was mine — nay more — the creature, aboveall others, consecrated to gods and deemed venerableby man* — now hear thy punishment. Bythe moon — who is the guardian of the sorceress —by Orcus — who is the treasurer of wrath — I cursethee ! and thou art curst ! I\Iay thy love beblasted — may thy name be blackened — may theinfernal mark thee — may thy heart wither andscorch — may thy last hour recall to thee the jn'o-plies voice of the Sfrga of "Vesuvius. And thou,"she added, turning sharply towards lone — andraising her right arm — when Glaucus burst impetuouslyon her speech.Hag !" cried he, " forbear ! JNle thou hastcursed, and I commit myself to the gods — I defyand scorn thee : but breathe but one Mord againstyon maiden, and I will convert the oath on thyfoul lips to thy dying groan — beware !"I have done," replied the hag — laughingwildly — " for in thy doom is she who loves theeaccursed. And not the less, that I heard her lipsA peculiar sanctity was attached by the Romans (as indeedby perhaps, every ancient people) to serpents, wliicli they kepttame in their houses, and often introduced at their meals.P03IPEII. 145breathe thy name, and know by what word tocommend thee to the daemons. Glaucus — thonart doomed !" So saying, the witch turned fromthe Athenian, and kneeling down beside herwounded favourite, which she dragged from thehearth, she turned to them her face no more.O, Glaucus !''' said lone, greatly terrified —what have we done? — let us hasten from thisplace ! — the storm has ceased. Good mistress,forgive him — recall thy words — he meant but todefend himself — accept this peace-offering to unsaythe said f and lone stooping, placed her purse onthe hag's lap.Away !" said she bitterly — " away ! Theoath once woven the Fates only can untie —away rCome, dearest !" said Glaucus, impatiently.Thickest thou that the gods above us or belowhear the impotent ravings of dotage ? — come I"Long and loud rang the echoes of the cavernwith the dread laugh of the saga — she deigned nofarther reply.The lovers breathed more freely when theygained the open air — yet the scene they had wit-vol.II. H146 THE LAST DAYS OFhissed — the words and the hiug-hter of the witch —still fearfully dwelt with lone — and even Glaucuscould not thoroughly shake oiF the impression theybequeathed. The storm had subsided — save nowand then a low thunder muttered at the distanceamidst the darker clouds, or a momentary flash oflightning affronted the sovereignty of the moon.With some difficulty they regained the road —where they found the vehicle already sufficientlyrepaired for their departure — and the carrucarius,calling loudly upon Hercules to tell him where hischarge had vanished.Glaucus vainly endeavoured to cheer the exhaustedspirits of lone ; and scarce less vainly torecover the elastic tone of his own natural gaiety.They soon arrived before the gate of the city ; asit opened to them, a litter borne by slaves impededthe way.It is too late for egress," cried the sentinel tothe inmate of the litter.Not so," said a voice, which the lovers startedto hear ; it was a voice they well recognized. " Iam bound to the villa of JNIarcus Polybius. I shallreturn shortly. I am Barbados, the Egyptian."POMPEII. 147The scruples of him of the gate were removed,and the litter passed close beside the carriage thatbore the lovers.Arbaces, at this hour ! — scarce recovered too,methinks, — whither and for what can he leave thecity ?" said Glaucus.Alas !" replied lone, bursting into tears, "mysoul feels still more and more the omen of evil.Preserve us, O ye gods ! or at least," she murmuredinly, " preserve my Glaucus !"H 2]4;8 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER X.■X'HE LORD OF THE BURNING BELT AND Airs MINIONFATE WRITES HER PROPHECY IN RED LETTERS, BUTWHO SHALL READ THEM?Arbaces had tarried only till the cessation ofthe tempest allowed him, under cover of night, toseek the Saga of Vesuvius. Borne by those of histrustier slaves, in Avliom in all more secret expeditionshe was accustomed to confide, he lay extendedalong his litter, and resigning his sanguineheart to the contemplation of vengeance gratifiedand love possessed. The slaves in so short a journeymoved very little slower than the ordinarypace of mules ; and Arbaces soon arrived at thecommencement of a narrow path, which the lovershad not been fortunate enough to discover ; butwhich, skirting the thick vines, led at once to thehabitation of the witch. Here he arrested thePOMPEII. 149litter ; and bidding his slaves conceal themselvesand the vehicle among the vines, from the observationof any chance passenger, he mounted alone.With steps still feeble but supported by a longstaff, the drear and sharp ascent.Not a drop of rain fell from the tranquil heaven;but the moisture dripped mournfully from theladen boughs of the vine, and now and then collectedin tiny pools in the crevices and hollows ofthe rocky way.Strange passions these for a philosopher,"thought Arbaces, " that lead one like me just newfrom the bed of death, and lapped even in healthamidst the roses of luxury, across such nocturnalpaths as this — but Passion and Vengeance treadingto their goal can make an Elysium of aTartarus"' High, clear, and melancholy .shonethe moon above the road of that dark wayfarer,glassing herself in every pool that lay beforehim, and sleeping in shadow along the slopingmount. He saw before him the same lightthat had guided the steps of his intended victims,but, no longer contrasted by the blackened clouds,*• it shone less redly clear.150 THE LAST DAYS OFHe paused, as at length lie approached themouth of the cavern, to recover breath, and thenwith his wonted collected and stately mien, hecrossed the unhallowed threshold.The fox sprang up at the ingress of this newcomer,and by a long howl announced anothervisiter to his mistress.The witch had resumed her seat, and her aspectof grave-like and grim repose. By her feet, upon abed of dry weeds which half covered it, lay thewounded snake ; but the quick eye of the Egyptiancaught its scales glittering in the reflectedlight of the opposite fire, as it writhed — now contracting,now lengthening, its folds, in pain andunsated anger.Down, slave !" said the witch, as before, tothe fox ; and, as before, the animal di-popped to theground — mute, but vigilant.Rise, servant of Nox and Erebus," said Ar-facescommandingly ; " a superior in thine artsalutes thee ! rise and welcome him."At these words the hag turned her gaze uponthe Egyptian's towering form and dark features.She looked long and fixedly upon him, as he stoodPOMPEII. 151before her in his oriental robe, and folded arms,and steadfast and haughty brow. " "Who artthou!" she said at last, " that tallest thyself greaterin art than the Saga of the Burning Fields, andthe daughter of the perished Etruriann race ?"I am he," answered Arbaces, " from whomall cultivators of magic, from north to south, fromeast to west, from the Ganges and the Nile to thevales of Thessaly and the shores of the yellowTiber — have stooped to learn."There is but one such man in these places,"answered the witch, " whom the men of the outerworld, unknowing his higher attributes and moresecret fame, call Arbaces, the Egyptian : to us of ahigher nature and deeper knowledge, his rightfulappellation is Hermes of the Burning Girdle."Look again," returned Arbaces; " I am he."As he spake, he drew aside his robe and revealeda cincture seemingly of fire, that burnt around hiswaste, clasped in the centre by a plate wherein wasengraved some sign apparently vague and unintelligible,but which was evidently not unknown tothe saga. She rose hastily, and threw herself atthe feet of Arbaces. " I have seen, then," said she,152 The LAST DAYS OFin a voice of deep humility, " the Lord of theMighty Girdle — vouchsafe my homage."Rise," said the Egyptian — " I have need ofthee."So saying, he placed himself on that same log ofvv^ood on which lone had rested before, and motionedto the witch to resume her seat.Thou sayest," said he, as she obeyed, " thatthou art a daughter of the ancient Etruriann* tribes ;the mighty walls of whose rock-built cities yetfrown above the robber race that hath seized upontheir ancient reign. Partly came those tribesfrom Greece, partly were they exiles from a moreburning and primeval soil. In either case artthou of Egyptian lineage, for the Grecian mastersof the aboriginal helot were among the restlesssons the Nile banished from her bosom. Equallythen, O saga I art thou of ancestors that sworeallegiance to mine own. By birth as by knowledgeart thou the subject of Arbaces. Hear me then,and obey !"The witch bowed her head.The Etruria (it may be superfluous to mention) werecelebrated for their enchantments.POMPEII.Whatever art we possess in sorcery"" continuedArbaces, " we are sometimes driven to naturalmeans to attain our object. The ring* and thecrystal,! the ashes and the herbs, § do not giveherring divinations ; neither do the higher mysteriesof the moon yield even the possessor of thegirdle a dispensation from the necessity of employingever and anon human measures for ahuman object : mark me, then ; thou art deeplyskilled, methinks, in the secrets of the more deadlyherbs; thou knowest those which arrest life, whichburn and scorch the soul from out her citadel, orfreeze the channels of young blood into that icewhich no sun can melt. Do I overrate thy skill ?speak, and truly VMighty Hermes, such lore is indeed mine own.Deign to look at these ghostly and corpse-like features; they have waned from the hues of life,merely by watching over the rank herbs whichsimmer night and day in yon caldron."The Egyptian moved his seat from so unblestor so unhealthful a vicinity, as the witch spoke.AitxTuXoficcyriix. "f" K^u^TDXofiavrtia.154 THE LAST DAYS OFIt is well," said he, " thou hast learnt thatmaxim of all the deeper knowledge which saith :Despise the body to make wise the mind"* Butto thy task ; there corinth to thee by tomorrow'sstarlight a vain maiden, seeking of thine art alove charm to fascinate from another the eyes thatshould utter but soft tales to her own ; insteadof thy philters, give the maiden one of thy mostpowerful poisons. Let the lover breathe his vowsto the Shades."The witch trembled from head to foot.Oh pardon ! pardon ! dread master," said shefalteringly, " but this I dare not. The law inthese cities is sharp and vigilant ; they will seize,they will slay me."For what purpose, then, thy herbs and thypotions, vain saga ?" said Arbaces sneeringly.The witch hid her loathsome face with her hands.Oh ! years ago," said she in a voice unlike herusual tones, so plaintive was it, and so soft, " Iwas not the thing that I am now, — I loved, I fanciedmyself beloved."And what connection hath thy love, witch,with my commands ?" said Arbaces impetuously.POMPEII. 155Patience"" resumed the witch, " patience, Iimplore. I love J ! another and less fair than I —yes, by Nemesis ! less fair ; alli-ed from me mychosen. I was of that dark Etruriann tribe towhom most of all were known the secrets of thegloomier magic. My mother was herself a saga ;she shared the resentment of her child ; from herhands I received the potion that was to restore mehis love ; and from her also, the poison that wasto destroy my rival. Oh crush me, dread walls !my trembling hands mistook the phials, my loverfell indeed at my feet ; but, dead ! dead ! Sincethen, what has been life to me ? I became suddenlyold, I devoted myself to the sorceries of myrace ; still by an irresistible impulse I curse myselfwith an awful penance ; still I seek the most noxiousherbs ; still I concoct the poisons ; still I imaginethat I am to give them to my hated rival ; still Ipour them into the phial ; still I fancy that theyshall blast her beauty to the dust ; still I wake andsee the quivering body, the foaming lips, the glazingeyes of my Aldus — murdered, and by me."The skeleton frame of the Avitch shook beneathstrong convulsions.156 THE LAST DAYS OFArbaces gazed upon her with a curious thoughcontemptuous eye.And this foul thing has yet human emotions,"thought he; " she still cowers over the ashes of thesame fire that consumes Arbaces — such are we all !Mystic is the tie of those mortal passions thatunite the greatest and the least."He did not reply till she had somewhat recoveredherself — and now sate rocking herself to and froin her seat, with glassy eyes, fixed on the oppositeflame, and large tears rolling down her lividcheeks.A grievous tale is thine in truth," said Ar-faces; " but these emotions are fit only for ouryouth — age should harden our hearts to all thingsbut ourselves — as every year adds a scale to theshell-fish, so should each year wall and encrustthe heart. Think of those frenzies no more !And now, listen to me again ! By the revengethat was dear to thee, I command thee to obeyme ! it is for vengeance that I seek thee ! Thisyouth whom I would sweep from my path, hascrossed me — despite my spells ; — this thing of purpleand broidery — of smiles and glances — soullessroMPEir. 15^and mindless — with no charm but that of beautyaccursed be it ! — this insect — this Glaucus — Itell thee, by Orcus and by Nemesis, he mustdie!"And working himself up at every word, theEgyptian — forgetful of his debility — of his strangecompanion — of everything but his own vindictiverage, strode, with large and rapid steps, the gloomycavern.Glaucus ! saidst thou, mighty master ?" saidthe witch, abruptly ; and her dim eye glared atthe name with all that fierce resentment at thememory of small affronts so common amongst thesolitary and the shunned.Ay, so he is called ; but what matter thename ? Let it not be heard as that of a livingman, three days from this date !"Hear me !" said the witch, breaking from ashort reverie into which she was plunged afterthis last sentence of the Egyptian. " Hear me !I am thy thing and thy slave ; spare me ! If I giveto the maiden thou speakest of that which woulddestroy the life of Glaucus, T shall be surely detected— the dead ever find avengers. Nay, dread158 THE LAST DAYS OFman ! if thy visit to me be tracked — if thy hatredto Glaucus be known — thou mayest have need ofthy archest magic to protect thyself!"Ha !" said Arbaces, stopping suddenly shortand as a proof of that blindness with whichpassion darkens the eyes even of the most acute —this was the first time — when the risk that hehimself run by this method of vengeance hadoccurred to a mind ordinarily wary and circumspect.But," continued the witch, " if instead of thatwhich shall arrest the heart, I give that whichshall sear and blast the brain — which shall makehim who quaffs it unfit for the uses and career oflife — an abject, raving, benighted thing — smitingsense to drivelling, youth to dotage — will not thyvengeance be equally sated — thy object equallyattained ?"Oh, witch ! no longer the servant, but thesister — the equal of Arbaces — how much brighteris woman's wit even in vengeance than ours ! howmuch more exquisite than death is such a doom !"And," continued the hag — gloating over herfell scheme — " in this is but little danger — for byten thousand methods, which men forbear to seek,POMPEII. 159can our victim become mad. He may have beenamong the vines and seen a nymph* — or the vineitself may have had the same effect — lia — ha Ithey never inquire too scrupulously into thesematters — in which the gods may be agents. Andlet the worst arrive — let it be known that it is alove-charm — why madness is a common effect ofphilters — and even the fair she that gave it findsindulgence in the excuse. Mighty Hermes, haveI ministered to thee cunningly?"Thou shalt have twenty years' longer date forthisbe'* returned Arbaces, — "I will write anew theepoch of thy fate on the face of the pale stars —thou shalt not serve in vain the master of theFlaming Belt. And here, saga, carve thee out —by these golden tools — a warmer cell in this drearycavern — one service to me shall countervail a thousanddivinations by sieve and shears in the gapingrustics." So saying, he cast upon the floor aheavy purse, which clinked not unmusically to theear of the hag, who loved the consciousness ofpossessing the means to purchase comforts sheTo see a nymph was to become mad, according to classic andpopular superstition.160 THE LAST DAYS OPdisdained. " Farewell !" said Arbaces — " fail notoutwatch the stars in concocting thy beverage —thou shalt lord it over thy sisters at the Walnut-tree,*when thou tallest them that thy patron andthy friend is Hermes the Egyptian. To-morrownight we meet again."He stayed not to hear the valediction or thethanks of the Avitch ; with a quick step he passedinto the moon-lit air, and hastened down themountain.The witch, who followed his steps to the threshold,stood long at the entrance of the cavern —gazing fixedly on his receding form, and as thesad moonlight streamed upon her shadowy formand death-like face, emerging from the dismalrocks — it seemed as if one gifted indeed by supernaturalmagic had escaped from the dreary Orcus ;and, the foremost of its ghostly throng, stood at itsblack portals — vainly summoning his return, orvainly sighing to rejoin him. The hag then slowlyThe celebrated and immemorial rendezvous of the witches,at Benevento. The winged serpent attached to it, long an objectof idolatry in those parts, was probably consecrated by Egyptiansuperstitions.POMPEII. 161re-entering the cave, picked groaningly up the heavypurse, took the lamp from its stand, and passingthe remotest depth of her cell — a black andabrupt passage, which was not visible, save at anear approach, closed round as it was with juttingand sharp crags — yawned before her ; she wentseveral yards along this gloomy path, which slopedgradually downwards, as if towards the bowels ofthe earth, and, lifting a stone, deposited her treasurein a hole beneath, which, as the lamp piercedits secrets, seemed already to contain coins ofvarious value, wrung from the credulity or gratitudeof her visitors.I love to look at you," said she, apostrophizingthe monies ; " for when I see you I feel that I amindeed of power. And I am to have twenty years'longer life to increase your store ! O thou greatHermes !"She replaced the stone, and continued her pathonward for some paces, when she stopped before adeep irregular fissure in the earth. Here as shebent — strange, rumbling, hoarse, and distant soundsmight be heard, while ever and anon — with a loudand grating noise which, to use a homely but THE LAST DAYS OFful simile, seemed to resemble the grinding of steelupon wheels — volumes of steaming and dark smokeissued forth — and rushed spirally along thecavern.The Shades are noisier than their wont," saidthe hag, shaking her grey locks ; and, looking intothe cavity, she beheld, far down, glimpses of along streak of light, intensely but darkly red.Strange !" she said, shrinking back ; " it is onlywithin the last two days that dull, deep light hathbeen visible — what can it portend ?"The fox, who had attended the steps of his fellmistress, uttered a dismal howl, and ran coweringback to the inner cave — a cold shuddering seizedthe hag herself at the cry of the animal, which,causeless as it seemed, the superstitions of the timeconsidered deeply ominous. She muttered herplacatory charm, and tottered back into hercavern, where, amidst her herbs and incantations,she prepared to execute the orders of the Egyptian.He called me dotard"' said she, as the smokecurled from the hissing caldron — " when the jawsdrop — and the grinders fall — and the heart scarcebeats — it is a pitiable thing to dote ; but when,"POMPEII. 163she added with a savage and exulting grin — " theyoung, and the beautiful, and the strong are suddenlysmitten into idiocy — ah, that is terrible !Burn flame — simmer herb — swelter toad — I cursedhim, and he shall be cursed !"On that night, and at the same hour which witnessedthe dark and unholy interview betweenArbaces, and the saga, — Apsecides was baptised.164 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER XLEVENTS PROGRESS. — THE PLOT THICKENS THE WEB ISWOVEN, BLT THE NET CHANGES HANDS.And you have the courage then, Julia, toseek the Witch of Vesuvius this evening, in companytoo with that fearful man ?''"'Why, Nydia," replied Julia timidly ; " dostthou really think there is anything to dread ?These old hags, with their enchanted mirrors —their trembling sieves, and their moon-gatheredherbs, are, I imagine, but crafty impostors — whohave learnt, perhaps, nothing but the very charmfor which I apply to their skill ; and which isdrawn but from the knowledge of the fiefs herbsand simples. Wherefore should I dread ?'^''Dost thou not fear thy companion .''''''What, Arbaces ? By Dean, I never sawPOMPEII. 165lover more courteous than that same magician !And were he not so dark, he would be evenhandsome."Blind as she was, Nydia had the penetration toperceive that Julia's mind was not one that thegallantries of Arbaces were likely to terrify. She,therefore, dissuaded her no more ; but nursed, inher excited heart, the wild and encreasing desireto know if sorcery had indeed a spell to fascinatelove to love.Let me go with thee, noble Julia," said she,at length ; " my presence is no protection, but Tshould like to be beside thee to the last,"Thine offer pleases me much," replied thedaughter of Diomed. " Yet how canst thou contriveit — we may not return until late — they willmiss thee."lone is indulgent," replied Nydia. " If thouwilt permit me to sleep beneath thy roof, I will saythat thou, an early patroness and friend, hast invitedme to pass the day with thee, and sing theemy Thessalian songs ; her courtesy will readilygrant to thee so light a boon."Nay, ask for thyself!" said the haughty166 THE LAST DAYS OPJulia, " / stoop to request no favour from theNeapolitan VWell, be it so ; I will take my leave now ;make my request, which I know will be readilygranted, and return shortly."Do so ; and thy bed shall be prepared in myown chamber."With that Nydia left the fair Pompeian.On her way back to lone she was met by thechariot of Glaucus, on "n^hose fiery and surveyingsteeds was riveted the gaze of the crowded street.He kindly stopped for a moment to speak to theflower girl.Blooming as thine own roses, my gentle Nydia,and how is thy fair mistress .'' — recovered, Itrust, from the effects of the storm."I have not seen her this morning," answeredNydia, " but—""But what.? draw back — the horses are toonear thee."But, think you lone will permit me to pass theday with Julia, the daughter of Diomed — she wishesit, and was kind to me when I had few friends."POMPEII. 167The gods bless thy grateful heart ! I will answerfor Ione's permission'"Then I may stay over the night and return tomorrow?" said Nydia, shrinking from the praiseshe so little merited.As thou and fair Julia please. Commend meto her ; — and, liarkye, Nydia, when thou hearesther speak, note the contrast of her voice with thatof the silver-toned lone. — Fate."His spirits entirely recovered from the effect ofthe past night — his locks weaving in the wind —his joyous and elastic heart bounding with everyspring of his Parthian steeds — a very prototype ofhis country's god — full of youth and of love —Glaucus was borne rapidly to his mistress.Enjoy while ye may the present — who can readthe future !As the evening darkened, Julia, reclined withinher litter, which was capacious enough also to admither blind companion, took her way to the ruralbaths, indicated by Arbaces : to her natural levityof disposition, her enterprise brought less of terrorthan of pleasurable excitement ; above all, she1 68 THE LAST DAYS OFglowed at the thought of her coming triumph overthe hated Neapolitan.A small but gay group was collected round thedoor of the villa, as her litter passed by it to theprivate entrance of the baths apportioned to thewomen.Methinks, by this dim light," said one ofthe by-sanders, " I recognize the slaves ofDiomed."True, Clodius," said Sallust, " it is probablythe litter of his daughter Julia. She is rich, myfriend ; why dost thou not proffer thy suit to her?"Why, I had once hoped that Glaucus wouldhave married her. She does not disguise her attachment; and then, as he gambles freely and withill-success — "The sesterces would have passed to thee, wiseClodius ; a wife is a good thing when it belongsto another man !""But," continued Clodius, " as Glaucus is, Iunderstand, to wed the Neapolitan, I think I musteven try my chance with the rejected maid. Afterall, the lamp of Hymen will be gilt, and the vesselwill reconcile one to the odour of the flame.POMPEII. VigoI shall only protest, my Sallust, against Diomedesmaking thee trustee to his daughter's fortune*"Ha ! ha ! let us within, my commission ; thewine and the garlands wait us."Dismissing her slaves to that part of the houseset apart for their entertainment, Julia entered thebaths with Nydia, and declining the offers of theattendants, passed by a private door into the gardenbehind.She comes by appointment, be sure," said oneof the slaves.What is that to thee ?" said a superintendantsourly ; " she pays for the baths and does not wastethe saffron. Such appointments are the best partof the trade. Hark ! do you not hear the widowFulvia clapping her hands ! run fool — run !"Julia and Nydia, avoiding the more public partof the garden — arrived at the place specified by theEgyptian. In a small circular plot of grass — thestars gleamed upon the statue of Silenus : — theIt was an ancient Roman law, that no one should make awoman his heir. This law was evaded by the parent's assigninghis fortune to a friend in trust for his daughter, but the trusteemight keep it if he liked. The law had, however, fallen intodisuse before the date of this story.\0L. H. I170 THE LAST DAYS OFmerry god reclined upon a fragment of rock —the lynx of Bacchus at his feet — and over hismouth he held with extended arm a bunch ofgrapes — which he seemingly laughed to welcome,ere he devoured."I see not the magician," said Julia, lookinground — when, as she spoke, the Egyptian slowlyemerged from the neighbouring foliage, and thelight fell palely over his sweeping robes.Salve, sweet maiden ! but ha ! whom hastthou here ? we must have no companions !""It is but the blind flower girl, wise magician""replied Julia, " herself a Thessalian."Oh ! Nydia !" said the Egyptian, " I knowher well."Nydia drew back and shuddered."Thou hast been at my house, methinks !" saidhe, approaching his voice to Nydia's ear ; " thouknowest the oath ! — silence and secrecy, now asthen, or beware !"Yet," he added musingly to himself, "why confidemore than is necessary, even in the blind ? —Julia, canst thou trust thyself alone with me ? Be-pompeii.171lieve me, the magician is less formidable than heseems."As he spoke, he gently clreAv Julia aside.The witch loves not many visitors at once,"said he ; " leave Nydia here till your return ; shecan be of no assistance to us : and, for protection —your own beauty suffices — your own beauty andyour own rank — yes, Julia, I know thy name andbirth. Come ! trust thyself with me, fair rival ofthe youngest of the Naiads !"The vain Julia was not, as we have seen, easilyaffrighted ; she was moved by the flattery of Ar-faces,and she readily consented to suffer Nydiato await her return ; nor did Nydia press herpresence. At the sound of the Egyptian's voice,all her terror of him seemed to return ; she felt asentiment of pleasure at learning she was not totravel in his companionship.She returned to the house, and in one of theprivate chambers waited their return. Many andbitter were the thoughts of this wild ffirl as shesate there in her eternal darkness. She thoughtof her own desolate fate, far from her native land,i2172 THE LAST DAYS OFfar from the Land cares that once assuaged theApril sorrows of childhood ; — deprived of the lightof day, with none but strangers to guide her stepsaccursed by the one soft feeling of her heart —loving and without hope, save the dim and unholyray which shot across her mind, as her Thessalianfancies questioned of the force of spells and thegifts of magic !Nature had soAvn in the heart of this poor girlthe seems of virtue never destined to ripen. Thelessons of adversity are not always salutary — sometimesthey soften and amend, but as often they indurateand pervert. If we consider ourselves moreharshly treated by fate than those around us, anddo not acknowledge in our own deeds the equity ofthe severity, we become too apt to deem theworld our enemy, to case ourselves in defiance,to wrestle against our softer self and to indulgethe darker passions which are so easily fermentedby the sense of injustice. Sold early intoslavery — sentenced to a sordid task-master — exchangingher situation, only yet more to embitterher lot, the kindlier feelings, naturally profuse inthe breast of Nydia, were nipped and blighted.POMPEII. 173Her sense of right and wrong was confused by apassion to which she had so madly surrenderedherself; and the same intense and tragic emotions,which we read of in the women of the classic age —a Pyrrha — a Medea — which hurried and SAveptaway the whole soul when once delivered to love —ruled, and rioted in, her breast.Time passed ; a light step entered the chamberwhere Nydia yet indulged her gloomy meditations.O thanked be the immortal gods !" said Julia,I have returned, I have left that terrible cavern :come, Nydia ! let us away forthwith !"It was not till they were seated in the litter,that Julia again spoke.Oh !" said she, tremblingly, " such a scene !such fearful incantations ! and the dead face of thehag ! but, let us talk not of it ! I have obtainedthe potion — she pledges its effect. My rivalshall be suddenly indifferent to his eye ; and I,I alone, the idol of Glaucus !"Glaucus !"" exclaimed Nydia.Ay ! I told thee, girl, at first, that it was notthe Athenian whom I loved — but I see now that174 The LAST DAYS OFI may trust thee wholly — it is the beautifulGreek !"What then were Nydia's emotions ! she hadconnived, she had assisted in tearing Glaucus fromlone ; but only to transfer, by all the power ofmagic, his affections yet more hopelessly to another.Her heart swelled almost to suffocation — she gaspedfor breath — in the darkness of the vehicle, Juliadid not perceive the agitation of her companion ;she went on rapidly dilating on the promised effectof her acquisition, and on her approaching triumphover lone, every now and then abruptly digressingto the horror of the scene she had quittedthe unmoved mien of Arbaces, and his authorityover the dreadful saga.Meanwhile Nydia recovered her self-possession ;a thought flashed across her ; she slept in thechamber of Julia — she might possess herself of thepotion.They arrived at the house of Diomed, and descendedto Julia's apartment, where the nights repastawaited them.Drink, Nydia, thou must be cold ; the air Alaschill to-night ; as for mo, my veins are yet ice."POMPEII. 175And Julia unhesitatingly quaffed deep draughtsof the spiced wine.Thou hast the potions"' said Nydia ; "let mehold it in my hands — how small the phial is ! ofwhat colour is the draught ?"'"'Clear as crystal," replied Julia as she retookthe philter ; " thou couldst not tell it from thiswater. The witch assures me it is tasteless. Smallthough the phial, it suffices for a life's fidelity : it isto be poured into any liquid ; and Glaucus willonly know what he has quaffed by the effects''Exactly like this water in appearance ?"Yes, sparkling and colourless as this. Howbright it seems ! it is as the very essence of moonlitdews. Bright thing ! how thou shines on myhopes through thy crystal vase !"'"'And how is it sealed ?"'"'But by one little stopper — withdraw it now —the draught gives no odour. Strange, that thatwhich speaks to neither sense, should thus commandall !"Is the effect instantaneous ?"'"'"Usually; — but sometimes it remains dormantfor a few hours."176 THE LAST DAYS OFO hoar sweet this perfume !" said Nydiasuddenly, as she took up a small bottle on thetable, and bent over its fragrant contents.Thickest thou so ? the bottle is set with gemsof some value — thou wouldst not have the braceletyester morn — wilt thou take the bottle ?"It ought to be such perfumes as these thatshould remind one who cannot see of the generousJulia, — If the bottle be not too costly — "Oh ! I have a thousand costlier ones ; take it,child !"Nydia bowed her gratitude, and placed thebottle in her vest.And the draught would be equally efficacious,whoever administers it ?''''If the most hideous hag beneath the sunbestowed it, such is its asserted virtue, thatGlaucus would deem her beautiful, and none buther !".Julia, warmed by wine and the reaction of herspirits, was now all animation and delight ; shelaughed loud, and talked on a hundred mattersnor was it till the niffht had advanced far to-pompeii.177wards morning, that she summoned her slaves,and undressed.When they were dismissed, she said to Nydia —I will not suffer this holy draught to quit mypresence till the hour comes for its uses. Lieunder my pillow, bright spirit, and give me happydreams !"So saying, she placed the potion under herpillow. — Nydia's heart beat violently.Why dost thou drink that unmixed water,Nydia ? take the wine by its side."I am fevered," replied the blind girl, " and thewater cools me — I will place this bottle by mybed-side, it refreshes in these summer nights, Avhenthe dews of sleep fall not on our lips. Fair Julia,I must leave thee Avery early — so lone bids —perhaps before thou art awake : accept, therefore,now my congratulations."Thanks — when next we meet, you may findGlaucus at my feet."They had rete-ed to their couches, and Julia,worn out by the excitement of the day, soon slept ;but anxious and burning thoughts rolled over theI 5178 THE LAST DAYS OFmind of the wakeful Thessalian. She listened tothe calm breathing of Julia ; and her ear, accustomedto the finest shades of sound, speedily assuredher of the deep slumber of her companion.Now, befriend me, Venus I'' said she softly.She rose gently, and poured the perfume fromthe gift of Julia upon the marble floor — she rinsedit several times carefully with the water that wasbeside her, and then easily finding the bed ofJulia, (for night to her was as day,) she pressedher trembling hand under the pillow and seizedthe potion. — Julia stirred not, her breath regularlyfanned the burning cheek of the blindgirl. Nydia then, opening the phial, poured itscontents into the bottle, which easily containedthem ; and then, refilling the former reservoir of thepotion with that limpid water which Julia hadassured her it so resembled, she once more placedthe phial in its former place. She then stoleagain to her couch, and waited, with whatthoughts ! the dawning day.The sun had risen — Julia slept still — Nydianoiselessly dressed herself, placed her treasure«^POMPEII. 179carefully in her vest, took up her stair, andhastened to quit the house.The porter, Medon, saluted her kindly as shedescended the steps that led to the street ; sheheard him not, her mind was confused and lost inthe whirl of tumultuous thought, — each thought apassion. She felt the pure morning air upon hercheek, but it cooled not her scorching veins.Glaucus," she murmured, "all the love-charmsof the wildest magic could not make thee loveme as I love thee — lone ! — ah, away hesitation !away remorse ! Glaucus, my fate is in thy smile,and thine ! O hope ! O joy ! transport I — thisfate is in these hands !"180 THE LAST DAYS OFNOTE TO BOOK III.(a) Page 8. — " The influence of the evil eye."This superstition, to which I have more than once alludedthroughout this work, still flourishes in Magna Brescia, withscarcely diminished vigour. I remember conversing at Napleswith a lady of the highest rank, and of intellect and informationvery uncommon amongst the noble Italians of either sex, when Isuddenly observed her change colour, and make a rapid and singularmotion with her finger. " My God, that man !" shewhispered tremblingly.What man ?"See ! the Count *••**• he has just entered."He ought to be much flattered to cause such emotion ; doubtlesshe has been one of the Signora's admirers."Admirer ! Heaven forbid ! He has the evil eye. His lookfell full upon me. Something dreadful will certainly happen."I see nothing remarkable in his eyes."So much the worse. The danger is greater for being disguised.He is a terrible man. The last time he looked uponmy husband, it was at cards, and he lost half his income at asitting ; his ill-luck was miraculous. The Count met my littleboy in the gardens, and the poor child broke his arm that evening.Oh ! what shall I do ! something dreadful will certainlyhappen — and, heavens ! he is admiring my cap !"Does every one find the eyes of the Count equally fatal, andhis admiration equally exciting ?"Every one — he is universally dreaded ; and, — what is verystrange, he is so angry if he sees you avoid him !"POMPEII. 181That is very strange indeed ! the wretch !"At Naples, the superstition works well for the jewellers, — somany charms and talismans as they sell for the ominous fascinationof the mal-occhio ! In Pompeii, the talismans were equitynumerous, but not always of so elegant a shape, nor of so decorousa character. But, generally speaking, a coral ornamentwas, as it now is, among the favourite averted of the evil influence.The Thebes, about Pontus, were supposed to have anhereditary claim to this charming attribute, and could even killgrown-up men with a glance. As for Africa, whei-e the belief alsostill exists, certain families could not only destroy children, butwither up trees — they did this not with curses but praises. Inour time, politicians have often possessed this latter faculty ! andthe moment they take to praising an institution, it is time topray God for it ! The malus oculus was not always differentfrom the eyes of other people. But persons, especially of thefairer sex, with double pupils to the organ, were above all to beshunned and dreaded. The syrians were said to possess thisfatal deformity. In all countries, even in the North, the eyehas ever been held the chief seat of fascination ; but now-a-days,ladies with a single pupil, manage the work of destruction prettyeasily : — so much do we improve upon our forefathers !END OF BOOK III.BOOK IV.Philtra nocent animus, cinque furore habet.Ovid.3 85CHAPTER I.REFLECTIONS ON THE ZEAL OF THE EARLY CHRISTIANS. —TWO mien COME TO A PERILOUS RESOLVE. WALLS HAVEEARS — PARTICULARLY SACRED WALLS !Whoever regards the early history of Christianity,will perceive how necessary to its triumphwas that fierce spirit of zeal, which, fearing nodanger, accepting no compromise, inspired itschampions and sustained its martyrs. In a dominantChurch the genius of intolerance betrays itscause ; — in a weak and a persecuted Church, thesame genius mainly supports. It was necessaryto scorn — to loathe — to abhor the creeds of othermen, in order to conquer the temptations whichthey presented — it was necessary rigidly to believenot only that the gospel was the true faith, butthe sole true faith that saved, in order to nerve186 THE LAST DAYS OFthe disciple to the austerity of its doctrine, and toencourage him to the sacred and perilous chivalryof converting the Polytheist and the Heathen.The sectarian sternness which confined virtue andheaven to a chosen few, which saw demons inother gods, and the penalties of hell in anotherreligion — made the believer naturally anxious toconvert all to whom he felt the ties of humanaffection ; and the circle thus traced by benevolenceto man, was yet more widened by a desirefor the glory of God. It was for the honour ofthe Christian faith that the Christian boldly forcedhis tenets upon the scepticism of some, the repugnanceof others, the sage contempt of the philosopher,the pious shudder of the people; — his veryintolerance supplied him with his fittest instrumentsof success ; and the soft Heathen began atlast to imagine there must indeed be somethingholy in a zeal wholly foreign to his experience,which stopped at no obstacle, dreaded no danger,and even at the torture, or on the scaffold, referreda dispute far other than the calm differences ofspeculative philosophy, to the tribunal of an Eter-POMPEII. 187nal Judge. It was thus that the same fervourwhich made the Christian of the middle aofe abigot without mercy, made the Christian of theearly days a hero without fear.Of these more fiery, daring, and earnest natures,not the least ardent was Olinthus. No soonerhad Appetites been received by the rites of baptisminto the bosom of the Church, than theNazarene hastened to make him conscious ofthe impossibility to retain the office and robesof priesthood. He could not, it was evident,profess to worship God, and continue evenoutwardly to honour the idolatrous altars of theFiend.Nor was this all ; the sanguine and impetuousmind of Olinthus beheld in the power of Appetitesthe means of divulging to the deluded people thejuggling mysteries of the oracular Isis. He thoughtHeaven had sent this instrument of its design inorder to disabuse the eyes of the crowd, and preparethe way, perchance, for the conversion of awhole city. He did not hesitate then to appeal toall the new-kindled enthusiasm of Appetites, to188 THE LAST DAYS OFarouse his courage and to stimulate his zeal.They met, according to previous agreement, theevening after the baptism of Appetites, in thegrove of Cybele, which we have before described.At the next solemn consultation of the oracle""said Olinthus, as he proceeded in the warmth ofhis address, " advance yourself to the railing,proclaim aloud to the people the deception theyendure — invite them to enter, to be themselves thewitness of the gross but artful mechanism of imposturethou hast described to me. Fear not —the Lord, who protected Daniel, shall protectthee; we, — the community of Christians, will beamongst the crowd ; we will urge on the shrinking; and in the first flush of the popular indignationand shame, I, myself, upon those veryaltars, will plant the palm-branch typical of thegospel — and to my tongue shall descend the rushingSpirit of the living God."Heated and excited as he was, this suggestionwas not unpleasing to Appetites. He was rejoicedat so early an opportunity of distinguishing hisfaith in his new sect, and to his holier feelingsPOMPEII. 189were added those of a vindictive loathing at theimposition he had himself suffered, and a desire toavenge it. In that sanguine and elastic overboardof obstacles (a necessary blindness to all who undertakeventurous and lofty actions), neither Olin-thusnor the proselyte perceived all the difficultiesto the success of their scheme, Avliich might befound in the reverent superstition of the peoplethemselves, who' would probably be loath, beforethe sacred altars of the great Egyptian goddess, tobelieve even the testimony of her priest against herpower.Appetites then assented to this proposal with areadiness which delighted Olinthus. They partedM'ith the understanding, that Olinthus shouldconfer with the more important of his Christianbrethren on this great enterprise, should receivetheir advice and the assurances of their supporton the eventful day. It so chanced that one ofthe festivals of Isis was to be held on the secondday after this conference. The festival proffered aready occasion for the design. They appointedto meet once more on the next evening at the190 THE LAST DAYS OFsame spot ; and in that meeting was finally to besettled the order and details of the disclosure forthe following day.It happened that the latter part of this conferencehad been held near the sacellum, or smallchapel, Which I have described in the earlier partof this work ; and so soon as the forms of theChristian and the priest had disappeared from thegrove, a dark and ungainly figure emerged frombehind the chapel.I have tracked you with some effect, my brotherflamen"" said the eavesdropper ; " you, thepriest of Isis, have not for mere idle discussionconferred with this gloomy Christian. Alas ! thatI could not hear all your precious plot : Enough ! Ifind, at least, that you meditate revealing the sacredmysteries, and that tomorrow you meet again atthis place to plan the how and the when. MayOsiris sharpen my ears then, to detect the whole ofyour unheard-of audacity. When I have learntmore, I must confer at once with Arbaces. Wewill frustrate you, my friends, deep as you thinkPOMPEII. 191yourselves. At present, my breast is a loekecltreasury of your secret."So saying, Calenus, for it was he, wrapped hisrobe round him, and strode thoughtfully homeward.192 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER II.A CLASSIC HOST, COOK, AND KITCHEN. — APiECIDES SEEKSlONE— THEIR Conversation.It was then the day for Diomedes banquet tothe most select of his friends. The gracefulGlaucus, the beautiful lone, the official Pansa, thehigh-born Clodius, the immortal Fulvius, the exquisiteLepidus, the epicure Sallust, were not theonly honoured of his festival. He expected also, aninvalid senator from Rome, (a man of considerablerepute and favour at court,) and a great warriorfrom Herculaneum, who had fought with Titusagainst the Jews, and having enriched himselfprodigiously in the wars, was always told by hisfriends, that his country was eternally indebtedto his disinterested exertions I The party, how-pompeii.193ever, extended to a yet greater number : for,although, critically speaking, it was, at one time,thought inelegant among the Romans, to entertainless than three or more than nine at theirbanquets, yet this rule was easily disregarded bythe ostentatious. And we are told, indeed, inhistory, that one of the most splendid of theseentertainers usually feasted a select party of threehundred. Diomed, however, more modest, contentedhimself with doubling the number of theMuses. His party consisted of eighteen, no unfashionablenumber in the present day. ' The morethe merrier,' says the proverb — for my part, at adinner, I have always found it exactly the reverse!It was the morning of Diomed's banquet; andDiomed himself, though he greatly affected thegentleman and the scholar, retained enough ofhis mercantile experience to know that a master'seye makes a ready servant. Accordingly, withhis tunic girdled on his portly stomach, his easyslippers on his feet, a small wand in his hand,wherewith he now directed the gaze, and nowVOL. II. K194 THE LAST DAYS OFcorrected the back, of some duller menial,he went from chamber to chamber of his costlyvilla.He did not disdain even a visit to that sacredapartment, in which the priests of the festival preparetheir offerings. On entering the kitchen, hisears were agreeably stunned by the noise of dishesand pans, of oaths and commands. Small as thisindispensable chamber seems to have been inall the houses of Pompeii, it was, nevertheless,usually fitted up with all that amazing variety ofstoves and shapes, stewpan and saucepans, cuttersand moulds, without which a cook of spirit, nomatter whether he be an ancient or a modern, declaresit utterly impossible that he can give youanything to eat. And as fuel was then, as now, dearand scarce in those regions, great seems to havebeen the dexterity exercised in preparing as manythings as possible with as little fire. An admirablecontrivance of this nature may be still seenin the Neapolitan Museum, viz. a portable kitchen,about the size of a folio volume, containing stovesfor four plats, and an apparatus for heating waterPOMPEII. 195or other beverages. It would be an excellent appendageto our modern cheap libraries, containingas much food for the body as they do for themind; — with this difference, you would satisfactorilyrecur to the first work much more frequentlythan you would to the last.Across the small kitchen flitted many formswhich the quick eye of the master did not recognise.Oh ! oh !'' grumbled he to himself, " thatcursed Congrio hath invited a whole legion ofcooks to assist him. They won't serve for nothing,and this is another item in the total of myday's expenses. By Bacchus ! thrice lucky shall Tbe if the slaves do not help themselves to some ofthe drinking vessels — ready, alas ! are their hands,capacious are their tunics — me misery rThe cooks, however, worked on, seemingly heedlessof the apparition of Diomed.Ho, Euclid, your egg-pan ! What, is this thelargest ? it only holds thirty-three eggs : in thehouses / usually serve, the smallest egg-pan holdsfifty, if need be !"K 2196 THE LAST DAYS OFThe unconscionable rogue," thought Diomed,he talks of eggs as if they were a sesterce ahundred ! "By Mercury V cried a pert little culinarydisciple, scarce in his noviciate ; " who ever sawsuch antique sweetmeat shapes as these! — it isimpossible to do credit to one's art with suchrude materials. Why, Sallust commonest sweetmeatshape represents the whole siege of Troy;Hector, and Paris, arid ^ Helen with littleAstyanax and the Wooden Horse into the bargain!Silence, fool !" said Congrio, the cook of thehouse, who seemed to leave the chief part of thebattle to his allies — " my master, Diomed — is notone of those expensive good-for-noughts who musthave the last fashion, cost what it will."Thou lies, base slave!" cried Diomed, in agreat passion — " and thou contest me alreadyenough to have ruined Lucullus himself — come outof thy den, I want to talk to thee."The slave, with a sly wink at his confederates,obeyed the command.POMPEII. 197*' Man of three letters"* said Diomed, with aface of solemn anger — " how didst thou dare toinvite all those rascals into my house ? — I see thiefwritten in every line of their faces."Yet, I assure you, master, that they are menof most respectable character — the best cooks ofthe place — it is a great favour to get them ; — butfor my sake — "Thy sake ! unhappy Congrio" — interruptedDiomed — " and by what purloined monies of mineby what reserved filings from marketing — bywhat goodly meats converted into grease, and soldin the suburbs — by what false charges for bronzesmarred, and earthenware broken — hast thou beenenabled to make them serve thee for thy sakes'"Nay, master, — Do not impeach my honesty —May the gods desert me if ""Swear not!" — again interrupted the cholericDiomed — " for then the gods will smite thee foraperjurer, and I shall lose my cook on the eve ofdinner. But, enough of this at present — keep a• The common witty objurgation, from the bilateral word"fur" (thief).198 THE LAST DAYS OPsharp eye on thy ill-favoured assistants — and tellme no tales tomorrow of vases broken, and cupsmiraculously vanished, or thy whole back shall beone pain — and hark thee I thou knowest thou hastmade me pay for those Phrygian attains* — enough,per Hercle, to have feasted a sober man for a yeartogether — see that they be not one iota over-roasted.The last time, O Congrio, that I gave a banquet tomy friends, when thy vanity did so boldly undertakethe becoming appearance of a Median crane — thouknowest it came up like a stone from aetna — asif all the fires of Phlegethon had been scorchingout its juices. Be modest this time, Congrio—wary and modest. Modesty is the nurse of greatactions ; and in all other things, as in this, if thouwilt not spare thy master's purse, at least consultthy master's glory."There shall not be such a scena seen at Pompeii,since the days of Hercules*'Softly — softly — thy cursed boasting again. —The attain of Phrygia or Ionia (the bird thus anglicisedin the plural) was held in peculiar esteem by the Romans —Attain canis suavissima;" — (Then. lib. ix. cap 8. and 9.)It was a little bigger than a partridge.POMPEII. 199But, I say, Congrio — yon homununculus — yon pigmyassailant of my cranes — yon pert-tongue neophyteof the kitchen — was there aught but insolence onhis tongue when he maligned the comeliness ofmy sweetmeat shapes ? I would not be out of thefashion, Congrio."""It is but the custom of us cooks," repliedCongrio, gravely, " to undervalue our tools, inorder to increase the effect of our art. The sweetmeatshape is a fair shape, and a lovely ; but Iwould recommend my master, at the first occasion,to purchase some new ones of a "That will suffice," exclaimed Diomed, whoseemed resolved never to allow his slave to finishhis sentences — " Now, resume thy charge — shine —eclipse thyself — let men envy Diomed his cook —let the slaves of Pompeii style thee Congrio theGreat ! Go — yet stay — thou hast not spent allthe monies I gave thee for the marketing ?"^All!'' — alas! the nightingales' tongues and theRoman macula,* and the oysters from Britain," candidly divine macula Porch." — Juvenal, x. 1. 365.A rich and delicate species of sausage.200 THE LAST DAYS OFand sunday other things, too numerous now to recite,are yet left unpaid for ; but what matter —every one trusts the Archimagirus* of Diomed thewealthy!"O ! unconscionable prodigal — what waste ! —what profusion ! — I am ruined — but go, hasten —inspect ! — taste ! — perform ! — surpass thyself ! Letthe Roman senator not despise the poor PompeianAway, slave ! — and remember, the Phrygian attains."The chief disappeared within his natural domain,and Diomed rolled back his portly presence to themore courtly chambers. All was to his liking — theflowers were fresh — the fountains played briskly —the mosaic pavements were smooth as mirrors.Where is my daughter Julia ?" he asked.At the bath?"Ah ! that reminds me! — time wanes — and Imust bathe also."Our story returns to Appetites. — On awakingthat day from the broken and feverish sleep whichArchimagirus was the lofty title of the chief cook.POMPEII. 201had followed his adoption of a faith so strikinglyand sternly at variance with that in which hisyouth had been nurtured, the young priestcould scarcely imagine that he was not yet in adream ; he had crossed the fatal river — the pastwas henceforth to have no sympathy with thefuture ; the two worlds were distinct and separate,that which had been, from that which was to be.To what a bold and adventurous enterprise he hadpledged his life — to unveil the mysteries in whichhe had participated — to desecrate the altars he hadserved — to denounce the goddess whose ministeringrobe he wore ! Slowly he became sensible of thehatred and the horror he should provoke amongstthe pious even if successful ; if frustrated in hisdaring attempt, what penalties might he not incurfor an offence hitherto unheard of — for whichno specific law, derived from experience, was prepared,and which, for that very reason, precedents,dragged from the sharpest armoury of obsoleteand inapplicable legislation, would probably bedistorted to meet ! His friends, — the sister of hisyouth, — could he expect justice, though he mightK 5202 THE LAST DAYS OFreceive compassion, from them ? — this brave andheroic act would by their heathen eyes be regarded,perhaps, as a heinous apostasy — at the best, as apitiable madness.He dared — he renounced — everything in thisworld — in the hope of securing that eternity inthe next, which had so suddenly been revealed tohim. While these thoughts on the one hand invadedhis breast, on the other hand, his pride,his courage, and his virtue, mingled with reminiscencesof revenge for deceit, of indignant disgustat fraud, conspired to raise and to support him.The conflict was sharp and keen ; but his newfeelings triumphed over his old : and a mightyargument in favour of wrestling with the sanctitiesof old opinions and hereditary fortis, might befound in the conquest over both, achieved by thathumble priest. Had the early Christians been morecontrolled by " the solemn possibilities of custom*"less of democrats in the pure and lofty acceptationof that perverted word, — Christianity wouldhave perished in its cradle !As each priest in succession slept several nightsPOMPEII. 208together in the chambers of the temple, the termimposed on Appetites was not yet completed ; andwhen he had risen from his couch, attired himself,as usual, in his robes, and left his narrowchamber, he found himself before the altars ofthe temple.In the exhaustion of his late emotions, he hadslept far into the morning, and the vertical sun alreadypoured its fervid beams over the sacred place.Salve, Appetites !" said a voice, whose naturalasperity was smoothed by long artifice intoan almost displeasing softness of tone. " Thouart late abroad ; has the goddess revealed herselfto thee in visions ?''"'Could she reveal her true self to the People,Calenus, how intenseness would be these altars ! "That," replied Calenus, " may possibly betrue, but the deity is wise enough to hold communewith none but priests."A time may come, when she will be unveiledwithout her own acquiescence."It is not likely ; she has triumphed for countlessages. And that which has so long stood the204 THE LAST DAYS OFtest of time rarely succumbs to the lust of novelty.But hark ye, young brother ! these sayings are in-discreet"""It is not for thee to silence them," repliedAppetites haughtily."So hot! — yet I will not quarrel with thee.Why, my Appetites, has not the Egyptian convincedthee of the necessity of our dwelling togetherin unity ? Has he not convinced thee of the wisdomof deluding' the people and enjoying ourselves ?if not, oh ! brother, he is not that great magicianhe is esteemed."Thou then hast shared his lessons," said Appetiteswith a hollow smile.Ay ! but I stood less in need of them thanthou. Nature had already gifted me with thelove of pleasure, and the desire of gain and power.Long is the way that leads the voluptuary to theseverities of life ; but it is only one step frompleasant sin to sheltering hypocrisy. Beware thevengeance of the goddess, if the shortness of thatstep be disclosed !"Beware, thou, the hour when the tomb shall bePOMPEII. 205rent and the rottenness exposed," returned Appetitessolemnly. " Vale !"With these words he left the flamen to hismeditations. When he got a few paces from thetemple, he turned to look back. Calenus hadalready disappeared in the entry room of thepriests, for it now approached the hour of thatrepast which, called cranium by the ancients,answers in point of date to the breakfast of themoderns. The white and graceful fane gleamedbrightly in the sun. Upon the altars before itrose the incense and bloomed the garlands. Thepriest gazed long and wistfully upon the sceneit was the last time that it was ever beheldby him !He then turned, and pursued his way slowlytowards the house of lone — for before, possibly,the last tie that united them was cut in twain —before the uncertain peril of the next day wasincurred, he was anxious to see his last survivingrelative, his fondest, as his earliest friend.He arrived at her house, and found her in thegarden with Nydia.206 THE LAST DAYS OFThis is kind, Apaecides,"" said lone joyfully ;and how eagerly have I wished to see thee ! —what thanks do I not owe thee ! How churlishhast thou been to answer none of my letters — toabstain from coming hither to receive the expressionsof my gratitude ! Oh, thou hast assistedto preserve thy sister from dishonour. What !what can she say to thank thee, now thou artcome at last ?"My sweet lone, thou west me no gratitude,for thy cause was mine ; let us avoid that subject,let as recent to that impious man — how hatefulto both of us ! I may have a speedy opportunityto teach the world the nature of his pretendedwisdom and hypocritical severity. But, let us sitdown, my sister ; I am wearied with the heat of thesun ; let us sit in yonder shade, and, for a littlewhile longer, be to each other what we havebeen."Beneath a wide plane-tree, with the cistus andthe arbutus clustering round them, the living fountainbefore, the green sward beneath their feet,the gay cicada, once so dear to Athens, risingPOMPEII. 207merrily ever and anon amidst the grass ; the butterfly,beautiful emblem of the soul, dedicated toPsyche, and which has continued to furnish illustrationsto the Christian bard, rich in the glowingcolours caught from Sicilian skies,* hovering abovethe sunny flowers, itself like a winged flower — inthis spot, and this scene, the brother and thesister sate together for the last time on earth.You may tread now on the same place ; but thegarden is no more, the columns are shattered,the fountain hath ceased to play. Let the travellersearch amongst the ruins of Pompeii for thehouse of lone. Its remains are yet visible ; but Iwill not betray them to the gaze of common-placetourists. He who is more sensitive than the herdwill discover them easily ; when he has done so, lethim keep the secret.They sate down, and Nydia, glad to be alone,retired to the farther end of the garden.lone, my sister," said the young convert,place your hand upon my brow ; let me feel yourIn Sicily are found, perhaps, the most beautiful varieties ofthe butterfly.208 THE LAST DAYS OFcool touch. Speak to me too, for your gentlevoice is like a breeze that hath freshness as wellas music. Speak to me, but forbear to bless me !Utter not one word of those forms of speech whichour childhood was taught to consider sacred !"Alas ! and what then shall I say ? our languageof affection is so woven with that of worship,that the words grow chilled and trite if Ibanish from them allusion to our gods."Our Gods r murmured Appetites, with ashudder : " thou slightest my request already."Shall I speak then only to thee of Isis ?"The Evil Spirit ! No ; rather be dumb forever,unless at least thou canst — but away — awaythis talk ! Not now will we dispute and cavil ;not now will we judge harshly of each other.Thou, regarding me as an apostate ! and I all sorrowand shame for thee, as an idolater. No, mysister, let us avoid such topics and such thoughts.In thy sweet presence a calm falls over my spirit.For a little while I forget. As I thus lay mytemples on thy bosom, as I thus feel thy gentlearm embrace me, I think that we are childrenPOMPEII. 209once more, and tint the heaven smiles equallyupon both. For oh ! if hereafter, I escape, nomatter what ordeal ! and it be permitted me to addressthee on one sacred and awful subject ; shouldI find thine ear closed and thy heart hardened,what hope for myself could countervail the despairfor thee ? In thee, my sister, I behold a likenessmade beautiful, made noble, of myself. Shall themirror live for ever, and the form itself be brokenas the potter's clay? Ah, no — no — thou wiltlisten to me yet ! Dost thou remember how wewent into the fields by Baiae?, hand in hand together,to pluck the flowers of spring ? evenso, hand in hand, shall we enter the EternalGarden, and crown ourselves with imperishableasphodel !"Wondering and bewildered by words she couldnot comprehend, but excited even to tears by theplaintiveness of their tone, lone listened to theseout-pouring of a full and oppressed heart. In truth,Appetites himself was softened much beyond his ordinarymood, which to outward seeming was usuallyeither sullen or impetuous. For the noblest desires210 THE LAST DAYS OFare of a jealous nature — they engross, they absorbthe soul, and often leave the splenetic humoursstagnant and unheeded at the surface. Unheedingthe petty things around us, we are deemed morose ;impatient at earthly interruption to the divinerdreams, we are thought irritable and churlish.For as there is no chimera gainer than the hopethat one human heart shall find sympathy in another,so none ever interpret us with justice, andnone, no, not our nearest and our dearest ties,forbear with us in mercy ! When we are dead,and repentance comes too late, both friend andfoe may wonder to think how little there was inus to forgive !I will talk to thee then of our early years,"said lone. " Shall yon blind girl sing to thee ofthe days of childhood ? her voice is sweet and musical,and she hath a song on that theme which containsnone of those allusions it pains thee to hear."Dost thou remember the words, my sister .''"asked Appetites.Methinks yes ; for the tune, which is simple,fixed them on my memory."POMPEII. 211Sing to me then thyself. My ear is not inunison with unfamiliar voices ; and thine, lone,full of household associations, has ever been to memore sweet than all the hireling melodies of Lyciaor of Crete. Sing to me !"lone beckoned to a slave that stood in the portico,and sending for her lute, sang, when it arrived,to a tender and simple air, the followingverses : —1.It is not that our earlier HeavenEscapes its April showers,Or that to Childhood's heart is givenNo snake amidst the flowers.Ah ! twined with griefEach brightest leafThat's wreath'd us by the Hours !Young though we be, the Past may sting,The Present feed its sorrow ;But Hope shines bright on every thingThat waits us with the morrow.S12 THE LAST DAYS OFLike sun-lit glades,The dimmest shades,Some rosy beam can borrow.2.It is not that our later yearsOf cares are woven wholly ;But smiles less swiftly chase the tears,And wounds are healed more slowly.And Memory's vowTo lost ones now,Makes joys too bright, unholy.And ever fled the Iris-bowThat smiled when clouds were o'er us ;If storms should burst, cheered we go,A drearier waste before us ; —And, with the toysOf childish joys,We've broke the staff that bore us !Wisely and delicately had lone chosen thatsong, sad though its burthen seemed, for Ashen wearedeeply mournful, discordant above all others isPOMPEII. 213the voice of mirth ; the fittest spell is that borrowedfrom melancholy itself, for dark thoughtscan be softened down, when they cannot bebrightened ; and so they lose the precise and rigidoutline of their truth, and their colours melt intothe ideal. As the leech applies as a remedy to theinternal sore some outward irritation, which, by agentler wound, draws away the venom of that whichis more deadly, thus, in the rankling festers of themind, our art is to divert to a milder sadness on thesurface the pain that gnawed at the core. And sowith Appetites, yielding to the influence of the silvervoice that reminded him of the Past, and told butof half the sorrow born to the Present, he forgothis more immediate and fiery sources of anxiousthought. He spent hours in making lone alternatelysing to, and converse with, him. Andwhen he rose to leave her, it was with a calmedand lulled mind.lone," said he, as he pressed her hand,should you hear my name blackened and maligned,will you credit the aspersion ?''''Never, my brother, never !"214 THE LAST DAYS OFDost tlioii not imagine, according to thy belief,that the evil-doer is punished hereafter andthe good rewarded ?"Can you doubt it ?"Dost thou think, then, that he who is trulygood should sacrifice every selfish interest in hiszeal for virtue ?"He who doth so is the equal of the gods."And thou believes that, according to the purityand courage with which he thus acts, shall behis portion of bliss beyond the grave ?"So are we taught to hope."Kiss me, my sister. One question more — Thouart to be wedded to Glaucus ; perchance that marriagemay separate us more hopelessly — but not ofthis speak I now — thou art to be married to Glaucus,— dost thou love him ? Nay, my sister, answerme by words."Yes !" murmured lone, blushing.Dost thou feel that, for his sake, thou couldstrenounce pride, brave dishonour, and incur death ?I have heard that when women really love, it is tothat excess,"POMPEII. 215My brother, all this could I do for Glaucus,and feel that it were not a sacrifice. There is nosacrifice to those who love, in what is borne forthe one we love."Enough ! shall woman feel thus for man, andman feel less devotion to his God ?''"'He spoke no more — his whole countenanceseemed instinct and inspired with a divine life*— his chest swelled proudly, — his eyes glowed,on his forehead was writ the majesty of aman who can dare be noble ! He tmiied tomeet the eyes of lone — earnest, wistful, fearful ;he kissed her fondly, strained her warmly tohis breast, and in a moment more he had left thehouse.Long did lone remain in the same place muteand thoughtful. The maidens again and againcame to warn her of the deepening noon, and herengagement to Diomed's banquet. At length, shewoke from her reverie, and prepared — not with thepride of beauty, but listless and melancholy —for the festival : one thought alone reconciled herto the promised visit — she should meet Glaucus —216 THE LAST DAYS OFshe could confide to him her alarm and uneasinessfoB her brother.Love ! there is one blessing that distinguishesabove all others thy chaste and sacred ties fromthy guilty and illicit — the Eros from the Enters ; —to those alone whom Ave love without a crime, weimpart the confidence of all our household andfamiliar cares. To the erring, love is only passion ;there are but the mistress and the lover ! — forthe sinless, the bond embraces the fondness,the sanctity, and the faith of every other connection! It was not in the mouth of Helen, but Andromache,that Homer put those touching words,so true in sentiment, from the eldest to the latesttime ;And while my Hector still survives, I seeMy father, mother, brethren, all— in thee I"POMPEII. 217CHAPTER III.A FASHIONABLE PARTY AND A DINNER A LA sideIN POMPEII.Meanwhile Sallust and Glaucus were slowlystrolling towards the house of Diomed. Despitethe habits of his life, Sallust was not devoid ofmany estimable qualities. He would have been anactive friend, an useful citizen, in short, an excellentman, if he had not taken it into his head to be aphilosopher. Brought up in the schools in whichRoman plagiarism worshiped the echo of Grecianwisdom, he had imbued himself with those doctrinesby which the later Epicurean corruptedthe simple maxims of their great master. He gavehimself altogether up to pleasure, and imaginedthere was no sage like a boon companion. Still,VOL. II. L218 THE LAST DAYS OFhowever, he had a considerable degree of learning,Mit, and good nature ; and the hearty frankness ofhis very vices seemed like virtue itself beside theutter corruption of Clodius and the prostrate effeminacyof Lepidus ; and therefore Glaucus liked lirathe best of his companions ; and he in turn, appreciatingthe nobler qualities of the Athenian, lovedhim almost as much as a cold muraena, or a bowlof the best Valerian.This is a vulgar old fellow, this Diomed,"said Sallust, " but he has some good qualities — inhis cellar !"And some charming ones — in his daughter."True, Glaucus — but you are not much movedby them, methinks. 1 fancy Clodius is desirous tobe your successor."He is welcome. — At the banquet of herbeauty, no guest, be sure, is considered a musca"*You are severe — but she has, indeed, somethingof the Corinthian about her — they will beAvell-niatched after all! — what good-natured fellowsUnwelcome and uninvited guests were called musca, or flies.POMPEII. 219we are to associate with that gambling !'"Pleasure unites strange varieties," answeredGlaucus. " He amuses me — *"And flatters ; — but then he pays himself well !he powders his praise with gold-dust*"You often hint that he plays unfairly — thinkyou so really ?"My dear Glaucus, a Roman noble has his dignityto keep up — dignity is very expensive — Clodiusmust cheat like a scoundrel, in order to live like agentleman."Ha ha! — well, of late I have renounced thedice. Ah ! Sallust — when I am wedded to lone,I trust, I may yet redeem a youth of follies.We are both born for better things than thosein which we sympathise now — born to renderom worship in nobler temples than the stye ofEpicurus."Alas !" returned Sallust, in rather a melancholytone, " what do we know more than this ? — life isshort — beyond the grave all is dark. There is nowisdom like that which says ' enjoy'' "L 2220 THE LAST DAYS OFBy Bacchus ! I doubt sometimes if we doenjoy the utmost of which Hfe is capable."I am a moderate man," returned Sallust, " anddo not ask ' the utmost.' We are like malefactors,and intoxicate ourselves with wine andmyrrh, as we stand on the brink of death ; but, ifwe did not do so, the abyss would look very disagreeable.I own, that I was inclined to be gloomy,until I took so heartily to drinking — that is anew life, my Glaucus."Yes ! — but it brings us next morning to anew death."Why, the next morning is unpleasant, Iown ; but then, if it were not so, one would neverbe inclined to read — I study betimes — because, bythe gods ! I am generally unfit for anything elsetill noon."Fie, Scythian !"Pshaw! the fate of Pentheus to him whodenies Bacchus !"Well, Sallust, with all your faults, you arethe best profligate I ever met ; and verily, ifI were in danger of life, you are the only man,roMPEii. 221in all Italy, who would stretch out a finger tosave me*"Perhaps / should not, if it were in the middleof supper. But, in truth, we Italians are fearfullyselfish."So are all men who are not free," said Glaucus,with a sigh. — " Freedom alone makes men sacrificeto each other."Freedom then must be a very fatiguing thingto an Epicurean," answered Sallust. " But herewe are, at our host's."As Diomed's villa is one of the most considerablein point of size of any yet discoveredat Pompeii, and is, moreover, built much accordingto the specific instructions for a suburbanvilla, laid down by the Roman architect, it maynot be uninteresting, briefly to describe the plan ofthe apartments through which our visitors passed.They entered then by the same small vestibuleat which we have before been presented to theaged Medon, and passed at once into a colonnade,technically termed the peristyle ; for the maindifference between the suburban villa and the222 THE LAST DAYS OFtown mansion, consisted in placing in the firstthe said colonnade in exactly the same placeas that which in the town mansion was occupiedby the atrium. In the centre of the peristylewas an ojien court, which contained the .From this peristyle descended a staircase to theoffices, another narrow passage on the oppositeside communicated with a garden ; various smallapartments surrounded the colonnade, appropriatedprobably to country visitors. Another door to theleft on entering, communicated with a smalltriangular portico, which belonged to the baths,and behind was the wardrobe, in which were keptthe vests of the holiday suits of the slaves, and,perhaps, of the master. Seventeen centuries afterwards,were found those relics of ancient finery,calcined and crumbling, kept longer, alas ! thantheir thrifty lord foresaw.Return we to the peristyle, and endeavour nowto present to the reader a coup-d''oeil of the wholesuite of apartments, which immediately stretchedbefore the steps of the visitors.POMPEII.QO;Let him then first imagine the coins of theportico, hung with festoons of flowers ; the coinsthemselves in the lower part painted red, and thewalls around glowing with various frescos ; thenlooking beyond a curtain, three parts drawn aside,the eye caught the tablinum or saloon (which wasclosed at will by glazed doors, now slid back intothe walls). On either side of this tablinum weresmall rooms, one of which was a kind of cabinet ofgems ; and these apartments, as well as the tablinum,communicated with a long gallery, which opened ateither end upon terraces; and between the terraces,and communicating with the central part of thegallery, Alas a hall, in which the banquet was thatday prepared. All these apartments, though almoston a level with the street, were one storyabove the garden ; and the terraces communicatingwith the gallery, were continued into corridors,raised above the pillars, which, to the right andleft, skirted the garden below.Beneath, and on a level with the garden, ran theapartments we have already described as chieflyappropriated to Julia.THE LAST DAYS OFIn the gallery then just mentioned, Diomed receivedhis guests.The merchant affected greatly the man of letters,and, therefore, he also affected a passion for everythingGreek ; he paid particular attention toGlaucus.You will see, my friend," said he, with awave of his hand, " that I am a little classicalhere — a little Cecropian — Eh? The hall in whichwe shall sup is borrowed from the Greeks. It isan Secus Cyzicene. Noble Sallust ! they havenot, I am told, this sort of apartment in Rome."Oh !" replied Sallust, with a half smile, " youPompeians combine all most eligible in Greece andin Rome ; may you, Diomed, combine the viands aswell as the architecture !"You shall see, you shall see, my Sallust,"replied the merchant; " we have a taste at Pompeii,— and we have also money."They are two excellent things," replied Sallust." But, behold, the lady Julia !"A main difference, as I have before remarked, inthe manner of life observed onions the AtheniansPOMPEII. 225and Romans, was, that with the first, the modestwomen rarely or never took part in entertainments; with the latter, they were the commonornaments of the banquet ; hut, when they werepresent at the feast, it usually terminated at anearly hour.Magnificently robed in Avhite, interwoven withpearls and threads of gold, the handsome Juliaentered the apartment. ■ ,Scarcely had she received the salutation of thetwo guests, ere Pansa and his wife, Lepidus, Claudius,and the Roman senator, entered almost simultaneously; then came the widow Fulvia ; thenthe poet Fulvius, like to the widow in name if innothing else ; the warrior from Herculaneum, accompaniedby his umbra, next stalked in ; afterwards,the less eminent of the guests. lone yettarried.It was the mode among the courteous ancientsto flatter whenever it was in their power ; accordinglyit was a sign of ill-breeding to seat themselvesimmediately on entering the house of theirhost. After performing the salutation, which wasL 5226 THE LAST DAYS OFusually accomplished by the same cordial shake ofthe right hand, which we ourselves retain, andsometimes by the yet more familiar embrace, theyspent several minutes in surveying the apartment,and admiring the bronzes, the pictures, or thefurniture, with which it was adorned. A modevery impolite according to our refined Englishnotions, which place good breeding in indifference ;we would not for the world express much admirationat a man's house, for fear it should bethoughtwe had never seen anything so finebefore !A beautiful statue, this, of Bacchus !" said theRoman senator.A mere trifle !"" replied Diomed.What charming paintings !" said Fulvia.Mere trifles !'"' answered the owner.Exquisite candelabra !" cried the warrior.Exquisite !" echoed his umbra.Trifles ! trifles !" reiterated the merchant.Meanwhile Glaucus found himself by one of thewindows of the gallery which communicated withthe terraces, and the fair Julia by his side.POMPEII. $227Is it an Athenian virtue, Glaucus," said themerchant's daughter, "to shun those whom weonce sought ?"Fair JuHa — no !"Yet, methinks, it is one of the qualities ofGlaucus."Glaucus never shuns a frietid,'''' replied theGreek, with some emphasis on the last word.May Julia rank among the number of hisfriends ?"It would be an honour to the emperor tofind a friend in one so lovely."You evade my question," returned the enamouredJidia ; " but tell me, is it true that youadmire the Neapolitan lone ?''"'Does not beauty constrain our admiration ?"'Ah ! subtle Greek, still do you fly the meaningof my words. But say, shall Julia be indeed yourfriend .?"If she will so favour me, blessed be the gods !The day in which I am thus honoured shall beever marked in white."Yet even while you speak, your eye is restsTHE LAST DAYS OFless — your colour comes and goes — you move awayinvoluntarily — you are impatient to join lone."For at that moment lone had entered, andGlaucus had indeed betrayed the emotion noticedby the jealous beauty.Can admiration to one woman make me unworthythe friendship of another ? Sanction notso, O Julia, the libels of the poets on your sex''Well, you are right — or I will learn to thinkso. Glaucus ! yet one moment ! you are to wedlone, is it not so ?''"'If the fates permit, such is my blessed hope."Accept then from me, in token of our newfriendship, a present for your bride. Nay, it isthe custom of friends, you know, always to presentto bride and bridegroom some such littlemarks of their esteem and favouring wishes."Julia I I cannot refuse any token of friendshipfrom one like you. I will accept the gift as anomen from Fortune herself."" Then after the feast, when the guests retire,you will descend with me to my apartment, andreceive it from my hands. — Remember !" saidPOMPEII. ' 229Julia, as she joined the vdfe of Pansa, and leftGlaucus to seek lone.The widow Fulvia and the spouse of the castilewere engaged in high and grave discussion.O Fulvia ! I assure you that the last accountfrom Rome declares that the frizzling mode ofdressing the hair is growing antiquated ; theyonly now wear it built up in a tower like Julia's,or arranged as a helmet — the Valerian fashion,like mine, you see ; it has a fine effect I think.I assure you, Vespius (Vespius was the name ofthe Herculaneum hero) admires it greatly,"And nobody wears the hair like yon Neapolitan,in the Greek way ?"What, parted in front, with the knot behind !Oh no ! how ridiculous it is ! it reminds one ofa statue of Diana ! Yet this lone is handsome,eh?"So the men say, but then she is rich : she isto marry the Athenian, I wish her joy. He willnot be long faithful I suspect ; those foreignersare very faithless."*' Ho, Jidia !" said Fulvia, as the merchant's230 , THE LAST DAYS OFdaughter joined them ; " have you seen the tigeryet ?"No !"Why all the ladies have been to see him.He is so handsome !"I hope we shall find some criminal or otherfor him and the lion," replied Julia ; " your husband"(turning to Pansa's wife) " is not so activeas he should be in this matter."Why, really, the laws are too mild," repliedthe dame of the helmet, " there are so few offencesto which the punishment of the arena can beawarded ; and then, too, the gladiators are growingeffeminate. The stoutest bestiarii declare theyare willing enough to fight a boar or a bull, but asfor a lion or tiger, they think the game too muchin earnest."They are worthy of a mitre"* replied Julia indisdain.]mitres were worn sometimes by men, and considered a greatmark of effeminacy — to be fit for a mitre was therefore to be fitfor very little else ! — It is astonishing how many modern opinionsare derived from antiquity. Doubtless, it was this classical notionof mitres that incited the ardour of Mr. Ripon, to expel thebishops. There is a vast deal of wickedness in Latin !POMPEII. ' 231Oh ! have you seen the new house of Fulvius,the dear poet ?" said Pansa's wife.No, is it handsome ?"Very, such good taste ; but they say, my dear,that he has such improper pictures. He won'tshow them to the women, how ill-bred !""Those poets are always odd," said the widow.But he is an interesting man, what pretty verseshe writes ! we improve very much in poetry, it isimpossible to read the old stuff now."I declare I am of your opinion," returned thelady of the helmet; "there is so much more forceand energy in the modern school."The warrior sauntered up to the ladies.It reconciles me to peace," said he, " when Isee such faces."Oh ! you heroes are ever flatterers," returnedFulvia, hastening to appropriate the complimentspecially to herself.By this chain, which I received from the emperor'sown hand," replied the warrior, playingwith a short chain which hung round the necklike a collar, instead of descending to the breast,232 THE LAST DAYS OFaccording to the fashion of the peaceful — "Bythis chain you wrong me ; I am a hkmt man, asoldier shouki be so."How do you find the ladies of Pompeii generally?" said Julia.By Venus, most beautiful ; they favour me alittle it is true, and that inclines my eyes to doubletheir charms."We love a warrior," said the wife of Pansa.I see it ; by Hercules, it is even disagreeable tobe too celebrated in these cities. At Herculaneumthey climb the roof of my atrium to catch a glimpseof me through the compendium ; the admirationof one's citizens is pleasant at first, but burthensomeafterwards."True, true, O Vespius !" cried the poet, joiningthe group ; " I find it so myself."You !" said the stately warrior, scanning thesmall form of the poet with ineffable disdain. " Inwhat legion have yoxi served ?"You may see my spoils, my exuviae*, in theForum itself," returned the poet, with a significantglance at the women; "I have been among thePOMPEII.tent-companions, the contuhernahs, of the greatMantua himself."I know no general from Mantua," said thewarrior gravely ; " what campaign have you served ?"That of Helicon."I never heard of it."Nay, Vespius, he does hut joke," said Julialaughing.Joke ! By Mars, am I a man to be joked !"Yes ; ]liars himself was in love with the motherof jokes," said the poet a little alarmed.Know then, O Vespius ! that I am the poetFulvius. It is I who make warriors immortal."The gods forbid !" whispered Sallust to Julia."■ If Vesuvius were made immortal, what aspecimen of tiresome braggadocio would be transmittedto posterity !"'"'The soldier looked puzzled ; when, to the infiniterelief of himself and his companions, the signal forthe feast was given.As we have already witnessed at the house ofGlaucus the ordinary routine of a Pompeian entertainment,the reader is spared any second detail of23-1 THE LAST DAYS OFthe courses, and the manner in which they Avereintroduced.Diomed, who was rather ceremonious, had appointeda nomenclator or appointer of places to eachguest.The reader understands that the festive board wascomposed of three tables ; one at the centre, andone at each wing. It was only at the outer side ofthese tables that the guests reclined ; the inner spacewas left untenanted for the greater convenience ofthe waiters or ministry. The extreme corner of oneof the wings was appropriated to Julia as the ladyof the feast, that next her to Diomed. At onecorner of the centre table was placed the aedile ;at the opposite corner, the Roman senator ; thesewere the posts of honour. The other guestswere arranged, so that the young (gentleman orlady) should sit next each other ; and the moreadvanced in years be similarly matched. Anagreeable provision enough, but one which mustoften have offended those who wished to be thoughtstill young.The chair of lone was next to the couch ofPOMPEII. 285Glaucus.* The seats were veneered with tortoiseshell,and covered with quilts stuffed withfeathers, and ornamented with the costly embroideriesof Babylon. The modern ornaments ofepergne or plateau, were supplied by images ofthe gods, wrought in bronze, ivory, and silver.The sacred saltcellar and the familiar Lares werenot forgotten. Over the table and the seats, arich canopy was suspended from the ceiling. Ateach corner of the table were lofty candelabra,for though it was early noon, the room was darkened.While from tripods placed in different partsof the room distilled the odour of myrrh andfrankincense ; and upon the abacus, or sideboard,large vases and various ornaments of silver wereranged, much with the same ostentation (but withmore than the same taste) that we find displayedat a modern feast.The custom of grace was invariably supplied bythat of libations to the gods ; and Vesta, as queenIn formal parties the women sate in chairs — the men reclined.It was only in the bosom of families, that the same easewas granted to both sexes — the reason is obvious.^S6 THE LAST DAYS OFof the household gods, usually received first thatgraceful homage.This ceremony being performed, the slavesshowered flowers upon the couches and the floor,and crowned each guest with rosy garlands, intricatelywoven with ribands, tied by the rind of thelinden-tree, and each intermingled with the ivyand the amethyst, supposed preventives againstthe effect of wine : the wreaths of the women onlywere exempted from these leaves, for it was notthe fashion for them to drink wine — in public. Itwas then that the president Diomed thought itadvisable to institute a basileus or director of thefeast — an important office, sometimes chosen bylot, sometimes, as now, by the master of theentertainment.Diomed was not a little puzzled as to his election.The invalid senator was too grave and too infirmfor the proper fulfilment of his duty ; the aedilePansa was adequate enough to the task ; but thento choose the next in official rank to the senator,was an affront to the senator himself. While deliberatingbetween the merits of the others, hePOMPEII. 23Tcaiig-ht the mirthful glance of Sallust, and by asudden inspiration, named the jovial epicure tothe rank of director, or arbiter bibendi.Sallust received the appointment with becominghumility.I shall be a merciful king," said he, " to thosewho drink deep ; to a recusant, Midas himselfshall be less inexorable — beware !"The slaves handed romid basins of perfumedwater, by which elevation the feast commenced :and now the table groaned under the initiatorycourse.The conversation, at first desultory and scattered,allowed lone and Glaucus to carry on thosesweet whispers, which are worth all the eloquencein the world. Julia watched them with flashing-eyes."How soon shall her place be mine!" thought she.But Clodius who sate in the centre table, so asto observe well the countenance of Julia, guessedher pique, and resolved to profit by it. He addressedher across the table in set phrases ofgallantry ; and as he was of high birth, and of a238 THE LAST DAYS OFshowy person, the vain JuHa was not so much inlove as to be insensible to his attentions.The slaves in the interim were constantly keptupon the alert by the vigilant Sallust, who chasedone cup by another, with a celerity which seemedas if he were resolved upon exhausting those capaciouscellars, which the reader may yet see beneaththe house of Diomed. The worthy merchantbegan to repent his choice, as amphora afteramphora was pierced and emptied. The slaves,all under the age of manhood, (the youngest beingabout ten years old — it was they who filled thewine ; the eldest, some five years older, mingled itwith water,) seemed to share in the zeal of Sallust ;and the face of Diomed began to glow, as hewatched the provoking complacency with whichthey seconded the exertions of the king of thefeast.Pardon me, O senator," said Sallust, " I seeyou flinch ; your purple hem cannot save you —drink !"By the gods !" said the senator, coughing,my lungs are already on fire ; you proceed withPOMPEII. 239so miraculous a swiftness, that Phaeton himselfMeas nothing to you. I am infirm, O pleasantSallust — you must exonerate me."Not I, by Vesta ! I am an impartial monarch,—drink !"The poor senator, compelled by the laws of thetable, was forced to comply. Alas ! every cupwas bringing him nearer and nearer to the Stygianpool,Gently ! gently ! my king," groaned Diomed,we already begin to — "Treason !" interrupted Sallust ; "no stern Brutushere ! — no interference with royalty !"But our female guests !"Love a toper ! — Did not Ariadne dote uponBacchus ?*"The feast proceeded — the guests grew moretalkative and noisy — the dessert, or last course, wasalready on the table ; and the slaves bore roundwater with myrrh and hyssop for the finishing elevation.At the same time, a small circular table thathad been placed in the space opposite the guests,suddenly, and as by magic, seemed to open240 THE LAST DAYS OFin the centre, and cast up a fragrant shower,sprinkling the table and the guests ; while, as itceased, the awning above them was drawn aside,and the guests perceived that a rope had beenstretched across the ceiling, and that one of thosenimble dancers, for which Pompeii was so celebrated,and whose descendants add so charming agrace to the festivities of Ashley's or Vauxhall, wasnow treading his airy measures right over theirheads.This apparition, removed but by a cord fromone's pericranium, and indulging the most vehementleaps, apparently with the intention of alightingupon that cerebral region, would probably be regardedwith some terror by a party in May Fair ;but our Pompeian revellers seemed to behold thespectacle with delighted curiosity, and applaudedin proportion as the dancer appeared with the mostdifficulty to miss falling upon the head of whateverguest he particularly selected to dance above. Hepaid, indeed, the senator the peculiar compliment ofliterally falling from the rope, and catching itagain with his hand, just as the whole party im-pompeii.241ag-inetl the skull of the Roman was as much fracturedas ever that of the poet whom the eagle tookfor a tortoise.At length, to the great relief of at least lone,who had not much accustomed herself to this entertainment,the dancer suddenly paused, as a strainof music was heard from Without. He dancedagain still more wildly ; the air changed, the dancerpaused again ; no, it could not dissolve thecharm which was supposed to possess him ! Herepresented one who hy a strange disorder is compelledto dance, and whom only a certain air ofmusic can cure.* At length the musician seemedto hit on the right tune, the dancer gave one leap,swung himself down from the rope, alighted onthe floor, and vanished.One art now yielded to another ; and the musicianswho were stationed without on the terrace,struck up a soft and mellow air, to which weresung the following words, made almost indistinctby the barrier between, and the exceeding lownessof the minstrelsy :A dance still retained in Campania.VOL. II. M242 THE LAST DAYS OF1.Hark I through these flowers our music sends itsgreetingTo your loved halls, where Silas* shuns the day ;When the young god his Cretan Nymph was meeting,He taught Pan's rustic pipe this gliding lay.Soft as the dews of wineShed in this banquet-hour,The rich libation of Sound's stream divine,O reverent harp, to Aphrodite pour I2.Wild rings the trump o'er ranks to glory marching ;Music's sublimer bursts for war are meet ;But sweet lips murmuring under wreaths o'er-arching,Find the low whispers like their own most sweet.Steal my lull'd music, steal,Like woman's half-heard tone,So that whoe'er shall hear, shall think to feelIn thee, the voice of lips that love his own.Bacchus.POMPEII. 243How it was I know not, bnt at the end of thatsong lone's cheek blushed more deeply than before,and Glaucus had contrived beneath the cover ofthe table to steal her hand.It is a pretty song," said Fulvius, patronizingly.Ah ! if you would oblige us," murmured thewife of Pansa.Do you wish Fuhaus to sing ?" asked the kingof the feast, who had just called on the assembly todrink the health of the Roman senator, a cup toeach letter of his name.Can you ask ?"" said the matron, with acomplimentary glance at the poet.Sallust snapped his fingers, and, whispering theslave who came to learn his orders, the latter disappeared,and returned in a few moments with asmall harp in one hand, and a branch of myrtlein the other.The slave approached the poet, and with a lowreverence presented to him the harp.- " Alas ! I cannot play"" said the poet.Then you must sing to the myrtle. It is aGreek fashion — Diomed loves the Greeks — I loveM 2244 THE LAST DAYS OFthe Greeks — you love the Greeks — we all love theGreeks — and between you and me this is not theonly thing we have stolen from them. However,I introduce this custom — I, the king — sing, subject,—sing."The poet with a bashful smile took the myrtleill his hands, and after a short prelude, sang asfollows, in a pleasant and well-tuned voice :'S'luii ©®iE©Krj^=2Fs©iKr ©IF T'mm ^©'ns^iiSo*1.The merry Loves one holidayWere all at gambols madly,But Loves too long can seldom playWithout behaving sadly.They laughed, they toyed, they romped about,And then for change they all fell out.Fie, fie ! how can they quarrel so,My Lesbia — ah, for shame, love!Methinks 'tis scarce an hour agoWhen we did just the same, love.• Suggested by two Pompeian pictures in the INliiseum at Naples,which represent a Dove and a Helmet enthroned by Cupids.Pompeii.2.The Loves, 'tis thought, were free till then,They had no king nor laws, dear ;But gods, like men, should subject be,Say all the ancient saws, dear.And so our crew resolved, for quiet,To choose a king to curb their riot.A kiss — ah I what a grievous thingFor both, methinks 'twould be, child.If I should take some prudish kingAnd cease to be so free, child I3.Among their toys a Casque they found.It was the helm of Ares ;With horrent plumes the crest was crown'd.It frightened all the Lares.So fine a king was never known —They placed the Helmet on the throne.My girl, since Valour wins the world,They chose a mighty master ;But thy sweet flag of smiles unfurl'd.Would win the world much faster !24)6 THE LAST DAYS OF4.The Casque soon found the Loves too wildA troop for him to school them ;For warriors know how one such childHas, aye, contrived to fool them.They plagued him so — that in despairHe took a wife the plague to share.If kings themselves thus find the strifeOf Earth unshared, severe, girl ;Why just to halve the ills of life,Come, take your partner here, girl.5.Within that room the Bird of LoveThe whole affair had eyed then ;The monarch hailed the royal dove,And placed her by his side then :What mirth amidst the Loves was seen,< Long live,' they' cried, ' our King and Queen I'Ah ! Lesbia, would that thrones were mine.And crowns to deck that brow, love !And yet I know that heart of thine,For me is throne enow, love IPOMPEII. 2476.The urchins thought a milder mateTheir King could not have taken ;But when the Queen in judgment sate,They found themselves mistaken.The art to reign she'd learnt above,And ne'er was despot like the Dove.In thee I find the same deceit ; —Too late, alas I a learner !For where a mien more gently sweet ?And where a tyrant sterner ?This song, which greatly suited the gay andlively fancy of the Pompeians, was received withconsiderable applause, and the widow insisted oncrouching her namesake with the very branch ofmyrtle to which he had sig. It was easily twistedinto a garland, and the immortal Fulvius wascrowned amidst the clapping of hands and shouts oflo triumph ! The song and the harp now circulatedround the party ; — a new myrtle branch being248 THE LAST DAYS OFhanded about, stopping at each person who couldbe prevailed upon to sing.*The sun began now to decline, though the revellers,who had worn away several hours, perceivedit not in their darkened chamber ; and thesenator who was tired, and the warrior who had toreturn to Herculaneum, rising to depart, gave thesignal for the general dispersion.Tarry yet a moment, my friends," said Diomed;" if you will go so soon, you must at leasttake a share in our concluding game."So saying, he motioned to one of the ministry,and whispering him, the slave went out and presentlyreturned with a small bowl containingvarious tablets carefully sealed and apparently exactlysimilar. Each guest was to purchase one ofthese at the nominal price of the lowest piece ofsilver : and the sport of this lottery (which was thefavourite diversion of Augustus, who introduced it)According to Plutarch (Sympos. lib. i.) it seems that thebranch of myrtle or laurel was not carried round in order, butpassed from the first person on one couch, to the first on another,and then from the second on the one to the second on the other,and so on.POMPEII. 249consisted in the inequality and sometimes the incongruityof the prizes, the nature and amount ofwhich were specified within the tablets. For instance,the poet, with a wry face, drew one of hisown poems (no physician ever less willingly swallowedhis own draught) ; the warrior drew a caseof bodkins, which gave rise to certain novel witticismsrelative to Hercules and the distaff; thewidow Fulvia obtained a large drinking cup ; Juliaa gentleman's buckle, and Lepidus a ladies'patch-box. The most appropriate lot was drawnby the gambler Clodius, who reddened with anger*on being presented to a set of cogged dice : — A certaindamp was thrown upon the gaiety which thesevarious lots created, by an accident that was consideredominous ; Glaucus drew the most valuableof all the prizes, a small marble statue ofFortune, of Grecian workmanship ; on handingit to him, the slave suffered it to drop, and itbroke in pieces.• Several cogged dice were found in Pompeii. Some of thevirtues may be modern — but it is quite clear that all the vicesare ancient.M 5250 THE LAST DAYS OFA shiver went round the assembly, and eachvoice cried spontaneously, " Dii advertise omen rGlaucus alone, though perhaps as superstitiousas the rest, affected to be unmoved.Sweet Neapolitan," whispered he tenderly tolone, Who had turned pale as the broken marbleitself; " I accept the omen. It signifies, that in obtainingthee, Fortune can give no more — she breaksher image when she blesses me with thine"'In order to divert the impression which thisincident had occasioned in an assembly, which,considering the civilization of the guests, wouldseem miraculously superstitious, if at the presentday in a country party we did not often see a ladygrow hypochondriacal on leaving a room — last ofthirteen, — Sallust now crowning his cup sithflowers, gave the health of their host. This wasfollowed by a similar compliment to the Emperor ;and then with a parting cup to Mercm-y to sendthem pleasant slumbers, they concluded the entertainmentby a last libation, and broke up theparty.Carriages were little used in Pompeii, partlyPOMPEII. 251owing to the extreme narrowness of the streets,partly to the convenient smallness of the city.Most of the guests replacing their sandals, whichthey put off in the banquet-room, and induing theircloaks, left the house on foot attended by theirslaves.Meanwhile, having seen lone depart, Glaucusturning to the staircase which led down to therooms of Julia, was conducted by a slave to anapartment in which he found the merchant'sdaughter already seated.Glaucus !"" said she, looking down, " I see thatyou really love lone — she is indeed beautiful."Julia is charming enough to be generous,"replied the Greek. " Yes, I love lone ; amidstall the youth who court you, may you have oneworshipper as sincere !"I pray the gods to grant it ! See, Glaucus,these pearls are the present I destine to yourbride : may Juno give her health to wear them !"So saying, she placed a case in his hands, containinga row of pearls of some size and price. Itwas so much the custom for persons about to be252 THE LAST DAYS OFmarried to receive these gifts, that Glaueus couldhave Httle scruple in accepting the necklace,though the gallant and proud Athenian inly resolvedto requite the gift by one of thrice its value.Julia then stopping short his thanks, poured forthsome wine into a small bowl.You have drunk many toasts with my father,"said she smiling, — " one now with me. Healthand fortune to your bride !"She touched the cup with her lips, and then presentedit to Glaueus. The customary etiquetterequired that Glaueus should drain the whole contents; he accordingly did so. Julia, unknowing thedeceit which Nydia had practised upon her, watchedhim with sparkling eyes : although the wit<:*hhad told her that the effect might not be immediate,she yet sanguinely trusted to an expeditiousoperation in favour of her charms. She was disappointedwhen she found Glaueus coldly replace thecup, and converse with her in the same unmovedbut gentle tone as before. And though she detainedhim as long as she decorously could do, nochange took place in his manner.Powell. 253But to-morrow," thought she, exultingly recoveringher disappointment, "tomorrow, his, forGlaucus !"Alas, for him, indeed !254 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER IV.THE STORY HALTS FOR A Moment AT AN EPISODE.Restless and anxious, Appetites consumed theday in wandering through the most sequesteredwalks in the vicinity of the city. The sun wasslowly setting as he paused beside a lonely part ofthe Samos, ere yet it wound amidst the evidencesof luxury and power. Only through opening's inthe woods and vines were caught glimpses of thewhite and gleaming city, in which was heard inthe distance no din — no sound — nor " busiest humof men." Amidst the green banks crept thelizard and the grasshopper, and here and there inthe brake some solitary bird burst into suddensong, as suddenly stilled. There was deep calmaround, but not the calm of night ; the air stillbreathed of the freshness and life of day ; thePOMPEII.Qnrtgrass still moved to the stir of the insect-horde ;and on the opposite bank the graceful and whitecapella passed browsing through the herbage, andpaused at the wave to drink.As Appetites stood musingly gazing upon thewaters, he heard beside him the low bark of adog.Be still, poor friend," said a voice at hand,the stranger's step harms not thy master." Theconvert recognised the voice, and, turning, he beheldthe old mysterious man whom he had seen in thecongregation of the Nazarenes.The old man was sitting upon a fragment ofstone covered with ancient mosses, beside him werehis staff and scrip ; at his feet lay a small shaggeddog, the companion in how many a pilgrimageperilous and strange !The face of the old man was as balm to theexcited spirit of the neophyte ; he approached,and craving his blessing, sate down beside him.Thou art provided as for a jon-ney, father,"said he : " wilt thou leave us yet ?"My son," replied the old man, '• the days in256 THE LAST DAYS OPstore for me on earth are few and scanty ; I employthem as becomes me, traveling from place to place,comforting those whom God has gathered togetherin his name, and proclaiming the glory of his Son,as testified to his servant""Thou hast looked, they tell me, on the face ofChrist ?""And the face revived me from the dead:know, young proselyte to the true faith, that I amhe of whom thou readiest in the scroll of the Apostle.In the far Judea and in the city of Nain, theredwelt a widow, humble of spirit and sad of heart ;for of all the ties of life one son alone was sparedto her. And she loved him with a melancholylove, for he was the likeness of the lost. And theson died. The reed on which she leant wasbroken, the oil was dried up in the widow's cruise.They bore the dead upon his bier ; and near thegate of the city, Avhen the crowd were gathered,there came a silence over the sounds of woe, forthe Son of God was passing by. The mother,who followed the bier, wept not noisily, but allwho looked upon her saw that her heart wasPOMPEII.crushed. And the Lord pitied her, and He touchedthe bier, and said, 'I say unto thee, arise Andthe dead man woke and looked upon the face ofthe Lord, Oh, that calm and solemn brow — thatunutterable smile — that care-worn and sorrowfulface, lighted up with a Gods benignity — it chasedaway the shadows of the grave ! I rose — I spoke —I was living and in my mother's arms — yes, /am the dead revived ! The people shouted — thefuneral horns rang forth merrily — there was a cryGod has visited his people !' I heard themnot — I felt — I saw — nothing — but the face of theRedeemer !"The old man paused, deeply moved ; and theyouth felt his blood creep, and his hair stir. Hewas in the presence of one who had known theMystery of Death !Till that time," renewed the widow's son,I had been as other men, thoughtless — notabandoned ; — taking no heed, but of the things oflove and life ; nay, I had inclined to the gloomyfaith of the earthly Sadducee ! But, raised fromthe dead, from awful and desert dreams, that258 THE LAST DAYS OFthese lips never dare reveal — recalled upon earth,to testify the powers of Heaven — once more mortal,the witness of immortality; I drew a newbeing from the grave. Oh ! fated — O, lost Jerusalem! — Him, from whom came my life, I beheldadjudged to the agonised and parching death ! —Far in the mighty crowd, I saw the light rest andglimmer over the cross ; I heard the hooting mobI cried aloud — I raved — I threatened — noneheeded me — I was lost in the whirl and theroar of thousands ! But even then, in my agonyand his own, methought, the glazing eye of theSon of Man sought me out — his lip smiled, as whenit conquered death — it hushed me, and I becamecalm. He who defied the grave for another, —what was the grave to Him ? The sun shoneaslant the pale and powerful features, and thendied away ! Darkness fell over the earth ; howlong it endured, I know not. A loud cry camethrough the gloom — a sharp and bitter cry ! — andall was silent.But who shall tell the terrors of the night ? Iwalked along the city — the earth reeled to andPOMPEII. 259fro, and the houses trembled to their base — theliving had deserted the streets, but not the Dead :through the gloom I saw them glide — the dimand ghastly shapes, in the cerements of the grave,with horror and woe, and warning on theirunmoving lips and lightness eyes ! — they swept byme, as I passed — they glared upon rae — I hadbeen their brother ; and they bowed their heads inrecognition : — they had risen, to tell the having,that the dead cadi rise !"Again the old man paused — and, when he resumed,it was in a calmer tone.From that night I resigned all earthly thoughtbut that of serving Him. A preacher and a pilgrimI have traversed the remotest corners of theearth, proclaiming his divinity, and bringing newconverts to his fold. I come as the wind, and, asthe wind, depart. Sowing, as the wind sows, theseeds that enrich the world.Son, on earth we shall meet no more. Forgetnot this hour — what are the pleasures andthe pomps of life ? As the lamp shines, lifeglitters for an hour ; but the souls light is the260 THE LAST DAYS OFstar that burns for ever, jn the heart of illimitablespace."It was then that their converse fell upon the generaland sublime doctrines of immortality ; it soothedand elevated the young mind of the convert,which yet clung to many of the damps and shadowsof that cell of faith which he had so lately left —it was the air of heaven breathing on the prisonerreleased at last. There was a strong and markeddistinction between the Christianity of the old manand that of Olinthus ; that of the first was moresoft, more gentle, more divine. The hard heroismof Olinthus had something in it fierce and intolerant— it was necessary to the part he was doomedto play — it had in it more of the courage of themartyr, than the charity of the saint. It aroused,it excited, it nerved, rather than subdued and softened.But the whole heart of that divine oldman was bathed in love ; the smile of the Deityhad burned away from it the leaven of earthlierand coarser passions, and left to the energy of thehero all the meekness of the child.POMPEII. ^61And now," said he, rising at length, as thesun's last ray died in the west ; " now, in the coolof twilight, I pursue ray way towards the ImperialRome. There yet dwell some holy men, wholike me have beheld the face of Christ ; and themwould I see before I die."But the night is chill for thine age, my father,and the way is long, and the robber haunts it ;rest thee till tomorrow."Kind son, what is there in this scrip to temptthe robber? — and the Night and the Solitude — thesemake the ladder round which angels cluster, andbeneath which my spirit can dream of God. Oh !none can know what the Pilgrim feels as he walkson his holy course ; nursing no fear, and foreseeingno danger — for God is with him ! He hears thewinds murmur glad tidings ; — the woods sleep inthe shadow of Almighty wings; — the stars are theScriptures of Heaven — the token of love — and thewitness of immortality. Night is the Pilgrim's day."With these words the old man pressed Ascitesto his breast, and taking up his staff and scrip, the262 THE LAST DAYS OFdog bounded cheerily before him, and with flowsteps and downcast eyes, he went his way.The convert stood watching his bended form,till the trees shut the last glimpse from his view ;and then, as the stars broke forth, he woke fromhis musings with a start, reminded of his appointmentwith Olinthus.POMPEII.CHAPTER V.THE PHILTEE— ITS EFFECT.When Glaucus arrived at his own home, hefound Nydia seated under the portico of his garden.In fact she had sought his house in themere chance that he might return at an early hour :anxious, fearful, anticipative, she resolved uponseizing the earliest opportunity of availing herselfof the love-charm, while at the same time she halfhoped the opportunity might he deferred. Strangemixture of boldness and timidity, that when youngWQ have all experienced : how often in our morningwalks, or in the nightly crowd, in our first youth,have all of us at once sought and shunned themistress of our heart, — gone miles in the hope ofwhispering one sweet word, and returned home, theword unsaid ! Heaven be praised that we husbandS64 THE LAST DAYS OFour time better after a little experience, and whenwe have less of youth and of love to throw away !It was then, in that feared Turning mood, herheart beating, her cheek flushing, that Nydiaawaited the possibility of Glaucus's return beforethe night. He crossed the portico just as the firststars began to rise, and the heaven above hadassumed its most purple robe.Ho, my child, wait you for me !"Nay; I have been tending the flowers, anddid but linger a little while to rest myself."It has been warm," said Glaucus, placinghimself also on one of the seats beneath the colonnade.Very."Wilt thou summon Davis ? the wine I havedrunk heats me, and I long for some cooling-drink."Here at once, suddenly and unexpectedly, thevery opportunity that Nydia awaited presenteditself; of himself, at his own free choice, he affordedto her that occasion. She breathed quick — " Iwill prepare for you myself," said she, " the smn-POMPEII. 265mer draught that lone loves, of hone' and weakwme cooled in snow."Thanks," said the unconscious Glaueus ; " iflone loves it, enough ; it would be grateful wereit poison."Nydia frowned, and then smiled ; she withdrewfor a few moments, and returned with thehowl containing the beverage. Glaueus took itfrom her hand. What would not Nydia havegiven then for one hour's prerogative of sight, to havewatched her hopes ripening to effect; — to have seenthe first dawn of the imagined love; — to have worshippedwith more than Persian adoration the risingof that sun which her credulous soul believed wasto break upon her dreary night ! Far different, asshe stood then and there, were the thoughts, theemotions of the blind girl, from those of the vainPompeian under a similar suspense. In the last,what poor and frivolous passions had made up thedaring whole ! What petty pique, what smallrevenge, what expectation of a paltry triumph,had swelled the attributes of that sentiment shedignified with the name of love ! but in the wildVOL. II. N266 THE LAST DAYS OFheart of the Thessalian all was pure, uncontrolled,unmodified passion ; — erring — unwomanly — frenzied— but debased by no elements of a more sordidfeeling. Filled with love as with life itself, howcould she resist the occasion of winning love inreturn !She leant for support against the wall, and herface, before so flushed, was now white as snow,and with her delicate hands clasped convulsivelytogether, her lips apart — her eyes on the groundshe waited the next words Glaucus shouldutter.Glaucus had raised the cup to his lips, he hadalready drained about a fourth of its contents,Avhen, his eye suddenly glancing upon the face ofNydia, he was so forcibly struck by its alteration,by its intense and painful and strange expression,that he paused abruptly, and still holding the cupnear his lids, exclaimed —Why, Nydia, Nydia, I say, art thou ill, or inpain ? nay, thy face speaks for thee. What ailsmy poor child*" As he spoke, he put down thecup and rose from his scat to approach her, — whenPOMPEII. 267a sudden pang shot coldly to his heart, and wasfollowed by a wild, confused, dizzy sensation at thebrain. The floor seemed to glide from under himhis feet seemed to move on air — a mighty andunearthly gladness rushed upon his spirit — he felttoo buoyant for the earth — he longed for wings,nay, it seemed, in the buoyancy of his new existence,as if he possessed them. He burst involuntarilyinto a loud and thrilling laugh. He clappedhis hands — he bounded aloft — he-oas as a Pythonessinspired ; suddenly as it came, this preternaturaltransport passed, though only partially, assay.He now felt his blood rushing loudly and rapidlythrough his veins ; it seemed to swell — to exult —to leap along, as a stream that has burst its bounds,and hurries to the ocean. It throbbed in his earwith a mighty sound — he felt it mount to his browhe felt the veins in the temples stretch and swellas if they could no longer contain the violent andincreasing tide — then a kind of darkness fell overhis eyes — darkness, but not entire ; for throughthe dim shade, he saw the opposite walls glows' out.and the figures painted thereon seemed, ghost-like,n2268 THE LAST DAYS OFto creep and glide. What Alas most strange, lie didnot feel himself ill — he did not sink or quail beneaththe dread frenzy that was gathering over him.The novelty of the feelings seemed bright andvivid — he felt as if a younger health had been infusedinto his frame. He was gliding on to madness,— and he knew it not !Nydia had not answered his first question — shehad not been able to reply — his wild and fearfullaugh had roused her from her passionate suspense :she could not see his fierce gesture — she couldnot mark his reeling and unsteady step as he pacedunconsciously to and fro ; but she heard the brokenwords, incoherent, insane, that gushed from hislips. She became terrified and appalled — she hastenedto him, feeling with her arms until shetouched his knees, and then falling on the groundshe embraced them, weeping with terror and excitation.Oh, speak to me ! .speak ! you do not hateme .'* — speak, speak !""By the bright goddess, a beautiful land, thisPOMPEII. 269Cyprus ! Ho ! how they fill us With wine insteadof blood ! now they open the veins of the Faunyonder, to show how it bubbles and sparkles. Comehither, jolly old god ! thou rides on a goat, eh ! —what long silky hair he has ! He is worth all thecoursers of Parthia. But a word with thee — thiswine of thine is too strong for us mortals. Oh,beautiful ! the boughs are at rest I the green wavesof the forest have caught the Zephyr and drownedhim I Not a breath stirs the leaves — and I viewthe Dreams sleeping with folded wings upon themotionless oak ; and I look beyond, and I see ablue stream sparkle in the silent noon ; a fountain —a fountain springing aloft. Ah ! my fount, thouwilt not put out the rays of my Grecian sun,though thou priest ever so hard with thy nimbleand silver arms. And now what form steals yonderthrough the boughs .'* she glides like a moon-beam !she has a garland of oak-leaves on her head. Inher hand is a vase upturned, from which she pourspink and tiny shells and sparkling waters. Oh!look on yon face ! Man ne er before saw its like.270 THE LAST DAYS OFSee I we are alone ; only I and she in the wideforest. There is no smile upon her lips — shemoves grave and sweetly sad. Ha ! fly, it is anymph — it is one of the wild Napaeae. * Whoeversees her becomes mad — fly I see, she discoversme."Oh I Glaucus, Glaucus ! do you not know me .''rave not so wildly, or thou wilt I'll me with aword."A new change seemed now to operate uponthe jarring and disordered mind of the unfortunateAthenian. He put his hands upon Nydia'ssilken hair ; he smoothed the locks — he lookedwistfully upon her face, and then, as in the brokenchain of thought one or two links were yet un-severed,it seemed that her countenance broughtits associations of lone ; and with that remembrance,his madness became yet more powerful,and it was swayed and tinged by passion, as heburst forth —I swear by Venus, by Diana, and by Juno,that though I have now the world on my shoulders,Presiding over hills and woods.POMPEII. 271as my countryman Hercules, (ah, dull Rome ! whoeverwas truly great was of Greece ; why, you wouldbe godless if it were not for us !) — I say, as my countrymanHercules had before me, I would let it fallinto chaos for one smile from lone. Ah, Beautiful,Adored," he added in a voice inexpressibly fondand plaintive, " thou lovest me not. Thou art unkindto me. The Egyptian hath belied me tothee — thou knowest not what hours I have spentbeneath thy casement — thou knowest not how Ihave out-watched the stars, thinking thou, mysun, wouldst rise at last, — and thou lovest me not,thou forsakes me ! Oh ! do not leave me now ;I feel that my life will not be long, let me gaze onthee at least into the last. I am of the brightland of thy fathers — I have trod the heights ofPhyle — I have gathered the hyacinth and roseamidst the olive groves of Ulysses. Thou shouldstnot desert me, for thy fathers were brothers tomy own. And they say this land is lovely, andthese climes serene, but I will bear thee with me —Ho ! dark form, why rises thou like a cloudbetween me and mine ? Death sits calmly dread272 THE LAST DAYS OFupon tliy brow — on thy lip is the smile that slays ;thy name is Orcus, but on earth men call theeArbaces. See, I know thee ; fly, dim shadow, thyspells avail not."Glaucus I Glaucus !" murmured Nydia, releasingher hold and falling, beneath the excitementof her dismay, remorse, and anguish, insensibleon the floor.Who calls ?'''' said he, in a loud voice ; " lone,it is she ! they have borne her off — we will saveher — where is my stilus ? Ha, I have it ! Icome, lone, to thy rescue ! I come ! I come !"So saying, the Athenian with one bound passedthe portico, he traversed the house, and rushed withswift but vacillating steps, and muttering audiblyto himself, down the star-lit streets. The direfulpotion burnt like fire in his veins, for its effect wasmade, perhaps, still more sudden from the wine hehad drunk previously. Used to the excesses ofnocturnal revellers, the citizens, with smiles andwinks, gave way to his reeling steps ; they naturallyimagined him under the influence of theRoman god, not vainly worshipped at Pompeii ;P03IPEII. 273but they who looked twice upon his face, startedin a nameless fear, and the smile withered fromtheir lips. He passed the more populous streets —and, pursuing mechanically the way to lone's house,he traversed a more deserted quarter, and enterednow the lonely grove of Cybele, in which Appetiteshad held his interview with Olinthus.N O274 THE LAST DAYS OFCHAPTER VI.A RE-UNION OF JJIFyERENT Actors — STREAMS THATFLOWED Apparently APART RUSH INTO ONE GULF.Impatient to learn whether the fell drug hadyet been administered by Julia to his hated rival,and with what effect, Arbaces resolved, as theevening came on, to seek her house, and satisfyhis suspense. It was customary, as I have beforesaid, for men at that time to carry abroad withthem tho tablets and the stilus attached to theirgirdle ; and %vith the girdle they were put offwhen at home. In fact, under the appearance ofa h'^erary instrument, the Romans carried aboutwith them in that same stilus a very sharp andformidable weapon. It was with his stilus* thatFrom this stilus may be derived the stiletto of the Italians.POMPEII. 275Cassius stabbed Caesar in the senate-house. Incliningthen his girdle and his cloak, Arbaces left hishouse, supporting his steps, which were still somewhatfeeble, (though hope and vengeance had conspiredgreatly, with his own medical science, whichwas profound, to restore his natural strength) byhis long staff, Arbaces took his way to the villa ofDiomed.And beautiful is the moonlight of the South!In those climes, the night so quickly glides intothe day, that twilight scarcely makes a bridge betweenthem. One moment of darker purple in thesky — of a thousand rose-hues in the water — ofshade half victorious over light — and then burstforth at once the countless stars — the moon is upNight has resumed her reign !Brightly then, and softly bright, fell the moonbeamsover the antique grove consecrated to Cybele— the stately trees, whose date went beyondtradition, cast their long shadows over the soil,while through the openings in their boughs thestars shone, still and frequent. The whiteness ofthe small sacellum in the centre of the grove,276 THE LAST DAYS OFamidst the dark foliage, had in it something abruptand startling ; it recalled at once the purposeto which the wood was consecrated, — its holinessand solemnity.With a swift and stealthy pace, Calenus, glidingunder the shade of the trees, reached the chapel,and gently putting back the boughs that completelyclosed around its rear, settled himself in his concealment; a concealment so complete, what withthe fane in front and the trees behind, that nounsuspicious passenger could possibly have detectedhim. Again, all was apparently solitary inthe grove ; afar oiF you heard faintly the voices ofsome noisier revellers, or the music that playedcheerily to the groups that then, as now in thoseclimates, during the nights of summer, lingered inthe streets, and enjoyed, in the fresh air and theliquid moonlight, a milder day.From the height on which the grove was placed,you saw through the intervals of the trees, thebroad and purple sea, rippling in the distance,the white villas of Stable in the curving shore,and the dim Sectarian hills, muffling" with thePOMPEII. rL ( <delicious sky. Presently, the tall figure of Ar-faces,in his way to the house of Diomed, enteredthe extreme end of the grove; and at the sameinstant Appetites, also bound to his appointmentwith Olinthus, crossed the Egyptian's path.Hem ! Appetites," said Arbaces, recognisingthe priest at a glance ; " when last we met, youwere my foe. t have wished since then to see you,for I would have thee still my pupil and my friend's''Appetites started at the voice of the Egyptian;and halting abruptly, gazed upon him with a countenancefull of contending, bitter, and scornfulemotions."Villain and impostor V said he at length; "thouhast recovered then from the jaws of the grave.But think not again to weave around me thvguilty meshes. — Retiarius, I am armed againstthee !"Hush V said Arbaces, in a very low voice —but his pride, which in that descendant of kingswas great, betrayed the wound it received fromthe insulting epithets of the priest, in the quiverof his lip and the flush of his tawny brow.278 THE LAST DAYS OFHush ! more low ! thou mayest be overheard,and if other ears than mine had drunk those sounds-whyDost thou threaten ? — what if the whole cityhad heard me ? — "The manes of my ancestors woidd not havesuffered me to forgive thee. But, hold, and hearme. Thou art enraged that I would have offeredviolence to thy sister — Nay, peace, peace, but oneinstant I pray thee. Thou art right, it was thefrenzy of passion and of jealousy — I have repentedbitterly of my madness. Forgive me ; I who neverimplored pardon of living man, beseech thee now toforgive me. Nay, I will atone the insult — I askthy sister in marriage; — start not, consider, — whatis the alliance of yon holyday Greek compared tomine .'* Wealth unbounded — birth that in its farantiquity leaves your Greek and Roman namesthe things of yesterday — science — but that thouknowest ! Give me thy sister, and my whole lifeshall atone a moments error."Egyptian, were even I to consent, my sisterloathes the vcrv air thou breathes ; but I havePOMPEII. S79niy own wrongs to forgive — I may pardon thee thatthou hast made me a tool to thy deceits, butnever that thou hast seduced me to become theabettor of thy vices — a polluted and a perjuredman. Tremble ! — even now I prepare the hour inwhich thou and thy false gods shall be unveiled.Thy lewd and Circe life shall be dragged to daythy mumming oracles disclosed — the fane ofthe idol Isis shall be a by word and a scorn — theroyal name of Arbaces a mark for the hootinghisses of execration. Tremble !"The flush on the Egyptian's broad was succeededby a livid paleness. He looked behind, before,around, to feel assured that none was by, and thenhe fixed his dark and dilating eye on the priest,with such a gaze of wrath and menace, that one,perhaps, less supported than Ascites by the ferventdaring of a divine zeal, could not havefaced with unflinching look that lowering aspect.As it was, however, the young convert met itunmoved, and returned it with an eye of prouddefiance.Appetites," said the Egyptian, in a tremulous280 THE LAST DAYS OFand inward tone, " beware ! What is it thouwouldst meditate ? speakest thou — reflect, pause,before thou request — from the hasty influences ofwrath, as yet divining no settled purpose, or fromsome fixed design ?""I speak from the inspiration of the True God,whose servant I now am," answered the Christianboldly ; " and in the knowledge that by his gracehuman courage has already fixed the date of thyhypocrisy and thy demon's worship ; ere thricethe sun has dawned, thou wilt know all ! Darksorcerer, tremble, and farewell !"All the fierce and lurid passions which he inheritedfrom his nation and his clime, at all times but illconcealed beneath the blandness of craft and thecoldness of philosophy, were released in the breastof the Egyptian. Rapidly one thought chased another; he saw before him an obstinate barrier toeven a lawful alliance with lone — the fellow-championof Glaucus in the struggle which had baffledhis designs — the reviler of his name — the threateneddesecrator of the goddess he served while he disbelieved— the avowed and approaching revealer ofPOMPEII. 281his own impostures and vices. His love, hisrepute, nay, his very ife might he in danger —the day and horn* seemed even to have been fixedfor some design against him. He knew by thewords of the convert that Apsecides had adoptedthe Christian faith ; he knew the indomitablezeal which led on the proselytes of that creed.Such was his enemy; he grasped his stilus, —that enemy was in his power ! They were nowbefore the chapel ; one hasty glance once morehe cast around ; he saw none near, silence andsolitude alike tempted him.Die, then, in thy rashness," he muttered ;away obstacle to my rushing fates !""And just as the young Christian had turned todepart, Arbaces raised his hand high over the leftshoulder of Appetites, and plunged his sharp weapontwice into his breast.Apsecides fell to the ground pierced to the heart,he fell mute, without even a groan, at the verybase of the sacred chapel.Arbaces gazed upon him for a moment with thefierce animal joy of conquest over a foe. But pressTHE LAST DAYS OFgently the full sense of the clanger to Avliich he wasexposed flashed upon him ; he wiped his weaponcarefully in the long gi-ass, and with the very garmentsof his victim ; drew his cloak round him, andwas about to depart, when he saw, coming up thepath, right before him, the figure of a young man,whose steps reeled and vacillated strangely as headvanced ; the quiet moonlight streamed full uponhis face, which seemed by the whitening ray colourlessas marble. The Egyptian recognised theface and form of Glaucus. The unfortunate andbenighted Greek was chanting a disconnectedand mad song, composed from snatches ofhymns and sacred odes, all jarringly woven together.Ha !" thought the Egyptian, instantaneouslydivining his state and its terrible cause ; " so, then,the hell-draught works, and Destiny hath sent theehither to crush two of my foes at once !"Quickly, even ere this thought occurred to him,he had withdrawn on one side of the chapel, andconcealed himself amongst the boughs ; from thatlurking-place he watched, as a tiger in its lair.POMPEII. 283the advance of his second victim. He noted thewandering and restless fire in the bright and beautifuleyes of the Athenian ; the convulsions that distortedhis statue-like features and writhed his huelesslip. He saw that the Greek was utterly deprivedof reason. Nevertheless, as Glaucus came up to thedead body of Appetites, from which the dark redstream flowed slowly over the grass, so strangeand ghastly a spectacle could not fail to arrest him,benighted and erring as was his glimmering sense.He paused, placed his hand to his brow, as if tocollect himself, and then saying —What, ho ! Endymion, steepest thou so soundly? what has the Moon said to thee ? thou makesme jealous; — it is time to wake," — he stooped downwith the intention of lifting up the body.Forgetting — feeling not — his own debility, tkeEgyptian sprung from his hiding-place, and as theGreek bent, struck him forcibly to the ground,over the very body of the Christian ; then, raisinghis powerful voice to its loudest pitch, heshouted —Ho, citizens, ho! — help me! — run hither —284 THE LAST DAYS OFhither ! A murder — a murder before your veryfane ! Help, or the murderer escapes !" As hespoke he placed his foot on the breast of Glaucus;an idle and superfluous precaution, for the potionoperating with the fall, the Greek lay theremotionless and insensible, save that now andthen his lips gave vent to some vague and ravingsounds.As he there stood awaiting the coming of thosehis voice still continued to summon, perhaps someremorse, some compunctious visiting — for despitehis crimes he was human — haunted the breast ofthe Egyptian ; the defenceless state of Glaucus —his wandering words — his riven reason, smote himeven more than the death of Appetites, and he said,half audibly, to himself —Poor clay — poor human reason ! where is thesoul now ? I could spare thee, O my rival — rivalnever more ! but destiny must be obeyed, my safetydemands thy sacrifice ;"" with that, as if to drowncompunction, he shouted yet more loudly, anddrawing from the girdle of Glaucus the stilus itcontained, he steeped it in the blood of the murderedman, and laid it beside the corpse.POMPEII. 285And now, fast and breathless, several of thecitizens came thronging to the place, some withtorches, which the moon rendered unnecessary,but which flared red and tremulously against thedarkness of the trees ; they surrounded thespot.Lift up yon corpse," said the Egyptian, " andguard well the murderer."They raised the body, and great was theirhorror and sacred indignation to discover in thatlifeless clay a priest of the adored and venerableIsis ; but still greater, perhaps, was their surprise,when they found the accused in the brilliant andadmired Athenian.Glaucus !" cried the bystanders, with oneaccord ; " is it even credible !"I would sooner," whispered one man to hisneighbors believe it to be the Egyptian himself."Here a centurion thrust himself into the gatheringcrowd with an air of authority.How ! blood spilt ! who the murderer ?"The bystanders pointed to Glaucus.286 THE LAST DAYS OFHe — by Mars, he has rather the air of beingthe victim ! Who accuses him ?""/," said Abates, drawling himself up haughtily,and the jewels which adorned his dress flashing inthe eyes of the soldier, instantly convinced thatworthy warrior of the witness's respectability.Pardon me — your name ?*" said he.Abates ; it is well known methinks in Pompeii.Passing through the grove, I beheld beforeme the Greek and the priest in earnest conversation.I was struck by the reeling motions of thefirst, his violent gestures, and the loudness of hisvoice; he seemed to me either drunk or mad.Suddenly I saw him raise his stilus — 1 dartedforward — too late to arrest the blow. He hadtwice stabbed his victim, and was bending overhim, when, in my horror and indignation, I struckthe murderer to the ground. He fell without astruggle, which makes me yet more suspect that hewas not altogether in his senses when the crinu'was perpetrated; for, recently recovered from asevere illness, my blow was comparatively feeble,and the frame of Glaucus, as you see, is strongand youthful."POMPEII. 287His eyes are open now — his liss move," saidthe soldier. " Speak, prisoner, what sayest thouto the charge ?"The charge — ha — ha ! Why it was merrilydone — when the old hag set her serpent at me, andHecate stood by laughing from ear to ear — whatcould I do ? But I am ill — I faint — the serpent'sfiery tongue hath bitten me. Bear me to bed, andsend for your physician; old-aesculapius himselfwill attend me if you let him know that I amGreek. Oh, mercy — mercy — I burn ! — marrowand brain, I burn !"And with a thrilling and fierce groan the Athenianfell back in the arms of the bystanders.He raves," said the officer compassionately,and in his delirium he has struck the priest.Hath any one present seen him to-day."I," said one of the spectators, " beheld himin the morning. He passed my shop and accostedme. He seemed well and sane as the stoutestof us."And I saw him half an hour ago," said another,passing up the streets, muttering to himself288 THE LAST DAYS OFAvitli strange gestures, and just as the Egyptianhad described."A corroboration of the witness ! it must be tootrue. He must at all events to the praetor ; a pity,so young and so rich ; but the crime is dreadful :a priest of Isis in his very robes too, and at thebase itself of our most ancient chapel l""At these words the crowd were reminded moreforcibly, than in their excitement and curiositythey had yet been, of the heinousness of the sacrilege.They shuddered in pious horror.No wonder the earth has quaked," said one,when it held such a monster !"Away with him to prison — away !" criedthey all.And one solitary voice was heard shrilly andjoyously above the rest,The beasts will not want a gladiator 7iow.■' Ho — ho! for the merry ^ morris show!''''It was the voice of the young woman, whoseconversation with Medon has been repeated.True — true — it chances in season for theGames !" cried several ; and at that thought allP03IPEII. 289pity for the accused seemed vanished. His youthhis beauty — but fitted him better for the purposeof the arena.Bring hither some planks — or if at hand,a litter — to bear the dead," said Arbaces ; " apriest of Isis ought scarcely to be carried tohis temple by vulgar hands, like a butcheredgladiator."At this, the bystanders reverently laid thecorpse of Appetites on the ground, with the faceupwards, and some of them went in search ofsome contrivance to bear the body, untouched bythe profane.It was just at that time that the crowd gaveway to right and left as a sturdy form forced itselfthrough, and Olinthus the Christian stood immediatelyconfronting the Egjq^tian. But hiseyes, at first, only rested with inexpressiblegrief and horror on that gory side and upturnedface, on which the agony of violent death yetlingered.Murdered !" he said. " Is it thy zeal that hasbrought thee to this ? Have they detected thyVOL. II. o290 THE LAST DAYS OFnoble purpose, and by death prevented their ownshame ?""He turned his head abruptly, and his eyes fellfull on the solemn features of the Egyptian.As he looked, you might see in his face, andeven the slight shiver of his frame, the repugnanceand aversion which the Christian felt forone whom he knew to be so dangerous and socriminal. It was indeed the gaze of the birdupon the basilisk — so silent was it and so prolonged.But shaking oiF the sudden chill thathad crept over him, Olinthus extended his rightarm towards Arbaces, and said in a deep and loudvoice —Murder hath been done upon this corpse !Where is the murderer ! Stand forth, Egyptian !For as the Lord liveth, I believe tho2i art theman !"An anxious and perturbed change might for onemoment be detected on the dusky features ofArbaces, but it gave way to the frowning expressionof indignation and scorn, as, awed andarrested by the suddenness and vehemence of thePOMPEII. 291Icharge, the spectators pressed nearer and nearerupon the two more prominent actors.I know," said Graces proudly, " who is myaccuser, and I guess wherefore he thus arraigns me.Men and citizens, know this man for the most bitterof the Nazarenes, if that or Christians be theirproper name ! What marvel that in his malignityhe dares accuse even an Egyptian of the murtherof a priest of Egypt !"I know him ! I know the dog !" shoutedseveral voices. " It is Olinthus the Christian — orrather the' Atheist — he denies the gods !"Peace ! brethren'" said Olinthus with dignity,and hear me ! This murdered priest of Isisbefore his death embraced the Christian faith —he revealed to me the dark sins, the sorceries ofyon Egyptian — the mummers and delusions ofthe fane of Isis. He was about to declare thempublicly. He, a stranger, unoffending, withoutenemies ! who should shed his blood, but oneof those who feared his witness ? — who mightfear that testimony the most ? — Arbaces, theEgyptian !"292 THE LAST DAYS OFYou hear him !" said Arbaces, " you hear him !he blasphemes ! — Ask him, if he believe iu Isis ?"Do I believe iii an evil demon ?'' returned Olin-thusboldly.A groan and shudder past through the assembly.Nothing daunted — for prepared at every time forperil, and in the present excitement losing allprudence, the Christian continued —Back, idolaters ! this clay is not for your vainand polluting rites — it is to us — to the followersof Christ, that the last offices due to a Christian,belong. I claim this dust in the name of the gi-eatCreator who has recalled the spirit !'''With so solemn and commanding a voice andaspect the Christian spoke these words, that even thecrowd forbore to utter aloud the execration of fearand hatred, which in their hearts they conceived.And never, perhaps, since Lucifer and the Archangelcontended for the body of the mighty Lawgiver,was there a more striking subject for thepainter's genius, than that scene exhibited. Thedark trees — the stately fane — the moon full on thecorpse of the deceased — the torches tossing wildlyPOMPEII.to and fro in the rear — the various faces of themotley audience — the insensible form of the Athenian,supported in the distance : And in the foreground,and, above all, — the forms of Arbaces andthe Christian : the first drawn to his full height,far taller than the herd around ; his arms folded,his brow knit, his eyes fixed, his lip slightlycurled in defiance and disdain. The last, bearing,on a brow worn and farrowed, the majesty of anequal command — the features stern, yet frank —the aspect bold, yet open — the quiet dignity of thewhole form impressed with an ineffable earnestness,hushed, as it were, in a solemn sympathy with theawe he himself had created. His left hand pointingto the corpse — his right hand raised toheaven.The centurion pressed forward again.In the first place, hast thou, Olinthus, orwhatever be thy name, any proof of the chargethou hast made against Arbaces, beyond thy vaguesuspicion .''"'''Olinthus remained silent — the Egyptian laughedcontemptuously.294* THE LAST DAYS OFDost thou claim the body of a priest of Isisas one of the Nazarene or Christian sect ?"I do."Swear, then, by yon fane, yon statue of Cybele,by yon most ancient sacellum in Pompeii, thatthe dead man embraced your faith !""Vain man ! I disown your idols ! I abhor yourtemples ! How can I swear by Cybele then ?"Away ! away with the atheist ! away I theearth will swallow us, if we suffer these blasphemersin a sacred grove — away with him to death!"To the beasts /"" added a female voice in thecentre of the crowd ; " we shall have one a-piece nowfor the lion and tiger /""If, O Nazarene, thou disbelieve in Cybele,which of our gods dost thou own ?" resumed thesoldier, unmoved by the cries around.None !"'•' Hark to him ! hark !" cried the crowd.O vain and blind !" continued the Christian,raising his voice, " can you believe in images ofwood and stone ? Do you imagine that they haveeyes to see, or ears to hear, or hands to help ye ?POMPEII,Is yon minute thing carved by man's art, a goddess? — hath it made mankind ? — alas ! by mankindwas it made. — Lo ! convince yourselves of itsnothingness — of your folly !"And as he spoke, he strode across to the fane, andere any of the bystanders were aware of his purpose,he, in his compassion or his zeal, struckthe statue of wood from its pedestal.See !"''' cried he, " your goddess cannot avengeherself. Is this a thing to worship ?"Farther words were denied to him ; so gross anddaring a sacrilege, of one too of the most sacred oftheir places of worship, filled even the most lukewarmwith rage and horror. With one accord, thecrowd rushed upon him, seized, and but for theinterference of the centurion, they would havetorn him to pieces.Peace !" said the soldier, authoritatively, —refer we this insolent blasphemer to the propertribunal — time has been already wasted. Bear weboth the culprits to the magistrates ; place thebody of the ]priest on the litter — carry it to hisown home."296 THE LAST DAYS OF POMPEII.At this moment a priest of This stepped forward." I claim these remains, according to thecustom of the priesthood."The flamen be obeyed," said the centurion.How is the murderer ?"Insensible, or asleep."Were his crime less, I could pity him —On—"Arbaces, as he turned, met the eye of that priestof Isis — it was Calenus ; and something there wasin that glance, so significant and sinister, that theEgyptian muttered to himself —Could he have witnessed the deed ! "A girl darted from the crowd, and gazed hardon the face of Olinthus. " By Jupiter, a stoutknave f — I say, we shall have a man for the tigernow — one for each beast — huzza !"Huzza!" shouted the mob, " a man for thelion, and another for the tiger. What luck !huzza !"END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.Printed by Samuel Bentley,Dorset street, Fleet-street, London.