NOTES ON HAITI,MADE DURING A RESIDENCEIN THAT REPUBLIC.CHARLES Mckenzie, Esq. F.R.S. F.L.S.I ATE HIS majesty's Consul-general IN HAITI,AND NOW HIS majesty's COMMISSIONER OF ARBITRATIONIN THE Savanna, &C. &C.v^uid dem? quid non dem? tenuis quod tu, jubet alter.Herat.IN TWO Volumes.VOL. I.LONDON :HENRY Colour AND RICHARD BENTLEY,NEW BURLINGTON STREET.1830.IPRINTED BY A, J. VALPY,UEU LION COURT, FLEET STREET.>i--V^TOJAMES Colles Richard.M. D. F. R. S.&c. &c. &c.My Dear Richard,I inscribe these two small Volumesto you, first to gratify my personal affections,and, secondly, to associate my namewith that of a man whose profound researchand accuracy of thought give him a high rankinthe literature of the world.The largest portion of both ourlives has passed away since it was my prideivto be considered your friend ; and it is now asubject of gratification, that neither separationnor diversity of pursuit has impaired our originalfeelings.Allow me, therefore, to avail myselfof the first public opportunity I have everhad of subscribing myselfYour truly affectionate Friend,C. M.London, April 1830.PREFACEIn laying before the public notes originallymade for my private use, it is necessary tooffer a few explanatory remarks, lest I shouldbe charged with attaching undue importance tothem.On my going to Haiti in 1 826, in addition tomere consular duties, others of a higher orderwere assigned to me ; and among these I wasrequired to report on the state of society, andthe actual condition of the new republic in allits relations : this was a task no less invidiousthan difficult ; but I performed it with zeal andto the best of my ability, utterly regardless ofany consideration beyond the faithful dischargeVI PREFACE.of my public duty. I was, however, fullyaware that imperfection was inseparable fromsuch an undertaking, under the circumstancesin which I was placed ; I therefore pointed outthe difficulty of acquiring accurate information,and reserved to myself the right of future correction,whenever inaccuracy should be detected.This right I repeatedly exercised, andI have the gratification of knowing that my exertionswere fully appreciated by His Majesty'sgovernment : the manner too in which their approbationwas conveyed to me by the lateMr. Canning, was equally flattering to me asaprivate individual and as a public officer.Proud of such a testimonial, and conscious ofhaving faithfully discharged the trust reposedin me, I returned to Europe on the terminationof my most important duties, without any designof appearing at the bar of public criticism.Immediately, however, after my arrival intown, I learned, for the first time, that proceedingswere in progress before the PrivyCouncil on the subject of compulsory manu-preface.Vllmission, and that in the course of these, oneof my dispatches had been produced as evidenceby the opponents of that measure. I wasfurther informed that the learned counsel on theother side had indulged in a strain of misrepresentationas little creditable to his taste as tohis acuteness.Very shortly afterwards the House of Commonsordered my reports to be laid on theirtable, which was done early in the ensuingsession, and they were printed in the month ofMay, 1829. So soon as this was done, I feltthat it became a duty to draw up (as far aswould be consistent with the confidential characterin which I stood) some account of themanner in which I had been enabled to obtainthe information of which a summary had beenprinted, and for that purpose I entered into arrangementswith my publishers.This step was taken after mature deliberation;but had I ever entertained a doubt ofits expediency, that doubt would have been removedby a number of the Anti-slavery ReporterVlll PREFACE.which was put, about the beginning of the presentyear, into my hands by a friend whollyunconnected with the West Indies. This gentlemanhad been struck with the coarse vulgarityand the impudent falsity with which I was assailed.I also felt these as strongly as he did ;but on examination I was still more impressedwith the dishonest style of criticism, with theflagrant misrepresentations of facts, with thegarbled quotations, and above all, with thejumbling together statements made at differentperiods, with those which they were intended tocorrect, as parts of the same document. It isnot my intention to engage in controversy withthis person, and my reasons are powerful.In the first place, the imputations he hascast upon me do not alter facts, and I am surethat all impartial people will see in them muchpassion, but little reason; and will also beconvinced thai " they disgrace only those whoutter them, and show only what it is that theywho are capable of imputing base motives toothers, would themselves be, if they were inPREFACE. IXofficial situations"* In the second place, acontest is on such unequal terms between aknown and responsible person and an anonymousassailant, as to warrant any man to declineit. And lastly, as I am not a partisan, Iwill afford no ground for my being so representedby the warmth into which I might bebetrayed in repelling ungentlemanly impertinence.I hired to be inhonour of our flag ; but the real solution was thatit is customary to salute at sun-set on the daypreceding any great festival, and this was theeve of Corpus Christii, one of the most honouredof the Catholic Church. Early in the morning Iannounced my arrival to the Secretary GeneralInginac ; but, as the whole of the authorities wereengaged in the religious processions, I did notland. In the course of the afternoon an officercame off from General Inginac, to invite me tovisit him the following day, which was done,and an appointment made for an interview withthe President at two o'clock on the 26th. Atthe appointed time, accompanied by CaptainChambers, and one of the gentlemen who wentout with me, I landed at a miserable woodenpier, where we found the officer, who had visitedus, waiting with a carriage that had been providedby the Government. In this we proceededto the '* Palais du Gouvernement," formerly theresidence of the French governor general. Some4 NOTES ON HAITI,delay occurred in reaching our destination, owingto the circuitous route the carriage was obligedto take, on account of the impassable state ofthe leading streets, which are generally torn upin the middle by the rush of the tropical rains ;and the only mode of repair is to fill up thecavities with any refuse that can be procured,which of course is washed out by the firstrecurrence of them.We however reached the palace in safety :before it we passed a cenotaph, in which theremains of the late President Petion and hiseldest daughter repose, and on the opposite sideis a wooden platform with steps, called '^ L' autelde la Patrie'' from which on certain occasionsthe president harangues the troops andthe citizens. A mountain cabbage-tree, (Palm anobilis) the tree of liberty in Haiti, grows near it.The palace is a large building, with a handsomeflight of steps leading into good reception-rooms,where we were met by the secretary-general andsome of the president's aides-de-camp. Theformer introduced us to his excellency, (for sothe president is exclusively designated,) andour reception was polite, if not gracious. Thepresident, a little intelligent-looking man, withvery keen black eyes, which he whirls aboutwith extraordinary rapidity, showed that hisINTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT. Omanners had been formed on a good Frenchmodel. Our interview was short, as I hadmerely to state the objects of my visit, which Idid with as little circumlocution as possible.We then retired to the ** Hotel de la Monnaie,"which had been considerately provided for usby the president, as neither house nor lodgingwas to be hired on the spur of the moment.The indispensable objects of attention, thatoccupy every new comer in all countries, havingbeen as speedily disposed of as possible, I appliedmyself with diligence to the acquisition ofinformation on every topic of interest, and to theperformance of those duties which had beencommitted to my charge. In the execution ofthis two-fold task, I was engaged until themonth of February 1827, when I commencedmore extended examination of the island. Thegeneral result of those inquiries I shall now give,before attempting to detail my observations inother districts.The city of Port-au-Prince was first built inthe year 1749, since which, with some few intervals,it has been the capital of French St.Domingo, and is now the capital of the wholeisland. The first view that we had of it, in animperfect light, was pleasing; but the broadglare of the sun removed the delusion, and ex-notesON HAITI,habited a town irregularly built, though thestreets are laid out with great precision, traversingeach other at nearly right angles, thelongest passing from north to south. The whitenessof those parts of rock which are exposed inthe immediate neighbourhood, produces an unpleasantglare ; and, in spite of Moreau St. Mery'sdenial of the resemblance to a Tartar camp, Icannot help thinking that the expression is by nomeans inapt. The most striking feature in theneighbourhood of Port-au-Prince, when lookedupon from the harbour, is the total absence of allvisible cultivation — the eye being only relievedfrom the monotony of rank wild vegetation, bya few neat-looking cottages that are scatteredover the hills close to the city, and which arethe residences chiefly of foreign merchants.Among these the '' Habitation Letor" (which isof higher pretensions) makes a very handsomeappearance. It was formerly the property ofan opulent Frenchman, and now belongs to theonly surviving daughter of the late PresidentPetion, and is occasionally the residence of thefamily of the present president.The city is partially fortified landward, and iscommanded in the rear by ^* Forts Belair andAlexandre," the last so named in honour of Potion• and the harbour is protected by a batteryNEIGHBOURHOOD OF PORT-AU-PRINCE. 7on a small island, at a very short distance fromthe shore. Immediately behind the palace is the*' Champ de Mars," where the troops are drilled,and where inspections take place every Sunday.The buildings being chiefly of wood, and seldomexceeding two stories in height, have a paltryappearance. This style of house was adoptedby the French in consequence of frequent earthquakes,which were found to overthrow more substantialedifices. There are no public buildingsof any importance, except the palace. Thearsenal (which was burnt during my stay), theprison, the church, the mint, the courts, theLyceum, and the military hospital, are all insignificantin appearance. But width almost all ofthese is associated some scene of bloodshed,which is quite sickening. It was in the front ofthe church that Colonel Maudlin, alternately theidol and the object of detestation of the populace,was basely murdered by his own regiment(that of Port-au-Prince), and his miserablecorpse torn to pieces by the infuriated rabble.And in the opposite direction is the burying-ground,in which his faithful slave deposited hisreeking remains, and then stretching himself onthe grave, blew out his own brains.I was also shewn the house in which was perpetratedone of those remorseless acts of brutalNOTES ON HAITI.city, that so pre-eminently distinguished thatmonster Dessalines. A person now dead, ofmixed blood, was suspected of having admittedhis claims to Haitian citizenship, (which wasdetermined by the complexion,) not from anypride in the fact, but from motives of temporaryconvenience, and the test to which he was exposedwas most atrocious. He was on terms ofgreat intimacy with a European Frenchman, ofthe name of Voucher, in fact living in the samehouse in habits of daily and familiar intercoursewith him. To prove his claims to Haitian citizenship,he was taken by a party of DessaHnes'aides-de-camp, and compelled to poignard hisunhappy friend. General Lacroix, in his veryable History of the Revolution of St. Domingo,mentions the fact, which I could scarcely credituntil it was confirmed by an individual who wasactually in the house when the deed of horrorwas perpetrated. His version of the anecdotediffered from that of the general, in ascribinghorror and repugnance to the involuntary murderer.I would willingly hope that this is true.There are three principal roads that lead outof Port-au-Prince — one to the north, whichbranches off to St. Mark's and to Mirebalais ;another to the east, leading to Fort Jacques ;and a third, that goes to the south and west,ROADS.leading to Leogane. On the first of these are thescenes of two important events in Haitian history,the Pont Rouge, where Dessahnes was shot froman ambuscade, formed by his own troops, andChert, where Christophe gained a signal victoryover Petion. In the direction of Mirabilisis the hamlet of Croix des Bouquets, celebratedas the place at which the first convention,in 1791, was entered into between thewhite and coloured population. On the Leo-gaveroad, close to the entrance into the city,there was formerly a block house, and furtheron, upon an eminence, stands the Fort Bizotton,which was carried by our troops in 1793, in anight assault. The whole of these roads are inbad order, from being composed of stiff claywithout any stones, although there is abundanceof rock at hand ; they are in wet weather nearlyimpracticable, as a horse sinks at every stepfetlock-deep, and the slipperiness of the mudrenders even the slowest motion hazardous.On such roads carriages are of little use, anda few waggons, not unlike those used in Spainand Portugal, drawn by oxen, are almost theonly vehicles seen. Asses and horses are theusual beasts of burthen, and almost every personkeeps a riding horse.Port-au-Prince is the seat of the republican10 NOTES ON Hailgovernment, and is the principal post of anArrondissement," under the peculiar protectionof the president, who strictly vindicates hisclaim to his official designation by interferingwith every thing. The effective service underhim is carried on by different departments.The secretary-general, Inginac, unites in hisown person the offices of secretary at war, offoreign and home minister. Among his otherduties he promulgates the orders of the president,and such laws as have received his sanction ;and he also countersigns certain documents.I believe a secretary-general existed under thecolonial system. The minister of finance, designated*' Secretaire d'etat des finances," M. insert,and the treasurer-general, M. Nau, arrangeall fiscal matters ; while the *^ GrandJuge'' who, strange to relate, is a military man,presides in the supreme court of justice, andexercises jurisdiction over all the inferior courtsand law officers. There are at Port-au-Prince,besides the court already named, one of cassation,another for civil and criminal cases in thefirst instance, and a 'juge de paix" court forminor matters of all kinds, A tribunal of commercewas talked of, but I know not whetherit has been yet constituted.The city, as well as Fort Bizotton, is harris— MILITARY REPOSE. 11sone by regular troops, and there are variousmilitary posts both within and without. Atmost of them the strange exhibition is made ofchairs or seats for the sentries on duty, andhammocks for the remainder of the guard. Thefirst place at which I remarked this singulararrangement was in the front of the president'spalace. At the outlet to Leogane, I have repeatedlyseen the sentinel squatting on theground, holding his musket between his knees.From this singularly elegant attitude he isscarcely ever roused, except by the clattering ofhorses' hoofs, moving faster than is meet in thepresence of a Haitian post. He then starts up,growling the awful words ^^ auras !" so familiarto all trotting delinquents. There is also anadequate stimulus to move him, in the prospectiveconfiscation of the plantains, yams, or fruit,of any unhappy wight, who, in contravention ofthe '* code rural," strays to the market on forbiddendays.The police is military, forming a particularregiment ; and, from having lived above twomonths nearly opposite to the juge de paix,I can aver that they have abundant employment,which they perform with the usual delicacyof their profession. The delinquents werechiefly offenders of both sexes against the code12 NOTES ON HAITI*rural — persons in fact who preferred dancing allnight, and drinking tafia, to the labour prescribedby that law. In some classes of offenceam sorry to say that they are either not sodiligent or successful* An out-building, attachedto my cottage in the country, wasbroken open when I was at dinner, and somemoney in a writing-desk, and a few articles ofdress belonging to one of my servants, werestolen. The fact was discovered certainly withinan hour, and immediately communicated to thepolice, and a reward of one hundred dollarsoffered. The inquiry however failed ; thoughsome time afterwards the desk was found brokenopen in a wood adjoining my premises. It i&however to the credit of the population, that noother robberies took place at my house, as itasmall size and the heat of the climate obligedus all to sleep with open doors and windows.The police is said to be much improved sincePetion's time, when the most barefaced robberieswere committed.The principal market-day is Saturday ; butthere are daily markets throughout the week forcertain articles. The supply of beef, mutton,and fowls, is very tolerable ; that of fish uncertain;and what is singular enough, althoughturtle abound in the bay, they are rarely metPOLICE— MARKETS RENTS. 13with for sale. ' There is also a respectable supplynot only of tropical vegetables and fruit, butof some European kinds, which are raised bysome natives, and by some of the American settlers,who have received grants of land from thegovernment. Peaches, not of a good sort, andapples come from the mountains near FortJacques ; and I have in my possession some exceedinglyfine cloves, bought in the market ofPort-au-Prince, which had been grown at Jerome.The mere necessaries of Haitian life arereasonable in price ; but whatever approaches toluxury is extravagantly dear. House-rent, atleast to every foreigner, is very high. I wasasked for an unfurnished house, without eitherkitchen or stable, four thousand dollars a-year.Of course I did not take it, but hired a smallcottage out of town. For my office in town Iwas obliged to pay fifteen hundred dollars■a-year. Waster is well supplied by several fountains,which are fed from the neighbouringheights, through channels constructed by thefrench.Port-au-Prince was formerly celebrated forits theatre and public amusements. There wasnothing of the kind when I was there.Situated as this city is, at the bottom of avery deep bay, and nearly surrounded by marshy14 NOTES ON HAITI,ground, under a burning sun, it is eminentlyunhealthy, and its insalubrity is not a little increasedby the interruption that the sea-breeze,so appropriately called the Doctor in most tropicalcountries, meets with in its progress fromthe Island of Gonave, which will be seen bya reference to the map, blocks up the entranceto the bay. During the months of May,June, July, August, and September, the heatis most intense ; for a considerable time mythermometer reached 99° every day in theshade.* The consequence of these concurrentcauses is mortal disease among new comers.Within a month after my arrival my principalsextant died of yellow fever ; within threemonths one of the acting vice-consuls fell avictim to the climate, and every other individualof my family, including servants, (one ofwhom was a native of La Guayra,) were mostseriously, if not dangerously, ill. The chiefsufferers, in general, are to be found among thecrews of foreign vessels. The climate and newrum are omnipotent. As an instance of the unfitnessof Port-au-Prince for European constitutions,I may cite the fate of the French consulgeneral's family. I believe that on arrivalMoreau St. Mery gives a catalogue, of fearful extent, of thediseases of every month ia the year.CLIMATE FUNERALS* 15it consisted of six, five of whom were deadwithin fifteen months, M. Malerr, the consulgeneral, being the sole survivor.It strikes a stranger as very extraordinarythat the people should seem to delight in attendingfunerals. The women are the principalattendants, and the greater the number, thegreater the honor paid to the deceased. Someuncharitable foreigners ascribe this to the wantof places of public amusement, at which theladies can exhibit themselves. Funerals andchurch thus, it is said, become their only resource.I found afterwards in Jamaica, that thehumblest slave aspires to the glory of a finefuneral ; so that personal vanity may not be thesole cause of the Haitian practice of inviting thewhole town to escort the dead to their lastearthly home. The custom extends to foreignersas well as natives, and, with half-a-dozen exceptions,I can with truth declare that all the invitationsI received for the first six months of myresidence were to funerals, and I must candidlyown that I did not do due honor to the dead ; forthe time of the ceremonial being one at which thesun was very powerful, I generally contrived tomourn by deputy.''^This subject is pathetically and admirably illustrated bySir Walter Scott in the " Antiquary."16 . NOTES ON HAITI.I have been repeatedly asked, is there anycourt in Haiti ? Were I to answer directly, Ishould say that there is none according to theEuropean standard, and I suspect that there isnothing to correspond with the republican leveesof Washington. To form, a correct idea ofthe meetings, or whatsoever else they may becalled, at the Palace of Port-au-Prince, it isnecessary to discard all the gorgeous accountsof Christophe's court. There is no king ; thereare no dukes, uiarquesses, counts, barons, orknights ; no stars or libbands ; neither arethere any splendid equipages : there is, in fact,nought but military rank, indicated by militaryattire, that commands respect, and, I may add,almost exclusive authority ; and the most illustriousof the Haitian chiefs wend their melancholyway to the Sunday levee on foot oron horseback, as their good stars may enablethem to do. This is the only fixed public day,and at six o'clock in the morning the Presidentreceives all persons, whether natives orforeigners, who choose to sally forth at this apparentlyunreasonable hour, though in realitynot a bad one, in a very hot country. Whenevera particular audience is required, especiallyby a public agent of a foreign government, difficultiesare rarely interposed by the president.LEVEES-military INSPECTION. 17After a due allowance of bowing and sayingcivil things, the chief mounts his horse, accompaniedby his officers of state and personal staff,and proceeds to the *' Champ de Mars," wherethe regiments in garrison, and the miHtia insuccession, from the adjacent districts, are formedinto three sides of a square, round which thepresident rides slowly, inspecting the men. Noevolutions are performed, and the troops rarelyfire — whether to economize powder, or to avoidpersonal risk to the *^ Eat Major'" does notappear quite certain. The military bands playduring the inspection, and I dare say that theperformance is highly gratifying to admirers ofcracked trumpets, and a ^^ pretty considerable "disregard of tune and time. Sometimes thepresident, '^ a la Napoleon," on noticing a soldierunusually neat, calls him out of the ranks,pats him on the back, and holds him out as anexample to his brethren. I never witnessed sucha scene, though it was accurately described tome; for I only once essayed the field, and myhorse was so little an amateur of the music,though himself a Hadrian, that I was delightedto escape without adding to the exhibitions ofthe morning by a somerset. Having no ambitionto display feats of horsemanship, I never18 NOTES ON HAITI.returned to the charge ; but I had weekly accountsconfirmatory of my own observations.This ceremonial ended, the president and hissuite ride through the city to inspect its condition,no doubt carefully surveying the veryrapid accumulation or decrease of filth (accordingto the serenity or wetness of the day) thatadorns the " beautiful capital." And as thispart of the business is conducted with indescribablegravity, I do hope that the communityat large may eventually derive much benefitfrom it.Besides these hebdomadal exhibitions, thereare three days consecrated by the thirty-fourtharticle of the revised constitution of 1816 topublic festivity, and on each of these the presidentholds a public court. The days are the1st January, the anniversary of Haitian independence; the 2d April, that of the birth ofPetion, the founder of the republic ; and 1stMay, that of the establishment of the " Feted'Agriculture." Of these I had the bad fortuneto be present only at the celebration of the anniversaryof the Independence of the Republic ;the other celebrations having taken place when Iwas absent from the capital. Of the occasion atwhich I was present, I shall give a short account*PUBLIC FESTIVALS. 19Some days prior to the " fete," on the 1st Jan.1827, 1 received an invitation to attend the greatmeeting on that day, at the palace, and afterwardsto dine with his Excellency. AccordinglyI went at six in the morning, (the appointedhour,) in all the paraphernalia of office, shininglike a dollar, as the Barbadians have it, andfound numberless military men as well as civilians,of nearly every colour in the rainbow,assembled, interchanging kisses with moustacheslips, a ceremony that affected my nervouseconomy in an indescribable manner, malekissing being rather against my code of ethics.All were huddled together without order, asthere was no master of ceremonies, evensuch a one as might have appeared at a ballafter Epping hunt, and every man was left tohis own resources. I was fortunate enough tofind my old friend General Inginac, to whom onthis and every other occasion I was indebtedfor personal kindness. But, notwithstandingthat kindness, I had got into a state of moral*' asphyxia," when the appearance of my friendand colleague, M. Malerr, the French consul-general,revived me. The time passed as pleasantlyas his wit and eccentric remarks on thescene could make it; but expectation underaccumulating heat is the devil. At length,20 KOTfiS ON HAITI.about eight o'clock, a buzz was heard, and outrushed his Excellency the President, mutteringa few words, which I was told by a step-son ofSonthonax, M. Villevaleix, (who now holds officein the republic,) was an apology for having keptus waiting. We were then marshalled by myinformant, who now assumed the duties of actingmaster of the ceremonies, and we proceededto the *' Autel de la Patrie," which from its appearancewould be more appropriately namedI'Echafaud de la Patrie'' By the time inwhich the procession (in which the precedenceof the students of medicine and of foreignagents was a moot point,) had reached its station,the president was on *' the altar," and wehad abundant leisure to examine his outwardman. He was dressed in a blue frock-coat,very richly embroidered with gold. On thebeauty of his inexpressible I cannot pretend todescant, from the depth and closeness of hiscoat ; but his boots surpassed any thing I hadever seen. The foot, the ancle, and the upperpart, was each of a different colour, the form,Hessian, bound with gold, with an enormous 'gold tassel dependent; and the whole was asamply embroidered as a Chinese shoe, and nearlyas elegant. Over his shoulder was slung a beltof velvet and gold, to which was appended ^FETE independence. 2lsword, such as Bayard may have been supposedto have used in his last devotions,while in his hand he carried a superb canemounted with gold, and nearly rivalling thepresidential altitude. His Excellency's headwas surmounted with a tremendous *^ chapeaua la Claque," which he dismounted, and gracefullywaving it, he emphatically recalled theglories of the day thus commemorated, anticipatedthe perpetuity of independence, foretoldbrilliant prospects of futurity, and the annihilationof foreign aggressors. His Excellency thendescended, and saying a few civil things to thosenear him, the procession again moved forward tothe church, where a " Te Deem" was performed,and we then returned to " the place from whichwe came," where we peacefully separated forour respective dwellings, half broiled by thesun, and exhausted by hunger and fatigue. Atseven in the evening, a party of about onehundred and fifty persons (including the foreignagents) dined with the President. Amongthe toasts were ^* The President and Republicof Haiti," '' Charles X." "George IV." andvarious others. Excess was not the characteristicof the party ; for, after a very few glassesof wine, we adjourned to an apartment, in which22 NOTES ON HAITI.the female members of General Boyer's familywere assembled, where we had some music; andthe honorary laureate of the republic, (GeneralCharlotte, since dead,) sung a song composedby himself, the burthen of which was '^ ViveBoyer ! Vive Haiti ! " More I recollect not,though the lyrics were published in a newspaper.I ought to have gone home at teno'clock, but my groom, having thought it necessaryto do honour to the day by potent libations,was unable to bring my horses, a-nd I wasobliged to go in quest of them.I regret, now that there is no probability ofmy ever again witnessing the scenes, that I lostthe two other national festivals, at which I understanda display somewhat different from thatjust described takes place. The professed objectof that of the 1st of May is to encourageagriculture by the award of prizes to the mostsuccessful cultivators ; but I am not awarethat the competition is as yet very extensive.However, it appears to be one of the objectsthat are very steadily pursued by the governmentof Haiti.Of the president's domestic arrangements andprivate parties, I can say nothing from personalobservation, as my intercourse with him wasDINNER AT PALACE. 23purely official. It was said that the Frenchconsul-general was more familiar, owing to thepredilections of the president, which very naturallytend to the country of his father, who wasa Frenchman.24 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER II.Population and Society of Port-au-Prince — Exclusion of Whit*Proprietors — Case of Parlour — American Servants — SlothfulHabits — Style of Visiting— Cultivation and Wages —Rural Police — M. Nau's Plantation.The population of the capital and its immediatevicinity consists of a few foreigners ofdifferent nations, the adopted citizens of the republic,and the natives of the island. The firstof these classes is composed of a few publicagents, merchants, and some tradespeople.With the exception of the British and Frenchconsuls, all the other agents were commercialmen. Of the style of society I shall presentlyspeak.The subjects, or citizens (which I believe tobe the more appropriate republican epithet) toHaiti, in this district, were, at the period ofwhich I refer, divided into three great classes ;COMPOSITION OF SOCIETY. 25viz. a very few white men ; every shade of colourbetween white and black, to which MoreauSt. Mery and Lacroix have attempted to affixa nomenclature ; and the negroes. In the orderof their numerical proportions they stand thus :black, coloured, white. The first two of theseclasses are again subdivided in reality, (thoughall professing a common allegiance) into all thenational distinctions of Europe and America ;for by the forty-fourth article of the constitution,all Indians, Africans, and their descendants,whether of mixed or pure blood, may becomecitizens after a residence of twelve months.The residence, however, is often dispensed with,though contrary to the theory of the constitution,as I have had occasion to know. HenceHaiti, in general, becomes a place of refuge toall persons of those classes, who either have, orsuppose themselves to have, reason to be dissatisfiedwith their own country ; and the capital,from natural causes, is the place of principalresort, especially on first emigration. Theremainder are native-born Haitians, having everypeculiarity of opinion that may be imagined tohave been engendered by their situation andcircumstances. Such, at least, is the opinion ofthe best informed persons (natives as well asstrangers) with whom I conversed on the sub-vol.I. B26 NOTES ON HAITI.sect; and my own observations, as far as theywent, confirmed what I had heard from others.Notwithstanding the discordance of these materials,the government asserts that all the feelingsand prejudices, either of the olden time, oron the subject of colour, or on that of nationalorigin, have been absorbed by an intense patriotism: others again aver, that in no part ofthe world do prejudices and feelings exist to sogreat an extent as in the capital itself; and I amdisposed to fear that the latter opinion is themost correct, from many facts ; but most especiallyso, from the maintenance of the 38tharticle of the constitution, which proscribes allwhites from becoming citizens, in spite of theconviction of the most enlightened of the chiefs,who, I cannot but believe, reluctantly defer tothe prejudices of the many.fI made many inquiries on this point ; for,besides its importance in determining the politicalconcord of the republic, I was curious toascertain how far a revolution, founded on hobart.38. " Aucun blanc, queue soit sa iiatiun, ne pourranettle les pieds sur ce territoire dl titre de satire ou die proprietary."t Christopher disapproved of this law ; and Vasty, in hisReflexion Politiques," proposed the substitution of " aucunFrancois," instead of ** aucun blanc."CASE OF Parlour. 27utility to prejudice of colour, had ended, withreference to what has been professed to be itsmost active immediate cause. The state of thecase, such as I believe to exist, is by no meansunnatural, however unfortunate it may be forabstract principles ; indeed, I apprehend it to beone of the most difficult efforts of humanity toremove prejudices, however absurd, in a limitedcommunity, with which they have been almostidentified. If this be true, a solution will be atonce given to this apparent anomaly in a societyformed out of the most dissimilar elements.The government, as I have already remarked,deny such an opinion, and they are right ; butthere is direct evidence of no very ancient date,that individuals may be found ready to excitepassions which it is clearly the interest of thewhole should slumber. In 1822, a black man,named Parlour, a native of the district knownby that name in Africa, who, when a boy, hadaccompanied a French gentleman from Egypt toFrance, where he had been educated, emigratedto Haiti. At Port-au-Prince he establishedhimself as the editor of a newspaper, called'^ Eclipse ;" and, adopting the opinion that hisown caste was undervalued and excluded fromoffices of trust, he became a vehement opponentof the government. His proceedings were so28 NOTES ON HAITI.violent that he was obliged to lay down his paper,and to support himself by manual labour.His restless spirit however, always at work,discovered, or supposed it had discovered, somenew oppression. He embodied his wrongs in apetition to the Chamber of Commons, which heproceeded to deliver at the bar of that body,with the support of some of its most distinguishedmembers. These proceedings werenipped in the bud ; for the petitioner was arrested,led before a court martial (although acivilian), tried, convicted, and shot. The memberswho had abetted him were exiled, as Iunderstood, without trial, to a distance fromPort-au-Prince, to which they were permittedto return after having duly expiated their politicalsins by an exile of some months. I wasalso told that they were expelled the Chamber.• As far as I could discover, there is nothing ofan imperceptible gradation in society. The presidentavowedly stands at the head, and themilitary and civil officers range according totheir respective ranks: but there is no higherorder, no middle class, descending to thelower orders in private life. Military and civilemployment, and the possession of money,alone entitle to consideration; but in generalthe possessor will associate on terms of familia-distributionOF OFFICE. 29city with the lowest member in the scale ofsociety, without any feeling of degradation.There are, however, exceptions to this awkwardpractice. Some have attempted to show thatthe coloured population form an aristocracy,while the whole of the labour is entailed on thenegro. This, I suspect, is generalizing too extensively; though it is a fact that the former veryoften fill the principal offices, owing, I suppose,to their being generally better educated; butthere are many instances in which blacks, evenwithout education, are intrusted vdth importantoffices. There is one circumstance which appearsto me very essentially to contribute to thisspirit of equality. Almost every man, whateverhis official rank may be, is either directlyor indirectly engaged in commerce, the acquisitionof money being held in as great repute asit ever was in Duke's-place or the Minores.Out of the class just mentioned there is nointermediate step to that of labourers, artizans,domestic servants, 8cc. These are of all coloursand of various qualities. The natives are themost numerous, and there are among themsome ingenious workmen and industrious labourers; but these qualities are not so generalas they ought to be.Among the labourers in tom, there is a connotesON HAITI.miserable number of emigrants from the UnitedStates of America, who, though by no meansdeficient in intelligence, are, with few exceptions,by no means the most respectable part of thecommunity. My personal experience among severalAmerican servants that I had, led to thisconclusion ; and on investigating the causes, Ifound that during the rage for emigration fromAmerica to Haiti, the very refuse of the blackand coloured population of the former wereforemost, no doubt in the expectation of findinga school-boy's Utopia in the new land of promise.But when they found that the government exactedlabour in return for food and grants of land,discontent and dissatisfaction followed ; and thosewho could not remove themselves, (which numbersfailed in doing, owing to the vigilance ofthe authorities) became as systematic in idleness,drunkenness, and profligacy, as men andwomen could be.Indolence and inactivity are not, however,confined to the emigrants ; they are the characteristicsof the country : there is a general airof listlessness, which may be aptly describedas *^ a death-like languor which is not repose,"pervading all classes. I was much struck by apractical illustration which was one day affordedby a Haitian of the truth of this remark. AnINDOLENCE OF PEOPLE. 31Englishman had desired a porter in the housewhere he was employed, to go on some messagefor him to a short distance. As I wasinterested in it, I awaited his return, which wasdelayed much longer than it ought to havebeen. At last the messenger appeared, ^^ creepinglike snail :" my acquaintance called outin the usual phrase on such occasions, ^' Vite !vite!" which seemed rather to retard the motionsof our Mercury. At last he arrived ; andon my asking *' Pourquoi, mon ami, est ce quevous ne courez pas?" he replied, with themost imperturbable gravity, ^' Nous ne couponspas dans ce pays ci," Had there been any drollery,it might have been cited as a specimen ofHaitian humour ; but it was no such thing ; itwas the sober enunciation of a principle.If a doubt remain on a stranger's mind as tothe correctness of this view of the case, let himride through Port-au-Prince at any hour of theday, and he will see '^ confirmation strong."The manner in which, at all hours of the day,the women and men are seen lounging undercanvas, strained in front of the houses to excludethe sun, is no bad accompaniment forthe sentries in chairs ; and I suspect there is nopart of the world where more time is literally'^ whiled away" than in Haiti. The impress of32 NOTES ON HAITI,listless indolence is decidedly given to all animatednature ; even the dogs and pigs wanderabout nth an apathy unseen elsewhere. The latterseem so lean, as almost to convince the spectator,that, contrary to the habits of their race,they have abandoned gluttony. I was oncemuch struck by a dry remark made by a causticfellow : *•' D — n these Haitians, they cannoteven fatten a pig." Whether this be true or not,or whether the climate exercises the enervatinginfluence ascribed to that of Naples, I will notpresume to decide ; but it is a certain fact thatwretched pigs and scarecrow dogs abound.The society of Port-au-Prince, as alreadystated of the population, is either foreign or native; the former very much divided, according tothe countries to which the individuals belong,although they mingle together very generally.Their foreign residents are merchant's, chieflyEnglish, French, German, and North American,who visit without restraint, although there areindividuals who seem desirous of keeping upnational distinctions. Many conceived it quiteanomalous that the French consul-general andthe officers of the French squadron should beon habits of familiar intercourse with me. Inspite of such opinions, I steadily maintained anintercourse on which I shall always reflect withSTYLE OF VISITING. 33pleasure, as having afforded a pleasing relief tothe most laborious and irksome portion of mylife. There is very little systematic visitingamong foreigners in Port-au-Prince, but a gooddeal of dropping-in visits. The practice ofbreakfasting at mid-day and dining (the nativescall it ^^ souper") at seven o'clock, tends to promotethis unceremonious kind of intercourse. Asthere is always enough prepared for the family,an interloper is never heeded, except to be welcomed.The chief objection to these late breakfastsis the introduction of \^ane and spirits,which sometimes leads to excess. They arehowever so much in vogue, that many foreigners,as well as natives, who never give a dinner,occasionally give a " dejeuner a la fourchette "to a small party of sixty or eighty. At one ofthese, given by a most respectable and worthyEnglishman, I witnessed the evil effects of theearly introduction of wine ; for an official foreignerwas soon carried off senseless ; while hisneighbour had solid reasons for regretting theproximity of his pockets to the eruption whichpreceded the melancholy state of repose thatrendered a bed necessary.What the intercourse of the natives with eachother may be I cannot describe, as I had nomeans of making any minute inquiries ; but I34 NOTES ON HAITI.should rather think that it consists chiefly incalls ; when slight refreshments, such as wine,or spirits and water, or ^^ eau sucree," are produced.Their invitations to foreigners are notcommon ; but when they do occur there isabundance of every thing. I cannot ascribethis rarity to any want of hospitality ; for, as Ishall hereafter have occasion to show, that isa virtue which abounds, at least in the countrydistricts. I suspect a want of means is the realcause.At the period of our arrival, and for a longtimeafter, there were no balls among thebetter classes, owing, in the first place, to themourning for the eldest daughter of Petion,who had died at a very early age, a short timebefore; and secondly, to the depressed stateof commerce, and the general distress : butshortly before I left the island the gaieties hadrecommenced. I wished certainly to have seenone ; but occupation, and the power of goingwhenever I chose, led me to postpone doing so,until sickness rendered it impossible.From some of my friends who were present,I learned that European dances were chiefly invogue ; the *^ carabines," a sort of cotillon,being almost the only one peculiar to the republic.The men are described as zealous, thoughBALLS AND CONCERTS. 35not the most graceful votaries of Terpsichore ;while the softer sex display much grace in evolutions,though too nearly allied to the style ofthe ballet. The men are reported not to dress inaccordance with the canons of Stilts ; but thetoilet of the ladies very closely resembles thaton the eastern side of the Atlantic, with the exceptionof the head-dress, which is a sort ofturban, constructed generally of a Madras handkerchief:I think it pretty, though rather toolofty. Whenever a lady does not intend todance, this head-gear is formed of a whitehandkerchief; a sort of flag of truce that isalways held sacred.I was told that it would be difficult to determinewhich was the worst, the music or therefreshments : the former consisting of two orthree cracked chariots and horns ; the latter,of orgeat, bad rum, worse water, and coarsesyrup and water, sparingly served out of a stillmore slender supply of glasses.Private concerts also occurred; and I understandfrom competent judges that they were, touse the professional phrase, very well got up.Among the chief performers where some nativeHaitians, who had held commissions in theFrench army in Europe. Upon these two KOTES O^ HAITI.portant points I am only a hearsay-witness, as Inever was present at either.The majority of the inhabitants of the countryadjacent to Port-au-Prince are small proprietorsor ^^ concessionaires ;" to whom, by anAgrarian law introduced by the late presidentPetion, small allotments of land have beenmade. I know of no small tenants paying rentfor land. They cultivate such articles as and vegetables, and they rear poultry.In the higher grounds coffee is grown to a smallextent. The same individuals also occasionallylabour for the foreign residents near the townfor wages. There may be a few professed labourers; but of these there are I believe butvery few : it is consequently difficult to securesteady labour. Living as I did, about two milesfrom town, I found it necessary to cultivate asmuch grass as was wanted for my own horses.I had always one labourer, generally an Americanemigrant, residing on my premises ; butoccasionally, to keep down the rapid growth ofweeds, extra labour was required : yet in spiteof the inducements of better wages than wereusually paid, and of punctual payment everySaturday, I could rarely, if ever, get the sameset of people to work two weeks continuously.WAGES AND CODE Rural. 37I found that the produce of one week's exertions(fmm 1| to two dollars), if they could be calledso, enabled the labourer to enjoy for a considerableperiod his chief luxury, rum ; as thenecessaries of life are to be procured for a meretrifle, or with very little effort. One exceptionI must make in favour of an old sous-lieutenant,who had served under Christophe, and in hislatter days reverted to his original rank, that ofa labourer ; he toiled week after week : but hehad acquired ambition in his military career.My hero, though one of the ugliest men in therepublic, was named Adonis!The evils of this disinclination to labour pressheavily on the finances of the government, whohave discovered that "ex nihil nihil fit*' andthat they cannot perform their engagementswithout produce. Hence originated the " coderural," the existence of which was so boldlydenied in this country. It provides, as I shallhereafter show, very amply for enforcing labour; but the execution of the law near becomes difficult from the want ofsubordinate agents. Night-dancing, so muchin vogue, is restricted to those nights that precedeholidays ; by which arrangement industryand pleasure may go hand-in-hand. But thelaw is inoperative. During the whole of my38 NOTES ON HAITI.residence near Port-au-Prince, my rest wasbroken at least thrice every week by the bigdrums at these meetings ; and one of the principalplaces of resort was the house of the captainof the rural police, whose duty it was to represssuch assemblages. This worthy also affordedhis visitants an opportunity of disgorging a littleof their surplus capital at ^^ rouge et noir," orsome other equally complicated game. Thisman was a character of some note. He was notinaptly named " Taureau ;" for though his meanswere small, and his cottage still smaller, he hada harem of no less than six wives, one of whomfor a time was my laundress. Great was theconsternation in the seraglio, when one of theladies was discovered to have, in defiance ofher allegiance, maintained a less than questionableintimacy with a young black gallant,yclept Michel, the servant of an English merchant.Complaint after complaint rolled outagainst the lover, and Heaven only knows whatmight have been his fate, had not the suggestionsof his master rendered him more circumspect.I once went to one of these rural balls, whichwas got up at the instance of one of my Englishneighbours, that I might have an opportunity ofmaking my personal observations. A rude hut.APPEARANCE OF THE COUNTRY. 39covered with the branches of trees, was lightedwith a few candles. The musician, dressedfantastically, sat in a comer, beating a largedrum ; and the dancers of both sexes movedslowly, chanting a melancholy and wild accompanimentto the drum. The attitudes were voluptuousand not devoid of grace : there was noparticular motion of the feet, and the figure wasmerely advancing to and receding from, andmo vino; si owl v around the cabin. At the end ofeach dance, the musician started up, darted tothe place where the strangers stood, and exhibitedsome frantic gesticulations. Smoking, anddrinking tafia, were the other recreations of theevening.I have already noticed the uncultivated appearanceof the country on approaching it fromthe sea. The same character prevails, thoughto a less extent, on riding through it; for althoughoccasional patches of cultivation dopresent themselves, they are so few when comparedwith the dense masses of rank naturalvegetation, (which proceeds with a rapiditywholly unknown in milder climates,) as to sinkinto the shade. Thus to a person unpreparedfor such quick growth, the beautiful plain ofCul-de-sac, to the N. E. of Port-au-Prince, wouldseem to be an old forest of logwood (hcema-40 NOTES ON HAITI.toxylum Campechianum), and of bayahond(acacia) ; although, within the last thirty years,it was covered with sugar establishments, whichmust have rivalled any in the world.The general kind of culture I have alreadynoticed, when speaking of the labourers. Thatof canes is carried on to a small extent in the environs.To the west, on the Leogane road, is theplantation Letor, already noticed ; another belongingto General Inginac and the widow ofM. Sabourin, a former chief judge, called MonRepos : one in the plain of Cul-de-sac, RocheBlanche, belonging to the president ; a plantationbelonging to General Lerebours, the commandantof Port-au-Prince ; another to M.Nau, the treasurer-general, on which one hundredand fifty labourers are employed, besidessmaller establishments. In the same directionthere is also a very pretty country-house, belongingto the president, called Drouillard, atwhich Christophe established his head-quarterswhen besieging Port-au-Prince. I do not believethat any cultivation goes on there. Ithas much the appearance of the retreat of anEnglish gentleman.In reply to some queries addressed to me bythe directions of the late Mr. Secretary Canning,I gave some account of Letor, which havingM. Eau's plantation. 41been printed by the order of the House of Commons,I feel myself at liberty now to use, especiallyas the statement has been fully borne outbysubsequent inquiries.** Formerly one thousand seven hundred car-reads(each containing about three hundred andeighty square French feet) were in canes ; aboveone thousand five hundred slaves were employedon it ; three sugar-mills were constantly at work,and excellent sugar was made. Now aboutseven arrears are in cultivation ; not fifty labourersare employed ; and the only produce isa little syrup and tafia, which last is retailed inasmall shop by the road-side, in front of thepresident's residence'' — P. 80. ParliamentaryPapers.M. Nau very kindly invited me to his countfor the purpose of seeing his plantation,which is justly considered amongst thefirst in the republic ; for being a man of property,he is never driven by poverty to abandonwhat he has once begun, which is very oftenthe case with inferior speculators. I spent theday very agreeably with him, and gained muchuseful knowledge of the state of cultivation.His arrangements were not quite finished ; butas far as I (who know nothing of the details ofsugar cultivation) can judge, they must succeed42 NOTES ON HAITI.when brought into full play, provided that hecan ensure labour. Little or no sugar is madeany where, at least for exportation, as I shallhereafter prove ; the juice of the cane beingalmost invariably only reduced to the state ofsyrup, and used in that state for domestic purposes,or distilled into tafia, of which there is avery large consumption, being the favouriteliquor of the natives.The commerce of Port-au-Prince is carried onby various classes of persons. The imports fromEurope and America are principally consignedto European and North American commission-houses,besides a few Haitian establishments.The capital is one of the ports to which foreignmerchants are confined by the law ofpatents ; but they are, or at least were duringthe time of my residence, restricted by heavypenalties to wholesale business. Of coursethey cannot deal with the consumers, but withthe native retailers, who are chiefly women,styled " marchandes ;*' these employ hucksters,also women, who traverse the country, attendthe markets, and give an account of their transactionsto their employers, either every evening,once a week, or once a month, according totheir character for integrity.As the payments to the importer are gene-modeOF TRAFFIC. 43rally in money, and there is only one importantarticle of export, coffee; the purchasesfor returns can only be made after the cropshave been gathered, and these are effected bybrokers, who often bargain with a class of nativescalled coffee speculators, from their dealingfor the chance of the market with the cultivators,and either sell to the best advantage, orfulfil contracts previously entered into.Among the respectable marchandes, there issaid to be much good faith ; but with the greatbody of customers, I believe the merchants areobliged to use the utmost circumspection.All the ordinary tradesmen, such as tailors,shoe-makers, and even a water-proof hat manufacturer,are to be found in Port-au-Prince.And I confess I was struck with the respectableappearance of several booksellers' shops, havinglooked in vain for such things both in Barbadoesand Antigua. The books are generally elementaryFrench publications and romances. Theworks of Voltaire, Rousseau, and others of thesame class, abound.There are also two printing-presses, one atwhich the government gazette, Le Telegraph,is printed, and the other from which the Feuillede Commerce issues. The former rarely containsmore than the documents issued by the44 NOTES ON HAITI.government ; the latter occasionally some spiritedpapers, and is conducted by M. Cotirtois,who was for a short time director of the postoffice.The apothecaries' shops are numerous, as theyought to be in such a horrible climate, and arewell supplied with all the contents of the Frenchpharmacopeia. There are also some tanneries,in which the bark of the mangrove is used as thetanning material. As far as I could ascertain,the great bulk of the border-people were eitherof that class of Europeans called in the Frenchtime ^^ petits blancs," or people of colour. Thelabourers either in town or country are generallyblack.At the time of my first arrival, the expectationsof the government as well as of the peoplewere on tiptoe, as to the establishment of a miningcompany, for working gold-mines in thedistrict of Cibao. During the era of miningdelusion, a company which was graced by manydistinguished names, was formed in London,and agents sent out to explore this new Eldorado,previous to realising golden visions. Undersuch auspices the expectations of the Hai-transscarcely knew any bounds ; but ^^ la crisefinanciers," as they phrased it in Europe, ratherderanged their ideas ; and when I was in Port-miningspeculations. 45au-Prince, one of the agents returned to reportthat no gold was to be found, and thus mostreluctantly this source of national wealth wasabandoned. How far the agents sent out werecompetent to the inquiry in which they wereemployed, or how far they executed with correctnessand ability their trust, I cannot decide,as I am too little informed of the arrangementsthat were made, or of the talents of the individualsin question ; but it is impossible to avoidsuspecting that the improvidence which characterisedthe proceedings of too many similar associations,was not wanting here ; or that failureresulted as much from bad information as fromthe absence of the precious metal. Indeed,one may suspect any absurdity when lookingback on the schemes of 1825 and 1826, a periodat which a company was gravely formedfor the condensation of saw-dust into planks,which were to be superior to the original deals.No supposition can be too absurd ; and one isonly surprised that Svidft's '* Wonder of all thewonders that ever the world wondered at" wasnot revived and credited.At the time of which I speak, the formationof a national bank too was said to have beenan object of great solicitude to the president.This much is certain, that a law was passed46 NOTES ON HAITI.authorising it ; but up to the time of my departure,I never heard that any progress hadbeen made towards its completion. Mr. Franklin,who I believe was engaged in the scheme,gives some account of it in his work on Haiti.Shortly after my arrival I had a pretty severeattack of fever, which I shook off; but aboutthe end of July, or the beginning of August, Ihad a second, that in a very few days reducedme to a state of infantine weakness. CaptainHunn, of His Majesty's ship Tweed, which wasthen at Port-au-Prince, with much kindnessproposed a short cruize. Right glad to escapefrom the heat of the capital, I availed myself ofhis offer, and we sailed as far as Gonave, visitedCape Nicolas Mole, and returned in aboutten days or a fortnight. We circumnavigatedGonave, which I have already mentioned aslying across the entrance of the bay, aboutforty miles from the anchorage at Port-prince.Formerly some settlements had beenmade on it ; but of late it has been whollyuninhabited, except by a few fishermen, who,with their families, had pitched their tentsthere to enjoy all the luxuries of mosquitos,sand-flies, sand, and heat: but as they alsoventured to cut down mahogany, and to establishthemselves as lords of the soil, much afterVISIT TO THE MOLE. 47the fashion of the American Squatters, hisExcellency the President, a very short timebefore my arrival, had fitted out an expeditionagainst the unhallowed knaves, and, afterhaving destroyed all their squatting broughtthem to the main land, to contribute to itswelfare, industry, and prosperity. Very goodwater is to be had in a bay on the northwesternextremity; — at least, I think it wasthereabouts.Our visit to Cape Nicolas was rather ill-fated.We entered the harbour, which is first-rate,being completely land-locked, so that thewater is as still as that of a pond, and of greatdepth, close to a very bold shore. As soon aswe had dropped our anchor. Captain Hunn,according to established usage, sent to thecommandant. General Jean Batiste Bastion, toarrange for an exchange of civilities in theway of salutes. It seems that we were, in thelanguage of the knowing ones, in the wrongbox ; for the mole is ^^ a shut port," not accessibleto any vessels except in stress of weather.Captain Hunn's application consequentlyproduced infinite consternation, and a rare specimenof epistolary composition — a specimen sounique, that it would have been unfair to thefuture race of public writers to have withheld it.48 NOTES ON HAITI.had I not unfortunately mislaid the copy. Itwarned us off; but nothing daunted by soformidable a warning, we discovered that wewanted water, and applied for permission tosupply ourselves. No difficulty was opposedto this ; but the salutes were not to be thoughtof, and to avoid our urgency to do honour tothe national flag of the republic, GeneralBastion, who had studied naval and militarytactics, as well as diplomacy, under Christophe,(who had created him Count de Leogane) performeda feat that has fairly entitled him to beconsidered the Talleyrand of his country. Heleft his aide-de-camp to negotiate with theofficer sent by Captain Hunn, while he and hiswife, in a towering black beaver hat with anenormous black plume, fairly galloped off tothe rear of the town. We afterwards discoveredthat there was only one gun mountedin this once formidable post. Early the followingmorning the land breeze wafted us fromthis inhospitable place.Cape Nicolas Mole, as is well known toevery one conversant with the revolutions ofSt. Domingo, was fortified at great expence bythe French government; and after we obtainedpossession, it was rendered one of the strongholdsof the world, seaward. And even nowCAPE Nicholas MOLE. 49the ruined works retain the names which wehad given them. After an enormous expensehad been fruitlessly incurred, the late Sir ThomasMaitland entered into a convention withToussaint in 1798, and delivered up the fortificationsto him, with so much pomp as to callforth the sneers of the French writers. WhenChristophe and Petion divided the Frenchportion of the island, the Mole retained itsfidelity to the latter. The former besieged itin 1812, and after the governor. General Lamar,had been killed, and his immediate successorhad blown out his brains on despairingof succour, it fell into the hands of Christophe,who butchered some of the survivors,razed the works, and even cut down the treesthat adorned the suburbs — a melancholy monumentof his vindictive fury. The destructionof the trees was an act of very wanton ferocity,as they afforded almost the only shadein that neighbourhood, the country being remarkablyarid and bare. The city is now reducedto the lowest state, there being no trade,notwithstanding its fine situation. In the eventof war it would still be an invaluable militaryposition, which would probably not be overlookedeither by America or France.After I had landed at Port-au-Prince, theVOL. I. C60 NOTES ON HAITI.Tweed was obliged to return to Jamaica, andCaptain Hunn visited Gonaives. It seems to havebeen his lot to meet with adventures. Whilethere, he invited all the authorities, who gladlyprofited by his politeness, and gave such substantialevidence of their approbation of his fare,that, to use Burns's appropriate phrase, most ofthem were '* right glorious." While in that state,some busy demon of imagination suggested thepossibility that in their helpless condition the frigatemight sail to Jamaica, and the hapless chiefsbe once more reduced to *^ villain bonds." Nosooner had this idea been excited than severalof the party disappeared, and were found hiccuppingtheir apprehensions in the boats alongside,out of which it was fruitless for the boat-keepersto attempt to expel them. The story got intosome of the English papers, and I deemed it afable; but I have since learned from eye-witnessesthat in essentials the narrative was strictlytrue.During my stay at Port-au-Prince, I madeseveral excursions in different directions ; butthat with which I was most pleased was to LaCoupe, a district in the highlands to the eastwardof the city, distant about seven or eightmiles. The road is well planned, but in a horriblydilapidated condition, and the ascent isVISITS TO LA COUPE. 51nearly continuous the whole way. There is, onthe way, considerable variety of bold and picturesquescenery overhanging the road, and atdifferent intervals there are some very neatcottages, surrounded by small patches of cultivatedland. One of these, belonging to a Haitianmerchant, I wished very much to haverented, but I could not get it. On reaching thedistrict named La Coupe, the atmosphere is cooland agreeable, and the few scattered cottagesthat present themselves afford a perfectly pastoralretreat, in which it is truly grateful to lounge,freed from the heat and innumerable '^ disagreement'^ of '^ la belle capitale." My first trip wasmade with M. Malerr and a party of Frenchnaval officers to the cottage of M. Jacquemont,a French gentleman, whose brother, a veryrising naturalist, is, I believe, now in India.My second was to a little mud hovel rented byMr. Moravia, an English resident. The contrastbetween the comparative coolness of LaCoupe, and the oppressive sultriness of Port-prince,can only be appreciated by those whohave been doomed, as was the case with myself,to swelter for uninterrupted months in the latter.I look back with pleasure to these two excursions,as among the few gratifying recollections52 NOTES ON HAITI.connected with this most unsatisfactory missionto Haiti.Some miles to the eastward of La Coupe, at astill greater elevation, is Fort Jacques, a fortress,I believe built by the British. I intendedto have visited it, but business always interfered,until I was incapacitated by dangerousillness from doing so. The climate is there cooland agreeable. Apples, pears, and Europeanvegetables, flourish ; but the road is execrable,and even hazardous; and, what is still worse,on reaching this otherwise agreeable, thoughfoggy, region, there is no accommodation, savesome miserable negro huts. Were it not forthese difficulties, although the distance fromthe coast is not less than eighteen or twentymiles, there would probably not be one foreignerof any consideration who would not have aretreat there ; but at present this is completelyout of the question. The comfort and healthinessof such an arrangement would be immense,and not to be imagined by those whohave never been exposed to a greater degree ofsuffering than being obliged to ride post, insteadof calmly reposing with air pillows in a chariotand four. Often, when oozing at every pore,and incapacitated even from holding a pen, haveVISITS TO LA COUPE. 53I wished for such a retreat ; but the wish wasas unavailing as if I had longed for Gyges'ring. Some centuries hence good roads maybeestablished, pleasant villas built, and theagents of distant countries may there, forgetfulof the annoyances of their predecessors,assemble and discuss the destinies of powersnot yet in being. In the mean time, the unfortunateindividuals who may be called tosacrifice health, comfort, and perhaps life, inthe service of their respective countries, mustbe satisfied to endure, and to believe that^' Virtus sua anaemia tulip."54 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER III.Departure from Port-au-Prince — Journey to Leogane — Commandantand Town of Grand Gave — Rumours of rural discipline— Crossing the Tapion — Petit Gave — M. Baudain —L'Acul de Petit Gave— St. Michel— Blind beggar— PostVigile — Dangerous ford — Acquit — Juge de Paix— St. LouisM. Dumesle — Cavaillon — Cay es — History — Town-adjutant— Suburbs — Distilleries.Having made the necessary arrangementsfor my absence, I left my cottage on the morningof the 10th February, at three o'clock, withmy brother and two of the gentlemen attachedto the consulate, together with a considerablecavalcade of horses and mules, rendered necessaryby the reported impossibility of procuringany thing on the road. As I was not well, Irode in a gig, which had been very kindly lentto me by one of the party. Our road lay pastLetor and Fort Bizotton, which I have alreadymentioned ; and to the left Mon repos, belongingto the secretary-general. Along the road-sidewe passed in confused assemblages the brokenROAD TO Legate. 55.utensils of sugar-works, indicating what hadformerly been. The morning was cool andagreeable, as it generally is, in Haiti at thatperiod of the day, when the thermometer rarelyexceeds 72°. of Fahrenheit ; but by the time wehad passed the Salines, a marshy wet portionof the road, and Morne-a-bateau, which is theboundary of the " arrondissemens " of Port-princeand Leogane, the sun became perfectlyintolerable. To ride fast was bad ; but to travelslowly was still worse. Being in a carriage,I was obliged to adopt the latter course. Thescenery on the road-side, which runs close to thebay, was very beautiful and thickly wooded, withmany of the trees in full bloom. There is butlittle elevation, except at Mome-a-bateau, whereour anxieties for home were strongly called forthby the appearance of the English flag on a vesselbeating into the bay. We crossed the riverof Leogane, which, though now low, changesduring rains into an impetuous and dangerouscurrent. It traverses a considerable plain of thesame name, to the east and south of the town ;and we reached, overwhelmed with heat, acoffee-house called Reunion, kept by a man ofthe name of May, in which there was a plentifulabsence of civility, accommodation, or fare ;though the art of making out a bill was as per-56 ' NOTES ON HAITI.fectly understood by M. May as it was byGil Bias' host at Penaflor. However, therewas no alternative, unless we had chosen tobask in the sun with empty stomachs.I called on the general commanding thearrondissement, Gideon, I believe the seniorgeneral in the republic, (lately dead,) but hewas absent on a tour of inspection. The commandantof the place was exceedingly civil,and reproached me with not having madehis house my quarters ; and I have no doubtthat he was in earnest; for throughout theisland I met with the greatest hospitality.This I ascribe partly to the natural dispositionof the people, and partly to the general popularityof my country among them. The liberalityof the British Government during theperiod that it shared in the local contests, hadendeared it to the Haitians ; and there is, Ibelieve, no small portion of them who look uptoBritain as the only power that could andwould protect them in any difficulty. Thisimpression I found very strong every where,whether well or ill-founded I cannot pretend todetermine ; though if unfounded, I rather rejoicethat the delusion had not passed awaywhen I might have suffered inconvenience fromits doing so. It was, however, a subject onCOMMANDANT OF Legate. 57which I never directly or indirectly expressedan opinion. I had rather a long conversationwith the commandant, who was very proud ofhis good roads, and he had reason for beingso, as they were really very respectable. Healso assured me, that under excellent directions(viz. his own) the code rural workedwell ; and that, in consequence, the " sirop" ofhis district was very much superior to that ofany other quarter. He appeared a frank, obligingman, quite aware of his own good qualities,but apparently not so conversant with Europeanopinions on some topics ; for, in speaking of anofficer of rank in the republic, he observedwith admirable naivete and exquisite logic,*' C'est mon beau frere, parceque je vis avec sasoeur."Leogane is a considerable town, chiefly builtof wood ; and the streets, though unpaved, arebetter than those of Port-au-Prince. It wasmarket-day, and there was a respectable degreeof activity and bustle. There is only anopen roadstead, but no sheltered harbour. Indeed,I believe there is none from Port-princeto Petit Gave.During the revolutionary contests, Leoganewas a point of some consequence, and frequentlythe scene of sanguinary conflicts. It58 NOTES ON HAITI.was also a place of importance even at the timeof the first discovery, being then the principalplace of the kingdom of Paraguay, under theCacique Behechio, whose successor and sisterAncona was so treacherously ensnared andbrutally murdered by the orders of Ovando,about the year 1497.During the French regime, it was a place ofvery considerable importance ; and in more recenttimes it fell alternately into the possessionof all the contending parties, and is noted forthe executions inflicted by General Rigaud onall who had deserted the republican banners,when he retook it in 1794. When I was there,no trace of such bloody deeds was to be seen.I should mention that, before my arrival in thecountry, some of the English residents of had entered into a subscription forestablishing a race-course near to Leogane, theplain being well fitted for such a purpose ; astand was talked of, and every necessary arrangementdiscussed ; but some how or otherthe project died away, though I never heardany reason assigned.On leaving this town for Grand Gave, Iintended to have proceeded by the road closeto the sea, so as to have seen the mud fortCairo, which, under the command of Petion inIHad TO GRAND GOAVE. 591795, had very handsomely mauled five of ourline of battle ships, one of which was commandedby the late Sir John Duckworth ; butby the mistake of my guide we got into themain road, which is wide, and for some distancescreened from the burning rays of thesun by a double row of trees of considerablesize. We passed L'L'Habitation Beauharnois,which formerly belonged to the father of thatgallant, high-minded gentleman, Eugene Beau-harness.It is now the property of a Haitian,whose name has escaped my memory.On this road there are no inconsiderable marksof cultivation, as compared with the neighbourhoodof Port-au-Prince ; generally speaking,however, every thing is on a small scale, whenone reflects on the magnitude of the establishmentsof which the ^' dissect membra" areprofusely scattered on every road that I hadpreviously passed over. On the right, not farfrom the town, lies the best estate in the district,the property of a black officer, one of the president'saides-de-camp. This perfection is ascribedby public report (which I believe notto be unfounded) to the use of cltib-law, whichthe gallant colonel is said by virtue of his militaryauthority to administer with equal liberalityand success. Among other stories, it is60 NOTES ON HAITI.asserted that on one occasion a blow from acocomacac (a heavy jointed cane in commonuse in Haiti) knocked out the eye of a loiterer.So horrid a violation of law in an officer on theimmediate staff of the chief ruler could not beoverlooked. The colonel was removed from hiscommand, and called upon to attend at thepalace. He obeyed, and the penance wasdoubtless great ; for the affairs of the Communewent on so very badly during the suspensionof the cocomacac authority, that he was sentback, it is supposed, with a suitable admonitionto be more chary of people's eyes for the future.I do not vouch for these facts ; I only givethem as they were told to me. The estate inquestion is described as in good order, whether inconsequenceof the discipline I know not. Othersin the neighbourhood are also said to deriveadvantage from the inspection of so vigilant aperson. As might be foreseen, his own estatehowever thrives most. I should fear that, inthe present state of industry, no one man canattend to the cultivation of more than oneestate, and exercise *^ surveillance" with anyeffect over a whole district. And yet, if thecommandants were not permitted to be cultivators,I do not see how they can be inducedto enforce labour on the properties of others.TAPION DE PETIT GOAVE. 61There is a choice of difficulties, in which I considerit fortunate that I am not called upon tomake a selection. Grand Gave was never (asfar as I know) a place of any great note ; atpresent it is a miserable small town, in whichI only saw a few soldiers loitering about thestreets. Along the road there are small bivouackedfor the same gentlemen, who are stationedto repress vagrancy.The road is good and shady. About midwaybetween Grand and Petit Gave stands theTapion de Petit Gave, over which a very goodthough steep road runs. It is celebrated as thespot on which, in July 1735, the French academicians,MM. Godin, Rougher, La Contains,and de Puysegur, determined the length of thependulum. They also ascertained its greatestelevation to be three hundred and fifty-fivetoises above the level of the sea. It is veryprecipitous towards the sea, and runs about fivemiles. The road passes amid very bold rocksrichly clad with tropical verdure, among whichoccasionally some small cottages peep out, andstrongly reminded me of some scenes in Spainthat had been almost forgotten during an absenceof fourteen years.On descending from the Tapion, the sea burstupon us in all the glory of a setting sun, the62 NOTES ON HAITI.beauty of which can only be known to thosewho have witnessed its descent on the oceanin warm countries. About two miles of veryimperfectly cultivated country brought us tothe small town of Petit Gave. Indeed, afterdescending from the magnificent vegetation ofthe Tapion, we found ourselves surrounded bythe logwood and bayahond, so abundant in theCul de Sac, the presence of which I believe isno bad index to the sort of cultivation that hadpreviously prevailed. Our first care was to finda lodging for the night ; but this miserablelooking place, once the capital of the Frenchcolony, could not afford us bare walls for hire ;and had it not been for the hospitality of M.Baudain, a native merchant, to whom I hadletters of introduction, our plight would havebeen truly lamentable. I had great difficultytoo in procuring any forage for my cattle. Althoughunprepared for visitors, and our partywith servants was rather formidable, M. Baudainand his wife received us with the greatesthospitality and good-humour, apologising forthe inconveniences incident to their not havingbeen apprised of our coming.Petit Gave was formerly a parish ; but onthe change of terms that occurred at the revolution,it became a commune, which it still re-COMMUNE OF PETIT GOAVE. 63mains. It includes the hamlet of St. Michel,and is under the spiritual direction of a Spanishpriest.The state of the cultivation is reported to bebad, although formerly sugar and coffee wereproduced to some extent. The latter is stillbrought from the mountains, and shipped inlargebarges to Port-au-Prince, whither wholesquadrons crowd before the sea-breeze, and arewell known as the Mosquito fleet. Most, if notall, of the sugar works have fallen into decay ;and as there are no funds, and less industry, thecultivation of the cane for sugar has been whollyabandoned. A little syrup is still made for thepurpose of being distilled into tafia.The harbour is said to be the best on thisline of coast, but the climate unhealthy, and thetown therefore less frequented than it wouldotherwise be. The sea defences are describedas having been good under the old regime ; atpresent they are much reduced both in numberand quality. As I intended to examine PetitGave more at leisure on my way back, andI wished to start betimes the following morning,our conference ceased at an early hour.At three o'clock on the morning of the 11th,we were up, and our kind hosts were ready withrefreshments for the whole party. Having NOTES ON HAITI,understood that it was not uncommon for Haitianseven of the first class to receive payment forany accommodation afforded to a traveller, I directedmy guide, who as a countryman wouldmanage the affair adroitly, to tender somemoney. This was rejected, much to the satisfactionof the servants, among whom the intendeddonation was divided. These preliminariesbeing settled, we parted with our hospitableentertainers, though not until we werepledged to make their house our quarters in returning,and to give due notice of our approach.On leaving Petit Gave, we pursued a miserableroad running by the shore, as far asL'Acul de Petit Gave, where it turns off to theleft, taking a southerly direction. At L'Aculwe found all the negroes dancing to their hideousdrum, with the same wild cry to which myears had been familiarised at Port-au-Prince.We passed the Plantation Willet, belonging tothe senator of that name, where, as he told me,above six hundred thousand pounds of clayedsugar were formerly made. Now not an ounce,and no labourers are to be found. We also wentby L'Ollivier, where we had been recommendedto halt ; but as there would have been someloss of time, we pursued our route. The wholecountry is uncultivated, and a rugged steepAUBERGE OF ST. MICHEL. 65hill, on which Macadam might be advantageouslyemployed, nearly knocked up our horses,and demolished our gig, before we reached St.Michel, which we did about eight in the morning,A small hut, entitled an auberge, afforded usshelter, and in an instant the whole of its inhabitants,consisting of an old woman, her sonand daughter, were in a state of activity toprocure food for man and beast. Some of thehorses were put out to graze ; Guinea grass wasprovided for others ; and servants and masterswere distributed in the coolest recesses thatcould be found, until breakfast could be prepared.St. Michel was formerly a parish of somenote, but now it forms a part of the Communeof Petit Gave, and the church is only dedicatedto sacred purposes on the feast of St.Michel. His reverence then performs the serviceof that archangel. This is a melancholyfact.While at breakfast, which consisted of allthe good things that could be collected, eggs,fowls, ham, tea and coffee, and wine, to saynothing of brandy and tafia, the commandant,I believe a subaltern, allured by the smell ofthe viands, strutted in, evidently for a share ;66 NOTES ON HAITI.but as he seemed stupid, and intent only onfeeding, I afforded him no encouragement, andhe with infinite good tact withdrew. Afterbeing fitted for research by feeding, I commencedmy inquiries, and was soon admitted tothe confidence of the family. The mother, arespectable-looking elderly black woman, hadformerly been a slave to Count Beaumont,who was so vehement against the recognitionof Haitian independence ; the count had, destituteof his present antipathies, wooed withso much success, that she had presented himwith a pledge of their loves, who, when Isaw him, was an active intelligent young Mulatto,who exerted himself with infinite zealandtalked to me of his noble " papa " withno small share of complacency. The daughter(also a Mulattoes) was equally bustling, active,and obliging.Count Beaumont and M. Duparc were therichest proprietors in the country, and from thereports made to me, they must have been kindmasters. I especially directed my inquiries tothe feelings of the people on the changes thathad taken place, and to their actual condition ,'and when the groupe was completed by thepresence of an old blind black man, who hadlost the whole of his toes from both feet, I feltBLIND BEGGAR. 67satisfied that I should not be deceived. I foundall '^ laudatory temporis act," and all equallydissatisfied. The blind beggar particularlydeplored the revolution, to v^^hich he ascribedevery misery that had befallen the country aswell as himself. He had been a slave of M.Duparc, and had he remained so, he contendedthat either he vi^ould not have lost his eyes andtoes, or that if he had, he v^^ould have beencertain of kind usage and support, withoutbeing driven to recur to the casual bounty ofstrangers.The expression of dissatisfaction by all wasnot confined to general or vague complaints.The whole party entered into a feeling anddetailed contrast of their present condition,though free, with the care bestowed by theplanters on their slaves in health, in sickness,in childhood, and in old age. They assured methat now there is not a single sugar estate inbeing in this vicinity : Semele, Beaumont,Duparc, and others, which had been highlycultivated, and had yielded large crops, hadfallen into complete decay, and coffee was theonly produce for sale. Although it was Sunday,numbers of drunken men were amusingthemselves by ending at full gallop along theroad.68 NOTES ON HAITI.One of my horses being thoroughly jaded,I was obliged to hire one ; as soon as my wantswere known, several horse-lenders presentedthemselves, all asking exorbitant sums ; andone of the worthies, on my repressing his violence,looked very fiercely at me, and exclaimed,'^ Nous sommes tons egaux ici." I could nothelp thinking that equality had never in all itsabsurdities been more thoroughly ridiculedthan by its assumption on this occasion.We left our auberge about three o'clock inthe afternoon, and after travelling over an execrableroad, just practicable for a gig, we reacheda small house in the midst of a garden keptin very tolerable order, called Trois Palmistry orPost Vigile, which last name it derives from itshaving been a post of the Marechaussee in thetime of the French. The scenery between St.Michel and this place is very bold and romantic,very richly wooded. Along the way-side Ifirst remarked groupes of graves, and my guideinformed me that they were the burying-groundsof the old plantations, which are still appropriatedto the same purposes by the people formerlybelonging to them or their descendants.Our ^^ hostelry" was a wooden building witha mud floor, standing in the middle of a smallplain on the summit of a height that rises fromPOST VIGILE. 69a place called '* Fond aux Negres." The proprietor,Cyril Dupont, who is an officer of thenational guard, together with his wife, aboundedin civility, and their charges were not extravagant.He told me the same story that I hadheard every where, that sugar was abandonedfor coffee, which is preferred by the cultivatorsas less laborious. So recently as 1815, Semele(which I had passed) had been in canes ; butinaddition to coffee, small quantities of tobaccofor home use are reared. This night we feltexceedingly cold, as the thermometer fell to69", which was at least 20° lower than we hadhad it in the shade the preceding days. The differencein the sun I had not noted.To avoid the burning sun, we commencedour journey at three o'clock on the morningof the 12th, and very nearly got swampedin a deep dangerous ford at the ^* Fond auxNegres." The road altogether was very bad,and I felt very insecure in the gig. No accident,however, occurred, and we soon reached asuccession of round, grass-clad hills, resemblingthe downs of Sussex, which belong to GeneralBorgella, the present commandant at San Domingo,on which formerly there was a considerablesugar establishment ; but now they areexclusively devoted to herds of cattle. I am70 NOTES ON HAITI.surprised that there are not more grazing establishmentsin Western Haiti. The labour is suchas would suit the habits of the people, and aprofitable trade in cattle, hides, horns, andtallow, might be carried on. About nine o'clockwe reached Acquit, where we met an Englishgentleman, Mr. Towning, who had been longresident at Cayes, and who had come thus farto meet us. He had also been provident enoughto secure a resting-place and some food for us —two most important matters at Acquit, wherethere is no trace of an auberge.This town was formerly of some consequenceas a place of trade, but has been ruined by itsport being closed — an act of the governmentbrought about by the unlimited smuggling thatwas openly carried on with the connivance ofthe revenue officers.The woman of the house where we put upwas a young lively negress, who, it seems, hadexcited the amorous propensities of M. le Jugede Paix, who, failing in all his advances whetherconciliatory or forcible, (in both of whichhe indulged,) had betaken himself to legal persecution,though with equally bad success ; forthe lady was obstinate, and I believe threatenedto withdraw her countenance from Acquit, andleave the worthy magistrate to pine in hopelessST. LOUIS DU SUD. 71love. What was the result of this amorouscombat I never heard, as I never inquired. AnEnglish police magistrate would make but asorry figure, were he to adopt the Haitian'' Juge" as a model.After a very broiling ride through a romanticcountry, on a very tolerable road, we came toSt. Louis, formerly the capital of the south ;now only remarkable for the beauty of its situation,and the excellence of its harbour. Theanchorage between a small island and the mainlandis first-rate, and capable of receiving thelargest line-of-battle ships. This island wasformerly very strongly fortified with sixty piecesof artillery ; but in the year 1748 AdmiralKnowles with a small squadron attacked andcarried it, after which he blew up the works,and made a convention with the governor thatthe port should thenceforward be open to Britishmen-of-war to wood and water. At presentthe fortifications are utterly ruined, andthe wild Indian fig (ficus Indices) threatenswith its insinuating roots final destruction tothe remaining walls. It was on this islandthat I first saw the sea-side grape, the fruit ofwhich was unripe and tasteless.I had been prepared, by Mr. Towning, for comfortin our accommodation at St. Louis, nor was72 NOTES ON HAITI.I disappointed. The inn is kept by M. DumesleLamotte, who holds the property whichhad belonged for some generations to his Frenchancestry. He is really married to his cousin,and is one of the most respectable men in manners,sentiments, and general character, that Ihad encountered in Haiti. He is also^^Jugede Paix," and acquits himself, according to commonreport, with firmness and propriety, especiallyin repressing the unconstitutional and arrogantpretensions of the military, who here, aswell as elsewhere in the republic, too oftenwould fain be a privileged class.The accommodation and fare are not inferiorto that of most hotels in Europe, and superiorto many provincial inns. We dined at a " tabled'hote," at which Monsieur and Madame Dumeslepresided, and for all our board and lodgingwe only paid four dollars each per day.In the evening we strolled along the beachto a ruined fort the south of the town, which, itseems, gave great offence to the old black commandant,who was not on terms with the civilauthorities. To mark his reprobation of so atrociousan act as that of visiting a ruin, he sent acorporal to order us off, an order easily compliedwith, as there was little to be seen, and thatlittle we had already seen.DEPARTURE FROM ST. LOUIS. /6Several evil reports are in circulation againstthe rural police of this neighbourhood, who are undisguisedlycharged with robbing the poor cultivatorsof their coffee, under pretence of protectingthem from penalties for breach of thelaw. Resistance had been recently made insome instances, though the final result was notknown, as the question had been finally referredto the president for his decision.On the morning of the 13th we left this exquisitelybeautiful spot before daylight, andafter travelling for some little time by the seaside,we struck across a small tongue of landto Cavaillon ; on the way to which we fordedthe river *^ des Managers," celebrated for thepurity of its water, and the river Cavaillonclose to the town. The town is in ruins, andat the early hour at which we passed through itno one was to be seen except a few soldiers,who stopped some of the servants who werewithout passports ; but they soon liberatedthem on hearing Mr. Towning's name. Thej-oad, like all that I had seen in the arrondisse-mentofAcquin, is rugged and bad. A suddenimprovement in this respect announced ourarrival in the jurisdiction of Cayes, whereGeneral Marion's attention has done greatthings. We gradually descended from theVOL. I. D74 NOTES ON HAITI.mountainous district in which we had beentravelling for some hours, into the extensiveand beautiful plain of Cayes, bounded by thesea, on the verge of which the city stands.The liveliness of the whole is peculiarly striking,and fully warrants the Haitians in describingthe city and neighbourhood as *^ tres riantes."We arrived at Mr. Towning's hospitable mansion,about a mile and a half from Cayes, wellbroiled, and quite ready for an excellent breakfastthat had been prepared for us.The city of Cayes is situate close to the shore,and was built in its present form about 1720.The streets are tolerably regular, and thoughexposed and consequently bad in wet weather,are clear and without holes, such as disgracethe capital. The houses are also of a superiorclass, but generally of wood. The whole plainis considerably cooler than Port-au-Prince, andthere is a regular sea-breeze ; but from theplain being alluvial, there is considerable sicknessin all directions. The entrance to the cityis graced by a triumphal arch, in honour of thepresent president's entry some time ago. Forsome reason that I do not know, his excellencyhas not repeated his visit to the good and loyalcity.Very soon after the commencement of theGENERAL Ribald. 75revolution in the north of Haiti, the peopleof colour of the south took up arms, and aftervarious conflicts in 1792, they where sufficiently-organizedto constitute an efficient body, underthe command of Andrew Rigaud, (better knovnias General Rigaud,) and his brother AugustinRigaud. The former was recognized as a generalby the civil commission, and he acted withzeal in concert with M. Blanchelande. In fact,he commanded one of the parties that attackedthe ^^ platoons," of which I shall hereafterspeak.This city was afterwards the principal place ofthe coloured population under Rigaud, when theyfanned a party distinct from that at the headof which Toussaint had placed himself. Somefruitless attempts were made to reconcile theserivals by General Hedouville ; but as the blackparty prevailed in 1800, Rigaud, with Petion,the present president Boyer, and others, soughtrefuge in France, and Toussaint was left in fullpossession of the north, the west, and the south.To reduce the latter to complete subjection,he sent Dessalines with a strong force ; and itis said that this sanguinary monster put todeath upwards of ten thousand people of colour.With such recollections, it may be easily imaginedthat his memory is as odious as that of76' NOTES ON HAITI.Le Clerc or Rochambeau, in the theatre of hisbarbarous exploits. Rigaud on the other hand,from having been the chief of the predominantparty, is revered in a degree corresponding withthe hatred of his opponent. Rigaud came outto join Le Clerc's expedition; but the fidelityof his party having become doubtful, he wassent back to France, which was by all accountsthe most injudicious act of all the ill-advisedproceedings of the French commander-in-chief.Until 1810, Rigaud remained in France underthe surveillance of the police. According tothe statement of his friends, he then made hisescape to America, whence he proceeded toPort-au-Prince. According to that of his opponents,the escape was feigned, and he cameout as an emissary of Napoleon, for thepurpose of re-establishing French dominion.Those who make this assertion also declarethat he maintained a correspondence with theFrench minister at Washington, and that theevidence of the fact is complete. I never heardany thing more than bare allegations, and cannoteven form an opinion. The presidentPetion, who had been Rigaud's adjutant-general,received him with apparent cordiality,though with real distrust ; but entrusted himwith a command at Cayes. DisagreementsCITY OF CAYES. 77soon took place, and a separation of the southfrom the west followed, and General Rigidwas placed at the head of a provisional government.Some attempts at an amicable adjustmentof the differences of the two chiefs wereequally unavailing, as some bloody encounters.About the end of 1811, Rigaud died,and General Borgella, who succeeded him, inashort time submitted to the rule of the president,thus re-uniting the two dissentient portionsof the republic. Ever since the unionhas been undisturbed.At present, Cayes is one of the most flourishingplaces that I have seen in the republic.There is considerable activity, and there areafew opulent merchants, both natives andforeigners; but the regulations affecting commercehave of late become so oppressive, thatmany of the latter had resolved not to renewtheir patents. I was not a little surprised atseeing the British flag flying on board a smallsloop in the harbour, which I found to be fromJamaica ; — with this island, as well as Cuba,there is said to be a considerable illicit trade ;and what is most surprising, sugar is the principalimport from the latter island.I had but little intercourse with the greatbody of the people ; but of the authorities 178 NOTES ON HAITI.saw a good deal, and I found them civil and accommodating.Many foreigners, however, do notregard them with favourable eyes, and accusethem of doing much that they ought not to do ;but of that I know nothing. With all classes, Iwas told that Great Britain is decidedly thefavourite European power ; and I am inclinedto think the statement true.The great body of the town's-people appearto be in easy circumstances, and do not, I think,lounge quite so much as their brethren ofPort-au-Prince, A circumstance occurred,which I noted as illustrative of the state ofsociety. The town-adjutant (who holds therank of captain, if I recollect aright) is moreovera professional cook, and generously contributesto the epicurean delights of all andany who call upon him, for a doubloon. In hisformer capacity he had called upon me in agorgeous uniform of green and gold ; in thelatter he was employed by my host, preparatoryto his entertaining the magnates of thecity; and, to my utter surprise, after he hadcompleted his labours, I saw him marched offbetween a file of soldiers. I was afraid thatmy friend had incurred the displeasure of thegeneral, for degrading his military professionby reverting to his original calling, and madeTOWN-ADJUTANT OF CAYES. 79anxious inquiries as to the cause of the phenomenonthat had astonished me ; but greatwas my amazement on being informed thatthe aforesaid adjutant was very prone to getdrunk after such hot work as that in which hehad been engaged ; that the general had fixeda day or two after for entertaining his friends ;and to secure the assistance of the Ude ofCayes, he had marched him in safe keeping to hishouse in the country, before he had any opportunityof making himself *o'er all the illsof life victorious \"The young men of Cayes are the dandiesof the republic, and better mannered than themajority of their countrymen. Many of theyoung women are very pretty, and graceful intheir forms.The young part of the people in the outskirtsappeared to me to spend the greatest portionof their time in dawdling about without anyapparent object in view; and I heard that theCreoles are decidedly idlers of the first class ;and that the only real work is done by the fewsurviving Africans, who, contra ly to the habitsof their progeny who crowd to the plains,retire to the mountains, where they cultivatesome sequestered spot, unheeding, and unheededby, the world.80 NOTES ON HAITI.The wayside of the avenue that leads tothe principal entrance of the town, has manyvery neat suburban cottages, to which themore opulent citizens retire after the laboursof the day have ceased. Their distributionrenders the approach exceedingly lively, asthey generally have some garden around them,and they are painted of as many colours as aDutch summer-house.Several small distilleries, '' guildiveries" asthey are called, are in the immediate neighbourhoodof the town, and they yield a largesupply of tafia. They amount in number toeighty-one, and consume about two millionpounds of syrup annually, which are convertedinto about one hundred and eightythousand gallons of liquor, which is said to beentirely consumed in Cayes and the adjacentdistricts. This consumption is quite independentof the rum manufactured at Mr. Towning'sestablishment.This consumption almost rivals that of whatare termed in the advertisements in the Morning-advertiser,the hard gin-drinking parts ofLondon.PLANTATION Labor. 81CHAPTER IV.Plantation Laborde — School at Cayes— Gauman — Sir Jamt'>iYeo— Lapointe — General Marion's estate — Free AmericansEntertainment — L'AUiance — M.Dubreuil—Platons — Dessalines'discipline — Coffee culture — Plain of Cayes— Cultivation— Produce — Labourers — Interest of money — MauriceLarac — Inhuman conduct— Mr. Downie — Return from Cayesto Port-au-Prince.I RODE out every day of my stay at Mr.Towning's, for some defined object, and ofcourse inspected L'L'Habitation Laborde, whichI believe originally belonged to the family ofthe well-known and accomplished CountAlexandre Laborde. It has the reputation ofhaving been one of the most splendid propertiesin the colony. It subsequently fellinto the possession of General Rigaud, andnow belongs to his widow, who is the wife ofM. Hara, an auctioneer at Port-au-Prince.Formerly, according to Moreau St. Mery, therewere on it one thousand four hundred slaves,and one million two hundred thousand pounds82 NOTES ON HAITI.of clayed sugar were produced, besides othermatters. People of authority in the plainassert that there were two thousand slaves, andthe produce two million pounds of clayedsugar.When I visited it, I found only the wallsof two of the sugar works standing ; the roofof the other was falling in as fast as possible.The dwelling-houses, which had been aselegant as substantial, entirely built of stone,were quite dilapidated. I did not see a cane,and around a few miserable negro huts therewere a dozen or sixteen labourers hangingabout, and I was told that they merely cultivatedprovisions for their own use. I also sawa few cattle, not exceeding twenty, grazing inthe very extensive savannas of the estate.The expense of irrigation throughout theentire plain must have been enormous ; theremains of the aqueducts are really magnificent.That at Laborde is among the first inexcellence that fell under my observation.Several attempts have been made to engagesome enterprising Englishmen to farm this property; but though the prop sect has been veryseriously entertained, it has been abandoned,on account of the impossibility of commandingsufficient labour for even a tithe of thet»LANTATIONS — EDUCATION. 83property* Indeed, it has been a favouritescheme with many of the proprietors to leasetheir land to foreigners, a scheme, however,that has been always defeated from the samecause, which will, I apprehend, prevail for ftvery long time throughout Haiti.The plantations Walsh, Mery, Esmangart,and O'Sheil, which were before the revolutionin the most flourishing state, are now utterlyabandoned.There is a school of mutual instruction inthe city of Cayes, under the direction of M.George Cedar. At this academy there are onehundred pupils maintained at the expense ofthe state, and thirty-five at their own, whopay each three dollars per month to the instructor,who also receives seventy dollars permonth as his salary from the government.The objects of instruction are, according to alist furnished by M. Cedar himself: — Readingand writing, French, declamation, arithmetic,elements of geometry, algebra, sacred history,geography, logic, rhetoric, drawing, simpleand double book-keeping, analysis, geometricaland logical, the historical catechism — anodd enough assemblage : whether successfullytaught or not, I had no means of ascertaining*84 NOTES ON HAITI.All that I can answer for is, that the teacherprofessed infinite zeal in his calling.I found the records of the trade at Cayeswere imperfect : nothing relative to the subjectin thq, early periods of the revolutions, andsome very inaccurate returns during the years1810, 1811, and a part of 1812. Since thepresidency of General Boyer, the records havebeen more correct ; but it is unnecessary to sayany thing of them here, as when I treat of thegeneral commerce of Haiti, the individual detailswill be better discussed.It was at one time contemplated by me tohave visited Jeremie and Jacmel ; but on makinginquiries, I learned that travelling wasso exceedingly bad, that I determined on abandoningmy design ; although I should haveliked much to have examined how far the cultivationof cloves and other spices had beencarried there, and what probability there waseither of increase or decrease. The Jeremiedistrict too has some attractions, from recollectionsof buccaneers, and from the fact that thefirst division of our ill-fated expedition, at thebeginning of the revolution, landed there.Among the fastnesses, a black lieutenant-colonel,named Gauman or Woman, in 1806, whengauman's defeat. 85the republic was rent by internal divisions, hadset himself up as a partisan of Christophe, butinreality as an independent chief, and had collectedunder his banners some hundred marauders,who kept the whole district in a state offeverish excitement, and most effectually checkedany improvement. On the re-union of thesouth and western provinces. General Borgellaand some other officers were sent with a strongforce to dislodge Gauman ; but for nine monthshe baffled them by his superior knowledge ofthe country, and the singular dexterity withwhich he destroyed all traces that could guidehis pursuers. At last, in 1820, he was, I believe,surprised, and in attempting to escape,was shot, and the survivors of his party completelydispersed. His death is said to havebeen a very substantial benefit to the country,for he subsisted by plunder, and his existencecould only be maintained by its being kept in aperpetual state of convulsion. The maintenanceof so small a band of robbers for twelve yearsmay be considered no small proof of the miserablestate to which the resources of the republichad been reduced by unceasing dissensions.During the separation of Cayes from ,Sir James Yeo, then commandingthe Southampton, captured a ship of war that86 NOTES ON HAITI.had originally belonged to Christophe, but hadfallen into the hands of General Borgella'sparty. The vessel did not strike before theslaughter was immense, when it was taken possessionof, on the ground that we recognisedthe flags of King Henry, and of the PresidentPetion ; but that we knew nothing of any thirdpower. The excitement in the city, on thenews being known, was intense ; and, had it notbeen for the firmness of Generals Borgella andAubert, the English residents would have beenmost probably murdered. So I was told by aBritish merchant, who had his life saved byhaving been sent to prison.Among other matters of information, I hearda good deal of one Lapointe, who had beenmayor of Arcahai, and is said to have held thecommission of a general officer in our service.General Lacroix mentions this as a proof ofthe mode in which the British character hadbeen degraded. This man, it is confessed, wasa most profligate person, yet he had been anactive, zealous, and useful partisan, in whichcapacity he had served with the army. Whetheror not he ever held any regular commission,I could never determine, nor is it of anygreat moment ; but I believe he received a pensionfrom the British Government, which heBRITISH EXPENDITURE. 87was reduced, by his habits of profligate expenditure,to sell long prior to his death, whichhappened at Cayes, not very long before myarrival. He died in extreme want, dependenton the bounty of the English residents for themerest articles of first necessity. I much fearthat there was much more expended uselesslythan what Lapointe received ; though I believethat the late Sir Thomas Maitland was mostsuccessful in reforming the abuses that hadprevailed previous to his administration ; and ineffecting these reforms, he displayed the samefirmness and right views of men and things,that characterised him afterwards, when actingon a more extensive field. His memory is regardedby many Haitians with great respect,though that respect is somewhat tempered byfear. I recollect a huge colonel boasting to methat he had had the honour of doing duty asaprivate grenadier at the government-house ofPort-au-Prince, when General Maitland wasthere.Having taken as correct a view of all that astranger could judge of, during so short a stayas I could bestow on the south, -I made preparationsto see a little of the country ; and GeneralMarion, on learning my wishes, offered88 NOTES ON HAITI.every facility, and as a further inducement, invitedme and every person of consideration inCayes to his estate in the country.On the 22d of February, I visited, with aparty both of foreigners and natives, the EstateBother, in the ancient parish of Torbec, afew miles from the town of Cayes, formerlybelonging to a French proprietor of that name,now the property of General Marion, the commandantof the arrondissement, and M. Douglas,an opulent merchant in the city. Fromthe resources of such an association, this is oneof the most favoured estates in the plain.The road by which we travelled, though notquite so good as that from London to Greenwich,is very respectable ; and I travelled verycomfortably in a two-horse cabriolet, whichGeneral Marion had provided for me. Thehouse is as usual of wood, and consequentlyreadily overheated in the full tide of the sun,which unfortunately shone in all his glory ; butthe distribution of it was convenient and fittedfor the comfort of all who are capable ofenduring heat. While our entertainment waspreparing, we surveyed the premises, and foundthe sugar-works, moved by water, in very goodorder ; the fences, though scarcely complete.AMERICAN LIBERATED SLAVES. 89were good as far as they were finished ; andthe few canes actually planted appeared to behealthy and flourishing.The most interesting part of the whole exhibitionto me, was a group of about sixty Americannegroes, who, having been liberated fromthe southern states by a society of quakers, hadbeen bound for a term of years to General Marion.The general desired them, when congregated,to tell me freely, as I was an Englishman, allthey thought and felt ; and as he did not understandone word of English, it is clear that theycould have no fear of giving offence. The privilegeconceded was liberally used, and althoughevery person concurred in representing thesepeople as orderly, laborious, and well conducted,each had some matter of personal complaint, andthe general grievances were perfectly overwhelming.They were altogether a healthy set ofblack men, women and children, of the last ofwhom, for the benefit of the republic, there wasa decided predominance. Wesleyan Methodismwas the prevailing religious system, and one oftheir number was a preacher of that sect. Quakerismand anabaptism (if I may use such aword) hovered over the small remnant of theflock. The whole party had been better thaneight months in Haiti ; they had nearly in-NOTES ON HAIT]closed the whole plantation, but had not yetbegun that portion of their labours which was tothem the most interesting ; viz. the cultivationof canes, as they were to have one fourth of theproduce to be divided among themselves. Theirlodgings were bad, in a sort of barrack ; but uponthe whole they were tolerably well treated, beingfed and clothed by the proprietors, whetherto be eventually repaid or not was uncertain ; theycomplained, however, of want of medical attendance,and many were afflicted with ulcers in theirlegs, which they ascribed to the climate ; butmost loud were their denunciations of their Haitianneighbours, whom they described as destroyingtheir fences to admit their bullocks intotheir gardens, and as plundering them of theirpoultry and pigs ; so that it was absolutely necessaryto keep a regular guard every night.Some carreaux of canes were in cultivation,which are said to yield about sixty thousandpounds of syrup, that sell for from nine thousandto twelve thousand dollars. No sugar has yetbeen made : all the hopes of such a manufacturedepend on the efforts of the American settlers.In the course of conversation General Marionstated his belief to be, that the total amount ofsyrup produced in the plain was about one millionfive hundred thousand pounds ; that last yearENTERTAINMENT AT BOUTILIER. 91(1826) it might amount to two millions of pounds,though this is not probable. Now it seems thattwo pounds of syrup yield about one poundof coarse Muscovado sugar, and about six ouncesof common molasses. If the estimate be correctof the entire produce, the whole plain doesnot yield as much as one respectable estate didin 1789.Our ^' dejeuner'^ was as usual profuse, amountingto what would be considered elsewherewaste, but such appears to be the system withinthe tropics.Eating, drinking, and toasting, were very active,but I cannot recollect any incident worthyof record, beyond the remark of Colonel PoissonParis, who, after having eaten as the Frenchphrase runs '* pour quatre," on being rallied onhis loss of appetite, replied with imperturbablegravity, ^^ Oui, je ne fais que le simulacre demanger," the exquisite absurdity of which sotickled one of the party, that he roared applause,which won for him the affectionate considerationof the colonel for the remainder ofthe day.We had made arrangements to establish ourhead-quarters at a small cottage belonging toMr. Towering and some of his friends, called bythe appropriate name of L' Alliance. After leaveNOTES ON HAITI.ing Boutilier, on our way to our resting-place,we visited M. Dubreuil, a senator, considered tobe one of the most intelligent men in the south.His cottage is in a beautiful mountain valley,hemmed in by mountains so as to form a completeamphitheatre. We made our arrangementsfor the following day, and returned andslept at L'AUiance, where we dined, and indespite of a most villanous huge black sand-flyand no curtains, I contrived to sleep. Igot some good specimens of plants. The rockis chiefly limestone.Early in the morning of the 23d, we rose betimes,and called on M. Dubreuil on our way tothe Plato, so celebrated for its bloody trophiesat the beginning of the contest in 1792. " LesPlatons,"as they are called, are the principal defile,(as the name indicates in Creole,) leadingfrom the plain of Cayes, of the Mores de laHotte, which is one of the most lofty ranges inthe island. The road to it was traced by theFrench, and is an excellent bridle way, shelteredfrom the sun by the large trees that coverthe mountain side, but from its situationit is very liable to be destroyed, either by rain,or the falling down of some loose rock or tree ;hence there is infinite facility to the defence ofthe position. The fortification called ^^ les Pla-visitTO THE Platoons. 93tons," is only half finished, and is commandedby a neighbouring hill, which however is in itsrear. It contains the tomb of General Gerard,one of the early revolutionary leaders.The view is remarkably fine, embracing thewhole plain, with the city and the Isle deVache in the distance. From the east bastionCayes lies S.S.E. The two rivers I'Acul andla Ravine are seen like small threads windingthe plain. In the midst of the fortressa huge bell is hung, to give an alarm inthe event of any enemy's landing ; one of ourparty accidentally sounded it, and direful wasthe alarm that was excited in an unfortunatenational guard, who acted as our cicerone.General Blanchelande met with a signalcheck in 1 792, when he attempted to dislodgethe insurgents who were there posted. Thedisobedience of the colonial troops contributedvery much to the disaster. The CommissaryPolvorel was more successful the followingyear, when he directed an attack to be madeby the chef-de-brigade Party. The post wascarried with the utmost gallantry. ^The works were, I believe, commenced byDessalines, but were never completed, and nowthey can scarcely be said to be kept up. In aruined barrack we took shelter from a heavy@4 NOTES ON HAITI.thunder-storm, and exercised our jaws on someroast mutton, with which our provident hosthad supped us.In the course of this morning's ride, I remarkedon the mountain side numerous smallpatches of land just cleared away, and smallhuts erected ; these belonged to the small proprietorswho inhabited them. There was anair of infinitely more industry than I had noticedelsewhere. I also gathered a good dealof information respecting the past and presentstate of agricultural industry throughout thisdistrict, and as it was an important part of myduty to determine the real facts, I bestowedmuch consideration on them. And I shall nowgive the general result of my inquiries, not inthe order in which I made my notes, but inthe most condensed form of which the subjectis susceptible.When Polvorel proclaimed liberty to theslaves of the south, he issued his *' reglemensde la police sur la culture et les cultivates,"which I shall more fully treat of in a distinctchapter. These regulations were clearly compulsory.Toussaint L'Ouverture and Dessalinesrendered PolvoreFs system more effective bypractically augmenting the penalties, thoughthe general avowed principles were the same.DESSALINES' DISCIPLINE. 95The stick was freely used ; and one of the mosttrust-worthy of my informants assured me thathe had seen abortion produced by the severityof the punishment inflicted by that monsterDessaUnes. Beating to death was no rare occurrence,and labouring in gangs was rigorouslyinsisted upon. Of these facts no Haitian everexpressed a doubt to me.After the return of Rigaud, and his assumingthe government of the south, he is said to haveresorted to the milder system of Polvorel, whichwas continued by his successor General Bore; and after the reunion of the south withPort-au-Prince, Petion's agrarian system wasestablished, and now prevails, although thegovernment has ceased to make farther grants.This system leads the negroes to the mountains,of which I saw the proofs, and consequentlythere arises a scarcity of labourers for large estates.At present, in the mountains the negroesare the chief labourers ; and coffee cultivation ispreferred, both because it is light work, andbecause one man can manage a considerablenumber of trees without any aid.Sugar requires combined and continuous labouras well as capital ; neither of which abound.The mountain sides are covered with coffee-treesof spontaneous growth, which only need96 NOTES ON HAITI.clearing to make them most productive. Myinformant says that at least two-thirds of thecoffee cultivated is lost for want of labour. Iwas startled at the returns stated by M. ,namely, that good trees would yield fromfive to six pounds ; but the average, he said, wasgood at two pounds. He had made an experimenton one hundred trees around his ownhouse, which were tended by his own family ;and he found, by the care bestowed, nine hundredpounds were produced, which is enormous.The same individual stated as his opinion, thatthe people of the mountains are improving inindustry, though still indolent, and excessivelyaddicted to Obeah. In this remote district thereare no public schools ; but the respectable personof whom I have already spoken had establishedone, taught by a Frenchman, for thebenefit of about twenty poor relations, orphans.I saw the school-room and the schoolmaster'sresidence, which were pretty and neat, on thebanks of a refreshing stream. Perhaps I admiredthem more than I might otherwise havedone, from the feeling of respect inspired by thefounder, who is one of the most unpretendingmen I have ever met.In the course of conversation with M. ,he expressed his conviction that theM. DUBKEUIL. PLAIN OF CAYES. 97people were satisfied with the form of government,though from their ignorance they wereliable to be misled. I never met a more perfectanti-gallican than he was. He stated shortly,that, as the son of a Frenchman, his natural predilectionswere in favour of France ; but that hehad witnessed the perfidies of Le Clerc andRochambeau, and that he had become a decidedenemy to every thing French.Apart from M. Dubreuil, my informationamounts to what I have stated in my reportto Lord Dudley, of which I extract the followingpassages :'' According to Moreau St. Mery, in 1789, theplain of Cayes, one of the finest in the island,was divided into two parishes — that of Cayes,and that of Purbeck. They contained at thatperiod one hundred flourishing sugar-plantations,which were calculated to yield annuallyfrom one hundred and thirty to one hundredand fifty thousand casks of Muscovado sugar,the weight of which unfortunately is not statedin pounds, so that the absolute amount cannotbe given.*^ At present the whole of these Hundred plantationsare still partially planted in canes, ofwhich , however, no care whatever is taken . Aboutseventy-five of thei have either water or cattle-vol.I. E98 NOTES ON HAITI,mills for grinding the cane, with boiHng-houses ;but generally of a most wretched construction,and in miserable condition. The boiling-housesin general are formed by a shed made againstthe old walls, which, during the revolution, itrequired too much labour to destroy. The canesproduced on the remaining twenty-five plantationsare transported to those that have mills,and one-fourth of the sirup or molasses producedis allowed for the use of the mill. Thewhole of these estate*! are, more or less, in adismembered condition, from the small grantsmade by the government to the military offrom five to thirty arrears, and from similarsales having been effected by many of thelarge proprietors. The parties purchasing arecalled * Concessionaires,' and generally plantsmall patches of canes, which they grind atthe estate to which the land formerly belonged,or at some other neighbouring property."It is estimated that there are about fivehundred arrears in canes, in a wretched stateof cultivation, in the whole plain of Cayes.The land is never manured, and scarcely everweeded, and only a part of each year's produceis converted into molasses. This arises principallyfrom idleness ; to which may be addedthe depredations of cattle, owing to bad fences,PLAIN OF CAYES. 99and the almost total impossibility of repairingsugar-works, from a want of workmen, and thebad faith of all parties concerned.^^ About 2,000 hogsheads of raw sugar, of1,000 pounds each, may be considered theaverage quantity produced by those estates ;but it fluctuates very much ; one year perhapsexceeding the average considerably, and thefollowing year decreasing to almost nothing.^' The average produce of sirup in the plainof Cayes is about 2,000,000 pounds annually ;but in consequence of the unusually favourableseason of 1826, 3,000,000 pounds was produced; and about 200 casks of sugar, of 200pounds each (of very bad quality), procuredfrom the granulations of the sirup, and afterwardsput into fl-our-barrels to drain.** The sugar not being sufficient for the consumptionof Cayes, about the same quantity isannually smuggled into that part of the islandfrom Cuba. This is actually less than was producedfrom one estate (Laborde's), in the plainof Cayes, during the time of the French. Fewof the plantations make more than from threeto four hogsheads of sirup per week, and thatgenerally at distant periods ; very few havingthe power, from want of manual labour, ofgrinding canes two or three weeks in succession.IGO NOTES ON HAITI.'^ Nearly the whole of the molasses is purchasedby the distillers (the proprietors beinggenerally too poor to erect distilleries on theirown plantations), and principally converted intotafia (an inferior spirit), 4,500 hogsheads ofwhich, with 600 hogsheads of rum of 60 gallonseach, were made in 1826.*^ The whole of those spirits are consumedeither in the immediate neighbourhood, or sentinto the interior, or leastways to Port-au-Princeand other ports. None of them are exportedfor foreign use.** The very little field labour effected is generallyperformed by elderly people, principallyold Guinea negroes. No measures of the governmentcan induce the young Creoles to labour,or depart from their habitual licentiousness andvagrancy. The whole body of proprietors constantlylament the total incapacity of the governmentto enforce laboursIn reply to inquiries I made respecting corporalpunishments, I have the following answers :^* The laws recognise no other punishmentThe language used is not my own, but that of my informants; and it is marked as a quotation in tl.e reports laidbefore Parliament. It is right to add that the individuals whogave this statement, are deeply interested in the prosperity ofthe Republic.PLAIN OF CAYES. 101than' fine and imprisonment with hard labour,although it is no uncommon thing to see thesoldiery and military police use the * plat desabre ' and cocomacac (a species of heavyjointed cane,) in a most arbitrary and sometimescruel manner ; but almost always, fromthe natural obstinacy of the negro, without theintended effect.^* The few young females that live on plantationsseldom assist in any labour whatever,but live in a constant state of idleness anddebauchery. This is tolerated by the soldieryand military police, whose licentiousness is gratifiedby this means''From these combined causes I learned, fromthe same respectable sources from which theforegoing statements were derived, that the valueof land is very small, varying from 24 to 100dollars per carreau, or 2-^^ acres. In some fewcases 200 dollars have been given. Rent alsovaries. It is, however, rare that estates arefarmed out in the neighbourhood of Cayes.Small properties of from 5 to 10 carreaux, witha few negro huts, are let at an annual rent of40 to 100 dollars. Larger ones of 100 or 200carreaux, from 400 to 800 dollars per annum.Money is lent at 75 per cent, per annum.This information was abundantly confirmed102 NOTES ON HAITI.by all the personal inquiries that I made inevery quarter.Coffee is cultivated in the vicinity of Cayes,and small patches present themselves to thetraveller in visiting the mountains ; but thequantity produced is small in proportion to theextent of fruitful soil ; for I find, from the tworeturns from Cayes for 1824 and 1825, thatthe coffee exported in the former year amountedonly to 11,157,411 pounds, and that in thefollowing year it fell off to 7,135,901 pounds.After a farewell to Alliance, we rode backto Mr. Towning's house, and took in our waythe estate Award, to which we had been invitedby Colonel Paris, the proprietor. Wefound the establishment respectable ; but thelabour was inadequate. The colonel told methat he had made fifty flour barrels of sugar,(each about two hundred pounds weight) theyear before ; but that they were not then sold.He added that he made 60,000 weight ofsirop,' which was seriously doubted. Yetthis was one of the best estates in the plainunder the old regime.The whole of the 24th I employed either intakingleave of my acquaintance, or in notingsuch matters as might be more leisurely answeredby them at a future periods In theM. MAURICE XARAC. 103course of the day I heard two anecdotes,which, whether true or false, serve to illustratethe history of the country. The first I believeto be true, and I hope, for the honour of humanity,that the last is false.Now for my redeeming story. There is oneMaurice Larac, a man of coloiu*, now living(at least in 1827) at Cayes, and a considerableproprietor. During the revolutionary struggle,when the natural children of proprietors succeededon the deaths (however procured) oftheir white fathers, a bloodthirsty party attackedthe house of M. Larac's father, for thepurpose of putting him to death as a whiteFrenchman. At the moment of the attack,the son was at the threshold, and declaredthat, to reach his father, it would be necessaryto pass over his dead body. His firmness succeeded,and he conveyed his parent in safetybeyond the reach of the assassins, and hasever since supported him to the utmost of hisability. I was told that the old gentlemanwas at Cayes when I was there ; but of thatI know nothing with certainty.In contrast, I give the other tale, but as Ihope it is false, I shall give no names ; thoughthe parties were said to be alive at the timeof the narration.104 NOTES ON HAITI*Two natural sons of two respectable Frenchmen,resident in St, Domingo, knowing thenew law of succession to which I have alreadyadverted, wished to become proprietors of thefamily estates ; but having some small tinctureof humanity, and consequent objection to parricide,this proposition was made, *' tue le fieri(pere), et je tuerai le tien -/' and, sad to tell,this was done, and the worthies ranked aslanded proprietors.After all the hospitality and kindness of myfriends at Cayes, I was reluctant to part fromthem ; but it was necessary that I should do so,and in spite of the pressing invitations of M.Raganean de la Cheney, the French consul,and others, I arranged to leave a town withwhich I had so much reason to be satisfied,early on the 25th. My host was unable to accompanyme; but Mr. Downie, whose longresidence rendered him an invaluable guide tothe feelings, views, and tendencies of the people,(but who has, I lament to add, fallen, afterthe period of which I speak, a victim to heartrendingdisappointment,) was kind enough tooffer to accompany me. The offer I graspedat, and it will ever be one of my lasting regretsthat so valuable a man should have been lost,when a little effort might in all human pro-theLATE MR. Downe. 105ability have saved him. I saw Utile of Mr.Downie, but that little convinced me that hisprinciples were good, his intelligence very superior,and the kindness of his heart unbounded.I now regret that I saw so littleof him. There are, I believe, some who survivehim, that do honour to his memory, andto them this honest tribute may not be displeasing,however unavailing it may be inessentials. It may be a consolation to thosewho loved poor Downie, to know that, althoughhe has left no splendid monument torecord his last resting-place, there is at leastone hand ready to render justice to those amiableand intellectual qualities, that, underfairer aspects, would have made him an objectof envy to many who now ^' strut their fretfulhour" on a stage for which nature has lesseminently qualified them.Mr. Downie was ready before day-break;but rain interfered, and I was very glad of anextra half-hour's sleep. We however had anearly breakfast, and although now exposed tothe sun, I had the advantage of seeing thecountry better than I had done, when passingthrough it in the imperfect twilight of myformer transit. We resumed the old road toCavaillon and St. Louis, and I was struck.103 NOTES ON HAITI, 'as soon as we got out of the immediate boundsof the city, with the appearance of absolutewant of habitation or cultivation. Indeed thewhole way to Cavaillon, and thence to St.Louis, there was scarcely a solitary hut by theroad. It is probable that there may be manyin the woods, where I understand the negroesare fond of erecting their dwellings. A fewcleared patches occurred ; but the generalcharacter of the country was that of an uninhabiteddistrict. We took up our abodeagain with M. Dumesle at St. Louis, and foundour favourable impressions quite confirmed.There was some excitement at this time inthe town, owing to the ci-devant member forit having forged a number of signatures toa petition against the " Juge de Paix." Thematter had been taken up warmly, and beenreferred to the President, whose decision Inever knew.On the 26th we retraced our steps to Acquit,where we found General Bergerac Thicket absent,and there parted with Mr. Downie. Thecountry is in a state of apparent abandonment.When riding along, a countryman on horsebackovertook me, and finding that I was anEnglishman, entered into a series of queriesas to the progress of the negotiation betweenRETURN TO PORT-AU-PRINCE. 107Great Britain and Haiti ; of all these mattersI professed the most perfect ignorance. Thepoor fellow expressed great anxiety that thearrangements should be made, as the onlymeans of saving the country from the rapacityof France. The hatred in the south to themother country is as strong as it is undisguised.We returned to '' Trois Palmistry," and weretold that, in that neighbourhood, '' brigandage"was general as well as idleness, andthat the ^^ code rural" did not work at all.I did not see or hear of any outrage beyondpetty larceny ; the idleness was obtrusivelyobvious.The following day brought us to the hospitableresidence of M. Baudain at Petit Gave ;but the exposure to the sun had brought onso smart an attack of fever, that I was scarcelyable to note that, being " Mardi gras," thewhole town was busy with a sort of carnival.A warm bath and bed were more tempting,even at mid-day, than witnessing the s|X)rts,that inspired every one else with glee. Thefavorite masquerade was that of women appearingas men.The relief afforded from fever by the bathenabled both my brother and myself to recommenceour journey on the 28th, and we did108 NOTES ON HAITI.SO, pursuing the same route by which we hadpreviously travelled. In crossing the Tapion,I was even more struck than I had formerly beenwith its picturesque beauty, which was peculiarlyfavoured by the gradual bursting of daylight,and as we were sheltered, long after thesun had risen, from his fiercer rays by thefoliage and the precipitous sides of the mountain,our enjoyment was greatly enhanced.We passed through Grand Gave, and oncemore found ourselves at Leogane, in the coffeehousein which we had formerly found imperfectshelter and refreshment.On arriving there, I found one of the gentlemenattached to my office, awaiting my arrivalwith despatches from England, which renewedmy leave to return home ; but though by nomeans well, and anxious to do so from privateconsiderations, I felt that, having done so muchin my inquiries, I was bound, at any sacrificeof personal interests or feelings, to completethe task I had undertaken. I therefore pursuedmy way, and reached my residence in thecountry near Port-au-Prince, quite satisfied thattravelling in Haiti is very different from similaroperations, in which the '^ Gentlemen of England,who live at home at ease," ever indulge.STAY AT PDRT-AU-PRINCE, 109CHAPTER V.Stay at Port-au-Prince — Election of members of House ofCommons — Explosion of arsenal— Defects of police — Mr,Gordon — Mr. Everaerts — M. Godard — Aggressions of cattleProsecution of M. Courtois — Rumours of insurrection —Education — Diplomas— Post-office — Departure for St Mark'sGonaives — Amusing officer — Toussaint— St. Mark's —Petite Riviere — Crete a Pierrot — Hill-forts — Marchand —Insurrection in 1820 — Gouimands of Haiti, . ,At Port-au-Prince I remained thirteen days,in preparing for the prosecution of my journeyround the island, in completing whatever publicmatters had fallen into arrear, and in makingup such notes as I had only briefly recordedon former occasions. The latter partof my task I found peculiarly irksome ; forthe intensity of the heat rendered exertionexceedingly painful, and to the-physical disinclinationto mechanical effort was superaddeda desire, perhaps carried too far, torecord, with undeniable fidelity, all that Inoticed. Whatever I did notice may be NOTES ON HAITI.pended upon, for though I registered much,I do not here record by a great deal what Idid see. Without any particular order, I shallnow notice some matters connected with thecapital that have been hitherto passed over.In consequence of some misconception ofthe President's proclamation for the election ofmembers of the Chamber of Commons, theelections took place generally in December,1826, instead of the following month. Thecapital, however, was correct, and did not exerciseits right of election until the prescribedday. This city returns three regular membersand three supernumeraries, as in Spain duringthe constitution, and as is now the case inMexico.Universal suffrage is the law of the land,founded on the Haitian Magna Charta, if Imay so designate the constitution of 1806, revisedin 1816, and now the apparent rule ofproceeding. The only individuals who cannotvote, are those under judicial sentence, ideots,or menial servants.Trusting to this law, the American emigrants,who are adopted citizens, proposed to elect, asone member, a methodist preacher, one of theirnumber, and for that purpose proceeded in abody to the church, (where the elections takeELECTION OF MEMBERS. Illplace,) and it was reported to me that theywere entered in at one door and civilly handedout of the opposite one, without having beenallowed a solitary vote.The first candidate was elected without anyopposition ; the second was proposed by thegovernment, and he of course was chosen ;but some doubts were raised as to the validityof the election ; for although there were morethan one opposing candidate, the singular phenomenonhad occurred, of there being five morevotes in his favour than there were voters present.This apparent inconsistency did notaffect the proceedings ; and only one individualventured to make some observations on themiraculous excess of votes. He had scarcelybegun to speak, when so loud a clamour wasraised that he was glad to run off, which heliterally did ^^ au grand pas," and it is added,by the historian of his glories, that he actuallydid not stop until he found himself safe amonghis household gods, at a distance of half amile from the scene of tumult.The party which had so successfully discomfitedour hero, emboldened by success, determinedto pursue still further their ingeniousand simple expedient, and when the voteswere collected for the next candidate, also on112 NOTES ON HAITI.the government interest, he was declared thesitting member, in consequence of havingtwenty votes more than there were voterspresent.I was not present at this strange exhibition ;but I have faithfully recorded the statementsmade to me by various persons at various periods.Ballot is the mode of election employed,which of course facilitates the proofsof double voting.A representation was said to be made to thePresident of these irregularities ; but he is reportedto have declared his utter disbelief ofthe statement made : and as I never heard ofa reference in such a case in Haiti to an electioncommittee, I believe that the two honourablemembers were assured of their seats untilthe dissolution of the parliament.Such an occurrence naturally leads to reflectionson the expediency of the semblance ofa popular representation in an unformed community,and from what I have seen amongthese people, as . well as on the continent ofAmerica, (I mean among the new republics,) Iconfess that I entertain very serious doubtsof its compatibility with the permanent advancementof the community at large.Among other hitherto unrecorded events, IEXPLOSION OF ARSENAL. 113had passed over the destruction of the arsenal,large building in the midst of the town closeto the water-edge. The incautious striking aniron hoop with an iron hammer, over a barrelof gunpowder, is reported to have producedthe explosion. I had, early on the morning ofthe 2nd of February, received a bag from England,and while busied with its contents, sittingin the gallery of my residence, which overlookedthe city, my attention was solicited bya distant explosion, followed by a mass of densesmoke, which, on clearing away, fully explainedthe nature and extent of the calamity.I instantly went down, and applying to the mastersof the British vessels in port, they cheerfullyadopted my suggestion of placing theircrews at the disposal of the government, andfor a time they were very useful. The crews ofthe French men-of-war also rendered very goodservice, and contributed very essentially to theextinction of the fire. It was very fortunatethat the sea breeze did not set in until theflames were nearly extinguished ; for had itdone so, the whole town must have been laid inashes. As it was, the loss was great, beingestimated at a million of dollars ; for althoughthe quantity of gunpowder was small, therewas a large assortment of army clothing, NOTES ON HAITI.non, bomb-shells, muskets, and sabres, thatwere entirely destroyed. Occasional reportsof cannon were heard, proceeding from theartillery, which it was said had been loaded,and had remained so from the time of Christophe'slast siege in 1812.After the fire, there were several attempts toburn the town, no doubt made by needy adventurersto profit by the plunder, which couldnot be effected at the arsenal. Several suspectedpersons were arrested for the offence,but I never heard that any punishment wasinflicted. For some time there was great andwell-founded apprehension, that the incendiarieswould have persevered until they hadsucceeded. Several lives were lost in theexplosion ; and I believe that the Presidenthad scarcely left the building more than tenminutes before the accident happened. Thebuilding was reduced to an unseemly mass ofruins.In some of my former notices, I have hintedat the defects of the police system. Severalinstances of this kind occurred at differenttimes, which may as well be now stated in acontinuous form. One of His Majesty's actingvice-consuls, the late Mr. Charles Gordon,had been dining with me in the country atDEFECTS OF THE POLICE. 115M. Malerr's, and we had returned to townabout ten o'clock on the evening of the 1stof July. My house was a few hundred yardsfrom Mr. Gordon's lodgings, to which hewent immediately after having placed hishorse in the stable. He had scarcely leftmy door, when a party of black soldiers laidhold of him, under the pretext that he wasfound in the street after ten o'clock at nightwithout a lantern, contrary to the police regulations,of which not one of us knew anythink;. These ruffians threatened to drasc Mr.Gordon to prison ; and when they foundhim an unresisting victim, they robbed himof all the money he had, and they parted.Early on the following morning the affair wasreported to me — the details were laid beforethe government — and though much vigilancewas professed to be used in tracing the culprits,they were never detected ; and I believethat their impunity was owing to the fact thatthey belonged to the black and most numerouspart of the population. But, unfortunately,the unredressed assault on Mr. Gordon is onlyone of various offences committed against thepersons of foreigners, without any remedy.On the 31st of October, 1826, the Dutchconsul Everaerts, when quietly riding through116 NOTES ON HAITI.the streets, accompanied by Commodore deDelay, and some other French gentlemen,was violently assaulted and abused by the ex-adjutantof Port-au-Prince, St. Roume, whoafterwards violently forced his way into thehouse of a French merchant, named Godard,and assaulted him with equal violence.M. Everaerts made immediate complaint tothe President on his own behalf, and the Frenchconsul-general made another on the behalf ofhis countrymen. The most ample reparationwas unhesitatingly promised, and I have beentold that General Inginac volunteered an assurancethat the delinquent should be sent toSamana, a place of banishment at the northeasternpart of the Island. St. Roume was accordinglyarrested, but in two or three days hewas bailed by a senator, the brother of the commissaryof the government, the governmentlaw-officer; and on the case being broughtbefore the tribunal, the judges declared theirincompetence, on some technical ground, to decide; and the first use made by St. Roume ofhis acquittal, was to seek out and to insultMr. Everaerts. A second representation wasmade to the government, which produced unboundedpromises of redress ; but none everfollowed. Comment on such facts is un-aggressionsOF CATTLE. 117necessary, as the inferences are clear and obvious.So much for insults to public officers offriendly powers. Let us now look to more domesticpolicy, if I may so distinguish it. The'^ Code Rural '' imposes penalties on the proprietorsof cattle who permit their animals to strayand injure the fences of their neighbours ; whileit stoutly prohibits the slaying of any forfeitedoffenders, except pigs and goats. It sohappened, as one of the penalties of my sins,that near to my cottage a large number of thegovernment bullocks were brought every evening,after having discharged their duties to thestate, under the care of ^* M. le gardien desboeufs," to an open space near to my cottage.The place into which these hungry animals wereput had little grass, and was uninclosed, sothat they naturally dashed at the nearest fieldthat held out any inducement, which happenedto be mine. Night after night my fences weredestroyed, my grass not merely eaten, but troddenunder foot. I represented my case fii-st to*^ M. le gardien," next to the captain of the ruralpolice, the already celebrated Captain Taureau,and lastly to the government : the evilstill continued. At last I betook myself topractising at the bullocks, and in fact used them118 NOTES ON HAITI.as targets. This was successful, and every eveningI saw my friend " M. le gardien " scuddinground my fences, to warn his erring flock fromso dangerous a neighbourhood. I regretted theviolation of any law ; but I had no alternative,and I do not think that the course I pursuedgave any offence.A very remarkable proceeding occurred atPort-au-Prince in the month of January, andas I think it marked the then subsisting relationsbetween the government and the people,I shall note it. The editor of the only print,except the Government Gazette, M. Courtois,put forth an article of considerable virulenceagainst foreigners, — an article that might havebeen considered a preliminary to their expulsion.This produced so strong a sensation, that thegovernment resolved on prosecuting him, as dida private lawyer, who considered himself alsoinjured by the publication. The paper was suppressed,the editor was arrested and held to bail,and proceedings formally commenced againsthim at the instance of the two aggrieved parties.The day of trial was postponed from that onwhich it had been first fixed, and the commissaryof the Court of Cassation, who was marriedto a relation of the President, resigned hisoffice to defend his friend, and still more extra-prosecutionOF M. COURTOIS. 119ordinary, Colonel Rigaud, the chief of the engineerdepartment, and the son of the celebratedrevolutionary chief, stepped forward as a defenderof the accused, which may be done byothers than professional men in Haiti,I was present at the proceedings, and althoughthere could not be a doubt of the libelloustendency of the publication, M. Courtoiswas acquitted, a result that he had fullyanticipated, as he had engaged a party to dinewith him ; and the celebration of his acquittaltook place within an hour of the event. Thisevent was strongly contrasted with some otherpublic transactions in the most recent historyof the republic. Various solutions have beenoffered, but as I know not the accuracy of any,I shall abstain from recording those that reachedmy ears ; for even though they might be true,I do not imagine they will establish any onewell-defined position.During the latter part of my residence inHaiti, there were constant rumours of some risingin the country, though the object was neversufficiently defined to enable me to determinethe probability of its taking place. Still they affectedmy plans very seriously, by keeping mestationary at the capital, when the public objectsmight have been equally well served, and120 NOTES ON HAITI.my own individual views most decidedly promoted,by having been sooner enabled to havereturned to that home which I had most reluctantlyleft.The rumours of insurrection continued rife,but they all ended in mere rhetorical flourishes; and I do not now believe more was everseriously contemplated, even by the mostvehement declaimer in the utmost fervour ofdeclamation ; for the more I have reflected onthe character of the people and the history ofthe revolution, the more thoroughly have Ibeen impressed with the conviction that allclasses are sated with blood, and that they(with few exceptions) would endure muchwrong rather than have the wretched scenesrenewed, that have almost identified the nameof Haiti with that of inhuman atrocity. Iwatched with care how far this feeling operatedin the capital and elsewhere ; and I ampersuaded that a discreet government might, atleast in the tone of mind that prevailed in1826 and 1827, do any thing with the people,except indeed to make them systematicallyindustrious, or lovers of France.At Port-au-Prince the government has certainlygiven evidence of its conviction of theadvantages that must result from education —STATE OF EDUCATION. 121at least I may speak of the external indications.According to the law, education may be undertakeneither by foreigners or natives, who havereceived the sanction of the permanent commissionof education, established at certainpoints. There are eight such courts, as I believethey may be called, at Port-au-Prince,Cayes, Jeremie, Jacmel, Cape Haitian, LaVega, St. Marc, and Santo Domingo.The Lycee and all the primary schools areat the charge of the government ; all otherseminaries are at the risk of those who establishthem. The first-named of these establishments,the Lycee, was founded by Potionson the model of the institution so named atParis. The first object was to provide for theoffspring of meritorious citizens, who had leftthem without provision. The President canalso admit a deserving pupil of any of theprimary schools protected by the government.Boarders and day-scholars may also be receivedby the professors. The professed objects ofinstruction are the ancient and modern languages,rhetoric, logic, ethics, the elements ofmathematics and physic, ancient and modernhistory, geography, and drawing. There areof course a due proportion of professors ; butVOL. I. F122 NOTES ON HAITI.how far they can acquit themselves with benefitto their pupils, I cannot say ; and as littleam I informed, in despite of considerable exertionto acquire knowledge, of the number ofpupils.The Commission, or I believe it should beAnglicized the Education Committee, at is very respectable, and General In-ginac is the president.Besides the establishments paid by the government,there are some private ones, and amongothers one for females, taught by an Americanlady, who had no inconsiderable share ofpatronage.But there are higher aspirations in 'Mabelle Capitale." There is an hospital : thePresident confers degrees in medicine ; andthere is a school of medicine, of which theprofessor is a French physician named Dr.Civet. 1 have already remarked the difficultyof placing the medical students in theirproper place at the *' Fete independence,"and I may add that they appear a very respectableset of young men. One of them isan African captured in a Spanish slaver by aHaitian vessel named the Wilberforce, and Iwas told that he is among the most acute andSTATE OF EDUCATION. 123intelligent of all the pupils. There was anexamination of these young persons, at whichI should have attended had I been apprized ofit in time. I once saw a diploma, or licence,from the President to an English surgeon, topractise as a ^^ medicine," and I regret that Idid not take a copy of it, as it did not resembleany document for a similar object that Iever had seen.There is no ordinary share of pomp in everypublic act ; even an auctioneer's license assumesthe form of a commission, being dulypreceded by a letter from the President; andlest I should be suspected of either misconceptionor misrepresentation, I shall here giveformal copies, which were made from the originals: —'• Port-au-Piince, 20 Juin, 1819.'^ Jean Pierre Boyer, President d'Haiti.'^ En conformity de la loi du 15 ]lai dernier,sur Organisation des tribunaux, qui eta-bitpour la Capitulations Enchanters publics; —connoisseur, citoyen, votre morality, votre fro-hi,et votre denouement a la publique, jevous prevent que je vous ai choisi pour En-canterpublic dans le ressort du TribunalCivil scant ^n cette ville, a la charge par vous124 NOTES ON HAITI.de satisfaire aux conditions imposes par laloi.*^ La presente lettre vous servir pour executerla dite charge, en attendant qu'.une commissiondans les formes vous soit expedite.(Signe) '^BoYER.''No. 12.*' Nous Jacques Ignace Fresnel, Grand Juge.'' Vu la decision de S. E. portant nominationdu citoyen a la place d'Encanteurpublic pour la ville de Port-au-Prince :'^ Cantons et ordonnons, que la dite nominationsoit transcribe sur le registre du GrefFedu Tribunal Civil sent en cette ville ; et a saprestation de serment en tel cas requis du susditcommissaire, qui devra deposer sa signatureau dit GrefFe —*^ Charges le Commissaire du Gouvernementpres le dit Tribunal de Execution dupresent management.Donne a Port-au-Prince, le 14 Juin, 1819,an 16 de Independence.Pour copie conforme au registre de commission,(Signe) '' Fresnel''I give these copies, not on account of anyDIPLOMAS POST-OFFICE. 125importance attached to them, but as specimensof the art of magnifying trivial matters into apreternatural importance. The reasons assignedby the President for his choice aregood — the morality, probity, and loyalty, ofthe individual selected. I fancy that elsewheresuch rigorous terms are not exacted.The individual whose merits are thus recordedwas a very civil obliging person.Among the various attempts at arrangementsthat have been made, there are none thathave so decidedly failed as those for the postofficeservice. I believe that the plan has beenwell digested, but the executive details aremost defective. From what cause this proceeds,I do not venture to say ; but for the factI vouch. As an instance, I may cite what happenedto myself. The distance from Jacmel isonly about seventy miles, and on one occasion,when my letter-bag from England had been entrustedto the regular mail, it was twenty dayson the road. And yet I believe this is a pointon which the government is most exceedinglyanxious. It is, I apprehend, only one of themany proofs that might be adduced of the difficultyattendant on the introduction of customsfamiliar to old communities, among those that126 NOTES ON HAITI.have been prematurely hurried through theearlier stages of political existence.By the morning of the 14th March, havingfinished all that I had planned before recommencingmy tour, I determined to do sowithout delay; and, judging from the progressI had previously made, I calculated that Ishould have finished my labours in about twomonths more. That I miscalculated will behereafter seen.There being nothing of particular interest onthe road from Port-au-Prince to St. Mark's, bythe way of Arcahai, and it being described asdeep and sandy, I determined to avoid it,especially as I had so recently suffered fromexposure to the sun ; and accordingly despatchingmy guide and animals to St. Mark's, I embarkedin His Majesty's ship Harlequin, in whichmy friend Captain Charles Elliott had, withhis usual attention, offered to convey me to thatcity. We sailed at midnight on the 14th March,favoured by the land breeze ; but as it slackened,and we had to beat against the seabreeze, it was impossible to land before thefollowing midnight. We therefore proceededto Gonaives, from which it was easy to pass byland to St. Mark's, and all the places worthiVOYAGE TO GONAIVES. 127seeing in the neighbourhood. Our expectationswere realised, for we were on shore early in theforenoon of the 16th, at Gonaives, where we werehospitably received, and lodged at the house oftwo English merchants established there.From the day of landing to the 18th I employedmyself in looking around me. Gonaiveswas formerly a place of importance, on accountof its salt-works, the labourers of which werea formidable body, and played a conspicuouspail at one period of the revolution, under theMarquis Bore. The country is low and sandy,and is chiefly devoted to the cultivation ofcotton ; but here, as in the south, the complaintsof idleness and want of hands werenever ending. Date-trees grow here to considerableperfection, and produce, according tomy informants, very good fruit ; which, however,I did not see. There are some pleasantrides in various directions, one leading to theestate and residence of Toussaint L'Ouverture,at the time of his seizure by the French. Itwas one of the very few sugar estates, if not theonly one, in this district. The works, whichwere substantial and good, are how in a stateof ruin. An old superintendent and his wifelive in one of the remaining buildings. It stillretains the name '^ Quartier L'Ouverture.'^128 . NOTES ON HAITI.I called, the day of my arrival, on the generalcommanding the arrondissement, a black officer,who had, I believe, served throughout therevolution. He was not at home, and I leftmy card ; which I afterwards heard was amatter of utter amazement to him, the purportof which he could not, by any possibility, bemade to understand. He, however, seemed tohave a faint glimmering that it might beexpected of him to entertain me ; but as sucha feat entailed charges, although he affected tohave been confined by lameness, he suddenlydiscovered that his presence was necessary insome distant part of his district, and fairly absconded.I mention this as the only instancethat occurred to me, during my tour, of eventhe appearance of a want of hospitality.Among my other visitors, I was particularlyamused by a mulatto colonel, who was mostanxious to be civil. He generally dropped inbefore nine in the morning ; and, after havingtaken a dram, became very voluble in discussinghis own merits, as well as those of hiscontemporaries. One morning, after havingworked himself into a state of admiration ofhis own performances, he proceeded to striphimself, to show the scars of eleven gun-shotwounds which he had received in various con-amusingOFFICER. 129flints with the French ; and he added, in a toneof exultation, '^ Je vous assure, Monsieur, queje suis le plus brave des tous les mulatres de cepays ci!" To these important details he addedthe fact, that he had as many children aswounds, and hinted that, if properly encouraged,he would contribute very essentially tothe much wanted increase of the population.I was afterwards informed that, in spite ofhis vain-glorious propensities, this person isreally a man of courage. He gave an anecdote,which is strongly characteristic of theinefficiency of the laws, to which so much isascribed by those who know nothing of Haiti.The Grand Marshal of Haiti, under Christophe,was an old African, named Paul Romain, whohad been imported as a slave, after havingattained manhood, before the revolution. He appearsto have been a man of considerable mentalpower, of which he afforded no mean evidence,by having acquired the art of writing well andcorrectly at an advanced time of life. I haveseen some specimens, which were very good.Under his sovereign he had been created Princede Limbe, and was commander-in-chief of thearmy in the neighbourhood of St. Mark at thetime that Christophe shot himself. After the130 NOTES ON HAITI.revolution, he reverted to the style and title ofGeneral Romain ; and being implicated insome revolutionary schemes with Richard (theci-devant Duke de Marmalade), he was senta prisoner on parole to Leogane, under thesurveillance of the general commanding there.After some time he was killed by a party ofsoldiers, commanded by the worthy colonel,from whom I had the account. The governmentversion is, that Romain, then eightyyears of age, had renewed his communicationswith the disaffected, at the head of whom hehad made arrangements for placing himself;and on being ordered into confinement, hadresisted, and was unfortunately slain. Theother edition, from the chief actor was, thatthe general commanding at Leogane, actingon orders received from the palace of thegovernment, directed him to pick a quarrelwith the old chief, and to massacre him ;which he did, as he asserted, in the true spiritof military subordination. The Presidentloudly disclaimed all participation in thisodious assassination ; and the colonel declaresthat he was made the scape-goat, and sent toGonaives to repent at leisure.In Gonaives itself, the traces of a considerablebuilding, which Toussaint had erected ashis palace, are to be seen. In the town thereare several of his relatives ; and I believe thatthe wife of his son Isaac L'Ouverture, (nowresident either in Bordeaux or its neighbourhood,)was there for the purpose of settlingsome of their affairs. The French government,or rather Napoleon, has been charged withhaving secretly made away with this individual.The allegation is utterly unfounded.Some little coffee is produced at the heightsa short distance from the sandy plains of Go-natives.There is an Italian priest resident, whois also the vicar-general of the district. He appearedan unpretending man, but certainlydid not seem fit to rank with the Moliere,Marines, and other confidential counsellors ofToussaint.Gonaives is a most unpleasant residence :the loose sand, charged with saline particles,is in constant motion, and penetrates the slightwooden-houses, so as even to load writing-paperto such a degree as to impede Writing.The slightest wind, instead of refreshing, thusbecomes a source of annoyance to the eyes andlungs. The houses are in the same style withthose of the other towns I had previously132 NOTES ON HAITI*visited, low, seldom exceeding two stories,built of wood, with a large sitting-room thatopens to the street, and the sleeping apartmentsabove and behind, with a yard interveningbetween the main house and the kitchenand other offices.The houses of the poorer classes are allequally bad, and I should think uninhabitable,being perfect hawthorns ; so much so that aperson on the outside can hear with great correctnessall that passes within — a circumstancepeculiarly unfavourable to the little intriguesthat prevail, and which has on more than oneoccasion led to very unsatisfactory consequencesto the suspected. The scandalous stories in circulationare, as might be expected, very plentiful,but they are all of a ludicrous character.Early on the morning of the 18th, accompaniedby one of the gentlemen at whose houseI stayed, I made my way by a retrograde movementto St. Mark's, over the road to Port-prince,part of which runs over the low flatsalines, and part by the foot of the mountains,that rise rapidly at an inconsiderable distancefrom the sea.Over the river Ester, (where Toussaint madea rendezvous with Colonel Brisbane for theVISIT TO ST. mark's. 133purpose of betraying him,) we passed oyera very respectable wooden bridge. This is aconsiderable stream, which from its sluggishmotion is very favourable to the habits of thealligator, which abound in it. On our way wepassed one that, in traversing the salines, hadbeen stoned to death by some of the inhabitants,who have a mortal hatred to this animal,although I could not learn that it has any ofthe formidable propensities attributed to hisbrother of the Magdalena. We also crossed theArtibonite, which at that time was low ; butduring the rains it swells both rapidly and extensively.Though several miles from its mouth,vessels of some burthen can go up to the passage,and sharks also find their way there.There is no bridge, but a cable is strainedacross, and a large flat-bottomed boat attachedto it by means of a running block ; whenlanded, it is brought into such a position, thatthe current acts on the side opposite to the intendedlanding place, and the whole cargo iscarried over in safety. Some years ago someenterprising Englishmen offered to throw asuspension bridge over it, on condition of receivingcertain tolls for a term of years ; butdifficulties were interposed, and the project134 ' NOTES ON HAITI.was abandoned, without much Likelihood of itsbeing speedily resumed, from the diminishedvalue of such a speculation.The approaches to St. Mark are good, thoughthe immediate entrance through a dilapidatedgate is paltry. The town itself is strikingly contrastedwith any thing I had previously seen.Though filled with ruins, they were ruins of magnificence; and some of the houses, especiallythose that face the sea, are of a very superiororder, being built of freestone, which had beenprepared and sent out from France. The town,though always small, must have been really verybeautiful, and there are abundant materials forrestoring it, if not to its former beauty, certainlyto a state of comparative grandeur. GeneralBonnet, who commands here, receivedme with great attention, and in the eveningwalked out with me to a building out of thetown commenced by Christophe, but still unfinished,which is dignified with the title of thepalace. It would have been substantial, beingcomposed entirely of stone. The situation howeverseemed to have been chosen for the sakeof security, not of beauty. There are also iiboutthe town some fortified places, among othersFort Churchill, which were erected by ourGENERAL BONNET. 135army during our occupation of the island, andwhich are intimately associated in Haitian recollectionwith the benefits of a liberal expenditureand double rations.We returned to dine with the general, towhom, and Madame Bonnet, I was much indebtedfor polite attention. Our dinner andwines were good, and had it not been for thetoo great proximity of the military band whichplayed during dinner, I should have derivedno inconsiderable satisfaction. As it was, Igot a good deal of information, and I beganto learn that the capital was not an example,either in point of manners or hospitality, toother towns.Among the party was M. St. Macary, (whohas since been employed by his government inFrance, for the purpose of arranging the termsof the indemnity,) whose father was the mostopulent inhabitant of St. Mark before the revolution.He was reduced like many others toa deplorable state of poverty, and I was informedthat his son, though a poor man, veryproperly contributes to his utmost to the supportof his father.In conversation, I could gather that industrydoes not prevail more at St. Mark's than it does136 NOTES ON HAITI.elsewhere ; but that cultivation there too languishes.In order to be quite unembarrassed in mymovements, I had taken my lodgings at asort of hotel kept by a notary-public, whohad been at one time an acting purser inour navy. He spoke English well, and wasintelligent ; but among the other strange topicsof communication that he selected, he informedme that a British general officer had formerlykept, as a mistress, the lady whom he had sincehonoured by marrying, but had had no children,adding, with exultation, that he had been moresuccessful, as he could boast of several, someof whom he produced with their honoured mother.He was very anxious to procure the addressof Madame 's former lover, that he mightwrite to inform him of his superior prowess.This man was an active opponent of thegovernment, setting himself up as the championof the constitution, which he asserted thegovernment was constantly undermining. Ibelieve that he had been very troublesome toall the authorities, especially his immediatechief. He either was, or had been, a memberof the " Chambre des Communes."The streets of St. Mark were clean ; andVISIT TO PETITE RIVIERE. 137the state of quiet in which they were keptindicated some good order. Dessalines reducedthe tOAvn to its present state by fire.Early in the morning of the 19th I set off tovisit the Commune of Petite Riviere, accompaniedby Colonel Bigaye, a black officer, whohad served under Colonel Brisbane ; to whosemerits, both as an officer and a man, he boreample testimony : he had also served withToussaint, and had remained firm in his allegianceto the last moment of Christophe'slife. He is better educated than most of hisbrethren, and was very communicative. Hehad read Baron Lacroix's History of the Revolution,which he insisted was most incorrect :though I thought that this arose from a supposedpartiality, on the part of the author,to the coloured party. At a short distancefrom the town, just about dawn, he pointedout the spot where the gallant Colonel Brisbanefell, leaving a reputation full of honor,even amon the most inveterate of his enemies.we passed through several cotton plantations,which bore marks of more care than areusually exhibited ; and 1 was informed thatthe sugar-cane was also occasionally cultivated; but I did not see any. I saw a fev/138 NOTES ON HAITI.parties working among the cotton trees, whichhad been nearly cleared of the woollen pods.The universal complaint is a want of labourers.About ten o'clock we reached '^ La PetiteRiviere," which is under the direction of theblack lieutenant-colonel Jean Charles, whohad formerly been a baron and lieutenant duroi under Christophe. We were conductedby a party of military, headed by the commandant,that met us at a spot where I reluctantlyparted with Colonel Bigaye, whowas obliged to return to St. Mark, to ahouse in which the President puts up whenmaking tours of inspection. Here we had thebest breakfast the place could afford; and Ihad toiled through receiving the visits of theofficers of garrison and the municipality, towhom a consul-general was about as great acuriosity as a Haitian ambassador would be inLancashire. We proceeded to visit the fortificationcalled Crete a Pierrot, celebrated inHaitian annals for the defence it made againstno less than three divisions of General LeClerc's army. Among my other visitants wasthe ^^ Juge de Paix," a mild-looking youngblack man, one of the innumerable sons thatDessalines left to uphold his name. I endearA PIERROT. 139poured to draw him into conversation ; but hisshare of it was ahiiost confined to the monosyllables*^Oui/' or *' Non." On inquiring intohis character, I found that it was as remarkablefor mildness and want of pretension, as that ofhis father was for ferocity and insolence.Crete a Pierrot is an insignificant fortification,built by our army on the right bank of theArtibonite, protecting one of the principalpassages to the north and east of the group ofmountains called ^^ Les Mores de Cahos," ata distance of rather more than a mile from thevillage of Petite Riviere, from which the ascentis very gradual, terminating in an elevationwhich, judging by the eye, cannot much exceedthree hundred and fifty feet. One side next tothe river is nearly precipitous, while from thenorth and south the approaches, though difficult,are covered with a considerable quantityof underwood and some large trees, under coverof which the French made their attacks. Afterthree unsuccessful assaults by the French, in thelast of which, according to General Lacroix,who commanded a division there, there werefully twelve thousand men, the garrison,consisting of not more than one thousand ortwelve hundred, under the command of the140 NOTES ON HAITI.chef-de-brigade Lamartiniere, cut their way-throughtheir assailants, and retired in safetyto the black army with a loss of less thanone half of their numbers. The Haitians areproud of this achievement, and according tothe acknowledgements of their candid opponent,whom I have quoted, they have goodgrounds for being so.Having performed this duty, I proceeded,through some very good roads running betweencotton plantations, from Petite Riviere to Marchand,a town founded by Dessalines, to whichhe gave his name, but which has fallen intodecay, and has reverted to its original name,which is that of the French proprietor. Greatertraces of industry were here perceptible than Ihad seen elsewhere, owing without doubt to thevigilance of Colonel Charles, who, on the road,met a wandering ^* cultivateur," and in aninstant ordered the delinquent to retrace hissteps, and to present himself the next morningto explain his vagaries. The cotton trees werepartially picked, and I was told that the wantof labourers was most seriously felt ; so that,even where industry is called forth, the lack ofhands renders it very imperfect.I learned mv black friend's history from MARCHAND. 141self. In consequence of having been one ofChristophe's confidential officers of his owncaste, he did not get employment for a longtime; but now I should think that if zeal, andthe faithful discharge of the duty entrusted tohim, can ensure the confidence of his government,he must always be on active service.The only remnants of the meditated grandeurof the new city, are a large rambling low house,called the palace, and six hill-forts that riseabruptly to the north. Dessalines, as well asToussaint and Christophe, appears to haveentertained strange notions on the subject ofdefence. Thus, in the selection of this mountainrange as well as the '* Platoons," he incurredan enormous expense in the erectionof a line of fortifications, which could only serveas places of retreat, being so situate as to beutterly unfit for defending permanently any onepart except their immediate site, besides beingliable to be turned in almost every direction.Our party slept at the palace, and early nextmorning we were on our way to Gonaives, by aroad close to the base of the mountains, whichwe had seen from a distance the two precedingdays. We were soon out of the commune ofPetite Riviere, as we knew by the increase ofunderwood, and the decrease of apparent curtisNOTES ON HAITI.nation. We arrived in the course of the forenoonat Gonaives. I should mention that thecolonel and a captain, who commanded theparty at Marchand, escorted us out of theirbounds.In the course of my communications with thevarious black chiefs whom I saw within thosethree days, 1 elicited a great deal of informationrespecting Toussaint, Dessalines, and Christophe,and it was given with a degree of franknessfor which I confess I was scarcely prepared.Toussaint certainly possesses the attachmentof these people ; — he is represented ashaving been stern and unbending, but j must, andintimately acquainted with the best interests ofhis country, as well as with the habits of hiscountrymen. The opposite party represent himas full of craft, duplicity, and cruelty, — nay, theyeven deny him talent. Among other barbarousacts ascribed by the French writers to Toussaint,is this : — on the arrival of the Frencharmy, he is said to have removed all his treasureto the mountains of Cahos, and there buriedit ; after which he murdered the whole ofthe people employed. I enquired particularlyas to this statement of the black officers, whothen served with him, and they deny the existenceand burying of any treasure, equally with'*^.INSURRECTION IN 1820. 143the murder. Dessalines, from the concurrenttestimony of all, was brave, but a monster whospared ^^ no man in his wrath, or woman in hislust." Christophe on the other hand seems,in spite of many admitted atrocities, which areduly recorded by the republican party, to haveacquired an immense ascendency over the mindsof his own people. The time of his death wasrepeatedly described to me as *Me tens denotre malheur."The insurrection, which terminated in hissuicide in 1820, commenced at St. Mark, in aregiment, two officers of which he had disgracedand degraded. They murdered in thestreets a black general, Jean Claud, who hadbeen directed to quell the mutiny ; and thespirit of disaffection having extended, by themachinations of the republicans, to the armysent to crush the insurgents, the business wassoon brought to a close.To rest our horses, we determined not tostart for the Cape before the morning of the22nd, which we did at an early hour, havingour party augmented by some of the officers ofthe garrison, some strangers then visiting Go-natives,and some individuals going to the Cape.I must not omit to mention that Gonaives isI144 Note ON HAITKcelebrated among the gourmands of the republic— and they form no contemptible portionof the population — for its fat capons and luscioustrusses, with both of which it supplies the capital.That my report of the gourmanderie maynot seem exaggerated, I may mention what wastold as a fact to me : — an eminent Haitian lawyer,well known for his aldermanic propensities,received as a professional fee, on one occasion,six thousand dollars. He pleaded hiscause, and, I believe, gained it; but he neverdreamed of returning home until he had literallydevoured his fee !POTEAU. 145CHAPTER VI.Leaving G natives — Poteau — L'Escalier — Plaisance — CampLecoq— Madame Babier—Liml)6— Approach to Cape Haitian— Functionaries — City of the Cape— Society — Fossette —School — Executioner — Christophe — Brutal conduct— licentiousness—Character — Noyades — Sans Souci — La Ferriere —Suicide of Christophe — Murder of his son — Le Ramier —Mr. Lathe.On the morning of the 22nd, at an earlyhour, we left Gonaives, and, after having travelledabout three hours, we reached a placecalled Poteau, which boasts of a shed in whichthe travel 1-er may get coffee, and rest for a shorttime. We did both, and escaped a very heavyfall of rain, which came down in torrents.There are a few straggling houses in this hamlet,all sufficiently miserable, except one thatbelongs to one of the surviving mistresses ofDessalines, who had nearly as many concubinesas Solomon himself. From Poteau there aretwo roads to Cape Haitian, or, as it is commonlycalled, the Cape, I suppose in contradistinctionVOL. I. GU6NOTES ON HAITI.to Cape Nicolas Mole ; one by Ennery, theother by Plaisance, over a steep mountain, andcalled from its steepness L'Escalier. Our roadlay over a very wild, uncultivated country, graduallyrising to the foot of the steepest part,where there are the ruins of an old coffee plantation,and a very pleasant stream. There wehalted, to put our horses in wind before undertakingthe ascent.The " Escalier '' is remarkably steep and inmany places overhanging precipices, which,though not so formidable as those of the " Corral" in Madeira, are quite sufficient to rendercaution necessary, especially in those who,like myself, cannot look from a great elevationwithout becoming giddy. The entire road ispaved, and was constructed by a black colonelnamed Thomas Durocher : he is a native ofone of our colonies, and is there called anEnglishman. The work is very creditable tothe planner, and it has been well executed.Perhaps a part of the ascent might have beenavoided by adding to the distance, as it struckme that though the greatest eminences hadbeen avoided, to run over the summits of thelesser ones was deemed, as in the Highlands,the shortest cut.On reaching the highest point, the view thatl'eSCALIER PLAISANCE, 147bursts on the eye is remarkably extensive andimposing, reaching as far as the sea, whichseemed in the distance, from the reflected raysof the sun, to be a bright line ; the interveningspace being an infinite variety of hill anddale, covered with luxuriant vegetation, inwhich there appeared not the slightest traceof the hand of man. Whatever habitationsmight exist are lost in the profusion of trees,until the traveller is close upon them. Afterthe descent begins to the north, the road ceasesto be good, and part of the way it degeneratesinto a mere bridle-path. I had been toldthat carriages had travelled over '^ I'Escaher,'*but that I seriously doubt ; at all events Ishould certainly not chuse to be an inside oreven an outside passenger in such an experiment.In the midst of the mountains we found Plaisance,a sweetly situated spot, though almostalways enveloped in mist on account of itselevation. It is a straggling village, consistingof a few small wooden houses ; in one of which,belonging to another ^' chere amie" of Dessalines,we sought refuge, and found that, inanticipation of ample remuneration, our hostess(having been apprised of our incursion) hadmade preparations, which, after a fatiguing148 NOTES ON HAITI,ride, were very acceptable. Some of our partyreturned to Gonaives, and the remainder proceededon our route to the Cape. The roadwinds very prettily over the declining hills ;,where I first saw the wild pine-apple; andlong after night-fall we arrived at a smallhut called " Camp Lecoq," the proprietor ofwhich, a negro man who has two wives, inducesthe youngest and most active to makeprovision for wayfaring persons '* for a consideration."Our fare was very acceptable,,though rather later than we wished, and servedin vessels that might have been recorded byHai Baba himself; but these incidents affordedone of my fellow travellers, who possessesthe Creole dialect in great perfection,an opportunity of exercising Madame Babies'spatience by incessant attacks on her want ofsystem and order. At one time she got fairlyangry, but finding wrath quite unavailing, sheresumed a more pacific one, and finally becameperfectly amiable. On this occasion, aswell as in all my intercourse with even thelowest of the Haitian peasantry, I was struckby the air of perfect independence with whichthey conduct themselves. Madame Babiesgibed, gibbered, scolded, or joked, as freely asif she had been a guest ; and when she hadMADAME B A BIER. 149put our supper on the table, quietly took aseat by us — not at table it is true, but quiteclose to it ; nor did she, in doing so, seem tothink that there was the slightest irregularity.The cottage consists of a small sitting-roomand two bed-rooms. The cooking was, I believe,carried on either in an out-shed or inthe open air. The beds were clean, and uponthe whole the dwelling was the most reputablepeasant's cottage I had seen in any partof the republic. The merchants of the Capehave the credit of having held out inducementsto the owner to have a resting placeat a very convenient distance between theCape and Plaisance ; for although the distancefrom Gonaives to the former of theseplaces may be traversed in one day, yet itis better to divide the journey, which cannow be done with tolerable comfort,I had requested a gentleman at the Capeto purchase a cabriolet, and to send it tomeet me at Gonaives ; but not finding a vehicleof that description, he had purchased anEnglish chariot and four horses, which Ifound awaiting me at " Camp Lecoq" — anapparatus which could not be used on theroad with any degree of comfort.Early on the 23rd we were afoot, and afterNOTES ON HAIT]some obstructions to the progress of the carriagefrom the state of the roads, especially where aford occurred, we got fairly into motion, and hada delightfully cool ride, until we reached Limbe,a village which owes its chief note to havinggiven a title to Romain under Christophe.We went on horseback until the road becamesomewhat better, about four leagues from theCape, which was scarcely to be seen, althoughthe bay called ^^ I'Acul'' lay beneathto the left. Previous to getting into thecarriage, we stopped for half-an-hour at asmall hut consisting of two rooms, with noother furniture than a stool or two. The inmateswere a young woman, and a grinningblack infant tumbling about the floor, andan elderly black man, who was plastering thewattling, of which the walls were composed,with a mixture of mud and ashes ; and I wassurprised to see him use his hand, althoughhe had a trowel. On inquiring why he didso, he answered for the sake of convenience.Although the house was in the midst of fencedground, there was no cultivation, and as Icould discover no trace of food of any kind,I inquired how the people lived, but couldobtain no information. Thinking that Ihad failed to make myself intelligible I gotENTRANCE INTO CAPE Hadrian. 151my companion to pursue the inquiry, but hewas equally unsuccessful, and I was neverable to ascertain how the people existed. Itis true that their necessaries of life are thesimplest imaginable ; but some exertion is requiredto obtain even these : and here wasa woman lounging away the day with herchild, without any exertion to acquire theslightest means of satisfying hunger — nor couldI find that her husband was more profitablyemployed.As the road improved, the progress of thecarnage increased, and we soon passed the*^ Haut du Cap," some very neat houses ofstone standing off the road, and entered thecity of Cape Haitian, once the capital of the'' Queen of the Antilles."I was conducted to lodgings which had beenprovided for me by an English resident at theCape, and found my brother, who had sailedround in the Harlequin, and had arrived beforeus, in possession of the premises, which Ioccupied until the 15th of April, with the exceptionof the time passed in little excursions,of which I shall give some short notices.My first business was to wait upon the authorities,to whom I had letters from the government,and I was received with the most marked152 NOTES ON HAITI,kindness by General Leo, Colonel Backer, andothers. General Many, the commandant ofthe arrondissement, was absent on account ofhis health, which had for a long time been declining.Some time after my arrival, I saw thegeneral, who had played a very conspicuouspart during the progress of the various revolutions.He had been one of Christophe's favouritegenerals, and had been created Duke dePlaisance ; but he had embraced the republicancause, and ranged under the banners of Petion.He was a negro, and certainly one of the quietestand best mannered I ever saw. His demeanourwas remarkably contrasted with that ofmost of his compatriots. He had served inToussaint's guard, which he commanded at thememorable defence of Crete a Pierrot. He diedlately, much lamented, as he possessed greatinfluence with his own caste, which he is representedalways to have exercised for the benefitof the whole community.The city has had a variety of designations —Cato Santo, Cap Francis, Cap Republican,Cap Henri, and now Cap Hasten. The Spaniardsstill give it the aboriginal name Guarico.It is built at the base of a mountain, that screensit from the north and the west, called Mornedu Cap; on one of the summits there is theHARBOUR OF THE CAPE. 153signal-post (vigil), which announces the approachof any vessel, distinguishing the nationand the class. The harbour or road lies to theeast and south, and is protected by a tongue ofland that runs out from the plain of the north.At the bottom of the bay thus formed, is thesmall town of Petite Anse. The entrance isdifficult, but the anchorage good. The city islarge, the streets spacious and well paved, andthe houses chiefly built of stone, with handsomesquares, large markets, and a copioussupply of water from fountains.The defences to the sea are respectable, andhad been much attended to by Toussaint, Dessalines,and Christophe. The arsenal was builtin the reign of Louis XV., whose initialsappear over the gate and windows. The churchwas handsome, but is now in ruins ; so are thetheatre, the college of the Jesuits, the govern-penthouse,and two convents of very considerableextent. The quays are good, and afford apleasant promenade, when the sun has declinedso far as to be intercepted by the adjacent mountain.The palace of Christophe is kept up forthe president, but his stables are unfinished.Upon the whole, the city is remarkably beautiful,and must have been, during its glory, the mostagreeable residence in the Western Archipelago :154 NOTES ON HAITI.but now little more is to be seen than the tracesof former grandeur : even in the Place d'Armes,the handsomest square in it, some of the finesthouses are unroofed, and plantain trees aregrowing in the midst of the ruins. I was particularlystruck by the strange effect of this,in the midst of an inhabited town.Those who wish to see a very full descriptionof its former prosperity, will do well to consultthe formidable book of Moreau St. Mery, whodetails even the names of alleys with a minutenessthat cannot interest the great body ofreaders.The Cape has been singularly unfortunate infires, having been seriously injured seven timesbefore the revolution by the flames, and twice(if not oftener) it has been since nearly laid inruins ; so that the whole of the existing desolationis not to be attributed to its present masters.It was the seat of government, as well as ,according to circumstances, underthe French ; and continued to be so underToussaint and Christophe. At present it holdsonly a secondary rank ; though in politicalimportance and extent of trade it is little inferiorto the capital.The inhabitants consist of the same classesas those of other towns in Haiti ; but, as far asINHABITANTS OUTLETS.I could perceive, the natives are more accessibleto strangers, better informed, and blendingmore cordially among themselves. Such, atleast, is the appearance to a visitor. Amongthe better classes there is little entertainmentgiven, owing, no doubt, to the causes of depressionthat affect all parts of. the republic. Butthe negroes dance with much zeal every Sundaywithin the walls. What they do in this way inother places and at other seasons I cannot describe.On the road toLimbe, and on the heights overthe town, in different directions there are severalpretty country-houses, in which the refreshinginfluence of the sea-breeze is felt fromseven o'clock every morning. In the formerdirection there are two handsome residences ofstone, one of which belongs to an English merchant,and the other was vacant. In the timeof Christophe this was a sort of club-house forforeigners, beyond which they were not allowedto go without passports.At the entrance of the town there is a publicwalk planted with rows of trees, called ^* LaFossette," at one corner of which is the smallburying-ground to which Toussaint is said tohave looked with much anxiety, as the destinedasylum of Le Clerc's army. At another spot156 NOTES ON HAITI.is a small theatre, which Christophe caused tobe erected in some incredibly short time bysome German artificers, to prove how promptlyhis wishes could be realized.Trade is carried on as elsewhere in the republic; but there appeared to me more activityand a greater variety of shops than in Port-prince.Colonel Backer, who had served in theFrench fleet at the battle of Trafalgar, is theadministrator of the finance department, andwas obliging enough to take me through theseveral branches of his office, all of which presenta clearness of movement which it wouldbe well to imitate elsewhere. He also conductedme to the large military hospital, thebarracks, and national school, now taught bya young mulatto, M. Papillon, who had beeneducated by Mr. Gulhfer, in the school establishedby Christophe. An examination ofthe pupils in French, English, grammar, andarithmetic, took place in my presence, and theeager anxiety of all the boys (between thirtyand forty) showed that the teacher had succeededin establishing the best ground of success— a spirit of emulation. One little mulattoboy was particularly acute, to the apparentdiscomfiture of a little black fellow, whose zealchristopher's executioner. 157far exceeded his ability. Upon the whole,however, talent appeared pretty equal amongthe castes.There was a newspaper, which died a naturaldeath, and there is still a printing-press.Among the other things to which a stranger'sattention is called, is a savage ruffian-likeblack man, (named Gat tie,) who labours as aporter. He walks about bare-footed, dressedin a linen shirt and trowsers, with a large beard,and his eyes fixed on the ground. This fellowwas Christophe's chief executioner, of whom itis told that, when directed to perform the dutiesof his office, he invariably waited on the relativesof his victim and demanded a fee, inproportion to which he inflicted more or less tortureon the unhappy sufferer. He had attainedfrom practice such an unenviable dexterity indecapitation, that for a proper remunerationhe could vvdth his sabre remove the head at onestroke, and by the instant prostration of thetrunk avoid staining the collar with blood. Atleast such is the tale told, when, shuddering athis ill-omened countenance, he is pointed outbythose who remember him il all his gloryand iniquity. I repeatedly saw him, but alwaysalone. Yet I was told that he earned a decentlivelihood as a porter among the foreigners. It158 NOTES ON HAITI.is a matter of surprise that he should still livein the scene of his atrocities, in the midst ofnumberless individuals, v^^ho have been by hishand bereft of some of their nearest and mostvalued ties. It speaks well for the people.Besides this odious vestige of Christophe,there are others of a more agreeable kind, inindividuals who had been educated at his institutions.I found education among the blacksmuch more general than I had previously seen ;and remarked with surprise that all who hadcompleted their studies before 1820, or verysoon after, spoke a little English. The individualwho made the sketches which are engravedin these volumes, is a native Haitian,who owed all his instruction to the institutionsof the king.The recent death of Henry Christophe, andthe existence of many of his chief officers, affordedme an opportunity of making manyresearches into his personal character, and thehistory of his reign, which was confirmed bysome intelligent foreigners ; and as I am notaware of any very faithful record of either, Ishall note such matters as may be interesting.I had hoped to have seen Dupuy and Provost,his principal officers, but the one died before,and the other very shortly after, my arrival ;HISTORY OF CHRlSTOPHt. l59this loss, however, was in a great measure obviatedby my having had access to the personalassociates of both, and to the confidential correspondencebetween Sans Souci and the Capefor many years, and from them some curiousmaterials have been obtained.Henry Christophe was born, according to an'official account sanctioned by himself, in theisland of Grenada, in the year 1769, andcame at an early age to St. Domingo. He wasnot a pure black, but a sambo or griffe, as it iscalled. He was the slave of a French gentleman,whose daughter resided there when I wasat the Cape, to whom the former domestic waskind and attentive in his prosperity. He afterwardsbecame a waiter at an hotel, then priva-steersman,and then returned to an hotel andgaming-house. It does not appear when heentered the army ; but in 1801 he was generalof brigade and governor of the Cape. He distinguishedhimself on the arrival of the Frenchexpedition, first in his negotiations with LeClerc, and second, by filling his house, richlyfurnished, with combustibles, and setting fire toit,as a signal for the conflagration of the wholecity. Before Toussaint submitted, Christophehad yielded to French ascendancy, and servedfor some time, but afterwards joined the bands160 NOTES ON HAITI.that were roused to revolt by the unsparingatrocities of Rochambeau, whose memory hasan unenviable celebrity in every part of Haiti.On the expulsion of the relics of that corps in1803, Christophe was one of the officers thatsigned the act of independence ; and althoughhe served under Dessalines, he is reported tohave entered into a confederacy which led tothe assassination of the Emperor Jacques I. atPont Rouge. That, however, is resolutely deniedby his partisans.The death of Dessalines was the signal forintrigue ; and Christophe, having failed in obtainingthe wished-for ascendancy over thewhole, retired to the Cape in the beginning of1807, and was proclaimed president and generalissimoof Haiti. On the 28th of March,1811, he was elected king, under the title ofHenry I. The act called ^' La loi constitutionallydu Conseil d'etat, qui tablet la royaumea Haiti," completely established the feudallaw.With the succession of public events it isnot my intention now to meddle ; but ratherto confine myself to such anecdotes as are characteristicof the man.During his presidency, and the early part ofhis reign, he was mild, forbearing, and humane •GOOD HUMOUR OF KING HENRY. 161but afterwards his nature seemed to have beencompletely changed, and he indulged in whateverhis uncontrolled passions suggested — andthey suggested almost every act that can violatethe charities of life ; and as he proceeded inhis career, he became suspicious and wantonlycruel.He was destitute of even the elements ofeducation, and scrawled a signature mechanically'without knowing a single letter. Hehowever understood English as well as French,and possessed a rare memory as well as acuteness.Yet he never would speak the formerwhen engaged in discussions with the British,by which means he had leisure to consider thetopic which his interpreter was translating,and had at the same time an opportunity ofdetermining the fidelity of that officer. A ludicrousstory is told of an American captain, whohad been brought before him for some violationof law, and who, indignant at the rating hereceived, and ignorant of his Majesty's accomplishments,muttered to himself a Wsh that hehad the sable king at Charleston. Henryquietly asked him, ^' How much do you think Ishould fetch ? " The offender was dismissed,See note (A) hit Appendix.162 NOTES ON HAITI.nor do I believe that any further notice wastaken of his irreverent remark.All his acts were not equally marked by thekingly virtue of mercy, his want of whichbegan to be felt after he assumed the monarchy ;for although he had all the semblance of aconstitution, he was practically a thoroughdespot, dictating to the puppets, who appearedto those at a distance to act independently.On his return from his last unsuccessfulattempt on Port-au-Prince in 1812, some busymeddler told him, that the women of colour hadgone to the cathedral to implore Heaven toprevent his return. This was sufficient ; bandsof sanguinary ruffians proceeded from house tohouse of those destined for slaughters in thedead of the night, and massacred, withoutremorse, an immense number of these haplessbeings. Indeed it is reported that, on an orderfor the indiscriminate murder of all the peopleof colour, even the sanctities of domestic lifewere violated ; and I have sat at the sametable with a black general, who I believe tohave put to death, with his own hands, hiscoloured wife and children, in order to satiateThere can be no doubt of this, from the testimony ofeye-witnesses now at Cape Haitian !BRUTAL CONDUCT OF KING HENRY. 163his master's thirst for blood. But even that didnot secure him from outrage, for in a fit ofpassion, he did him the favour to knock outone of his eyes.He also assassinated some German officers,who had been allured by his promises to erectfortifications, under some vague pretence oftreason ; but the real motive was to prevent theexposure of his defencesWhatever may have been the motives of hisearly career, those of his latter life, if we canjudge from his conduct, were to obtain uncontrolledpower, and the most perfect indulgenceof all his inclinations, however improper andlicentious. I was told by a person who witnessedthe transaction, that having detected oneof his servants at Sans Souci stealing a verysmall quantity of salt fish, he ordered him tobe laid down in his presence, in the kitchen,and the man was literally scourged to death,and all entreaty sternly rejected. His majestythen went to breakfast with as much composureas if he had been performing a very ordinaryact.I had in my possession a copy of thesentence of a court on a man who had beenSee Appendix (B.)164 NOTES ON HAITI.convicted of robbery, with the mandate ofthe king to carry it into effect within twenty-fourhours. This gentle punishment was toscourge the convict to death with rods.An English resident, named Davidson, fellunder his suspicion as a spy : he was arrested,confined, and was even tortured. At the instanceof all the foreigners he was released, butcompelled to quit the country at considerableloss. A part of the correspondence betweenChristophe and Dupuy, which will also befound in a notes will give the best history ofa transaction which has rarely been equalledin the annals of cruelty and duplicity.His indulgences are described to have beenof the most abandoned description. He addictedhimself to brandy, which added fuelto his naturally ungovernable passions; andthough, to gratify his European friends, heinsisted on marriage, and set the example inhis own person, yet he habitually broke itsties ; and the palace acquired a title to a verydegrading designation. It is recorded thatthe ladies attended there in regular rotationto abide the will of their despotic chief; andnot one solitary Lucretia has been immortalized.t See Note (D.)LICENTIOUSNESS OF KING HENRY. 165Among his other deeds, he was devoted to afemale of colour, the wife of one of his officers,who, even when I saw her, justified her pretensionsto beauty and grace. In order tohave undisturbed possession of the lady, hevoted the husband mad, and consigned himfor a long time to a mad-house. Sated, however,with the charms he had so ardentlycoveted, he discovered that their possessorwas an improper character, and, above all,that she had " une mauvaise langue*' He thenordered her to go in procession to the '^ Maisondes Fous, with drums and trumpets sounding''to take out her husband, and to restore himto his connubial rights;* and thrush theseviolations of decency were public, yet no onedared to report them in Europe, such beingthe vigilance of his police, and such hisdreaded severity.His archbishops (two) were privately takenoff; and so was Medina, the French agent.In short, the dagger and the cord were unsparinglyused, and occasionally the poisonedchalice took off an unsuspecting victim, whomit would have been imprudent to have sacri-seeNote (E.)166 NOTES ON HAITI.fixed more openly. But though I consider itmore than probable that such statements arecorrect, yet as they may have been exaggerated,I do not relate them with the sameconfidence that I have felt in such details asare supported by documents.In the midst of all this brutality, Christophewas intent on exalting the condition of hiskingdom ; although his personal gratificationswere probably the mainsprings of hisaction. He was the principal dealer in thecountry ; and some English merchants, whohad had extensive transactions with him, havedescribed him to me as singularly well informedon all matters connected with thisbranch of his business. To promote the civilizationof his subjects, he assembled men oftalent, even from Europe, established schools,built fortifications, disciplined his army,formed courts for the administration of justice,encouraged commerce and agriculture, andundoubtedly promoted activity and enterprise.But the monarch was sullied with remorselesscruelty. As an ignorant untaught man, he maybeconsidered one of those phenomena that occasionallyexcite attention, but leave scarcelyany beneficial trace behind. He seems toCHARACTER OF KING HENRY. 167have possessed a rare degree of native acuteness,activity, intrepidity, and the art of commandingthe respect of those around him.These qualities, however, united with hisabsolute ignorance, were disadvantageous, as,while they made him thoroughly master ofone view of a subject, he was blind to everyother; and thus knowing nothing of thealmost imperceptible degrees by which alonecivilization can be rendered permanent, heattempted to carry his object by storm, andsucceeded, until bodily infirmity convinced hisbarbarians that he was mortal. With all hisstrength of mind, he could not resist thetemptation of encouraging a belief that hewas protected by a tutelary demon, whowould have instantly avenged any insultoffered to him. It is also said that he hadgreat faith in Obeah. With all his atrocitieshe was an affectionate father, and endeavouredto place his children above himself in mentalculture.Towards the close of his reign his crueltybecame dreadful. He buffeted his generals —beat the governor of the Cape, Richard, witha huge stick whenever he displeased him — degradedgenerals to the rank of private soldiers —168 NOTES ON HAITI.sent his ministers to labour on the fortifications; * and, above all, kept his soldiers inarrear of their pay from extraordinary avarice.A fit of apoplexy gave confidence to the dissatisfied,and revolt broke out, and terminated,as is well known, in the destruction of the monarchy.On the shore of Petite Anse, immediatelybelow high-water mark, the remains of coffinsare exposed to the view of the passenger. Oninquiry, I was told that they contained thebodies of the Haitians who underwent the'^ Noyade" under Le Clerc and Rochambeau ;that there was a vessel, with an open bottom,into which were consigned the unfortunatewretches who were doomed to death, thatsailed every night with the land breeze, andreturned the following day with the sea breeze,having disposed of her cargo ; that, with thetide, the bodies that escaped the voracity ofthe sharks were cast on shore ; and it was apart of the duty of the Haitian soldiers tocollect and inter the bodies of their friends.The statement may be true, but I suspect thatin such a climate twenty-four years would notSee Appendix (F.)SANS SOUCI CITADEL. 169leave even the miserable vestiges of coffins thatwere visible. I rather suspect that some oldburying-gromid has been exposed.The President Boyer narrowly escaped thisfate, through the intercession of the Frenchgeneral Boy, who is, I have understood, nowin Egypt ; and similar tales are rumoured inevery part of Haiti, with circumstances of aggravation,that it is unnecessary, without fullevidence, to repeat. I am, however, inclined togive credit to the atrocity, though I doubt itsconnexion of the fact on which the statementI received was founded. The French have leftthere, as well as in Germany, Spain, and Portugal,fearful records ; yet whenever they againappear, a veil of oblivion is readily thrownover the past.30th March. — As a matter not to be omitted,I formed a party to visit the ruins of Sans Souci,or Millet, the former residence of Christophe,in the time of his greatest splendour, and the'^ Citadelle Henri," or '^ La Ferriere," which isonly three leagues from the palace ; and, as apermission from the authorities at the Cape isnecessary for so doing, I applied to the commandantGeneral Leo, in the absence of GeneralMany, and he very readily granted it, direct-vol.I. H170 NOTES ON HAITI.ing, at the same time, one of his aides-de-camp,Captain Emile, to accompany us.Sans Souci is on the southern confines of theplain of the north, and the district of Limonade,which gave the title of duke to Christopherforeign secretary General Prevost. We travelledover a tolerably good road, through theruins of sugar plantations, of one of which theplate gives a very accurate representation.We stopped at the village of Millet, at asmall house, where strangers are able to procurerefreshment, and having breakfasted, we paidour respects to Colonel Belair, the commandant,a black officer, who had been on guard at thepalace at the time of Christophe's suicide. Healso accompanied us to visit the remains of aplace in which, I believe, for a time, more unlimiteddespotism had been exercised than hasever prevailed in any country aspiring to Christianityand civilization. It is a large clumsybuilding on the side of a mountain, resemblinga huge cotton factory. The accompanying viewis tolerably correct. We ascended through thegateway up a spacious flight of steps, whichare pretty well expressed in the engraving,and then passed through a series of ampleapartments, all now dismantled, but the usesof which were well remembered by our con-palaceINSURRECTION OF 1820. 171doctor. Some were destined for the receptionof treasure, some were private, others publicapartments ; others were occupied by the militaryand civil functionaries. The floors, whichhad been of mahogany, had all been torn up.I visited with particular interest the bed-chamberof Christophe, in which he had terminatedhis life ; and as I heard most of the details atthe time of this visit, I shall give them in thisplace, although some particulars may appearthat have been gleaned at other periods.When the royal army, which had been sentunder the Prince de Limbe to repress the insurrectionat St. Mark's, had declared in favourof the revolution, some dissatisfied chiefs, amongwhom were the Governor of the capital andGenerals Nord and Profit, excited the garrisonto revolt against Henry, who at that time waslabouring under a partial paralysis. On thenews reaching Sans Souci, he, with accustomedenergy, by the use of stimulants, enabled himselfto mount his horse, for the purpose ofplacing himself at the head of his householdtroops, who still appeared to remain faithful.But disease had made Loo extensive inroads tobe resisted, and he was compelled to abandonhis intentions. This was a complete deathblowto his power. His presence alone would172 NOTES ON HAITI.have been a host. Resistance, however, vrainecessary, and he confided the command to hisfriend and relation, Prince Joachim, retainingonly the few guards required for duty at thepalace.The little army consisted of the elite of Haiti,but had been a little mutinous, in consequenceof their pay having fallen into arrear, owing toa foolish niggardliness that latterly influencedtheir chief. In order to restore a proper toneof feeling, the arrears were paid and a donationgiven, and they commenced their workwith probably the same integrity of purposethat prompted Ney to pledge himself to-bringhis former master in a cage of iron. On arrivingat a well-known place called ^^ Haut du Cap,"they found the insurgents in position. A parleyhaving failed, Joachim ordered his troopsto fire ; but, instead of doing so, they joinedthe ranks of their opponents, and commenceda fire on their late general, and some few individualswho retained their fidelity. Flight wastheir only resource, and I have the detailsfrom one of Christophe's secretaries, whoshared in the disgraces 'of the day, and couldsing of his ^^ pamela non bene recta." Hewas the first to reach Sans Souci, and to communicatethem. He found Christophe, whoDEATH OF KING HENRY. 173had been calmly discussing with his medicaladviser (the late Dr. Stewart, a Scotch physician,who had been long his confidential attendant)the most vulnerable parts of the humanframe. The disastrous intelligence wasprivately given to him, and he then communicatedit to his family, whom he desired to leavehim alone, that he might meditate on the bestcourse to be adopted in the emergency. Soperfectly calm did he appear that no apprehensionwas excited of his purpose. One of hisattendants, on hearing him lock his bed-chamberdoor, looked through the key-hole to ascertainwhat was going on, and he saw the kingapparently adjusting himself in an arm-chair,and immediately discharging one pistol throughhis head and another through his heart, he fellback dead before any alarm could be given.This happened about ten o'clock, on the nightof the 20th of October, 1820, and terminatedthe life of a remarkable man, whose careerexhibits extraordinary changes, singularly opposedtraits of character, and proves how muchmay be effected by uncultivated talent, whileit marks the insecurity of trusting a barbarianmind with excessive power.The rapid approach of the insurgent troops174 MOTES ON HAITI.rendered it necessary to remove his body, lestit should be exposed to the brutal insults of aruffian soldiery ; and the performance of this actwas the last proof that could be afforded of thedevotion of Dupuy and Prevost, who personallyassisted in conveying his remains to the CitadelleHenri, where it was hastily interred.The family of the deceased king, consistingof his widow, two daughters, and his son, proceededto the Cape, and placed themselvesunder the protection of some of the revolutionaryleaders. They were all treated, at first,with respect, and the females were placed insafety. The Prince Royal, and his brother theDuke de Mole, a natural son of Henry, andPrince Joachim, were eventually lodged in aprison, where, in the dead of night, they werebasely murdered by the governor of the Cape,Richard Duke of Marmalade, (who was afterwardsshot for treason at Port-au-Prince,) atthe moment that General Nord was intercedingfor the youthful prince.The view from the palace towards the sea isexceedingly fine, stretching over the plain ofthe north to the city of the Cape. Behindthere is a terraced garden, filled with fruit-treesof different kinds, and admirably sup-nationalCLERGY. 175plied with water, in which the females ofChristophe's family are said to have spent muchtime.In the court there is a fine star apple-tree,with seats around its trunk, under which,in good weather, Christophe held his levees;and in the coach-houses we found the royalcarriages wholly unfit for use. Indeed hisdeath seems to have been the signal for destruction,for even the guard-houses, and thehouses in the village for his nobility, are quitedismantled. The only building that has thesemblance of being kept up is the church, theroof of which is a cupola. Abbe Lesson officiatesthere, and presides over a college thathad been just set on foot, for the formation ofa national clergy. How this is to be donewithout the concurrence of the pope, I do notknow, unless the suggestion of a very influentialman in Haiti to me be adopted, of^^ framing a religion suitable to the character ofthe people'* In such a case, the president ofthe new university may be no bad Mahomet:for it is confidently asserted that he is a lieutenantin the French navy, and that his priesthoodis quite imaginary.After this" visit we ascended, by a ruggedand steep road, about one league and a half, to176 NOTES ON HAITI.a small coffee plantation occupied by Mr.Barouche, a partner in an English house at theCape. There we breakfasted, and rested duringthe heat of the day ; and in the afternooncommenced our journey to La Ferriere, or theCitadel. We ascended nearly a league and 'ahalf over a narrow paved road, at times overhangingconsiderable precipices, and at lastarrived at this monument of barbaric power. Itis situated at the extremity of a mountain rangeof considerable elevation, which runs nearlynorth and south, and is a huge ungainly pile, rivalling,in my imagination, the tower of Babel,both in point of utility and extent. As far as Icould see, it has three tiers of guns on everyside, and there is infinite accommodation for alarge garrison, and it is said for three years' provisions,with a profusion of water. The wallsare prodigiously thick ; but on one side the useof the plummet must have been sadly neglected,as they literally bulge out. Within the wallsthere is a palace, and complete plans of securityfor the royal household, as well as for thereception of treasure. We also saw the marbletomb of Prince Noel, the queen's brother, whowas killed by the lightning that destroyed aportion of the fortress, and scattered aboutsome of the hoarded dollars. But I cannotPREJUDICES OP THE OFFICERS. 177pretend to give anything like a description ofthe buildings ; for there was evidently a vastsuspicion on the part of Belair and the otherblack officers, trained in the school of Christophe,v^ho never admitted any foreignerswithin the sacred precincts. He laid hold ofmy hand under the pretext of guiding, but itwas evident that his object was to prevent anyaccurate examination ; and from being hurriedfrom point to point, my observations becameconfused. Several circumstances occurred whichconfirmed my belief. In order to ascertain theheight, I had with me one of Carey's very excellentportable barometers, which I requestedpermission to use, having fully explained theobject, which could be in no way injurious toany one ; but it was refused, and the aide-de-campwith us, although he felt the folly, wasobliged to acquiesce. I had a similar refusalwhen I wished to take the bearings of the Capewith an azimuth compass ; and I have littledoubt that some magical influence was ascribedby the old barbarians, to the instruments.Notwithstanding all this folly, I was stronglyaffected by the deep feeling displayed by these .old men, whenever their former chief or hisinstitutions were the subject of conversation.They never mentioned his name, but emphasisNOTES ON HAITI.call called him '* homme," or *' le roi." Ishall not soon forget the manner in whichmy conductor grasped my hand, when we hadreached the chamber in which the remains ofChristophe repose, nor the manner in whichhe pointed out the spot where his uncoffinedremains have their last resting-place. Amongother anecdotes that are treasured respectinghim, one of them mentioned that after the intermentit was discovered that his right handwas extended above the surface, as if in defianceof his enemies.Over the grave some planks are placedacross the transverse beams, which have neverbeen boarded, under which two of our partyrather indiscreetly went, and were pursuedwith extraordinary alacrity by one of theofficers and two of his men. I apprehendthat some violation of the grave was feared,for some angry Creole discussion took place,and at last the ire was assuaged.In return for the privation of all opportunityof accurate observation, many wondrous taleswere recounted ; such as that the king wishedto try the range of a gun, and seeing a fishermancarrying a basket at the ^^ Haut du Cap,"at least nine miles off" in a straight line, hefired at and cut the man in two. On anotherANECDOTES OF HENRY. 179^occasion, to show that the guns commandeda certain part of the road, he ordered a shotto be fired at a horseman just at the angle,which was done, and both man and horse werekilled. Such feats seemed to be recountedwith satisfaction, as evidence of the power ofthe sovereign. I was also shown a place inwhich a refractory officer, " Count deanery,"had been tortured to death, by being fixedin a situation in which water was incessantlydripping on his head.This huge pile is said to contain three hundredpieces of artillery, and the constructionof it (which occupied many years) must havecost almost inconceivable labour. The materialsfor building, and the artillery, were alldragged by human hands; for which, in additionto the troops employed, there wereregular levies of the peasantry. In lookingback at the precipices to be surmounted, Ican easily believe that it cost the labour ofan entire regiment a whole day to drag upa single thirty-two pounder. Neither age norsex was exempt from this duty, and the royalofficers were unsparing in their exaction oflabour. I saw a young woman at Gonaives,whose back was deeply wheeled by a cow-skinapplied to it by the general in comma ndy when180 KOTES ON HAITI.employed in carrying stones on her head. Themortality was very great, and it is said that theseverity of this service was one of the principalcauses of the revolution. No doubt othercruelties and oppressions had their share.I cannot suppose that the citadel was everintended to be any thing else than a stronghold,into which, in case of rebellion or invasionthe chief might have retired ; and I believethat such would have been the case, had hebeen in the enjoyment of his original vigourboth of mind and body. All his disposablemoney was there hoarded, and it is said thatat one time no less than thirty millions ofdollars were collected. At the revolution it iscalculated that about six millions found theirway into the republican treasury. There arevarious surmises as to the remainder.At a short distance from the citadel standsa small palace called " Le Ramier," also builtby Christophe, to which he occasionally retired.We did not visit it.The mist becoming very dense, and the coldsevere, we descended ; and, as is usual inHaiti, a few dollars were given to the colonelfor the men, and he very quietly divided thembetween the officers and men.An instance occurred of the *^ jactance " ofOCCURRENCES AT THE CITADEL. 181these people, when Captain Elliot of theHarlequin, who had accompanied me, unconsciousof error, looked at some forbidden object.He was warned, and when, to assurethem that he had no sinister design, he said,n'ayez pas peur'* the old gentlemen clappedtheir hands upon their swords, and utteredinconceivable nonsense, which was not terminatedfor some minutes. The division of themoney had a most soothing influence, andrestored the most perfect harmony; so thatat the castle gate we shook hands with infinitecordiality.On the way back to Mr. Barouche's, wherewe were to spend the night, I observed someclearing for coffee, which here as well in theother parts that I had seen, is the favourite ;but, generally speaking, the old coffee-treesin bearing were over-run with weeds. Inshort it seemed that, if they produced coffee,it was gathered ; if they were unfruitful, noeffort was made to render them otherwise.182 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER VII.Visit to Dondon and Grand Riviere — Abbe de la Have—Reported cave — Idols — CofFee-trees in bloom— Col. Mon-cards— General Kayer La Riviere — History — AdventuresHabitation Gallifet — Return to the Cape — Quartiers Morinand Limonade — Breda — Duplat — Brossard — Actual condition— Departure for Spanish part — Intermediate — FortLiberty — General Lacroix — Butchery by Jean Francois —M. Mehu — Account of Christophe's system of agriculture —Departure for Ouanaminthe — Account of it — Laxavon —Vega Real — Grazing farm — Jacouba — Escalante — L'HopitalMao — Sleeping in the woods — River Yaqui — Arrival atSt. ago.On the morning of the 31st, two of ourparty retraced their steps to the Cape, whileI and two others pursued our way round thebase of the mountain range on which the citadelis placed, to Dondon, so celebrated as " LaVendee'' of St. Domingo, in which the royalists,at the outset of the revolution, made theirlast struggle to uphold the rights of LouisXVI. The road is bad, but the valley ofVisit to dondon. 183Dondon is splendidly beautiful ; and as themorning was mild, my enjoyment was, I maysay, almost intense. The village is a miserableone, with small signs of cultivation aroundit, and is more remarkable for what it has beenthan what it is. At the early period of therevolution, the Abbe de la Have was theparish priest, and distinguished himself bothas a naturalist and as an earnest advocate ofthe slave population. He was probably constrainedto become almoner to Jean Francois,and on being taken by the opposite party, wasdoomed to death, but escaped by the lenityof the commissioners. He thenceforward remainedin Haiti ; but on the return of theFrench in 1802, he was suspected of a bearingto his countrymen by his pupils, and murderedby them.After I had no means of examination, Iheard of a cave * said to have been formed bythe aboriginal inhabitants, on the walls ofwhich there are some rude sculptures. I regretmuch having missed the opportunity ofseeing them, as I should have been glad tohave ascertained the resemblance, if any, tothree uncouth idols which were found in thatSee Appendix, Note (0.)184 Notes ON HAITI.neighbourhood, and given to me by an Englishgentleman at the Cape. They. are now in theBritish Museum, where they were placed bythe Earl of Aberdeen, to whom, as the Presidentof the Society of Antiquaries, I had takenthe liberty of sending them. After quittingDondon, the surface became more varied, andwe passed through some beautiful mountain-scenery,which was literally covered with wildcoffee-trees in full bloom, that were really wastingtheir fragrance in the desert air, there notbeing a solitary trace of cultivation. The descentfrom Dondon to the arrondissement of " GrandeRiviere" is through a difficult mountain-gorgecalled ^' Grandchild," in which Hardy's division,during the last French invasion, wasnearly annihilated by a small body of Haitians.On approaching Grand Riviere, the road wasevidently better ; on the confines of the districtwe encountered Colonel Moncardy, (theci-devant grand carver of King Henry,) whohad been sent out by the general commandingto receive and welcome me. He appeared a respectable,quiet man ; and although he was amulatto, and bore testimony to the barbarity ofChristophe, I thought he felt some regret at thedestruction of royalty. At a little distance wemet the General Kayer La Riviere in person, at-generalKAYEK LA RIVIERE. 185tended by his staff, and the indispensable accompanimentsof trumpets and horns, whichwere duly exercised.As La Riviere was one of the most remarkablemen I met in the republic, and as I have nothingto say of him that can cause him pain,I have no hesitation in giving a short sketch ofhim, as derived chiefly from himself, and oneof his most confidential friends.His father was a Frenchman, and he himselfwas, I think, originally a hair-dresser. At thetime of the revolution he became a soldier, andafter the destruction of the coloured party byToussaint, he went to France, from which he returnedwith Le Clerc, as an officer on the staffof General Hardy. On the expulsion of theremnant of the army, he remained faithful, andaccompanied Rochambeau. Along with otherofficers of his caste he was sent to Corsica, ofwhich he spoke with unfeigned bitterness. Assoon as escape was practicable, he effected iton board an English privateer, on board ofwhich he remained three months, and at lastarrived in London without money or friends.From this state of destitution he was relieved byMessrs. Stanford and Blunt, and the accountof the old man of his pockets being picked ofhis newly-acquired treasure was quite graphic.186 NOTES ON HAITI.By the good offices of the same gentlemen hemade his way to Port-au-Prince, where he wasreceived with open arms by Petion, into whoseservice he entered, and was appointed to thecommand of the President's body-guard.Soon after his arrival, he found that a blackofficer in the service of Christophe, and in theactual command of a frontier post, who hadbeen reared by his mother, and to whose carehe had entrusted his two sisters on quitting thecountry, had treacherously murdered both forthe sake of their property. He solicited thePresident's leave to take a small body of mento attack his enemy : this was refused on accountof the risk. Nothing daunted, Kayerselected from his regiment some men on whomhe could depend, and by marching throughthe woods, subsisting on parched corn, he atlast reached his destination, at no great distancefrom the Gape. He put the sentry to death —went boldly to the door of the commandant,announcing himself as the bearer of despatchesfrom Henry — demanded admission, which wasgranted. Having placed his companions toguard the door, he presented himself to theastounded commandant, and, after upbraidinghim with his ingratitude and treachery, plungeda dagger to his heart. I believe he finished byGENERAL Layer LA RIVIERE. 187setting fire to the house. Pursuit speedily commenced,but his knowledge of the countrysaved him and his associates, and they returnedin safety to Port-au-Prince, where thehardihood of the deed secured the pardon ofthe military disobedience.On the death of Christophe he was namedthe commandant of ''La Grand Riviere," atthat time in a very disturbed state. He hadscarcely assumed the command before a mutinytook place among the soldiery. Two ofthe ringleaders were shot, and all was quiet.Horse-stealing too had thriven unmolested : LaRiviere detected two offenders, '' flagrantedelicto," and they were shot : horse-stealingceased. But he recounted with peculiar glee anadventure with a black artillery-man, who consideredthe corps to which he belonged exemptfrom ordinary labour. A bridge was to bebuilt, and every man found on the road wasimpressed to finish this necessary work ; amongothers, the artillery-man was seized. He refusedto handle brick and mortar ; — he was ledbefore the general, to whom he declared that hewould prefer having his head between his feet,to submitting to such degradation. Kayer calledout a file of men, ordered them to load, andto take their muskets to the bridge, where, if188 NOTES ON HAITI.he retained his predilections, he was to be instantlyshot, and his head cut off and placedbetween his feet. A little reflection produceda change of resolution, and he was ready towork. I smiled at this narration, and La Rivierethinking that I considered him jesting,looked grave, and seriously assured me, onhis honour, that he should have done what hepromised. Nor do I doubt that he would.The old general, in spite of his severity, isjust to the poor people around, and I was pleasedto hear the market-people (for it was markedly)addressing him as " papa," and allseemed content. The market was crowded withdealers in produce, and with the huckstersfrom the Cape, who prefer dealing with thepeople of Grande Riviere on account of theirgreater wealth and honesty. When ridingabout, I saw some old iron sugar-pans on theroad, which were used for the manufacture ofthe small quantity of indigo consumed in thedistrict, which was the only trace I saw of amanufacture once of primary importance.We rode up to ^^ L'L'Habitation GaUifet," onwhich the negro insurrection began. The oldavenue is still preserved, and the dwellinghouse of stone is the only residence of an oldproprietor that I saw in Haiti in a habitablePLANTATION GALLIFET. 189condition : even the old back pavement, andclumps of orange trees remain. The site ispretty, on a gently rising eminence that overlooksthe village.After partaking of the hospitality of the general,and of his escort on the way to the Cape,we parted from him, sincerely grateful for hisattention, and gratified by the unequivocal delightwith which he recurred to the kindnessof unknown Englishmen to him. I should havementioned that Gallifet, in common with numerousother properties, belongs to the President,On our way to the Cape, we passed as usualthrough the ruins of another period, and foundthe roads very tolerable, though not of a first-ratedescription.On the 1st of April the Harlequin left theCape, and I was obliged to part from my brother,whose health was too bad for him to attemptto pursue the journey I contemplated;and from that time to the 15th of the samemonth, I was employed in inquiries as to thepoints on which information was required fromme. In the course of these researches, I visiteddifferent points of the " Quartiers Morinand Limonade'' which were formerly the mostbeautiful districts in the north, and even now190 NOTES ON HAITI.retain evidence of their former splendour. Inalmost every direction ruined buildings areto be seen, and fields formerly covered withcanes, are now over-run with wild Guavatrees.I visited Breda, to which Toussaint had beena slave, and from which he took his first name,Toussaint Breda, and I found that althoughcultivation is not wholly abandoned, the buildingsare one heap of ruins.In the ** Quartier Morin" is the estate Du-plat,which also belongs to the President.It formerly belonged to Christophe, and thenyielded about four hundred thousand weight ofsugar. At present it does not yield fifty thousandpounds, which, for some cause or other,I was told, were unsaleable. I saw about adozen negroes at work ; but there was decidedlymore chatter than labour. The overseer or '^ ge-ranactually complained to me of starvation.There were about one hundred flour barrels ofsugar in store, which could not be sold.But as my instructions had particularly directedmy attention to the estate Brossard, Itook considerable pains to acquire some exactknowledge ; and by the assistance of Mr.Thompson, the British vice-consul at the Cape,I obtained the substance of my report to thePLANTATION BROSSARD. 191government, which has been printed by theorder of the House of Commons ; and as thatdocument is not in every one's hand, I ventureto transcribe it.*' As might be inferred from the name, thisestate formerly belonged to M. Brossard, aFrench colonist, whose daughter married M.Beaumont, another Frenchman. This personbecame the partner of the black general Richard,afterwards Duke de Marmalade ; and, upon thedeath of the former, the whole was vested inthe survivor.In Christophe's reign, Richard, who wasa marshal of Haiti, and governor of the Cape,collected about one hundred labourers, whowere attached to the soil. The produce eras, itis said, from three mitred thousand to fourhundred thousand French pounds of sugar ;but no statements could be furnished of any oneyear. The average may be distrusted, on accountof its vagueness and its excessive amount,as compared with the number of labourers.After Christophe's death in 1820, the generalrelaxation (which I was assured by a nativeofficer of rank to have been perfect in threemonths) affected Brossard in common withallother properties; so that by 1822, when192 NOTES ON HAITI.Richard was executed for a conspiracy againstthe republic, it was entirely abandoned. In1824 Madame Richard, to whom the successiondevolved, let it to Colonel Neri, who had nottime to renew the cultivation before he wasordered to the city of Santo Domingo with his regiment.On his return in 1825, he found thecultivation entirely neglected ; and about elevenmonths ago (April 1827), two years after hisreturn, he had succeeded in collecting elevenpersons as labourers, and intended to plant apiece of canes. The rent paid at present Icould not learn ; from which I infer that it is,as I know it to be elsewhere, merely nominal."Rep. p. 90. 91.The general result of my inquiries was, thatsome few of the properties which were inactivityin Christophe's time, were kept up formaking syrup, which was mainly converted intotafia. The actual quantities I could not thenascertain, though I did so at a subsequentperiod.I may here remark, that although I frequentlyasked for sugar, the produce of thecountry, I saw none except that of Duplat. Yetit is asserted that large quantities are shippedleastways to Jeremie, Cayes, and other places.DEPARTURE FROM THE CAPE. 193I suspect the truth to be, that sugar raised athome costs more than the smuggler, with hisnumerous tricks, can import it for.In a preceding part of my Notes I have givenall that I actually collected, without referenceto time and place, with respect to the Cape,its revolutions, and its most distinguishedrulers. Nothing, therefore, remains for me todobut to pursue the narrative of my journey.Having ascertained that there was a carriageroad as far as St. lago, and being willing toavoid the sun as much as possible, as wellas to give security to my books and papers, Ipurchased a small cabriolet drawn by threehorses ; and to have a fair trial of it beforematching it with riding-horses and baggage-mules,I left the city at seven o'clock, andcrossed the ferry at Petite-Anse. Near Du-plat,my carriage and three horses stuck inthe slough, and my driver was obliged toengage five dancing negroes from Duplat,already mentioned, to extricate us. This theydid, and then carried my companion andmyself on their shoulders across the impracticablepassage. Owing to this detention, wedid not reach Duclaireau, a sugar-farm, untileleven at night ; when, by reiterated noises,VOL. 1. I194 NOTES ON HAITI.we roused an old woman and a cock-eyedfellow out of bed. They furnished a light, bywhich we devoured a roast-fowl which I hadprovided, and swallowed some claret, which Ihad also secured ; so that, in spite of thesequarters, and a vile bed, I slept like a top.On the 16th we proceeded to L'lnteraiediaire,ci-devant Henry, formerly one of Christophe'scountry-seats and sugar estates, over an indifferentroad and through an uncultivatedcountry. Intermediate now belongs to thestate, though I suspect it does not contributevery largely to its exigencies.The house is large, but most unkingly inappearance, being rather that of a barrack thanapalace. It is ill-arranged, with abundance ofspace for attendants. There was a larger quantityof canes in cultivation than I had elsewhereremarked, and the mill and works werein very good order. I could learn nothing ofthe produce. After some parley with an oldblack lady, I succeeded in inducing her to producea fowl and some plantains, and by thetime that they were ready the baggage cameup ; so that after a short rest for the animals,we were on our way to Fort Liberte, formerlyFort Dauphin, and Fort Republican, and in stillmore ancient times, Bayaha, which we reachedARRIVAL AT FORT Liberty. 195after dark, having passed several abandonedproperties ; the country being, as usual, coveredwith bayahond, logwood, and wild guava trees.I immediately made my way to the commandant,the black General Lacroix, to whom Ihanded my passport, and a letter from thegovernment. He received me with the warmesthospitality; but the aid of the secretary wasessential for decyphering the hieroglyphics Ihad brought. The secretary was an intelligentyoung black, who had been educated at Christophe'snational school, under Tulliver. It cannotbe offensive, even to the general and hiswife, for me to say they were in every waythe most extraordinary couple I ever saw. Toadd more would be an ill return for the frankhospitality with which I was received by both.In the evening Colonel Poux, the commandantof the twenty-eighth regiment, waited uponme, and I mention his doing so to record thefeats of his brother (General Poux, now dead).This officer was esteemed for his gallantry byChristophe ; but in one of his reckless fits ofcruelty, he despatched a band of assassins toput him to death. The general gallantly resisted,and after repelling the assailants, wentdirectly to the king, and upbraided him withhis treachery. This manly confidence affectedNOTES ON IIAIT]even his savage nature, and Poux lived everafter in security.I also saw a black colonel, whose son is atsome school in England, an evidence of theeffect of Christophe's attempt to make Englandhis model, for completing which he was graduallyintroducing our language. *Fort Liberte is in a very ruinous state, towhich the fact of its being a closed port contributesvery essentially ; but it must have beena pretty small town, with an admirable harbourwell protected by fortifications. The entranceis narrow, but the water deep within the bay,where a large fleet of men-of-war might ridewith perfect security. The general endeavouredto revive the industry both of the town andneighbourhood, and for failure the usual reasons," faute des bras et des capital," wereinvariably assigned.Close to the town there is a pottery forcoarse jars and red tiles, which belonged toGeneral Picard, formerly Christophe's grandchamberlain, who reports that he never felt hishead safe on his shoulders until his morning'saudience was over. I could not learn that thereis much going on in the manufacture.In the year 1794 this town was occupied bythe Spaniards, who invited by proclamation theMASSACRE AT FORT Liberty. 197fugitive proprietors to return. Most of them didso. Scarcely had they arrived, when the insurgentchief, Jean Francis, encamped in thesuburbs with his hordes. The following day heentered at their head — the garrison turned out—high-mass was performed — and on a signalgiven, the whole of the soldiery divided intoparties to perpetrate a massacre, which, Lacroixsays, had been arranged by the Spanish priestVasques with the revolutionary leaders. Athousand victims of every age and sex perished,and only fourteen escaped in SpanishunifoiTus. I ascertained that the murders didtake place, though I had no means of tracingthe treachery attributed to the Spaniard. Appearancesare certainly in favour of Lacroix'sstatement ; for had there been no guilty knowledge,the Spanish troops would not have spontaneouslystained themselves with the blood ofthe helpless and confiding French colonists.It was my wish to have visited Monte Christii,had the roads not been represented as mostwretched. This city was, during the Spanishrule, one of some importance, though now it isa closed port. It was founded in 1533, butwas abandoned by the orders of the court in1606, in consequence of smuggling; but afterwardsbecame one of the ports through which198 NOTES ON HAITI.there was communication with the interior ; andits proximity to the French colony rendered itavery flourishing place. Now I understand ithas fallen into entire decay. It stands on theright bank of the Yaqui, which takes its risenearly in the middle of the Spanish portion ofthe island, on a point of the Cibao rangecalled *^ Pica de Yaqui ;'' and after a long andtortuous course, empties itself in the bay ofMonte Christii. La Grange, a well-known landmark,lies to the north of the town, forming theextremity of a high tongue of land. I was alsodesirous of ascertaining if the road from thattown to St. lago was as good as I heard ; butthese objects of curiosity were not worth gratifyingat the loss of time that would have beenrequired, especially as I believe it to be very generallyadmitted that the population is scanty,with very little cultivation.On the morning of the 17th I despatchedthe baggage for Ouanaminthe, or Juan mended,as the Spaniards call it ; and as the distanceis short, we did not leave Fort Libertemitil a quarter past three in the afternoon.The General, Colonel Poux, and Captain Abel,of the gendarmerie, accompanied us. About aleague from the town the old general dismounted.I did so likewise ; we parted withPARTING FROM GENERAL Croix. 199many benedictions from him, and prayers thatthe prosperity of the country might be restoredby Great Britain. I said all the civil thingswhich his attention and hospitality fully merited,and we parted the best friends imaginable.Mr. Hood would have made a good sketch,with illustrative notes, of the retreat of the veteranchieftain. The road was shaded by splendidtrees, and the ride was very agreeable,through several large sugar plantations, whichhad been worked to considerable advantage byChristophe, who appropriated no small numberof them to himself. As usual, no specific detailscould be obtained, beyond the assertionthat now they yield little or nothing. Thecountry appears fertile, covered with bayahond;Poux and Abel accompanied us to Ouanaminthe,a wretched village, consisting of a few thatchedhuts, and a sorrel apology for a chapel, whichwas lighted up in honour of some festival. Theold church had been destroyed in the revolution,and a sort of fort was erected on thesite of the parsonage-house. Wretched, however,as every thing promised to be, we wereaccommodated by the juge de paix and thecommandant, with whom we dined. In thecourse of the evening, while the gastronomicpreparations were going on, we visited the ruins200 NOTES ON HAITI.of the church and fort, where in 1791 M.Gravi and about sixty unfortunate whites weresurprised and butchered by the ferocious bandsof Jean Francois. The scene, as described tomeby an eye-witness, was dreadful. Ourcicerone, a black captain in the national guard,was the most uncommunicative person I evermet. In spite of exerting all my ingenuity toget some account of the carnage in which he hadassisted, his replies were restricted to ^* Oui,oui:" whether shame or not influenced him,I cannot determine. I was more fortunate withM. Mehu, the juge de paix, a very intelligentman, who had been one of Christophe's secretaries.From him I got the most ample detailsof the system of cultivation under that chief,which shall be given in his own words elsewhere.18th. At an early hour we left Ouanaminthefor Laxavon, when Mr. Thompson (now theBritish vice-consul at the Cape), who had gonethus far, returned to his post. At this last-namedplace we crossed the river Massacre, theancient boundary of the two colonies, whichempties itself into the bay of Mandeville. Onthe left bank of the river the remains of Lax-avonor Daxabon stood. This was a placeformerly of some importance, from being theCOMMANDANT OF VEGA REAL. 201Spanish frontier ; but from the unproductivenessof the soil, it was never much resorted to.This point may be said to be the commencementof the immense plain called " La VegaReal," which stretches to the bay of Samana,bounded by the mountain ranges of MonteChristii and Cibao. It is the largest plain in theisland, and is traversed in different directionsby three large rivers, the Great Yaqui, theLuna, and the Camou, besides several tributarystreams. The Yaqui is said to be navigableat a short distance from its embouchure ;but its rapidity, and the accumulation of largerocks, together with its variable depths, dependingon the dry or wet season, render itimpracticable further up the stream.We entered that part of the ^' Vega Real,"which, from its want of population, is very appropriatelycalled ^^ El Despoiled." We didnot meet a single individual before we arrived,after travelling four leagues, at a small hut offthe road, in the neighbourhood of which weresome small signs of cultivation. It was thehouse of a grazing establishment of an opulentresident at the Cape, who courteously receivedus, and furnished milk, cheese, fresh butter,and grass. Every thing else was on a sumptermule. In conversation with the proprietor,202 NOTES ON HAITI.I had every thing confirmed of the want of population.The only inhabitants that I saw, besidesthe owner, were two negroes and one ne-^dress. The shelter afforded by a few treesaround the hut was very agreeable, and weprofited by it until the sun had begun to decline.On going, I considered it quite ** enr^gle " to offer the usual douceur to our host ;but he indignantly refused it, observing, ^* Habitne fait pas le Moine." I pacified him byobserving, that it was intended for the servant :'^ Ah, c'est une autre affaire," and the servantwas not equally fastidious. I cannot say thatthe indignation was feigned, and that any divisionof the money took place ; if it was, myfriend was a practised actor.Our route for the remainder of the day wasequally monotonous: no passengers, the roadleading through uncultivated savannas, boundedby some trees, and the chain of Monte Christiito the left. After travelling several leagues,we were fortunate enough to find shelter in asmall hut close to the banks of the Jacouba,occupied by one of the herdsmen, a white manand a native, who was civil and ignorant. Hislack of utensils of all kinds was deplorable,which I felt ; for hitherto I had travelled withmerely eatables, trusting to find some vesselJacob — ESCALANTE. 203for cooking; or washing. Neither was to befound at the hut Jacouba. A twine hammockto swing in, and a few seats fashioned out ofthe trunk of the cabbage-tree, constituted allthe furniture, which the poor fellow readilyplaced at my disposal, without the unmeaningphrase of *^ a la disposition de used." Finding,on inquiry, that the distance from St. lagowas much greater than I expected from thestatements made before leaving Port-au-Prince,I was anxious to push on ; but it was necessaryto divide the road according to resting placeson the way: so we took our quarters for thenight. On the 19th we travelled over adistrict, closely resembling that over which wehad passed the preceding day; only that wecrossed several streams, tributary to the Yaqui,which were very low, on account of the dryseason. Our journey, of many a wearyingleague, brought us to similar accommodationat *^ Escalante," which is the name of a smallsavanna surrounded with wood. The founderof this establishment, as well as those of others,I remarked had been careful to build veryclose to a river ; the only precaution thatappeared to have been ever deemed necessary.The 20th brought us, without any thingremarkable, to L'Hopital, which had beenX204 NOTES ON HAITI.represented as the end of the first day'sjourney from Ouanaminthe. On the morningof the 21st, after crossing a small stream,the Mao, we reached a cottage of the samename with the river, decidedly of a betterdescription than any thing I had seen withinthe Spanish frontier. It was built of boardsof the cabbage-tree, and thatched withits leaves. It contained three rooms — hadtables; and the chairs, or rather the seats,were cut out of portions of the trunks of thesame palm, with backs of the outer part,making very light and comfortable seats. Theowner was a European Spaniard, (a Catalan,)named Manuel Rodriquez, a shoemaker byprofession. He was married to a colouredwoman, and had two grown-up daughters.The unmarried one, his mother-in-law, one ofhis grandchildren, and a little nephew, with ablack labourer, completed the household.Besides the main house, there was an outerbuilding behind for the labourer. My hostand his family were among the most intelligentpeople of their rank I had seen in Haiti. Ashis profession did not give him sufficientemployment, he cultivated a little coffee, somecotton, sugar-canes, which he ground with asmall mill worked by two horses, and reestablishmentOF Rodriguez. 205tables. He manufactured sugar, syrup, andtafia; from the sale of the surplus of whichhe added to his limited comforts. There wasaltogether an air of intelligence, comparativeindustry, and cheerfulness, that was highlygratifying; and although Rodriquez assuredme that he had many compeers, I never hadthe good fortune to meet one of them. Allthe party were clean and well clothed. Inshort, though poor, they were independent,and possessed all that they could desire in agenial climate and a productive soil.As some of my horses were knocked up, itbecame necessary, as I was anxious to reachSt. lago before night, after which it was vainto think of crossing the rapid and rugged, andconsequently dangerous Yaqui, to hire twohorses. My host went in pursuit of a neighboursome two leagues off, and brought DonFrancisco Nunez, who might have sat for theoriginal of Quintain Mats's miser. His countenancewas no bad index to his habits. Afterinfinite discussion, I was compelled to take histwo brutes to St. lago at sixteen dollars, heengaging to guide us on such a way that weshould end our journey that night. Rodriquezvowed that the charge was out qf all measure ;but there being no alternative, I was obliged to206 NOTES ON HAITI.submit. As soon as the cavalcade was inmotion, I remarked that my host was mountedbare-headed, without a saddle, and guidinghis little courser with a rope noosed over hismouth, for the purpose of directing us across adifficult ford, across the Mina, about half aleague from his house. Off he started, prancingand curvetting, no bad resemblance to aCossack of the Apure. It would have puzzledany brother of the gentle craft in London tohave ridden a race with my friendly guide.We crossed in safety, all except a loaf ofsugar, which was entirely dissolved ; a loss ofno mean magnitude in such a situation. Whenquietly reposing within reach of a hundredgrocers, this would be never thought of; buthere it was a subject of deep regret, and by noone was it more deplored than my two Englishservants. As soon as Rodriquez had seen thewhole party in safety, he left us with manyfriendly greetings ; and on reaching the oppositebank, waved his hands and puzzled, as longas we could hear him, with as much zeal as ifhe had been a veritable Cossack. The stream,though not deeper than the middle of thehorses, was rapid and dangerous.Once over, we were at the mercy of DonFrancisco el avaro ; and after winding throughISLEEPING IN THE WOODS. 207rather a pretty country, which had more varietyof surface than might have been expectedin the midst of an extensive plain, without anysigns of the Yaqui, I began to be uneasy, moreparticularly so, as one of my party had goneoff unattended to St. lago, in order that wemight have some dinner and lodging on arrivingthere, which I expected would have taken placeat a late hour. Don Francisco then for the firsttime announced the impossibility of realising ourexpectations, as the distance was eight insteadof four leagues, according to our first computation.I deemed this a trick, urged on thetarrying animals, but met a traveller who morethan confirmed our ill-omened conductor ; andafter having pressed our steeds to the utmost, wefound ourselves, after night-fall, in the middleof a forest, where the best alternative was to selectan open space where the baggage might bepiled — the mules and horses pocketed, so as tograze — a fire lighted, and our hammocks slung.Then matters were arranged vvdthout difficulty ;but it soon appeared that the expectation ofreaching St. lago that night had led my peopleto acts of wanton waste, for I expected tofind in the panniers enough food for the party,consisting of nine persons : but, lo ! there wasonly a fragment of cheese, a small portion of208 NOTES ON HAITI.bread, and one solitary bottle of putrid Seltzerwater. I made an equitable division of all,and fortunately there was no grumbling. Iregretted most that there was no water for thecattle. All anxious as I was, I do not recollectthat I ever slept more soundly than I did in thismy first buccaneering feat, slung between twotrees in a wild country — a priori, it would bedeemed impossible to do so with impunity underthe influence of tropical dews, venomousmosquito, and pestilential swamps ; but so itwas, that not one of the party suffered inconvenienceat the time, nor could I ever trace thegeneral illness that eventually occurred to thisindividual exposure, but rather to the influenceof continued and unceasing exertion fornearly two months, under circumstances of noordinary suffering and privation ; and I am persuadedthat it is to this reiterated applicationof active causes we owe the mortality that prevailsamong Europeans within the tropics. Oneexposure may be overcome; but the poisonoften recurring, becomes identified with theindividual, and eventually destroys the powersof Use.Having no bath nearer than the Yaqui,which we found to be more at hand than hadbeen anticipated, man and beast hastened toPASSAGE OF THE YAQUI. 209its banks — the former to purify, the latter todrink. These important matters being completed,the animals loaded, and all being readyattempt the passage, I was agreeably surprisedby the apparition of my volunteer incompany with a stranger on the opposite bank,pointing out the least dangerous part of theford, which, though low, was extremely rapid,and encumbered with irregular masses of rock,to navigate among which, above the horses'girths deep, for a space equal to the breadth ofthe Thames at Westminster Bridge, requiredlocal knowledge, without which there wouldhave been imminent danger. All the animals,and even the cabriolet, passed over withoutinjury ; and I confess that I felt no slight satisfactionwhen I saw the last of the train fairlyacross.The gentleman who accompanied my companionwas a European Spaniard, who had beenlong established in the country, and then heldthe office of judge of the civil court. Littleoccurred worthy of remark, or I was too muchfagged to notice any thing, until we approachedthe city of St. lago, the vicinity of which wasmarked by roads that had been good, by somepassengers, a few detached houses, and somecultivated patches. On reaching the town, we210 NOTES ON HAITI.were conducted to the house of a Spanishpriest, which had been prepared for us throughthe considerate kindness of the principal peopleof the place, who had been, without myknowledge, apprised of my coming.ST. lAGO. 211CHAPTER VIII.St. lago— Antiquity — Convents — Destruction of town and in-Solutions — Christopher an active agent— Population — Attachmentof former slaves to their former owners — Sugarfarm — Castes friendly to each other — Cultivation — Increaseof births — Due de Limonade— Cura and Suez de Paz—Journey to Port-au-Plate—Altamira— Landlady — Villanue-va's catechism — Scenery — Hazardous ride — Lacerta — Approachto Port-au-Plate — Guide fantastical and conceited —Arrival at Port-au-Plate— Kind reception — General JacquesSimon — Administrator — Parrot shooting.From the day of arrival (22nd April) to the26th, I was employed in looking about andgetting all the information possible. My friendDon Francisco insisted on my paying sixteendollars for lodging in the open air: I wasobliged to do so. St. lago de los Cavaliers isone of the oldest cities in Haiti, having beenbuilt in 1 504. It stands on an elevation on theright bank of the river Yaqui, which forms adeep reach around it, and the banks of which212 NOTES ON HAITI.are richly wooded. It is quite an open town,though there are one or two short forts for itsprotection, which have been thrown up duringthe civil commotions. The streets are regularand well laid out, traversing each other at rightangles. Many of the houses are of stone, butthe majority are of brick and wood. The conventualbuildings (now in ruins) must havebeen handsome and spacious. One churchalone remains of several. St. lago is consideredone of the most healthy spots in theisland, and I believe not without foundation.The town had been more than once pillaged bythe French during their contests for supremacywith the Spaniards ; but the last and most fatalattack was made by Christophe in 1805. Atthat time Dessalines, then the chief, determinedto make himself master of the Spanishportion, and for that purpose invaded it withtwo corps. The one commanded by himself,entered by the road through San Juan, Aqua,and Bani ; and the second, under the orders ofGeneral Chevaux, took the road which I hadtraversed from the Cape. It is well knownthat the invaders retired from the siege of thecity of San Domingo on the approach of a smallFrench squadron. Dessalines' passions wereroused to the highest pitch by this disgrace, andDESTRUCTION OF ST. lAGO. 213his course, as well as that of his subaltern, maystill be traced amidst ruins and marks of conflagration.Christophe, no unworthy minion ofDessahnes, commanded the rear-guard of Chevaux'scorps, and on his retreat halted onGood-friday, of the year 1805, at St. lago — aday for ever memorable in that devoted place.He commenced with exactions, promising personalprotection ; but the following day heviolated his pledges, set fire to the churchesand convents, among which there was an ecclesiasticalschool for priests, and the best parts ofthe town, deliberately murdered six priests, andcarried off several wretched people as prisoners.His more extensive atrocities were stopped byhis immediate commander.In the Appendix I give some account of thisruthless proceeding, in the words of one of theunhappy sufferers"* who, with all his family,was reduced to the most abject misery.The population, as a body, is more respectablethan usual. The proportion of white andcoloured men is very considerable; and theblacks are a stout fine race of men. There is noone rich person, or, at least, who would be soconsidered elsewhere ; but there are degrees ofSee note (H) in the Appendix.214 NOTES ON HAITI.wealth even there. By the most intelligentpersons to whom I had access, I was informedthat even in the town there are none absolutelypoor; for wages are high, being three rials aday, or one shilling and sixpence, or two rialswith food. All classes have the means ofdecent subsistence.Since the revolution and the establishmentof the republican government, great fidelityhad been displayed by the former slaves totheir masters. They had never been numerous,the discipline never very rigorous, nor hadthe labour exacted been ever severe. One ofthe old proprietors, who, from having no otherresource, remained with his wife and family,informed me that not one of the former slaveson a small sugar property near to the town hadleft him ; that they retained all the old customs,called him still ^^ Amo," and asked his blessingon their knees whenever he visited them. Ihad been told that in other parts of SpanishSt. Domingo, the slaves, who had been equallywell treated with those of St. la go, had, on thefirst proclamation of freedom, abandoned theirmasters to become soldiers, as being a moreluxurious life. My informant appointed a timefor visiting his estate, that I might see what hedescribed; he was, however, attacked with aRELATIONS OF CASTES. 215dangerous fit of gout, and had not recoveredbefore my departure. I was, consequently, disappointed.From this and other statements it would appearthat there is a kindly and good feeling ofall the castes towards each other in this district;and all of them appear to be what theyare represented, highly respectable and well conducted.In proof of this, no insult was offeredto the whites at the period of the revolution.I was not a little amused with the contemptuousmode in which even the blacks speak oftheir western neighbours as ^' quells negros."It did not appear to me that the arrangementswith France were more acceptable thanin other districts ; and I do not think thepeople, if even willing, (which they are not,)can pay any part of the contribution.Tobacco is the principal object of culture:other objects of colonial agriculture are partiallyattended to. Formerly there was a considerabletrade in cattle; but it has been nearly annihilatedby the non-intercourse between Haitiand the neighbouring islands : a grievance thatis very rightly attributed to the change ofgovernors. Under the Spanish rule there wasfree communication: now there is none whatever.A bullock, which formerly sold for thirty216 NOTES ON HAITI.or forty dollars, is sold at St. lago for six oreight.The population of the district forms morethan one-sixth of that of the whole of the east,and was estimated at eleven thousand and fifty-sixsouls, which is augmenting, according tothe information of the " officier de D'etat civil''(who keeps the register of births, deaths, andmarriages,) in a very wonderful degree. Thedeaths average one hundred annually, whilethe births average five hundred ; thus giving,if correct, an annual increase of four hundred,which is, in proportion to the reputed population,3-61 per cent., far exceeding the ratein England and Wales. This rapid increaseis ascribed by the inhabitants to the salubrityof the climate, the facility of maintaining afamily, and to the general practice of one manhaving only one wife, which does not prevailto the same extent on the French side.General Prevost (the Due de Limonade)held the command ; but he became tired of thepost, and was succeeded by General Prophets,one of the chief conspirators against Christophe.He ruled with a rod of iron. Complaints wereat last made, and a commission sent to inquireinto his conduct : the result was his dismissal.He was succeeded by General Belliard, whoCURA, AND Suez DE PAZ. 217had been registrar of the national domainsunder Christophe. From this officer I receivedmuch attention during my stay. I frequentlyrode out with him, and remarked with surprisethe small number of houses that were to beseen. This he explained, by telling me thatthe habit of the country people is to hide theirdwelling in the midst of trees.I was visited on the 24th by the '* Cura"and the ^' Suez de Paz," both respectable men.The former seemed more conversant with passingevents than might have been expected in soretired a nook ; for, among other topics, heintroduced the Thames Tunnel, the existenceof which he at first seemed to consider veryapocryphal ; but, on being assured that such awork had actually been undertaken, he regardedit as the eighth wonder of the world.On the morning of the 26th, accompaniedby one of my party, and General Belliard'ssecretary as our guide, I left St. lago forPort-au-Plate, which, being the only openport in the north of the eastern division, wasworth seeing. The road runs to the northwest,along that portion of the plain of LaVega Real which derives its name from St. lago,to a considerable distance before reaching theformidable mountains that form the range ofVOL. I. K218 NOTES ON HAITI.Monte Christii. The greater portion is weftshaded by immense forest trees, intermingledwith flowering plants on the road-side.After the ascent has once begun, it is exceedinglyrapid ; and the road, from neglect,is in wretched order, and often overhangs someugly precipices, at the base of which mountainstreams dash with a brawling activity. Thebreadth of the path renders it not at all dangerous.After having passed through one continuedmountain forest of mahogany trees, which itseems may be felled by those that list — theabricotier or mamma grande, laden with itslarge rough fruit — the cabbage and cedar trees,besides numberless others — we arrived at asmall hamlet named Altamira, composed ofabout fifty huts, which were built of the samematerials as Rodriquez's cottage at Mao. Thecabbage-tree is truly the prop of the easternHaitian : he eats the upper part of it ; hebuilds and covers his house with its variousparts; and he fashions his furniture out of itstrunk.We stopped, by the direction of our guide,nearly in the middle of the village, at the mostrespectable-looking house in it, which belongsto '^ a widow bewitched," named Gertrude Her-mina,who, while preparing some chocolate andALTAMIRA LANDLADY. 219other refreshments, cross-questioned me very narrowlyas to my name, quality, and objects, whichI answered tc the best of my ability ; and hergratitude was so excited by my communications,which amounted to nothing, that she amusedme with her own history. She had marriedearly, and had six daughters ; one a widow withtwo infants ; the rest unmarried, three beingperfect children. Her husband had been faithless,and, under pretence of business, resideson the sea-shore with another woman, leavingthe poor Senora to her own resources. Theseshe seems to have managed discreetly, by cultivatinga small patch of land, and keeping a sortof shop for spirits, wine, sugar, and other matters,as well a house of call for travellers, whoneed not complain either of her civility or thefare set before them. She had not confinedher care of her children to merely rearing andclothing them : the girls could read, and Ifound one of them busily occupied with Dr.Villeneuve's ^^ Catechism," written chiefly forthe Americas, and published by Mr. Ackerman,in the Strand.The situation of Altamira is truly fine — asmall level surface bounded by vallies of noextent, well cultivated, through which innumerablebrooks dash ; while the whole is bounded220 NOTES ON HAITI.by a succession of receding mountains, studdedwith magnificent trees, so as to form a completeamphitheatre. It is beautiful, and the air ofseclusion is not to be surpassed any where. Icould not help thinking how admirably it wasfitted to be a retreat for any one who wished towithdraw from all terrestrial pursuits : he wouldhave as much leisure for meditation, and a lesshazardous post than that of Simon Stylites. Iam persuaded that in almost every direction,within a small circle of three miles, situationswould be found whither human foot never nowpenetrates.Having reposed from ten till two, the hottestpart of the day, we parted from our kind thoughgarrulous hostess, leaving strict directions tohave meet preparation made for us on the secondday after. We found the road still worsethan it had hitherto been. Recent rains havingrendered the valley road impassable, we wereconstrained to pursue that over the mountains,the acclivities of which are so steep, that I cancompare them to nothing else than the roof of ahouse. This was particularly the case on thelast ascent we were doomed to try, called *' LaPuerta," where, if the rider had attempted tomaintain the usual position on horseback, itcannot be doubted that he would have fallenROAD TO PORT-AU-PLATE. 221backwards. I was obliged to bring my nosenearly to a level with my horse's neck. But ifthe ascent were bad, how much more atrociouswas the descent ? The steepness in each wasthe same ; but there had been most rain on thenorthern side, and the whole road either had,or appeared to have, cross bars of some solidmatter covered with clay, while the intervalswhere filled with the softest mud, rendering thestepping of the horse most insecure. Indeed,one of the party was fairly unhorsed, and hissteed laid on his side ; and it cost no smalleffort to extricate both. I met two bullocks draggingup, on a sort of sledge, one iron sugar-pan ofvery small size. About a league from the townof Port-au-Plate we got into more level ground,and were delighted with the luxuriant appearanceof the plain, bounded by the distant viewof the sea. At a short distance from the roadsidestands the sugar estate of General JacquesSimon, the commandant of the arrondissement,the buildings on which appeared to be wretchedhuts ; but the property is understood to be thebest and most productive in that part of theisland.Further on there are some neat cottages, surroundedwith remarkably well-dressed gardensand fenced fields. On inquiry, I learned that222 NOTES ON HAITI*they were the dwellings of some North Americanemigrants — the few who remained of all thefirst parties who had so eagerly sought the landof liberty and equality.We parted with our guide on entering thetown, he to seek his own quarters, and we togo to the house of the partner of a respectablefirm at Cape Haitian. He was a very amusingfellow in his way, quite such a " bavard " asyou sometimes meet in France, differing onlyin complexion ; he talked ^^ de omni simili,"abounded in lies and grimaces, was ** himselfthe hero of each little tale," and was as ignorantof every thing connected with his countryas if he had just fallen from the clouds. Wheneverhe found himself fairly at fault, and unableto answer any inquiry, with an indescribablyludicrous expression of countenance, and flourishof a huge cane that he carried, he uniformlyexclaimed *^ par bleu ! " ^' sacre bleu !"mon Dieu !" and not another word could beextracted from him on the unmanageable subject.These words were as useful to him as thetwo magical English monosyllables to Figaro.I rarely have met with so inveterate and unreflectinga liar. In the course of a very shorttime he convicted himself of falsehood at leastfive times. Yet the man was civil, and meantPORT-AU-PLATE GEN. SIMON. 223to be useful. The best apology that can bemade for him is that of my old French master,who, whenever he heard any one abused forcowardice, always defended him by saying, " Oh,it is not his fault — it is his infirmity."I found the gentleman to whom I had lettersof introduction absent with another English nerochant in the mahogany district, but we were hospitablyreceived by the wife and mother-in-lawof the former ; but having been actually tenhours and a-half on the road, exclusive of thetime spent at Altamira, I was fevered to sucha degree as to be glad to seek repose in thehouse of the English absentee, where everypreparation had been made by his orders forme.Bed and copious dilution of tea enabledme early on the morning of the 27th to be onthe alert. after looking through the tov^^n^which is a collection of wretched cabbage-treehuts, such as I have already described, I wasvisited by the general and all the authorities,as well as by the Cura, of v/hom some veryclerical reports are in circulation, which wereduly related to me by his undutiful flock.General Jacques Simon was one of Christophe'sold generals, and on the appointmentof General Belliard to the command of thecitadel, had charge of the domains. He commandedone of the three divisions sent to repel224 NOTES ON HAITllthe rebels at Haut du Cap, all of which, whenordered to fire on the enemy, ran over with criesof "Vive la liberties' Simon accompanied hiscorps, and held his command thenceforward atPort-au-Plate. He is an intelligent little blackman,tolerably educated, exceedingly decent inhis manners, and has the reputation of being abrave soldier. About two months before thetime of which I speak, he had an opportunityof proving that his character for courage was merited.In order to enable the troops to earnsomething beyond their pay, they are allowedto cut mahogany all the week, if they choose ;but they are obliged to do what may be necessaryon the public works on Sunday, Thesegentlemen refused to comply with the latter condition,and would not march off from parade tothe works, on the score of their pay being fivemonths in arrears, which it actually was.Simon, with a brace of loaded pistols, went uptothe leading file, ordered them to face to theright and march : they obeyed. The arms werepiled.In the evening I rode out, and was muchamused with the gasconade of the administrator,who, by his own account, far transcendedin chivalry Amadis de Gaul, or any of KingArthur's knights. One of his feats, not of thesame character, is worthy of record, as a proofADMINISTRATOR — RIDE. 22oof the bluntness of the moral sense in somemen. He had been a regimental paymasterunder Petion. Finding his allowances inadequate,he made false returns of the strength,drew the pay of the men of straw, and pocketedit. This was discovered, and he was sent tobe a purser of one of the vessels of war ! Thishe gravely told as a wondrously clever feat.Other tales, equally creditable, are current ofthis worthy.Our ride added nothing to my knowledge ofthe country, for it only presented the scene, sooften witnessed, of rank vegetation undisturbedby the hand of man, except to trace a road.For the first time I saw a sportsman returninghome, with a dozen or two of parrots hangingfrom his fowling-piece.As our two hosts had returned by the evening,we dined with them, and met all the personswhom we had seen in the morning, one ofwhom complained that, as he was an abstemiousman, Madeira wine was too powerful ;yet, before rising, he contrived to finish a bottleof Hollands.It is said, though with what truth I knownot, that in the neighbourhood there are richmines of" gold, silver, and copper. -The town was formerly flourishing, but was226 NOTES ON HAITI.proscribed for smuggling with Monte Christiiin 1606. Now a small trade is carried on inmahogany and some of the minor productionsof the country.RETURN TO ST. lAGO. 227CHAPTER IX.Return to St. lago — Gold dust— Former abundance — Recentresearches — General Belliard — Recount of Christophe — Hospitalityof inhabitants — National school — Departure — SantoCerro — Chapel — View of La Vega Real — Ancient city ofConcepcion de la Vega — Ruins — River Caniou — La Vega-generalPlacide Lebrun — Lodging — Guitars — Bands playing— Fete agriculture — Colonel Charlemagne — M. Deschamps— Penal — River Luna — Cotuy — Constance — Se-vico— Monte de Don Juan — Sleeping in the woods — SanPedro — La Louisa— Arrival at Santo Domingo.Accompanied by our two hospitable acquaintance,on the morning of the 28th wewere again on the road to St. lago, withouthaving gained any information to compensatefor the actual labour and fatigue. The interveningdry day induced us to try the valleyroad, and we nearly had reason to regret having-doneso, as we were obliged to travel at a footpace,from the depth of mud. We soon, however,oft into the road over which we had228 NOTES ON HAITI.already gone, after having escaped that terrible'' La Puerta;" rested at Altamira, and arrivedlate in the evening at St. lago, having crossed,in the course of the day, at least thirty-threestreams, all of which, except the Yaqui, beingthen very paltry.The two days that I spent at this place weredevoted to complete my stock of local knowledge; and, among other points, I was curiousto learn the causes of the failure of the MiningAssociation. Two phials, that contained at leastthree ounces each, filled with gold dust, in theform called by the Spaniards " pepitas,"^ gatheredby hand from the sands of the Yaqui,were exhibited to me. One of the grains wasas large as the end of my little finger. Therecan thus be no doubt that gold does exist ;though it does not appear that it is in the formof ore. The report at St. lago was, that theagent of the company sought for mines, andfound none. If he did so, without attendingto gold washings, in a district in which it couldnot be questioned that the metal existed, hemust have been deplorably ignorant of what heought to have known before he undertook theduties of his office. If, on the other hand, hedid attend to the washings, how did he conductthe inquiries — by experiment or talking ?Hadrian MINING. 229And why have the world been kept in ignoranceof his proceedings ? The Association interestedexpended a considerable sum of money,and I think they are entitled to a full accountof all that was done. My own conviction is,that with suitable machinery, gold washingsmight be advantageously carried on on thebanks of the Yaqui, Rio Verde, and variousother streams connected with the ancient auriferousdistrict of Cibao. Yet, though this isprobable, it might be a question with soberpeople how far capital could be safely vestedin such a pursuit in a country where the civilinstitutions cannot be said to be firmly fixed.From General Belliard I had much satisfactoryinformation respecting Christophe, whichhe was able to give with more than commonaccuracy, from the confidential situations he hadheld for many years. Among other facts, he mentionedthat Duplat and other properties, whichChristophe had appropriated to himself, usuallyyielded four hundred thousand weight of sugareach. This may be possibly an exaggeratedstatement ; but there is no doubt, from the returnswhich I shall hereafter give, that the producewas very far beyond what it is at present.Christophe never paid for any thing in money —always in produce ; while he exacted gold and230 NOTES ON HAITI.silver for all that he sold. The money thusacquired was hoarded, and accounts for theaccumulated wealth at the Citadel. Besideshis sugar and coffee plantations, he had enormousgrazing establishments, and he monopolizedthe supplies of meat. No butcher couldbuy from any other person, unless when hegranted a license, which he only gave in consequenceof an apprehension of exhausting hisstock of cattle.He was not only a drunkard, but an epicure ;and among other proofs of his Vitellian propensities,he never would eat either the Muscovyor common duck, but reared with uncommoncare a cross-breed of both, which he considereda superior delicacy. Upon the whole,he was described by the general as a savagemonster, blood-thirsty, lustful ; but acute, intelligent,and an accurate observer, and muchtoo violent to dissemble to the same extent asToussaint, whose powers of dissimulation aredescribed by all that knew him, as equal tothose ascribed to Talleyrand.All M. Mehu's account of the agriculturalsystem was fully confirmed by Belliard, whoalso added, that the disorganization of thatsystem, and the establishment of idleness, wasrendered complete by Richard in three monthsTHE NOYADES. solafter Christophe's death. So truly the poetsays, *^ facies est descensus Avernus'The Noyades, which I formerly mentioned ashaving been practised in the French army, were,according to the accounts of the general, whowas an eye-witness, carried to a frightful extent,and were really effected in the manner mentioned.An entire regiment, commanded by GeneralGuerrier, were drowned between the Cape andFort Dauphin, at the time of the evacuation ofthe latter place. Their commander escaped byinsisting on travelling by land. Such was thebelief in French cruelty, that it was asserted tome,though never by an eye-witness, that Ro-flambeau,to train blood-hounds, used to baitthe unhappy negro prisoners in front of thegovernment-house, and those poor wretcheswere literally torn to pieces. For the honourof human nature I trust that this is mere rumor.Heaven knows, the ample store of well-authenticatedatrocities in this devoted islandneeds neither embellishment nor addition.During my stay at St. lago, I was treated withthe utmost hospitality, though somewhat of anovel kind. I was lodged in the priest's house,and was not allowed to purchase a single thingfor my table. Every day my breakfast anddinner were brought by some smirking black232 NOTES ON HAITI.girls, who were the deputies of the commandant,the chief judge, and the '* officier deD'etat civil'' who never came near me at thehours of repast, but insisted most sturdily onmy being their guest-To have refused wouldhave given offence, and I submitted.There is a house building for the president,as is the case at most of the principal towns,though the progress is slow, from the want offunds. It will be a large straggling place,without the least pretension to elegance. Itschief recommendation is its situation, which isvery delightful, overlooking the plain, with theriver rolling rapidly round the foot of the eminenceon which it stands, and is accessible toevery breeze that can blow.The distance from the Cape to St. lago isestimated at forty-one leagues. I think it mustexceed sixty ; and I may mention, as a proofof the neglected cultivation, that from FortLiberte to the last cv>wn, I could never find ablade of Guinea grass for my cattle, but wasdriven to turn them out to graze on the parchedsavannas, with occasional feeds of Indian corn.At St. lago, General Belliard has succeeded inintroducing the cultivation of the Guinea grass,though the prejudices of the people werestrongly opposed to it.SANTO CERRO — CHAPEL. 233There is a national school at St. lago, but noteacher ; the person sent from the capital bythe Education Commission having been utterlyincompetent.Having taken leave of all my friends, beforeday-break on the morning of the 1st of May Ifound myself on the road to the town of LaVega. The scenery was the most pleasing ofany that I passed through since leaving thefrontier, though there was, *^ ut mos est," notrace of cultivation, except a few plantainwalks, at all visible. By the bank of a smallstream, the name of which my guide did notknow, we breakfasted in the shade, and thenproceeded to the Santo Cerro, from whichColumbus first surveyed the magnificent plainof ^^ La Vega Real." He also planted a rudecross, said to have been the first erected in hisnew discovery : the cross has since been removedto the cathedral of San Domingo, thoughthe chapel erected on the spot where it stoodis still kept up, and is still resorted to by piouspilgrims. Immediately before getting to thechapel, we found a small village, in which theguardians of the sacred spot reside. On enteringthe building, nothing remarkable presenteditself, beyond some wretched daubs, representing,or at least affecting to represent, the connotesON HAITItests of the Indians with the Spaniards, inwhich victory was always ensured to the latterby some saintly apparition dealing out fleshlyweapons with infinite zeal and activity. Amongothers, the Virgin Mary seated on a cloud wascoolly levelling an marquess at an Indiancacique, doomed to die. The old woman andher aide-de-camp were exceedingly diffuse intheir wondrous narrations, which I was underthe necessity of curtailing, to avoid being overtakenby nightfall on the road. A small gratuity'^ por los pores" was very thankfullyreceived, and before descending, I gazed withincreasing delight on the splendid scene at ourfeet. Viewed from the Cerro, the La Vega Realstretches so far to the east as to appear to beinterminable — so richly wooded, as to impressthe beholder with the belief that it is clothedwith a never-ending forest. Indeed, I am convincedthat, with very slight changes, the samescene is now displayed that is said to have delightedthe illustrious discoverer, who ever dweltwith fond affection on this first fruit of his adventurousenterprise.The descent is steep and rugged : once ended,the road (which is the direct one between St. lagoand La Vega) is broad and good, well screenedby the trees on the summits of which we hadRUINS OF Conception. 235been recently looking down. In the middle ofan entangled part of the forest, the remains ofthe ancient city of La Concepcion de la Vegalie scattered in awful confusion. The church,mint, and fort may, it is said, be still traced ;I, however, only saw the former, the gothicdoor-way and window distinctly marking it.It was a most flourishing establishment until1564, when it was overwhelmed by an earthquake,which left no building standing, anddestroyed nearly all the. inhabitants. Unlikethe Guatemalians, who rebuilt several times onthe ruins of their overwhelmed city, the LaVegans abandoned their altars for ever, and someof them laid the foundation of the present city,town or village of La Vega.A peasant on the road, who conducted us tothe ruins, was intelligent and civil, and to mysurprise refused a gratuity when offered to him.He must have done so from some principle ofdut)^ for all his phraseology was tinctured withreligion. I marvelled how religious principlescould find a place in such a district.Pursuing our route, we found ourselves onthe banks of the Camou, a deep and rapid,though barren stream. Soon after passing theford, we were at the end of our day's journey,having travelled fifteen leagues. My cabriolet236 NOTES ON HAITI.with all my papers had not, however, appeared ;and as any accident to them would have beenirreparable, as soon as I had paid my complimentsto the commandant. General PlacideLebrun, I occupied myself with despatchingmessengers to assist in case of any mishap, andit was fortunate that this was done, for thedriver and his guide had made up their mindsto pass the night on the road, on account ofsome trifling derangement to the carriage. That,however, being set right, my anxieties wererelieved, so as not to affect the vigour withwhich I applied myself to the discussion of ahasty meal that was provided for me, in amiserable hut, the only one to be had, in whichmy quarters were fixed.The evening being fine, I strolled out, andwas strongly reminded of the peninsula by thetinkling of guitars, and the monotonous chantso familiar to all who have visited Spain. Isaw enough during my stroll to convince me,that if La Vega ever had any glories, they hadvanished, as nothing but a miserable collectionof wooden houses was to be seen.I have hitherto omitted to notice a customwhich is rather irksome to a way-worn traveller.Whenever any stranger of note arrives, to whomit is deemed proper to pay honour, a band alwaysLA VEGA. 237attends, and plays as long as he chooses, expectinga handsome douceur for so doing. I wasobliged to undergo this ceremony at La Vega, asI had been at every principal town thatI had visited. The band of the Cape reallyplayed well, although I have not done honourto it in the place most befitting.The 1st of May is that on which the " feted'agriculture" is celebrated ; yet there wereno signs of exuberant joy, unless the hoistingthe national flag in the middle of the ** Placed'Armes," or the firing of cannon, be so considered.In spite of dirt, fleas, and mosquito, I managedto sleep with infinite perseverance untilthe following morning, when I had intended tohave proceeded on my journey, though thescheme was defeated. I spent the best part ofthe day with the General and the '^ Commandantde la Place," Colonel Charlemagne, one of thefew educated black men I had known personally.The former had been Count de GrosSome under Henry, who is reported not tohave treated him with much delicacy ; yet itwas clear that there was a lingering feeling ofregret for stars, ribbands, and privileges, whichare no longer attainable. Both these officersconfirmed all that I had ever heard from others238 NOTES ON HAITI.of Christophe's depravity and intelligence. Thispersonage had secured as favourable associationswith his name at La Vega as at St. lago,having there committed, in 1805, unheard-ofatrocities. The want of energy and the moralparalysis of the present day was strongly contrasted,by my informants, with the vigour andactivity of the older system.In the evening I made the acquaintance ofan old French medical gentleman named Deschamps,who had been settled there upwards offorty years, and having no means of subsistenceelsewhere, had been forced to remain after theestablishment of the republican government.Poor old man ! cut off from all that a man ofeducation can deem the world, his fate is themost unenviable that can be imagined : he is byno means insensible to its inconvenience, yethe bears it with that practical philosophy whichis so peculiarly familiar to Frenchmen, andwhich seems to have a self-adapting power tocircumstances where they cannot be controuled.He was very intelligent, and had the goodnessto furnish me with an itinerary to San Domingo,which I found eminently useful.Under the escort of the friendly commandant,we quitted La Vega before day-break on themorning of the 3d of May, and after travellingJOURNEY TO Costly. 239thirteen leagues over a wild uncultivated country,only practicable to horsemen, we stopped ata '^ hatto" named Penal, where we had a cut down for our breakfast. There wasa poor miserable deformed boy about fourteenyears of age, who called forth much compassion.Under any circumstances, deformity and helplessdecrepitude are grievous ills ; but in sucha wilderness, where the death of one or two individualsmight leave the unhappy sufferer toperish piecemeal, they are horrible. Such scenesdo not confirm Rochefoucault's maxim, ^^ Hy aquelques choses dans les malheurs des nos amis,que ne nous depart pas ;" but they ought to excitea feeling of deep gratitude to Heaven in allmore fortunately placed. At the close of theday we arrived on the banks of the Luna, afine deep river, which empties itself into the bayof Samana. We travelled on its banks throughovershadowing forests for about three quartersof a league before reaching the ford, which isdeep, and about as wide as the Thames at Vaux-hall.We had some difficulty in stemming theforce of the current with our wearied animals,but at last succeeded in gaining the right bank,whence we proceeded to the miserable village ofCotuy. At the house of the commandant, ColonelSanchez, we were bluntly received ; but in240 NOTES ON HAITI.the course of the evening friendly relationswere established, and we all supped together,of course on the produce of my cook's labours.Here we obtained forage with difficulty, and toget water, even for the drinking, it was necessaryto send to the Luna, which is a fine bodyof water.Cotuy was never a place of much importance,though it was founded very early (in 1505) ;but in its neighbourhood there are said to bemines which were worked so lately as 1747,having been previously abandoned from a dearthof labourers. The latter workings were directedby the father of Valverde, the historian of SantoDomingo. The principal mine, in the mountaincalled Mammon, is of copper, which containseight per cent of gold. Lapis lazuli hasbeen found in the same mine ; and not far distant,it is reported that emeralds have occurred.Iron in a very pure state also abounds in theneighbourhood.Cotuy is also near to the gold mines of Cibao,the highest mountain range in Haiti ; in whichSpanish cupidity is said to have entombedthousands of Indians. Although now whollyunproductive, their reputation of richness isalmost unbounded. Not only are the minesreported to abound in this precious metal, butVALLEY OF CONSTANCE. 241the sand washed down by the mountain streamsIS reported to be charged with it ; and out oftheir produce as much as two hundred and forty-thousandcrowns of gold have been struck offin one year in the mint of Concepcion de laVega. A great quantity, besides what wasbrought to the mint, was supposed to have beensecreted to avoid payment of the king's dues.Rearing herds of cattle forms the chief employmentin this district. Houses too, thoughnot numerous, are more frequently seen on theway-side; and grass, plantain, and other tropicalesculents, with a little tobacco, are cultivated; but I could not learn that more wasraised than was necessary for home use.At a very moderate distance is the mountainvalley of Constance, situate on the Cibao range,where wheat has been raised with perfect success,and which is said to be at times very cold.After quitting Cotuy, (which we did on themorning of the 4th of May,) we found thecharacter of the country changing very considerablyfrom what it had previously been.Instead of the varied surface richly wooded, wenow saw nearly one extensive plain, occasionallyrising into round knolls, with a few scatteredclumps of trees, chiefly the cashew appleand v^dld guava, bearing in gentil characterVOL. I. L242 NOTES ON HAITI,a very close resemblance to the arid plainsof Castile : there is the same parched appearance,the same sandy soil, the same want oftrees. After fording the river Maguaca, weentered upon a large savanna, well called lasavanna grande. To me it seemed interminable.We afterwards crossed another stream, theChaque ; and amid some wood we fell in witha small hut, to which, with some others thatwere not visible, the name of Sevico-blanco isgiven. The door was open, and the embers of thefire were not extinguished ; but there was nosemblance of any living being. At last, by dintof peering into every corner, I spied a negro boyin a plantain walk, who, on being discovered,run off like a wild deer. By starting, and makingevery kind of noise that I could, an old negresssallied forth to ascertain who the intruders were.We soon negotiated a treaty of amity andcommerce, and the boy went in quest of fowlsand eggs, while his grandam (for such the oldlady turned out to be) gathered plantains,renovated the fire, and assisted in our culinaryoperations. She had endeavoured to avoid us,believing us to be a party of marauding soldiers,of whom she had a most holy horror. Therewas produced (very unexpectedly) some foragefor the almost exhausted animals. Sevico isSEVICO-BLANCO SAN PEDRO. 243chiefly remarkable for its desolate appearance,and for the most enormous sand-flies I eversaw, of a black colour, and literally causingthe blood to flow from their bite after they aresatiated. It was vain to slay one colony in thehope of relief, for the vacant ranks were instantlyfilled up. At some distance we crossedthe Majaqual; after which we found ourselvesonce more in a hilly region, displaying all thecharacters that distinguish similar districtsthrough which I had previously travelled —equally beautiful, wild, and uncultivated. Wedid not meet or see a single individual. Afterhaving gained the mountain, called, whereforeI know not, el Monte de Don Juan, thecattle were so completely knocked up, that Iwas compelled to abandon all hope of reachingthe ^^hatto" de San Pedro; and selecting anopen space, where the animals might graze,End where hammocks might be slung, we preparedto bivouack for the night ; and after ascanty supper, we spent the night " sub dio ;"and on the following morning, (the 5th,) as soonas our stray horses could be collected, the partywas on the way to the ^^ Rio Vermes." Afterhaving extricated ourselves from this branch ofthe Don Juan range, the country became champagne,through which we wearily went, until244 NOTES ON HAITI.the long-expected San Pedro appeared on asmall eminence to the right. We readily obtainedadmission ; but not so any provender.First a black boy and then a black man appeared,each ringing the changes, to all entreatiesand supplications, on the two melancholy words*^ no hay." One of the party, however, discovereda store of tasso and plantains. Weinsisted on purchasing — blacker insisted on notselling ; but finding us resolute as well as numerous,and, moreover, really inclined to pay,he consented to stay our appetites. Havingsettled these matters, I was anxious to knowwhy he refused to sell what he had at his disposal,with the certainty of profit, as he mightbe sure a man in my situation would not higglemuch. His answer was characteristic of thecountry. It seems that he procured his provisionsat some distance from his residence,and that he sought them only once a-week.Now, if he sold his weekly stock, he would beobliged to make another journey, which he didnot choose to do, although he had leisure enoughto make it each day in the week. Profoundlyignorant, my host could give no information onany subject ; yet he spoke of his western neighbourswith contempt, as inferior to himself andhis countrymen of the east. He rememberedLA LOUISA BIVOUAC. 245the inroads in the time of Dessalines, butcould give no account of any thing beyondthe fact that the army was " muy barbarous'A fatiguing ride over rather a pretty countrybrought us to the " hatto de la Louisa,"which is off the road, situated in a beautifulknoll embowered with trees, at the foot ofwhich runs rapidly a small stream, tributaryeither to the Isabella or Ozama, the name ofwhich I could not learn. At La Louisa thepeople were wondrous civil in despite of theitch, which affected them all. Under such circumstancesit-^vill not be considered remarkablethat we once more bivouacked. During our supperunder two large mango trees, numeroushalf-starved dogs, allured by the smell, surroundedus so completely, and made such daringincursions, that we were in danger of losingeven our scanty fare. One luckless wight approachedincautiously, and I gave him a kickthat seemed to affect his master's feelings veryseverely ; for angry remonstrance, followed withthreats, compelled me in turn to threaten toexterminate both master and dog if any furthertrespass occurred. This, backed by the appearanceof fire-arms, induced the chiefs to drawoff their disappointed curs, arid leave us inpeace and quiet. We were driven to make our246 NOTES ON HAITI.toilet on the banks of the small river which wehad crossed the preceding evening. At LaLouisa Indian corn was to be bought in sufficientquantity for the wants of the four-footedportion of the party.At two o'clock on the morning of the 6th,the gentleman who had pushed on to St. lagooffered to move in advance to St. Domingo, inorder to secure lodgings and stabling. I followedwith the remainder of the party. Wecrossed the Ozama at two small streams called"Las Lucas," and passed through a countryabounding in lofty trees, though without muchapparent cultivation for ten leagues, when wereached a small posada kept by an emigrantFrench Creole, at an angle of the river Isabella,where, uniting with another stream, it proceedsto its confluence with the Ozama, which formsthe harbour of San Domino. Our host hadescaped during the horrors of the revolution,and had ever since resided near this spot withhis family. After all the privations to whichwe had been subject since leaving St. lago, thislittle inn appeared to be infinitely comfortable :there was shelter from the sun, and abundanceof food for men and animals, and a bustlingactivity very different from our anti-commercialfriend at San Pedro. Being Sunday, there werePOSADA APPROACH TO THE CITY. 247many neighbours and kinsfolk, who readilyconversed, and gave the air of approaching aninhabited district. In truth, for the journey ofthe last few days I question whether we shouldhave felt more thoroughly cut off from theworld if we had been in the midst of the GreatDesert of Africa. One of my mules had becomeso sick, that I was under the necessity oflea vino; him at board and lodo-ino- with theFrenchman, as well as to hire a deputy to carryhis burthen.On leaving ^^ La Isabella" we fell into the*^ Paseo Real," a broad spacious road runningthrough a dense forest, in the breaks of whichpatches of limited cultivation appear. Fourleagues is the distance from the posada to thecity, as it is emphatically called by the inhabitants.My attention was strongly roused by hearing,at an angle of the road, screams of agony! Ipressed on, and found an old black man beating,with a stake that he could scarcely wield, ablack boy apparently about fifteen or sixteen.The poor fellow's woolly head was matted withgore, and the unfeeling old rufSan, after knockinghim down, dragged him by the feet throughthe dust and stones. Whenever the boy escapedfrom his grasp, he threw himself on his248 NOTES ON HAITI.knees, screaming, *' Mata me, padre, mata me !"Each appeal was followed by blows that seemedto show that it was not fruitless. I hastilyrode up, exclaiming against such barbarity, butthe only answer was that he might do what hepleased with his own. Reasoning with such abeast was out of the question ; and when hesitatingwhat to do, lest interference might ensuremore atrocious usage as soon as the fear of mypistols should be withdrawn, three or four stoutcountrymen came out of the wood and tookaway the poor boy, leaving his brutal parent tohimself. Had not the proceeding been interrupted,I have no doubt that the boy would havebeen killed ; and such, I understood afterwards,is the unbounded respect paid by the child tohis parent among these people, that nothingcould have tempted him to have resisted.Almost immediately after this scene, I metthe son and aide-de-camp of the commandant.General Carrie, who had politely sent out acarriage to take me into town. Approachingthe city by the suburb of San Carlos, andpassing through crowds of people in ^' theirSunday's best," we entered over a draw-bridge,and took up our quarters at a sort of inn orlodging-room at the extreme end of the principalstreet, which had been secured for us by theARRIVAL AT ST. DOMINGO. 249gentleman who had undertaken the duties of anavant-courier in the morning. The distancefrom St. lago is estimated at about seventy-threeleagues — it cannot be much less thantwo hundred and twenty miles — making theground I had gone over from the Cape not lessthan four hundred English miles.250 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER X.Generals Cornelia and Carrie — Vicar-general — Visit to thearchbishop and palace — Return of visit — State of feelingNovella's history of General Beauvais — Fontaine — La-pointe— San Carlos — The suburb — Senor Caminero — La-motteLuther — A remarkable man — Strange anecdote of aMaroon chief — Description of city — History — Peculiar modeof building — Cathedral — Tomb of Columbus — MonasteriesHospitals — Barracks — Newspaper — Printing-press — Harbour— Trade — Population — Adjoining country — Cottages —Gardens — Agriculture — Borgella's estate — San Cristal —Regency — Shrine — Expedient to secure labour — Formerwant of cultivators — Cattle-breeding — Causes of depressionAttempt of Spaniards to recover the colony.IHaving letters for the general commanding,Cornelia, the commandant de la Place, GeneralCarrie, and the vicar-general, Don JoseAkbar, I devoted the day after my arrival tovisits, and was kindly received by all. At teno'clock on the morning of the 8th, I waited,rider the escort of the vicar-general, on thearchbishop of San Domingo, (also the primateof the Indies), whom I was very desirous ofARCHBISHOP AND PALACE. 251seeing, as his reputation for personal integritystood very high. His name is Dr. Don PedroValera y Menes. The archiepiscopal palace is alarge unadorned stone square building, after theSpanish fashion, with a quadrangle in the centre,from which spacious steps lead to the first floor,which is occupied by the archbishop and hisofficers. The simplicity and want of ornamentwere strongly contrasted with the residences ofmany Catholic prelates in Europe, and even withthe republican style of the palace at Puebla ofthe late courtly Perez. In the anti-rooms wemet two clergymen, who ushered us intoanother chamber, into which his Grace, or ^* suillustrissimo," as the Spaniards address theirprelates, very soon entered. At this interviewhe was reserved, though polite, and seemedmuch gratified by my having paid him so earlya visit. He was (in 1827) in his sixty-ninthyear, quite grey, of a clear dark complexion,with intelligent yet mild black eyes. His dresswas as simple as might be, being the plainestblack robes. Our visit was short, and on themotion of the vicar-general we retired, thearchbishop over-ruling our opposition to hisaccompanying us to the gateway, at which hebestowed his benediction. I learned that hisinfluence ^^dth his flock is unbounded, and that252 NOTES ON HAITI.such is the unsullied character of his ife, as toensure the respect of those to whom he is poeticallyopposed, and the valuable appellationamong his friends of ** un prelate santo."He is a native of the city, and was appointedto the see in 1813 by the regency in Spain,though the Papal Bull was not issued for fouryears afterwards. Under the Spanish government,his salary, exclusive of episcopal dues,was ten thousand dollars a-year. On the revolutionin 1822, the republicans offered himthree thousand dollar's, which he has declinedto receive, as well as to take the oaths of allegianceto the new government. He has neversince celebrated divine service, but confineshimself to watching over his flock, on whosevoluntary contributions he supports himself andhis dependants, the extent of which is veryfar beyond what might be expected in a countryapparently so poor.The good old vicar-gentil, who is also thedean of the cathedral, in our way home,amused me not a little by expressing his firmbelief that in a very short time England wouldbe re-united to the church of Rome. I shortlyendeavoured to point out the progress of publicopinion in favour of Catholic relief, littleexpecting that that great act of justice was soBEAN AND CANONS. 253near being accomplished. All my details onlyserved to confirm the old gentleman's opinion.I did not discuss the question with him, or attemptto state the distinction between tolerationin its most extensive sense, and the adoption ofthe opinions of the tolerated party — for to haverefuted his milesian schemes would have inflictedreal pain on him.On the day following, the archbishop, accompaniedby the canon Don Francisco Gonzales,the last rector of the university, and DonAndrew Rosen, the archbishop's secretary, returnedmy visit. They sat a long time with me,and were very frank in their communicationson all the matters in which I felt interested.From them I learned that the schools formerlyestablished and supported by the kingof Spain had been abolished, as well as theuniversity, in which there had been taughtrhetoric, belles lettres, canon and civil law, medicine,and various other branches of science*But the most oppressive consideration appearedto be the progressive decay of religion. Thenumber of ministers had been so deplorably reduced,that the remnant could not dischargetheir most urgent duties. The chapter of SanDomingo formerly consisted of fourteen canons,two cures, and one sacristan mayor. Of these254 NOTES ON HAITI.four only were now left ; and although very zealous,they had not the power of performingtheir duty adequately. Although the archbishophad refused the stipend offered to him, thedean accepted one hundred dollars, and each ofthe canons fifty dollars, per month.It seemed to be the impression of these gentlemen,that the object of the existing governmentis to keep the people in a state of ignoranceand barbarism, in order to facilitate the managementof them. How far I may be right in thisview of their opinion I cannot pretend to saypositively, as they were very guarded in theirexpressions ; but if it should not be theiropinion, it is not an unlikely, one to be entertainedby men living among merely the wrecksof institutions which, from their childhood, theyhad been in the habit of regarding as sacred.I mentioned, in my account of the Cape, anattempt made at Sans Souci to form an ecclesiasticalseminary for a national clergy. I hadheard doubts on the clerical character of thesuperintendant. I inquired if these doubts hadany foundation, and found that his assumptionof the priestly character was a gross imposture.He has not the necessary documents to provehis pretensions, neither has he been able to procurethem, although he has been long denouncedCIVILITY OF THE CLERGY. 255by his diocesan. This, however, does not appearto be the first instance of an interloperhaving been protected by the Haitian government.Under that of Petion, it is said that aFrenchman appeared at Port-au-Prince, and assumedthe character of a bishop. His imposturewas exposed, without any further notice fromthe president, when pressed for allowing a person,so notoriously destitute of claim to his assumedcharacter, to remain, than that *^ it was convenient''During the whole of my stay in thiscity I continued to maintain the most friendlyterms with the clergy, for I was daily visitedby the two canons, Dr. Manuel Gonzales andDr. Thomas de Portes, to whom I am indebtedfor the copy of Valverde's History, which I hadsought in vain in every other place. The curaof the cathedral, Padre Toto, and of Santa Barbara,(a small parish within sight of the walls,)Dr. Jose Ruin, also called upon me; and I ambound to bear testimony to their kindly dispositionsand unobtrusive discharge of their functions.With General Borgella I also was on a veryagreeable footing. I found him a frank, open,manly soldier, without pretension, well versedsin the history of his country, as well as in thecharacter of his countrymen, and exceedingly256 Notes on haiti.friendly. He is the son of a French gentleman,who held large possessions in the Cul de Sac,and, as the president of Toussaint's ConstituentAssembly, signed the constitution of the colonypromulgated by that chief. For his share in thistransaction he was sent by Le Clerc to France,where he died in great want, leaving a widowand daughter, who are mainly supported bythe general.Borgella was (in 1827) fifty-three years ofage, and had served from the earliest period ofthe revolution, having held the French commissionof lieutenant of gens-d'armerie. He afterwardsadhered to Rigaud, and would haveaccompanied him to France on his expulsionby Toussaint, had he not been disgusted almostat the point of embarkation, to which he howeverattended his fallen chief. He remained?and was exposed to much hardship from Toussaint; but having a powerful friend in his father,his life was saved. When General Boudet'sdivision captured Port-au-Prince, Borgella wason General Ages' staff, the whole of whichjoined the French. Having saved the lives ofupwards of one hundred Frenchmen, who hadbeen ordered to be massacred by Toussaint, hewas much sought after and speedily promoted.On the division of the island between Chris-generalsBORGELLA AND BEAUVAIS. 2^7tophet and Petion, he adhered to the latter, butsupported Rigaud on his secession from Port-prince.Subsequently he has uniformly servedunder the republic, and public opinion has longmarked him as the future president of Haiti.It was important to obtain information froman individual so intelligent as General Borgella,who, having passed through so many tumultuousscenes, had never abandoned the island,even at her last gasp. I found him ready tocommunicate, and among other acts of civilityfor which I am indebted to him, he undertookto mark in the margin of '^ Histoire d'Haiti "by Placide Justin, the errors — which he did ;and, to the credit of the historian, they arenot numerous.He gave a very interesting, and even affectingaccount of General Beauvais, the first colouredchief, who appears to have been equallyEsteemed by the whites and by his own caste.He served v^dth great distinction, and commandedat Jacmel at the breaking out of thewar between Toussaint and Rigaud ; but beingunwilling to engage in what he deemed a fratricidalwar, he privately withdrew, leaving ashis successor the officer next in command.Accompanied by his wife and two daughters,he sailed from Jacmel only to fall into the258 NOTES ON HAITI.hands of a British cruiser. They were takento one of our islands, and an exchange of thegeneral was shortly negotiated. The partythen embarked in a French frigate for France.After being at sea for some time, beyond thereach of any port, the vessel was discovered to.be in a sinking state. The boats could removeonly a small number of the crew and passengers.It was determined to draw lots. Beauvais,having stipulated for the safety of his twodaughters, drew a favourable lot : that of hiswife was unfavourable. He insisted on hersafety, and perished. His two girls were adoptedby a rich old gentleman in France, and havebeen since very advantageously married.General Lacroix asserts that Fontaine, Tous-saintsaide-de-camp, had been shot by GeneralLe Clerc, for maintaining a treasonable correspondencewith his old chief. I was curiousto determine this fact, and General Borgellaassured me that he had been sent to France,and died, as he believed, at Mantua. He wasblack, had been well educated in France, andwas a very intelligent person. He had beenBeauvais' aide-de-camp when he left Jacmel,and subsequently served under the banners ofToussaint.Borgella does not reverence the memory ofAGE AND Pointe. 259General Age, whom he describes as a worthlessdrunkard, distrusted and despised by everyperson. He was also equally unflattering inhis portrait of Lapointe, of whom I took somenotice in my account of Cayes. He was a manof talent, but a most unprincipled scoundrel.He murdered nearly one hundred of his ownrelations and personal friends, whom his guiltyconscience led him to suspect might denouncesome of his treasons. Among his other qualifications,he possessed in a very superior degreethe art of lying ; thinking it, I suppose, as toomany do, even within the verge of places thatmust not be named, the perfection of diplomaticaddress.I think that it is the opinion of this officer,that there is every reason to expect that thetranquillity of the republic is not likely to beinterrupted without much mismanagement, forevery one is tired of civil dissention, and wishesto avoid the renewal of horrors, the very recollectionof which is heart-rending.I spent one day with the general at his houseat San Carlos, a cool retreat on a rising ground,about a couple of miles from the town, andanother at his sugar estate Bassora, on the leftbank of the Ozama, about twelve miles distant.On both these occasions there were260 NOTES ON HAITI.various persons present, the commandant GeneralCarrie, Senor Caminero, an eminentlawyer, Lamotte Luther, the store-keeper,General Riche, the black inspector of fortifications,and various others.M. Lamotte is a remarkable man : he is anative of Jeremie, and remained there until1802, when he was saved by the commissaryof police from being murdered, and went toAmerica. His account of the atrocities of M.D'Arbeau, who received twenty thousand dollarsyearly from the " comte" of public safetyto give impunity to their hangings and drownings,was dreadful. Lacroix gives some accountof the bloodshed in that quarter. Lamottemade his way to Europe, where he exercisedhis talents as an artist, which are really veryrespectable. He practised his art at Lisbon forsome time, but at last returned home.All agreed that the jealousy which prevailedamong the castes had been excessive ; andknowing this to be the case, Sonthonax attemptedto promote it, so as to render eachparty in turn subservient to his objects. Thiscommissioner, by the reports made of him,must have been totally devoid of principle :one anecdote is so characteristic of his system,that I cannot refrain from giving it.MAROON CHIEF. 261Amongst the other worthies that he collectedunder his standard, there was a negro chief,previously a runaway, of a most hideous countenanceand appearance ; and he considered hisabominable aspect so essential to his authority,that he added to it all that was in his power.Among other expedients, he hung bells to hisovergrown beard and whiskers, and painted hisbody white.This individual, who was especially protectedby the French commissary, encamped nearBeauvais at Croix des Bouquets, at the timeof the schism between Sonthonax and the colouredchief. Under the pretext of establishinga friendly intercourse, he invited the latter, withhis staff, to breakfast with him. The real objectwas assassination —fortunately it was discoveredby the captain of the gens-d'armerie,who selected and despatched to the scene ofaction a confidential serjeant named Phillips,and fifteen chosen men, (having also securedall the outlets, and stationed a strong party ofsoldiers in ambush.) Phillips arrived justas the general and his party, unsuspicious oftreachery, had deposited their arms in an outerroom, and had gone into the breakfast apartment,where it had been arranged that each ofthe devoted guests was to be placed by the side262 NOTES ON HAITI.of his intended assassin. Phillips suddenlypresented himself, and calling out Beauvais,hastily stated the circumstances. The individualsthus summoned resumed their arms. Thegens-d 'amies pressed forward and poured in avolley on the conspirators, which destroyed thewhole of them. The coloured chief was thussaved.It is quite certain that Sonthonax calculatedmuch on the prejudices of castes, which formerlyprevailed so extensively, and which thereis too much reason for believing exist with adegree of force which must render the managementof the republic a difficult business.During my stay in this city, I was fortunateenough to make a very general acquaintancewith the leading people of all the castes andconditions ; and as they treated me with equalfrankness, I had probably the best opportunityyet afforded me of determining the characterand dispositions of all. Of these I shall hereafterspeak ; but it is due to those from whom Iderived so much useful information, for me heretoexpress my sense of gratitude.Santo Domingo is the earliest European establishmentnow existing in the New World, andought to have been the metropolis of the west.It was founded in 1494 by Bartolommeo Colum-cityOF SANTO DOMINGO. 263bus on the left bank of the Ozama, and borethe name of *' La Neva Isabella' which wasafterwards changed to its present designation,it is said, in honour of Columbus' father, whosename was Domingo. On the same side of theriver, Diego, the son of the great navigator,built a large stone house, with defences againstthe Indians, the remains of which still exist.A hurricane in 1502 destroyed the first city,and the present one was founded on the oppositebank of the Ozama, and is described tohave in a very short time attained a degree ofgrandeur not unworthy of its metropolitan rank.It is built on a small platform that commandsthe harbour. Its form is trapezoidal, extendingalong the Ozama about nine hundred yards,and along the sea about eight hundred, havinga circuit of about three thousand yards. Thewhole is surrounded with a rampart, whichvaries in thickness from eight to twelve feet.There are also around it traces of a ditch. Thebastions are small, and two half-moon batteriesprotect the two extremes, and some irregularworks defend the city towards the sea. Asmall height to the north-west commands therampart in that direction. When I was there,the repair of the fortifications was going on asfast as small means would allow.264 NOTES ON HAITI.The interior of the city is regularly laid outin streets, that intersect each other nearly atright angles. The houses are in the Spanishstyle ; the larger ones forming a square, withan inner quadrangle ; those of an inferior kindsuch as are seen in the smaller towns in Spain,with massy doors and barred windows. Theolder buildings are generally of a limestone ofthe country ; those of more recent date, of anearthy matter called ^' tapis." Pillars of masonryare run up, a frame of wood-work connectingthem, and the intervals are filled upwith this " tapis," which is beaten down, andon setting, as I believe it is technically phrased,it acquires a hardness equal to that of stonework,with the advantage of being one continuouswall. The larger houses are very good ;but the appearance of the whole is deformedby small thatched buildings, even in the principalstreets.The streets are not all paved, but they arewide and spacious. The climate is agreeable,and what is invaluable, there is a never-failingsea-breeze, which, however, is obstructed bythe rampart to the east : indeed, I may sayit is entirely excluded from the lower parts ofthe houses.But notwithstanding these advantages, theunbounded praises lavished on it in some of theearlier reports to the Emperor Charles V., cannotnow be bestowed ; and from the remains ofits former condition, which is exemplified in thepublic buildings, I may be pardoned for suspectingthat the facility afforded by the Spanishlanguage to exaggerated description, may havecontributed to the glowing pictures that havebeen handed down, chiefly by Oviedo.Of these monuments of former splendour thecathedral remains, having been founded in 1514,and finished in 1540. The architecture is Gothic,and it contains a nave and two aisles. The roofis so substantial as to have resisted earthquakesand even shells, one of which thrown duringthe last siege by the British, is firmly fixedin it. In this building the cross which I mentionedin speaking of the Santo Cerro, is preservedas a precious relic, enchased in filiisilver, and there is a particular service inits honour, which one of the canons, Dr. Portez,was so obliging as to perform when heexhibited the holy relic. Formerly the bonesof Columbus, and the irons in which he hadbeen sent to Spain a prisoner, were lodged inthe wall ; but on the treaty of Basle the onlymortal remains that could be found were transportedto the city of Havana, in the catchesI. M^66 NOTES ON HAITI.deal of which they now repose. It may, however,be seriously doubted whether these bonesare Columbus', or those of his son or brother.Moreau St. Mery made some diligent inquirieswhich lead to the doubt ; yet if the maxim'' crete quod babes et babes " be correct, itwould be a pity to disturb the popular belief.The monasteries of Mercy and of St. Francis,and the Jesuits' college, are no longer devotedto religious purposes. A decree of the government,8th of July, 1824, abolished all monasticorders ; and there is not, I believe, a singlemonk or friar in the city. The college of the Jesuits,which is now the military store-house, isremarkably fine. Its cupola and chief altar arecarved out of the most beautiful mahogany.Two convents for nuns, one dedicated to'* Regina Angelorum," and the other to *^ SantaClara," still subsist, but are deprived, by thedecree just cited, of all their revenues, and nofresh inmates are permitted to be received.There were (in 1827) six or seven old nuns stillliving in them, receiving an allowance from thepublic treasury.The Dominican convent was devoted to theuses of the University until that establishmentsunk. It is said that divine service is still performedin nine churches, besides the cathedral :HOSPITAL — BARRACKS — PALACE. 267it may be so ; but it would be difficult to pointout the officiating priests.To the honour of the Spaniards, notwithstandingall that has been said, and may, I fear,be truly said, of their misdeeds in the westernworld, they generally established on their settlementshospitals for the sick and destitute.Two hospitals erected by them in Santo Domingoattest this assertion, and it is creditableto the existing government that they are carefullykept up.The caverns, or barracks, are large and commodious; the arsenal extensive. The lighthouseand prison are conveniently placed, bothunder the refreshing influence of the sea-breeze.The national palace is by no means a splendidone. A new building, instead of it, wasin progress during my visit.There are few monuments of the fine arts ;the only one I saw was a painting of the Crucifixionin the office of the commandant of thecity, into which is introduced, among othersuppliants at the foot of the cross, a Haitiansoldier in full uniform. The question naturallyarose, as in the case of the fly in amber, ^* Howthe devil did he get there ?"A newspaper had been lately discontinued268 NOTES ON HAITI.for want of encouragement, but there was stilla printing-press.The harbour, formed by the termination of theriver Ozama, is excellent, being in fact a naturalbasin, capable of containing a large number ofvessels, and of protecting them from every tempest.The bar at the entrance is, however, a formidabledrawback; for although earlier writerssay that vessels of four hundred tons couldpass it, now it is found that there is no greaterdraught of water than ten or twelve feet. Theconsequence is, that ships of any burthen areobliged to anchor at the entrance in the roads,which are exceedingly exposed. There is a convenientfountain for watering shipping, said tohave been built by Diego Columbus. The Ozamais navigable for considerable-sized craft for nineor ten leagues from the port, a circumstancethat may be turned to good account if the populationon its banks should increase.Considerable trade is carried on in the articlesof consumption of the country; but asthe chief exports are mahogany, lignum-vitae,and other woods, the outward-bound vesselsgenerally load at the point of the coast mostconvenient for the embarkation of their cargoes.There is more appearance of internal traffichere than in most towns in Haiti.POPULATION SAN CARLOS. 269The population is very mixed, consisting ofall the classes and castes that are to be seen inthe other parts of the island. The number offoreigners is considerably smaller, however, thanat Port-au-Prince, Cayes, or the Cape ; whilethe proportion of native whites and colouredpeople considerably exceeds that of the blacks.There did not appear to me to exist to the sameextent as elsewhere, the prejudices which formso inveterate an obstacle to the consolidation ofthe Haitians as a nation having only one commonfeeling. I chiefly remarked that there wasa considerable dislike between the residentpriesthood and the soldiery from the west ; theone party regarding the other as a band of menwithout religion or principle, while they weredeemed a set of fanatic bigots. All outwardshow of rancour has been subdued by GeneralBorgella's adroit management of very discordantmaterials.To the north and west the country is openand very agreeable. Between these two pointsstands the suburb of San Carlos, at the vergeof which is the country retreat, already mentioned,belonging to General Borgella. SanCarlos was founded by a colony from the CanaryIslands, commonly called " Canaries," orIslands. It is said to have been formerly NOTES ON HAITI,some ; but Dessalines, when he besieged thecity, destroyed all but the church, which stillremains, and is a handsome stone edifice. Thewalks are pleasant, and on hot days are crowdedby gay parties, displaying the mantilla, fan, andelastic step that so fascinate all admirers ofgrace and elegance. The veil may not, however,be so frequently removed as it might be, wherebrilliancy of complexion is more prevalent.Along the sea-shore there are some pleasantcottages surrounded by gardens. I was at twoof them and enjoyed the fresh breeze exceedingly.One belonged to the only English resinsident, Mr. Lawrence, and the other to SenorCaminero ; and I heard (too late to visit it)that an industrious North American has establishedin the same neighbourhood a sort ofVauxhall, to which crowds of people resort,much to the replenishment of his purse.In and about this part of Haiti, I apprehendthat though agriculture may have improved oflate, it is still very far behind what it ought tobe. Guinea grass, so necessary for forage, hasbeen introduced, and it is extending. Somecacao, coffee, cotton, tobacco, and sugar, areproduced, for they may be bought ; bit I didnot see the plantations on which they grow,with the exception of Bassora already named,PLANTATION Bassa. 271on which there is a good mill, all the requisitemachinery, and a hundred men constantly employed; but the superintendant was captainof the rural police — a fact which tended muchto maintain discipline. Though rather out ofplace, I must record a fact that occurred duringmy visit to this estate : — one of the party, ageneral officer, was missing, and on looking forhim, he was found sleeping among the servants ;and such was the irksomeness to him of remainingwith us, that immediately after breakfasthe again retired to his associates amongthe guides and grooms, with whom he discussedcigars until we moved off for the city.I mention this as illustrative of the progressof society.On Bassora very good sugar is made; butthere is a want of a steady home market, syrupbeing so much more generally used by thenatives.I believe the principal supply of all the minorarticles brought to the market is derived fromboth the banks of the Ozama, as well as of theIsabella, where, in the recesses of the forest,cultivation is said to be gradually advancing.At the distance of a few leagues from thecity is situated San Cristal, in the midst ofthe flourishing district of " Los Ingenious."272 NOTES ON HAITI.General Borgella has attended with a fosteringcare to this, and the efforts of the inhabitantsare reported to have so well corresponded withhis views, that the most sanguine expectationsof improvement there are confidently entertained.It is in this district that fortificationshave been established, to serve as a depot incaseof foreign invasion. The selection of theposition is described to be peculiarly good, inan almost inaccessible point, commanding awide extent of country, abundantly suppliedwith water, flowing through a rich virgin soil,that reaches close to the walls of the fortress.About forty leagues from the city is the townof Higuey, celebrated for its virgin, to whoseshrine devotees even from the most remotecorners of the island resort, either to expiatecrime or to invoke blessing's. I knew an instanceof a female, dio had a deaf and dumbchild, travelling from Port-au-Prince to Hi-greyin the vain hope of cure. The reputationof the saint, though not equal to her ofLorenzo, is a very abundant source of revenueto the superintending priest. The offeringsof the pious, who beg, borrow, or steal, topay him, render him the richest clergyman inHaiti.The representation of the saint, as describedSHRINE AT IIIGUEY Industry. 273to me, is an oil-painting about a foot in length ;the frame is solid gold, or seems to be so, setwith precious stones, so as to correspond in allrespects with a crown of similar materials. Theneighbouring soil is described as exceedinglyproductive, scarcely requiring cultivation.There, however, as well as elsewhere, regularlabour is procured with difficulty, ifprocured at all. An old settler told me of avery whimsical expedient, to which he was ledto recur by his knowledge of the people : atthe revolution in 1822, all his slaves becameinoculated, like Cornet Ollapod, with a militaryardour, and left him for all the delights ofa Haitian guard-room. It was necessary forthe support of his family that his estate shouldnot lie fallow — but how could he procure labourers? — Why, he became the godfather toevery fine stout boy in his neighbourhood.Now the authority of a godfather is unboundedthroughout Haiti : he may actually take libertiesthat a father could not. All the godsonof my acquaintance are employed as labourers,and, if idle, they are thrashed without anydread of the '^ code civil;" and as he alwaystakes care to have relays in store, as fast asvacancies are produced by attaining the ageof twenty-one years, they are filled up by274 NOTES ON HAITI.the new made Christians. In this way hekeeps up an efficient set of about twenty stoutlads : few, however, have the same resourceat command. Nor is it all surprising suchshould be the case under the new regime,since we find that, even so long ago as in theyear 1785, with the slave system in full force,there was a deplorable deficiency of labour, somuch so that the proprietors, according to thenative historian Valverde, were too poor toemploy managers or overseers, but were obligedto superintend in person the operations oftheir labourers. Nor does there appear to havebeen any want of industry ; but the lack of meansof increasing labour kept them in continueddepression. It is not a little remarkable thatmany of the same individuals who in the richsoil of San Domingo remained poor, on removaleither to Puerto Rico or Cuba made large fortunes.To trace all the causes producing sosingular an anomaly would require more intimateknowledge of facts than any strangercan acquire in a short residence. I shall howeverpoint, before I end, at some of them. Aclass of small proprietors of farms called*' Estancias," with two or three negroes, appearto have flourished in San Domingo as wellas in Cuba, where they form that very efficientMonsters — CATTLE BREEDING. 275body of men called " Montrose." They labourwith their slaves, and fare nearly as they do.Since I have had any knowledge of the fact,that Europeans may thrive within the tropicsas these individuals do, the speculation, first,I believe, recommended by the late indefatigableDr. Colquhoun, of encouraging in the highlandsof our colonies small white proprietors,has been one of my favourite schemes ; nor doI think it would be difficult to show that theadoption of such a measure would add to theirsecurity, no less than increase their value tothe parent state. Many of the Spanish Haitiansstill hold ^^ Estancias."Cattle-breeding was always an object of importance,at least since 1535, at which periodhorned cattle had multiplied to an enormousextent ; but independent of these, horses, sheep,goats, asses, and hogs also abound.The grazing establishment is called '^ harpoonwhich the arrangements (which were veryextensive) were made with great precision.The animals were classed according to theirhabits. The father of the family generallydirected the whole, while his sons undertookthe executive part of the duty. Their life wasone of continued hardship and exposure ; yet Iquestion whether there is one who would NOTES ON HAITI.singly exchange it for any other, I shall notreadily forget the delight with which one ofthese hardy fellows detailed to me the numberof nights he was in the habit of spendingamong the mountains, carrying in a scrip asmall allowance of food, sleeping under a tree,with his back propped by it, and exposed toincessant wet in the marshy plashy grounds ;and, when awake, depending for his safereturn home on his intimate knowledge of thecountry. The gratification which he experiencedmost probably arose from the same circumstancethat animated the French renegado,mentioned by Chateaubriand, when gallopingat-the utmost stretch across the Great Desart —the sense of uncontrolled freedom.There has been a variety of causes assignedfor the depopulated and uncultivated conditionin which this most glorious island has been almostfrom its earliest history, while the adjacentislands were rising into opulence and importance.At the first view it certainly appearsto be utterly incomprehensible, for itcould not depend on the indolence of Spaniards,since in Puerto Rico and Cuba the self-sameSpaniards, as has been already stated, wereindustrious and flourishing ; neither could it beascribed to any sterility of the soil, since thisCAUSES OF FORMER DECAY. 277is unquestionably not the least luxuriant inthe world, and decided evidence was given ofthe fact by the success of the French in thewest. This much is certain, that after SanDomingo had been three centuries in the handsof Spain, she was worth nothing as a colony.Valverde, who sometimes aims at being poetical,observes that the riches and splendour ofHispaniola resembled those flowers that scarcelyallow time to admire their beautiful tints, andto inhale their fragrance, before they expire.It would seem that the first blow given tothe prosperity of the colony was the infamousrecal of Columbus, which afforded an opportunityto the unprincipled Bobadilla and Ovando,contrary to the wishes of their sovereigns, todistribute the unhappy Indians among theland and mine-holders. Goaded by ill usage,many of these wretched people escaped to thecontinent ; others died of small-pox ; while thesudden change of life from one of unrestrainedfreedom to that of incessant labour, destroyeda very large number. On the loss of labourersthe produce both of the soil and the mines alsoceased, as an inevitable consequence.Next followed the intestine divisions, which,in spite of the prohibition by^the court of Spainof emigration, forced the most opulent proprietyNOTES ON HAITI,tors to seek an asylum in other countries. Yet,notwithstanding these difficulties, the colonystruggled through the sixteenth century by thelabour afforded by negroes; and cultivationprospered to a small extent, while the herdsrapidly augmented. All trade with the Peninsula,and even with Mexico, having ceased,the colony might have been totally lost to Europe,had not the Dutch and other foreignersmaintained an illicit intercourse with it. Theonly act of interference of Spain, and it wasone of consistent imprudence, was to destroythis resource in 1606, under the pretext of puttingan end to smuggling, by abandoning theports of the north, the inhabitants of whichwere forced into the interior. If the court ofMadrid had desired to make an experiment onthe possibility of barbarizing a community inthe midst of increasing civilization, a bettermode could possibly not have been devised.Jobbing, however, was, I believe, the realcause of the atrocious deed. Disease in differentforms, each equally fatal, earthquakes and foreigninvasion, contributed in turn to destroyand to dishearten such of the inhabitants assurvived. A modern author sums up the stateof abandonment at the end of the seventeenthcentury, by saying, ^^ Thus the island, theFORMER CONDITION. 279metropolis of the fourth part of the world, onlyretained the inhabitants who were bound by-extremenecessity ; the houses decayed from awant of occupants ; the lands abandoned oftenremained without an owner ; and the landmarkshaving ceased to exist, no man could distinguishhis property from that of another. The publicrevenue was almost nothing, and the only returnsto the public chest arose from a few quiresof stamps and a few papal bulls. To defray thecharges of the government, it was necessary tosend large sums from Mexico. In a word, sowretched was the poverty, that the greatestfestival in Santo Domingo was on the arrival ofmoney to pay the administration. Its entrywithin the gates was announced by the ringingof bells, by rejoicing, and cries of joy"*To remedy the want of population, the governmentsent out some families from the Canaries,many of whom, from injudicious treatment,died ; yet the colony began to revive as itsFrench neighbour advanced in prosperity.Smuggling was rendered more easy, and thedemand for cattle considerably augmented.Description de I'lsle de S. Domine — Partie Espagnole,pM Moreau St. Mery, p. 40, vol. 1.280 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER XLEffects of revolution in the West or the East — Emigration —Check to decay — Depreciation of the value of property — Accountof the revolution hi 1821 and 1822— Nunez — ColonelAly and his black corps — Spanish governor — Pascal Realwrested and deposed — Counter-revolution — Causes — Occupationby President Boyerand republican army — Guaranteesgiven — Tumults suppressed — Trade not very active— Pretensionof Spanish customs — Mantilla — Guitars — Artisans —Public amusements— Preparations for departure.Such was the state of St. Domingo duringthe greater part of the eighteenth century. Newdangers arose at the commencement of therevolutionary movements in the French colony ;and the Spaniards are accused of having secretlyencouraged them, even before the war hadcommenced in Europe between the two parentstates. This much is certain, that, as soon asthe war had commenced, the Spaniards suppliedthe revolted slaves with arms, admitted themEFFECTS OF REVOLUTION. 281into their territory, and gave rank to their chiefs.Toussaint held that of a colonel in the Spanisharaby; and it is asserted by French writersthat '^ Jean Francois," one of the first insurgentblack leaders, was elevated to the rank of agrandee of Spain. This assertion is as boldlydenied by respectable Spaniards, though withwhat truth I cannot presume to determine. Ibelieve that Jean Francois died not many yearsago in Madrid, in the receipt of a pension fromthe government.The necessary alarm, from the proximity ofrevolutionary materials, must have, withoutquestion, operated very powerfully in drivingaway those whose prosperity enabled them toremove with their families : probably thesewere accompanied by all their dependants, whogladly followed their fortunes to the neighbouringand more peaceful islands of PuertoRico and Cuba. Since 1795 there can havebeen no assured security, which must haveeminently contributed to the downfal of the colony— a downfal which had been progressivelygoing on in regular progression, until it hasbeen finally brought to its lowest point.The further decline is universally allowedby the inhabitants to have been retarded bythe conciliatory yet firm conduct of General282 NOTES ON HAITI.Borgella. Under his administration the overwhelmingprogress of decay has been counteracted,and eventually the current may bedirected into a better channel ; but still thewant of population and capital are evils thatcan only be thoroughly remedied by time,aided by the judicious encouragement of foreigners.I may mention, in proof of the depreciationof property owing to the want of funds,and the desire of many of the Spaniards torealize and withdraw their property from anobnoxious government, that the house in whichI lodged, which was formerly worth six oreight thousand dollars, was offered for sale atonethousand; and the best estate (sugar) inthe neighbourhood, which was valued at eightythousand dollars, was sold for fifteen thousand,to be paid out of the crops. The inducement inthis case was confidence in the personal honourof the purchaser, or it would have been soldfor a smaller sum in cash.As I collected some interesting particulars ofthe revolution, I cannot, I think, do betterthan give a short account of it in this place,while treating of the scene of action.It is well known that, by the ninth article ofthe treaty of Basle concluded the 22nd ofJuly, 1795, between France and Spain, thePROGRESS OF REVOLUTION. 283eastern part of St. Domingo was added to theformer power, in consideration of giving up allher conquests in the Pyrenees. There appearsto have been some subsequent understandingbetween the parent states, for no orders appearto have been ever given to the republican chiefsin the island to occupy it ; indeed, positive instructionsnot to do so are said by Lacroix tohave been sent to Toussaint L'Ouverture, who,suspecting their import, pressed on in advanceof the officer conveying the despatches, andhad taken military possession of the city itselfbefore they reached him. He thus attained hisobject without appearing to do so, in oppositionto higher powers.After Le Clerc arrived, the city, in commonwith the whole island, fell into his hands, andremained so until 1801, when the small Frenchforce then occupying it capitulated to thelate General Carmichael, who, I presume, fromdirections from home, delivered possession tothe Spanish authorities, at the head of whomwas Don Juan Sanchez : thus the cession madein 1795 was actually voided by conquest ; andto confirm the right of possession, it was stipulatedby the eighth article of the treaty ofParis, concluded 30th of May, 1814, that284 NOTES ON HAITI.His most Christian Majesty* restores in fullright and sovereignty to His Catholic Majesty,the portion of St. Domingo ceded to France bythe treaty of Basle." Thus from that periodthe point of lawful possession was fixed andacted upon by the contracting parties.The decrepitude of the Spanish governmentwas never more strongly exemplified than inits conduct to this its most ancient westernpossession. On every occasion there was displayedthe most marked inability to afford theleast protection, beyond supplying it with avery ample number of public functionaries. Allthis afforded a strong argument to revolutionaryminds to propose a change, while all the sinsof preceding governments furnished never-failingtopics of declamation. It is not, under suchcircumstances, a matter of surprise that turbulentspirits should be called into activity whilerevolution was raging in every direction ; andeven in this obscure nook there were materialsto act and to be acted upon.There was, in 1821, resident in the city, andholding the rank of '^ auditor de guerra," alawyer named Jose Nunez de Cares, (after-seeAppendix, note (I.)NUNEZ REVOLUTION. 285wards the friend, secretary-general, and confidentialadviser of Paz in Colombia,) who hadfailed, through the intrigues of his enemies inSpain, to obtain the rank of one of the judgesof the ^^Audiencia Real;" and consequentlybecame an inveterate patriot and avenger of hiscountry's vs^rongs. At this time the troopsscarcely amounted to one hundred and fiftyEuropeans, who, it is said, had been all corrupted— and a black regiment commanded byColonel Aly, which had accompanied Toussaintat the time of his conquest, and had subsequentlyentered the Spanish service. Yet, withsingular improvidence and disregard of thedangerous neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince,the officers were only allowed to hold rank intheir own corps, being, as I understood, withoutthe power of command over any other ; infact, having purely regimental, not army rank.Although this body always conducted themselvesw ell, it is not to be supposed that theywould particularly object to any change thatwould place them in a better relative situationto their fellow-soldiers. Of the knowledge ofthese facts Nunez made ample use : he leaguedhimself with seven others to throw off allegianceto Spain; and they made their an-argumentsso well, that on the night of the 30th of NoseNOTES ON HAITI.member, 1821, they arrested the governor-brigadierDon Pascal Real in bed withoutopposition, hoisted Colombian colours, andwere in possession of all the fortifications assoon as the dawn broke on the morning of the1st of December. They also issued a Declarationof Independence,* signed by the wholeparty,' which, too, had been previously printedat the government printing-office. I was informedby an eye-witness that the revolution was effectedwithout the slightest tumult ; and theonly perceptible change to the inhabitants wasthe substitution of the Colombian for the Spanishflag; so thoroughly was the real power ofthe mother-country destroyed, even in this hermost feeble dependency.All the usual transatlantic themes of a vassalageof three centuries, oppression, neglect,&c. were duly enunciated by the revolutionaryparty as the reasons of their proceeding. Thechiefs then formed a provisional government,at the head of which Nunez was placed as president.One of his coadjutors became captain-generaland commander-in-chief of their Lilliputianarmy, and the remainder elected themselvesdeputies of the north, east, and south.• See Appendix, note (J.)PROGRESS OF REVOLUTION. 287There being no candidate, the west was leftunprovided with, a representative.According to the established formula in suchcases, an ^* acta constitution"* was ushered intothe world by this small band of political obstetricians.Commodore Auri, with several armedvessels, hovered about the coast, I presume tosee that the patriots fulfilled their duty toColombia ; and Baron Jacob paused at Samara,to see whether any thing favourable toFinance offered.Although the scheme went on with so muchapparent smoothness, there was considerabledissatisfaction among no small portion of thepopulation. The proscription in Colombia ofEuropean Spaniards naturally alarmed such ofthat class as held property in Haiti ; and assoon as they were certified of the proceedingsof Auri and Nunez — forgetful of the frightfulclause of the Constitution of 1806, which prohibitsall white men from being proprietors inthe republic, they began to intrigue in its favour,considering its rule, as many have franklyavowed, the least of two grievous evils. It isrumoured that for a long time prior to this theHaitian government had active agents feelingSee Appendix, note (K.)288 NOTES ON HAITI.the pulse of the people. If so, it is not to besupposed that the events just narrated vere likelyto lull them into repose. Be that as it may,scarcely had the self-formed government commencedtheir legislative functions, when emissarieswere despatched by the inhabitants ofthe principal towns in the east, both to CapeHaitian and Port-au-Prince, to urge the unionof the whole island under one head. Beforetheir arrival, or that of the news of the revolution.President Boyer had despatched threeofficers to compliment General Real ; but onreaching their destination the change had occurred.Nunez had taken care to announce tohis brother president, whose reply detailed theinvitations received' his acceptance of them,and his intention of marching with an overwhelmingforce. He also guaranteed the safetyof persons and property, and stated the groundsof taking military possession to rest on thefortieth and forty-first articles f of the Constitutionof 1806, which declare the republic tobe one and indivisible. How far the right ofthe framers of that Constitution extended toconsider as an integral part of Haitian territorythat which they did not occupy, may be safelySee Appendix, note (L.)t See Appendix, note (M.)ANNEXATION OF THE EAST. 289referred to the common sense of mankind atlarge, without calling in the aid of Vattel, PuffBynkershoeck, or any other writer onpublic law.President Boyer further recommended a pacificcourse to Nunez, which was adopted.* Inthe interval the deputation returned from SantoDomingo to Port-au-Prince, with a proposalfor an alliance, offensive and defensive, betweenthe two republics ; which being rejected, citizenNunez, political chief as he was designated,proposed to surrender his usurped authority.On the 21st of January, 1822, the Haitianflag was first displayed in the city of SantoDomingo, and on the 9th of the next monththe municipality, at the head of whom appearedthe ex-president, met the President Boyer beyondthe walls, and offered to surrender to himthe keys of the city, which were, however, refusedby him, for he came not as a conqueror,but as the father of his people.A proclamation of infinite promise was thenput forth, and was confirmed by a subsequentone from Port-au-Prince, dated 22d of June,1822: but pledges were deemed by the newrepublicans insufficient, as they saw their an-seeNote (N.) Appendix.VOL. I. N290 NOTES ON HAITI.cent laws suddenly changed to the Captaincode, the practical inconvenience of which,chiefly with regard to landed property, wasextensively felt, and the whites began to appreciatethe insecurity of their tenure under theconstitution. Numerous applications were thereforemade to the government, to adopt somefixed mode of remedying these inconveniences.The matter was referred to a committee of bothbranches of the legislature. This committeereported on all the points referred to them, andpractical inferences were deduced. The documentsare too long and uninteresting to be heredetailed ; * but the united legislature sanctionedthe report. A commission, to carry into effectthe law thus passed, was appointed to reside atSanto Domingo ; but they have not given satisfaction,and the complaints of violated faithare loud and frequent. However, the reportwhich was adopted may be deemed the bill ofrights of the white Eastern population, as by it,quoad them, the right of holding property, inopposition to the mischievous clause of the constitutionalready cited, is preserved.Such were the consequences of the revolutionwhen I witnessed them ; and I am disposed toinfer, from what I heard at different periods,See Note (0.) Appendix.ANNEXATION OF THE EAST. 291that the parties referred to attempted in vain tofind any trace of compensation for the sacrificeof all their ancient predilections, and even prejudices.They consider their clergy degradedand injured, by being almost reduced to a stateof dependence on the already stinted means oftheir flocks, their religion consequently insulted,for they have no confidence in Frenchor Port-au-Prince Christianity. Their universityno longer exists ; the public schools aredestroyed ; and they insist that it is a mockeryto talk of national schools, the teachers of whichare utterly incompetent ; but the greatest grievance(and it is a terrible one) is that, at thevery age when their sons require the utmostcare of a parent, they are bound by the existinglaw to become soldiers, and to be initiatedinto all the profligacy of a guard-house, asprivates; from which scene of degradation nomerit can raise them, while the son of the mostworthless chief in the West is at once raised tothe rank of an officer. They complain too, thattheir morals being thus corrupted, there is littlechance of the unfortunate individuals ever resumingrespectable or decent habits. All thesepoints have been most strongly and feelinglypressed on me by sufferers, in nearly the languageused.292 KOTES ON HAITI.Besides these grievances, there has been nocompensation for the slaves liberated at therevolution, many of whom having become soldiers,have left the proprietors vi^ithout labourers,thus depriving their late masters oftheir only means of support. The French languagetoo is substituted for Spanish, an insultfully appreciated ; and in return for this beautifulindependence,* it is found not to be recognizedby either France or Spain ; yet thepresent government expects the disfranchisedSpaniard to contribute his proportion to theliquidation of the French indemnity.The reduction of the value of property affordsalso, where grumbling is permitted, a tolerablegood reason for venting occasional complaints.With the effects of these facts I have nothingto do, my present business being merely to recordmy observations.Some time before my arrival in the island,feelings of discontent had displayed themselvesso unequivocally that prosecutions where instituted,some individuals shot, and others banished.That these angry feelings have beensubdued, and peace maintained, may, I believe,be attributed to General Borgella's administra-seeNote (P.)— Copy of Ordonnance, April 17, 1823.COMMERCE OF THE EAST. 293tion, which, though not without its defects, is,upon the whole, mild and conciliatory, thoughfirm and vigilant.This state of things, of which the precedingpages contain a short sketch, does not warrantany expectations of extensive commerce in SantoDomingo. Accordingly we find that it is conductedon a very restricted scale. The populationbeing small, consumption is limited. Theproduce of the soil (that is the cultivated produce)is confined to domestic wants ; andalthough there is actually enough mahoganyand dye-woods to supply the whole of Europe,there is nobody to fell, to prepare, or to ship solarge a quantity as the earth spontaneouslyyields.I have already expressed my sense of obligationto all classes with whom I had any intercourse.Of their modes of general intercoursewith each other I had no means of judgingaccurately ; but from all I could gather, it ismuch the same as in the mother country, thehabits of which seem to have invariably rootedthemselves wherever the Spaniards have hadan ascendancy. I remember being struck withseeing in Holland the mantilla of cloth worn bythe women, nearly three hundred years afterthe Spanish yoke had been thrown off, under294 NOTES ON HAITI.circumstances that might have induced themost liquefied dismissal of even the mostagreeable customs of the oppressor.The tinkling of the guitar in the streets inthe evening is associated with so many pleasingrecollections to most peninsular travellers, thateven in hands not moulded to elicit eloquentmusic, it excites sensations nearly allied tothose of the Highlander at the animating soundof the pibroch. All is, I apprehend, dependenton associations with either some pleasingreality, or with some equally pleasing fantasy,that has influenced the feelings ^* in earlier daysand happier hours." Nearly every eveningthese sounds continued until the usual hour ofrepose, ten o'clock; and I confess they wereagreeable to me.Artizans of all descriptions in articles of commondemand are to be found in the city ; butthey are most celebrated for their work intortoise-shell, in silver, when it is to be procured,and in hats made of the palm-leaf. Thetortoise-shell combs are handsome and substantial; and canes are covered with the same material,so as to form a very tasteful walking-stick.The hats too are light and pleasant,though much inferior to those of Panama andChi.PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS. 295Of public amusements there was a lamentabledearth. I could hear of no bull-fights, notheatre, and only one exhibition of feats on theslack-rope by a Spaniard, who performed severaltimes during my stay. Some of my partywent and reported not unfavourably of theexhibition ; but as it took place at a time whenI began to feel the effects of exertion and exposure,I was not disposed to attend. I have forgottenthe particulars ; but as well as I recollect,the usual frolics were stated to have beenperformed much to the satisfaction of the audienceand to the peril of the vaulter's neck.Some little time before a company of Spanishcomedians, who had been making the grandtour of the republic, had been attracting overflowinghouses. I should have liked much tohave seen a classical Spanish tragedy, withallits declamation, enacted before such an audienceas might be expected at Santo Domingo.I believe that formerly exhibitions of the dramawere not unfrequent. This is very consonantwith the Spanish taste ; at Havana there is avery pretty little opera-house, with an excellentorchestra of motley musicians. Indeed,I believe that such an establishment uniformlyaccompanied that of every principal town in allthe Spanish Americas.296 NOTES ON HAITI.As I had completed my budget of information,and there was every reason to dread theapproaching rains, it became necessary to preparefor departure ; and after having devotedtwo or three days to the duties of civility, weprepared to find our way once more to thecapital.DEPARTURE FROM SANTO DOMINGO. 297CHAPTER XII.River Jalna — Ferry-boat — River Nisao — Mahogany cutters — ■Mode of preparing logs — Dinner v.itb dealers — Road to BaniArrival — Want of accommodation —Food and forage —Savanna Buey — Re-appearance of lost cook — Want of forageContinued rain — Active young negro — Wants supplied —Bay of Cocoa — Caracoles — 0\»ner — Family — Accommodation— Arrival at Azua — Reception by Colonel Bellegarde —His history — Difficulty in obtaining forage, owing to apprehensionof the soldiers — Loss of horses — Don Pablo BaezEntertainment — Departure — Guide— Skirting the banks ofthe Neybe — Accident from drunkenness of black officer —Arroyo Salado — Picturesque scene — Wild guinea-fowl —Novel lights— Sickness of one of the party — Little Yaqui — ^Passage of the ford — Nicaragua — Hostess — Odd notions —Expectation of invasion — Crossing of the Mijo — Arrival atSan Juan — Town-adjutant — Hi-story of town — Rock-salt ofNeybe — Valley of San Juan— Straying of horse — Nighttravelling bad — Arrival at Matte — Colonel Gardel — CommandantLassie — Chief of police at Rancho Mateo — Departure— Rancho Mateo — Disappointments — Miserable night —Passage of the river Juan de Vera — Journey to Las Caobas.On the 24th of May, at dawn of day, weleft the city of Santo Domingo, accompaniedby General Borgella, and Colonels Chardavoineand Philip. Issuing from the gate that leadsto San Carlos, we kept by the road that runsalong the shore, on which, I was told, General298 NOTES ON HAITI.Carmichael landed in 1808. We passed thesmall residences of some inhabitants of the cityalready mentioned, and Fort St. Geronimo, whichis a solid redoubt of masonry, capable of containingone hundred and fifty men with thenecessary provisions. Nearly opposite is asmall chapel, always open for the use of thefaithful. Cultivation is more exposed alongthe road-side than it generally is. On reachingthe small village called Jaina, on the banksof a river of the same name, we found breakfastprepared for us, by an express that had been senton by the general ; and after partaking of itunder a shady tree, we crossed the river in aferry-boat, which swings by a cable strainedacross. The river is deep and rapid, and fromits proximity to the sea, sharks of an immensesize gambol about without restraint ; 1 did notsee any of them, but some of the party sawseveral of a monstrous size. They are probablyallured by occasional supplies of dead animalsthat find their way down the river.Having parted with our friend the general,which I certainly did with regret, as he hadgained upon me by his frank manliness ofcharacter, we pursued our way along the seashoreover an irregular surface, until we reachedthe banks of the Nisao, a wide, though at thatMAHOGANY CUTTERS. 299time a fordable river ; on the banks of whichthere was a large accumulation of mahogany,that had been floated down from the uppercountry, in order that it might be prepared forshipment on board of some of the vessels thenawaiting their cargoes ; and as the coast is veryinsecure, it was a matter of great moment tocomplete the work with the least possible lossof time.The right bank of the river is the principalscene of operations Foreigners and nativeswhere all collected together, some preparing thelogs, others marking them, and others placingthem in such a situation as might be most favourablefor subsequent conveyance to the'vessels. The process of preparation is verysimple : — the trunk of the tree is squared withan adze, the workmen using no measure buthis eye to determine its accuracy ; and it istruly surprising to see the rapidity and precisionwith which, in this rude way, the log isfashioned into the form in which it appears inthis country. Some of the logs were remarkablylarge ; and I learned that the wood fromthis district is peculiarly prized for its beautyand solidity. Liverpool appears to be the marketto which the largest exports are made fromthis coast.300 NOTES ON HAITI.Among the persons busily engaged on theNisao, I found Senor Caminero, who had engagedto meet me there. Under his escort weproceeded to a house kept by a Frenchwoman,for the accommodation of the mahogany dealers.The note of the name both of the placeand hostess I have mislaid, which I regret, asI should have been o-lad to have associatedwith both the comfort I enjoyed at finding aplace where grass and forage were abundant,and where there was no lack of entertainmentfor man. The party was large, consisting ofFrench captains, mahogany brokers, Spanishresidents, our hosts, and our own party. Ourfare was abundant and good, and it was withno small degree of reluctance that I determinedon pursuing our way four leagues furtherto Bani. The first portion of the roadwas good, but a heavy storm came on, and wewere soon lost in utter darkness : groping ourway, we travelled a distance that seemed interminable,along the course of the river Bani,and at last arrived at the town. The rain stillpouring with unceasing fury, we made ourway to the commandant. Colonel Machado,who had been directed the preceding day byGeneral Borgella to make some preparationin the way of lodging, food, and forage. No-bankINCONVENIENCE. 301thing, however, was ready, except a miserablehouse, which, from having been uninhabited,smelt most foully of damp and rottenness.Although every effort was made, not a mouthfulcould be obtained for any of the party,either bipeds or quadrupeds ; and the latterwere obliged to stand out in the storm, therebeing no shelter ^o be procured. It was perhapslucky that my cook did not appear, asthere was nothings on which he could have displayedhis talents. On the following morningColonel Machado endeavoured to atone for theprivations of the preceding night, by giving usan ample breakfast ; but nothing could be procuredfor the cattle ; the whole day was nearlyspent in ineffectual efforts to get even a littlegrass. The day continued wet and comfortless,and the only remarkable occurrence wasthe instalment of some officers of a masoniclodge, which was conducted, I believe, with therequisite formalities, for I saw a sentry at thedoor of the lodge, and the procession marchwith intense solemnity through the muddystreets.The town is small and paltry, though in themidst of a beautiful uncultivated district. Formerlythere were extensive sugar estates, particularlysome said to have belonged to the302 NOTES ON HAITIkdukes of Veranda, but they have been long inastate of absolute abandonment — the meretraces of the walls are all that now remain toattest their former size.As there was no chance of relief for my sufferinganimals, and I was told that, at aboutfour leagues further on the road to Azua, Ishould find every thing that^ould be requiredat a small farm called Savanna Buey, belongingto Senor Caminero's father-in-law, I sentoff the baggage, with a messenger from theowner directing provision to bfe made. Someof the party remained with me to wait for ourlost cook, who appeared about four o'clock,very drunk, with a strange story of havingmissed his way, and having reached San Cris-total.I believe that he had remained withsome of his pot-companions in the city.Colonel Machado furnished me as a guide(me of the best built negro men I ever saw. Hehad been a slave, was now a small proprietor,and a Serjeant of the mounted militia.He was exceedingly well behaved and attentive.Under his escort we proceeded on theroad to Savanna Buey, but darkness and rainovertook us before reaching it ; and on reachingit, dire was the consternation when it wasfound that the promised abundance hadMISERIES OF SAVANNA Bey. 303dwindled actually to nothing. Nor couldeither entreaty or offers of money induce thesluggard inhabitants of the cottage to makethe smallest effort to relieve the urgent wantsof the party : all that could be done for thehorses and mules was to tether them in themost green parts of the parched savanna. Therain continuing ;^^th unabated fury throughoutthe following day, rendered it impossible tomove, and as there was more success in procuringsupplies, I thought it right to afford thepoor animals rest and opportunity of recruitingthemselves after their long fast.The inhabitants of the hut that we occupiedwere blacks, very civil ; and one young fellow,when fairly excited, was sufficiently active indoing what was wanted. The great difficultyconsisted in giving the first impulse. By hisexertions a tolerable supply of grass was procured,some fowls and eggs, which, with plantains,enabled us to exist until the next day.May 27th. — Left Savanna Buey without regret,at an early hour. The road winds along thebeach of the Bay of Cocoa, which is a fine anchorage.As I passed along it, I almost fanciedI saw the spot on which the gallant actionwas fought by Sir John Duckworth with theFrench Admiral Seigle on the 6th of February,304 NOTES ON HAITI.1806, in which one of my most esteemed friendsserved on board the Canopus, under the flagof the late Sir Thomas Louis. We also passedthrough a forest of palm-trees of a large size,but differing from any I had ever seen. Thename I have forgotten ; but I recollect thatthe v^^ood is employed in building cottages,and the leaves in the manufacture of hats.We found shelter at a small hut called*^ Caracoles," the residence of a '* hatter," theson of Spanish parents. He had a wife andtwo very fine children, all of whom appearedas happy as people in a state of nature couldbe. He entered freely into conversation, and Ifound that his wants were few, that he couldsupply them very amply with very slight exertion,and that his utmost enjoyment was to beemployed in the mountains, either hunting wildhogs or the oxen called ^' bravos." The continuanceof the rain, and the exhaustion bothof servants and animals in consequence of exposureand privation, led to another day's rest,though the smallness of the accommodationrendered a sojourn by no means desirable. Itwas therefore a matter of gratification to findthat the rain had ceased on the morning of the28th, when, at an early hour, we took the roadto Azua. The road itself is, or rather was,Aqua COLONEL BELLEGARDE. 305tolerable — the country uncultivated unto theimmediate environs of the town, which wereached about twelve o'clock.We were very hospitably received by ColonelBellegarde and his wife, and lodged in the housedestined for the officers of the republic on theirjourneys. It was large and convenient, andwith the aid of a few chairs and tables from thecommandant's own residence, we were betteraccommodated than we had been since leavingSanto Domingo. Colonel Bellegarde, who is aman of colour, served with the French army, andwent with Rigaud in 1800 to France, whither hehad been accompanied by his wife. He informedme that he had remained in that service until1816, when he and all his countrymen being releasedfrom their obligations, they returned to Potion,who found employment for them in the armyof the republic. He had passed through nearlythe whole of the revolution, and complainedbitterly of the bad faith of General Le Clerc,who twice endeavoured to procure the massacreof the coloured people by exciting suspicionof their fidelity ; but in both instances hefailed. He had been also on the staff of Leblanc,one of the civil commissioners. Therewas infinite difficulty in procuring forage during306 NOTES ON HAITI.the early part of the day ; but the peasants, onfinding themselves faithfully paid, towards theevening, brought more than was wanted. Ifound that suspicion of the soldiers, who hadbeen sent in quest of it, had led to the holdingback. Indeed one person told me very frankly,that as the military were in the habit of neverpaying for any thing supplied to them, thecountry people always pleaded inability to meettheir demands. We dined with the commandant,and as the accounts of forage on the roadwere bad, I determined to allow the animals toindulge during the whole of the 29th. AlthoughI had on all occasions attended as scrupulouslyas possible to the condition of the cattle, I hadbeen obliged to leave two at Bani, and to engagetwo at this place to relieve an equal numberof their loads.Incessant rain prevented any examination ofthe neighbouring country. The town itself wassoon reviewed, as it consists of little more thanasquare, surrounded by paltry buildings of thepalm-tree, and three or four narrow streets runningout of it. Senior Pablo Baez, a Spanishresident and proprietor, also a member of thechamber of commons, entertained us this day.There was plenty of food seasoned with gar-departureFROM Aqua. 307lie, and much rude hospitality. During dinneran unfortunate negro girl was grinding oneof the most unmusical hand-organs that I everheard ; still I feel grateful for the intention,though my ears were almost cracked by theattempt at melody.Having left two more horses at Azua, SeniorBaez furnished us with two others, and a verydecent guide. We were also joined by twoblack men, the one an officer and the other aSerjeant, who were conveying despatches to thepresident. We were all put by Colonel Belle-gardeunder the care of a European Spaniard,who was an officer of the militia cavalry, andwas directed to see us safe to San Juan. Asthis person had been in the country during theinvasion by Dessalines, and we passed over thescenes of many of his cruelties, as well as overthe spot where the only opposition was made,between the frontier and the city, I naturallyexpected to have heard some interesting details; but I soon ascertained that my companionwas too drunk to do any thing but prateof his own consequence and the valour of hiscomrades. He became so troublesome that Iwas really glad to shake him off. We travelledalong the course of the river Tavern, which wasvery shallow, and breakfasted on its right bank308 NOTES ON HAITI.under the shade of some lofty trees, wherethere was grass for the horses. As soon as thisoperation was over, our military guide vanished,although he had been directed to conduct us toSan Juan. After my arrival at Port-au-Prince,I received a letter from Colonel Bellegardeinquiring what was the cause of his suddendeparture : I told the plain fact, without addingwhat I might have done on the subject ofdrunkenness and impertinence.We were more fortunate in the attendantprovided for us by Senor Baez, who knew thecountry thoroughly, and was civil and attentive.On reaching a pass called the ** Puerta,"one of the best mules was so exhausted that hewas left standing stock-still, and one of thehorses laid down and died on the road-side.Pursuing our course, we went to the first fordof the river Neybe, which communicates mostdirectly with San Juan ; but on reaching its leftbank, we found that the recent heavy rains hadswollen it so as to form a furious torrent, sweepingevery thing before it. The floating bodyof a dead horse excited some apprehensions foracourier who had passed us the preceding day,but fortunately he had escaped.One of the black officers had indulged toofreely in tafia, and had become very much in-ESCAPE OF Horse FROM DROWNING. 309intoxicated. He insisted on giving water to thehorses, and dragged in one of our exhaustedbaggage animals, which was instantly carriedoff his legs ; and before he could be caught,he was nearly killed by exhaustion, and allthe clothes in his load were completely soakedthrough. A second horse was also nearly lost ;indeed both were saved by the activity ofBaez's man, whose energies were roused by thefee of seven dollars. We intended to havegone on to a house on the banks of the LittleYaqui, one of the tributary streams of theNeybe ; but the state both of men and horsesrendering that design impracticable, we contentedourselves with halfms; at a miserableshed called Arroyo Salado, not far from theriver Mijo. The hut, or rather huts, werewretched ; the only furniture, hides in an undressedstate, stretched over a frame, servedas a bed, and a place of refuge for fleasand bugs, the stench being almost poisonous.Nothing was to be had except alittle milk ; but there was a profusion of wildguinea-fowls in the adjacent woods ; I had,however, no fowling-piece. In such a caseexpedients readily suggested themselves : someof my pistol-bullets were soonl^eaten into smallslugs, and a rusty musket supplied the place310 NOTES ON HAITI.of a Wanton or a Moore. By this means, beforedark two of the finest guinea-birds Iever saw were quietly stewing for supper.Every traveller in Haiti should be providedwith a fowling-piece, for there is abundance ofguinea-fowls, spoonfuls, ducks, doves andpigeons in every part of the East, and to themhe must very often trust for his supper.The only lights that could be procured were asort of cane gathered in the neighbourhood,and which burnt very quickly, giving a veryclear light. While sitting by the door, I wasattracted to a very picturesque scene : arounda table illuminated by one of these torches,stood all the shepherds coagulating milk, which,when prepared, supplied them with a frugalmeal, the remains of which were bequeathed totheir dogs : the irregular light — the variousshades of complexion — the half-clad men —altogether furnished a subject not unworthyof a Rembrandt.In the course of the evening one of the party,whose resistance of climate had been an objectof admiration to many, was attacked with serioussymptoms of cholera, which lasted withsuch severity throughout the night as to exciteconsiderable apprehensions ; but the use ofweak tea, the only diluent that we had, and aARROYO SALADO YAQUI. 311small quantity of brandy, restored him so much,that by the morning of the following day (the31st) he was able to mount with the rest ofthe party.Before starting, we got intelligence of thelarge mule, so that I sent for him to await atArroyo Salado the return of Baez's servant.This being arranged, we travelled about fourleagues to the banks of the Little Yaqui, socalled in contradistinction to the larger river ofthe same name, near to St. lago ; but it is, inreality, a very formidable body of water. Onreaching the first point that is usually fordable,though narrow, it was too deep, and fully asrapid as the Xeybe : we therefore kept stillon its left bank; and as I had been detainedso much longer on the road, and begun to feelvery sensibly the effects of exertion and exposure,I was exceedingly desirous of pushinc]^on, although I was aware that preparation hadbeen made by an opulent ^' hatter" not farfrom the river, I sent on, requesting his aidat the ford ; and in about an hour he appearedwith some assistants and a due supply of ropes,and conducted us safely over the ford, which isbroad, and, though not deep, was abundantlystrong. The operation was tedious, as it wasnecessary for the guides to lead each horse NOTES ON HAITI.partly ; and although there were at leasthalf-a-dozen men so employed, nearly twohours elapsed before the whole party had effectedthe passage. The road reminded mestrongly of a Spanish ^^ Camino Real" in a stateof neglect — wide and spacious, but scarcely fitfor travelling. I saw no traces of cultivation,but passed a few people on the road : indeed,we met a considerable party at the ford ontheir way to St. Domingo. I here sustained agrievous loss in such a country and at such atime ; one of my servants was so obliging asto leave my umbrella on the bank of theriver.In an open space, not unlike an Englishpark, with some very fine trees grouped on italittle to the right of the road, we were conductedto a cottage named Nicaragua, whichwas occupied by a Spanish woman and her family— she was a widow, and lived in a state ofprimitive ignorance. After disposing of the animals,I applied myself to the regular inquiryas to what was producible. Dona Catalina declaredthat nothing was to be had for love ormoney ; but on the withdrawal of the twosoldiers, and on my explaining that I shouldpay for all that I received, — like Moses in theSchool for Scandal, she had a very good friendNICARAGUA — LANDLADY. 313who could meet my wants. In a trice, a turkey,fowls, eggs and vegetables, appeared;and having been duly paid for, the Senorabecame confidential; and having heard thatgeneral formed a part of my designation, shehad concluded that I must be a military man ;and having so concluded, it appeared mostlikely that I was invading the country — notwith the handful of servants that accompaniedme, but with a formidable body in my rear.Assuring me that all I reposed in her would besafe, she proceeded to inquire how many EnglishmenI had left at Santo Domingo; andwhen I assured her that there were, to the bestof my belief, only two drunken sailors, shewas convinced that I was playing on her credulity.Finding that I could not add to herstock of political dreams, she at last contentedherself with nodding confidentially at me,winking, and thereby insinuating to herhousehold that there was a perfect understandingbetween herself and the formidableinvader.The situation of this cottage was preciselysuch as should be selected as a residence in awarm climate — open country, diversified withlarge forest trees, and abundance of water athand. We passed not only the night of theVOL. I. o314 NOTES ON HAITI.31st of May, but the best part of the followingday, at Nicaragua, allured by thecloudiness of the weather, which enabled usto take the road at noon-tide without riskfrom the glowing sun. We left Nicaragua inthe afternoon — crossed the Mijo — traversed abeautiful country, though little cultivated —and arrived, long before dark, at San Juan.The character of the vegetation differs sensiblyfrom that of the East ; the size of the trees isless; the country is more open; and there isconsiderably less variety of surface.The commandant of the arrondissement,Colonel Gardel, was absent; so was the commandantof the place. Colonel Hearers ; butthe town-adjutant very politely furnished uswith a house, and put us in communicationwith bakers, butchers, *' et hoc genus omne,"who speedily supplied our various wants.San Juan in days of yore had been a placeof note, and contained, as I was told, someconvents ; but they were all destroyed duringthe civil contests, though the final blow wasgiven by Dessalines. At present, even thetraces of the church are scarcely to be madeout ; and the town itself reminds one of the accountsgiven by travellers in India, of the villagesruined by a Pindaric incursion. ThereSAN JUAN ROCK SALT. 315being little to detain us except the demandfor rest, we left San Juan as soon as we could,about mid-day.Not far from this town are the masses ofrock salt near to the town of Neybe, whichare so abundant, that it might become anarticle of great trade. I have some specimenswhich are equal, if not superior, in purity, tothe finest rock salt I have ever seen. At nogreat distance, too, are the mineral springs ofBanquet, which I should have gladly visited,had either my leisure or health permitted meto tarry longer on the road.After leaving the road, we crossed the upperpart of the Neybe, which, though narrow,was very impetuous. The valley of San Juanwas very beautiful, though scantily cultivated.The rain was heavy, and retarded our progressvery much ; and before night-fall, havingfrom the baggage with one of my ownriding horses, which followed like a dog in ordinarycases, to my horror, when in the midstof a thick wood, he bolted off by a cross road,from which I vainly attempted to drive him.At length, after a chase of nearly half an hour,I caught his collar, and dragged him back, asnearly as I could guess, to the-road; but nightclosed so rapidly, that all traces soon vanished ;316 NOTES ON HAITI.and I was not a little cheered, after nearly twohours wandering in the dark, to find myself inthe village of Lamatta. After that, I had somelittle difficulty in finding out the commandantof the district. Colonel Gardel. When I didfind him he greeted me with much cordiality,and insisted on doing what I attempted toevade by a Spanish embrace — kissing me withthree audible salutes : it was a trifle ; yet Iconfess that I was never more completely annoyedby a trifle. At the commandant Sala's,I found ample and hospitable provision madefor all the party ; and by the time the baggagehad arrived, all the cares and annoyances ofthe preceding few hours were forgotten. Salais a native of Cuba, but had been long establishedat Lamatta. He was a decent man, apparentlyattached to his family; but desirousof convincing me that the elements of improvementwere innate in the country. He was theonly person in the Eastern portion of Haitithat I ever heard declare that he believedit possible to pay the contribution for theFrench indemnity. He gave some long detailsof the style of warfare under Dessalines andChristophe; and I can easily imagine that,having no means of subsisting elsewhere, withhis family around him, he prefers the evilsENTERTAINMENT AT LAMATTA. 317that are familiar, to those at which his recollectionrecoils.In the course of the evening some officersdropped in, and among others there was thechief of the rural police at a small villagecalled '"' Rancho Mateo," which it was supposedwe should barely be able to overtakethe next day, in consequence of the wretchedstate of the roads, arising from the incessantrains. This person undertook to make everypreparation for us, after what was anticipateda very wet ride ; and he set out for that purpose.On the morning of the 3d, I took leaveof Colonel Gardel and Commandant Lasala inspite of the unceasing rains, which more thanfulfilled our worst auguries, and riding throughvillanous roads overshadowed by magnificenttrees, we passed the river Metayaya and arrivedat Rancho Mateo, where I expected that ourfriend of the preceding evening would havebeen ready to have done the honours. Howwoefully men sometimes miscalculate on promises! No thorough tried courtier or aspirantunderling ever displayed a greater facility offorgetfulness than this rural chief: we couldnot even gain admission into the house, andwith difficulty we found a civil old negro toconduct us to an adjacent hut. The truth we318 NOTES ON HAITI.found to be, that our provider had ordered a gooddinner, but that he and a party of his friendshad devoured it, and had concluded with gettingmost gloriously drunk. He was incapableof moving from his seat when I presentedmyself at the door. However, the place inwhich we obtained refuge was very decent,and the proprietor, a black woman, made ampleamends for the fare that was wanting, byher zeal and civility. The worst of the disappointmentwas, that the animals were againunprovided with any food, except what wasderived from the scanty herbage, and theywere obliged to stand without any shelter inatorrent of rain. The mud floors of the cottagewere literally flooded, and my hammockwas the only safe place of refuge that I couldventure into. On the morning of the 4th therain had ceased, and was succeeded by one ofthose scorching suns that seem to penetrateinto the inmost recesses of the body. We left'' Rancho Mateo" for '' Las Caobas," andafter travelling through a fine line of road,rendered almost impassable by the rain forabout a league, I saw a man in uniform onhorseback, awaiting our approach like a vidette.On distinguishing his features, I soon recognizedour inhospitable volunteer landlord of theLUDICROUS BLUNDER. 319preceding day. DofRng his huge cocked hat,he accosted me by the style and title of admiral.In vain I stopped him, to assure himthat I was no admiral : he still persisted, nodoubt thinking that, as Englishmen are celebratedas seamen, the greatest compliment thatcould be paid to any individual Englishman, isto consider him as holding the first rank in themost distinguished profession of his country.Finding it useless to press upon him my wantof title to any thing like a naval character, Ilistened to his oration, in which he pleadedguilty to having been drunk, to having eatenmy dinner, and to having acted most atrociouslyand most inhospitably. I expressed myregret at his vices, and assured him that hisapology was so ample as to assuage all theirritation I had experienced. I question much,if my poor animals had been consulted, whetherhe would have got off so easily. I believe hewas dreadfully alarmed at my reporting him tothe President, of which I had never thoughtfor one moment. We parted on terms of civility,and I proceeded on the road to *^ LasCaobas," which we reached, after having crossedthe winding river Juan de Vera several times.The country was very much like what I haveso often mentioned, rich, luxuriant, and beausNOTES ON HAITI.tiful, but wholly neglected by man. At *^ LasCaobas" there is nothing remarkable, exceptits resemblance to a straggling village veryfamiliar to me in Cumberland. Our accommodationand fare were by no means tempting,though Colonel Hearers was most civil ; butthe prospect of soon terminating my wearypilgrimage enabled me to endure both withoutdifficulty.DEPARTURE FROM LAS CAOBAS, 321CHAPTER XIII.Departure from Las Caobas — Boundary of old colonies — RiverFar de Cheval" — Aqueducts — Mirebalais — FortificationsRiver Artibonite — Kind treatment by the commandant,Colonel Charles Jeune — Journey to the capital — Trianon-mountainpass — Morne Cabrit — Fond an Diable— Plain ofCul de Sac — Arrival at cottage — Occupations — Rumoured insurrection— Trial and execution of four black officers— Generalobservations on Haiti — Illness — Departure for Jamaica.The morning of the 5th, which was fair,saw us in motion from ^^ Las Caobas." Theroad runs over a mountainous district, whichabounds in some of the finest mahogany treesI have yet seen. Were there any means ofconveyance to the capital, a very advantageoustrade in that beautiful wood might be carriedon to a great extent ; but at present nothingcan be done.About half a league from the village stands322 NOTES ON HAITI.a military post called Poste Gros Roche,which was formerly one point of the boundarybetween the two colonies — the fact is statedon the rock, which is also marked 193 : an inscriptionthat was unintelligible, not only tomyself, but to every person that was asked forasolution.Lower down, on reaching the valley, we encounteredthe rapid stream called ^' Per deCheval," which from the recent rains was renderednearly impassable. The passage was,however, effected in safety to all, except anunlucky cat belonging to a soldier who hadjoined our party. To secure his dumb companion,he had put her into a bag with his cap,and slung them over his shoulder ; but in thestruggle with the torrent, bag, cap, and catwere carried off with resistless force. Thecountry traversed on this day was more free fromwood, and consisted of grass-clad downs, onwhich very large pine-trees flourished, thoughthey were by no means equal to those I hadseen on the table lands of Mexico.Nearer to Mirebalais there are some smallplains, which are traversed by admirably arrangedaqueducts, for the purpose of irrigation.During the French sway, enormous expenseTOWN OF Mirabilis. 323had been incurred in establishing them ; butnow the abandonment of the sugar cultivation,and the non-introduction of any other in itsstead, have rendered them useless ; and therebeing no urgent necessity for attending to them,they are neglected and falling into decay, forwhich there will be soon no remedy, exceptat an expense equal to that originally incurred.At a short distance from the town of Mire-calais,the town opened upon us, with its fortifications,standing on the precipitous bank ofthe Artibonite, the lower part of which I hadpassed between Gonaives and St. Mark's. Thisplace has been for some time destined to betheseat of goverment. A fort has been thereerected, a depot of arms and ammunition established,and several buildings have been commenced.The progress, however, is slow ; andmore money must circulate in Haiti than thereis now, before the new capital can attain perfection.The climate is said to be healthy, andfrom its elevation the currents of air are lessstagnant than in the plains below, renderingthe heat, though considerable, infinitely moretolerable. I have remarked that the sensationof oppression from a high temperature withinthe tropics, is very much modified by the state324 ?Notes ON HAITI.of the motion of the atmosphere. If the aircirculate freely, almost any heat may be endured; but if stagnant, exhaustion and inabilityto exertion are the unavoidable consequences.This fact is well known even in England, butis often overlooked in comparing the absoluteheat of tropical regions, the hottest of which isoften more healthy and bearable than the coolest.— This apparent anomaly may, in manyinstances, be explained, by the slowness orrapidity of the evaporation process.I was debarred from determining the elevationby barometric observations in consequenceof the destruction of the tube of my barometer— a loss which, having occurred very earlyin my journey, interfered with all my intendedadmeasurements .Having letters for the General (Benjamin),I repaired to his house, and learned that he wasat Port-au-Prince ; but the commandant of thetown. Colonel Charles Jeune, treated us withcordiality and kindness. In the course of theday we were joined by several officers from theneighbourhood, one of whom engaged to accompanyus the following day to the capital. Itstruck me as a bad arrangement, that all theforage for the horses was obtained from theMirabilis TO PORT-AU-PRl Once. 325opposite bank of the Artibonite — an operationthat cost nearly the whole afternoon.Mirebalais is well placed as a capital as wellas a military position. It is quite protected bya chain of hill-forts towards the plain of GuideSac, flanked by a rapid and deep stream,and commanding the most important pass tothe north and to the east. There is an air ofimprovement about it highly creditable to thoseentrusted with it.Early on the morning of the 6th we leftMirebalais in the dark, under the guidanceof some black officers ; and after descendingthrough some ugly passes, we found ourselves atthe peep-of-day at '' Trianon," a truly beautifullittle spot, once a place of retreat to the half-broiledinhabitants of Port-au-Prince ; but nowoccupied apparently by a few cultivators, who donot much regard the beauty of the scene. Proceedingonwards through ^^ Fond au Diable,"we reached the portion of the road which windsround the side of ^^ Morne Cabrit," which appearsto be composed of a very beautiful compactgrey limestone : several hill-forts protectthis pass. From this part of the road there is asplendid view of the whole Cul de Sac, which,with the exception of the open space occupied326 NOTES ON HAITI.by the " Croix des Bouquets," appears to beone continuous forest, bounded by the sea, bythe lakes, and skirted by the mountain-arm thatstretches from the south side of the bay ofPort-au-Prince to the district of Neybe ; andat certain breaks a glimpse was caught of theapproaches to Arcahai. The plan of the roadis good, but rough, and requiring Macadam'said in an eminent degree. We passed somepieces of artillery waiting by the road-side, 1suppose, for amended roads.After stopping for refreshment at some hutsby the way-side, and crossing the GrandeRiviere, we arrived, completely knocked up,about five o'clock in the afternoon at my cottage,where I gladly met the gentleman whomI had sent home with despatches in the precedingOctober; and the satisfactory assurancethat no deaths had happened during my absence.In the evening the melancholy remnantof my horses arrived ; twelve out of twenty-onehaving been left on the road; and one diedafter arrival. My time thenceforward was devotedto official duties preparatory to goinghome ; and the chief matter to be recordedshall be now told, although it is a melancholytale.TRIAL OF FOUR OFFICERS. 327Very soon after my arrival, rumours prevailedof a dissatisfied spirit being at work, on accountof the arrangements with France ; but noovert act occurred, or was said to occur, beforeQiy return from my journey. At this time theboldness of the discussions excited the attentionof the government, and on the 26th June threeblack officers were arrested on a charge ofhaving tampered with a soldier, to join them inassassinating the president. The ostensibleprime mover of the plan, Captain Belgrade,also a negro, escaped. In the course of a fewdays after several arrests took place, and disclosuresof importance were reported to havebeen made as to the extent of the dissatisfaction.The trial of the three accused was firstfixed for the 2d July ; but the subsequent arrestof a fourth black officer produced a delay untilthe 3d of the same month, when the four accused,Captain Jean Francois, Lieutenant Michel,Lieutenant Lion, and Serjeant Lion Cour-choirs,were brought before a court-martial,consisting of nine members, seven of whomwere blacks. The prisoners were charged withconspiring to murder the president, to expel ormurder all Europeans, and to alter the government.They denied the intention to murder328 KOTES ON HAITI*the president, or any of the foreigners; butavowed their wish to put an end to the existingsystem of government, which they treated asoppressive, and to break off all connexion withFrance — a connexion which they consideredto be maintained merely to extort the last oftheir miserable pittance.I was not in court, but I was told that thisstyle of defence was soon stopped ; nor werethe counsel permitted to discuss the inapplicabilityof the law under which the trial wasgoing on, to the particular cases ; or to adduceevidence of their innocence. It was even assertedthat, on one of the advocates urging hisright to be heard, he was stopped by the president'sholding out his watch, and remarking,as he pointed to it, " le tens presse."The accused were convicted and sentencedto death. They called for a court of revision,which was refused ; and in two or three hoursthe unfortunate men were at the place of execution.The place of execution is a large open spaceclose to the principal burying-ground, called'■'■ La Cimetiere." On my riding there I founda considerable body of people assembled, andsome women, clothed in white, close to theEXECUTION OF THE OFFICERS. 329ditch that surrounds the place of interment,uttering wild cries, and exhibiting frantic gesticulations.They were the wives and femalerelatives of the unhappy convicts.The ground was guarded by the civic militia,whose apprehensions had been strongly excitedhy rumours of pillage meditated by the sufferers.A considerable body of troops, said tohave been disaffected, remained in quarters,and the artillery, under the command of one ofthe most devoted of the president's adherents,were drawn up, during the time of the execution,at no very remote distance.I had not been long on the ground before thebustle announced the approach of the four convicts.Each was tied, by the arms behind hisback, to a rope in the hands of a police-soldier,who walked after him ; each too was dressedin a white jacket and trowsers, and smoked acigar. A strong guard surrounded the wholeof the prisoners, and the melancholy processionwas closed by the shooting party, which consisted,as well as I can recollect, of about five-and-twentymen.I shall never forget the firm intrepidity withwhich these poor fellows advanced to meet theirfate. They moved on without the slightest hesi-330 NOTES ON HAITI.nation until they arrived at the fatal spot, close toa dead wall, at the extremity of the open spacealready referred to. On reaching it they stillremained pinioned ; but the policemen retired,and the shooting party advanced v^^ith evidentreluctance. At the word being given the firingcommenced, and instead of the wretched scenebeing closed by one, or at most two well-directedfires, there was absolutely a succession of dischargesresembling a feu-de-joie. I am surethat not less than one hundred discharges musthave taken place before the execution wasended. On reaching the ground, the wholefour refused to be bandaged, threw off theirhats, and exclaimed to their executioners, " Necraignez pas !" The first volley only slightlywounded Captain Francois, who stood at the extremeleft ; a second brought him down, thoughstill alive. Michel was shot through the bodyin several places, and had both his arms brokenbefore he fell. Lieutenant Lion fell next, afterhaving been severely wounded. During thewhole of this revolting exhibition, Serjeant LionCourchois was standing on the extreme rightof the party, calmly smoking a cigar, withoutmoving a limb or a muscle of his face. A ballthrough his body brought him to the ground,EXECUTION OF THE OFFICERS. 331and as he touched it, he spat the cigar from hismouth, and calmly discharged the volume ofsmoke from his lungs. The firing party thenadvanced, and putting the muzzles of theirpieces to the bodies of these unhappy men,ended their sufferings by blowing them literallyto pieces. At this part of the exhibition Igladly rode off, for it was the most revolting Ihad ever witnessed ; and strongly as I felt thedisgusting cruelty of the proceeding, I was morestrongly impressed with admiration of thecool, resolute, and unpretending intrepidity ofthese poor fellows, who had no strong stimulusto maintain their energy. They dreamt notof future immortality, nor that a record shouldever be made of a firmness and courage whichwould have done honor to any Roman. Whetheradmiration for the conduct of the dead,or disbelief of the charges against them operatedmost, I cannot pretend to say, but therewas certainly a general gloom after the execution,such as I never before witnessed in Haiti.On the 5th, proclamation was made that theindividuals executed, instigated by a desire ofpillage, had attempted a revolutionary movement,which had been frustrated ; and that allwas peace and happiness.332 NOTES ON Hath.Every friend of humanity must sincerely wishthat this may be the case, and that there maybeno recurrence to those scenes of slaughterthat must for ever disgrace the Haitian annals ^Yet there is too much reason to fear that theexpectation held out was too sanguine ; forsince I left the republic, there has been morethan one account of tumultuary proceedings,which have, at least in one instance, ended withthe death of one or two individuals. Indeed thepressure of the French indemnity is of itself calculatedto unsettle the minds of the population.It hangs, like the tyrant's sword, by an invisiblehair, and may descend to crush at any moment.France knows, better than I can pretend to do,her own interests ; yet I confess that I cannotdiscover the policy of pressing an improvidentarrangement on an impoverished people, scarcelyable to support themselves, and therebykeeping up all the ancient recollections of LeClerc and Rochambeau. The nominal friendsof Haiti, in England, France, and the UnitedStates, have incurred a fearful responsibility onthis point : for what purpose they best know,they have represented the progress of the newrepublic in the most glowing colours — its increasingprosperity has been so often asserted,DELAY OF DEPARTURE. 333as to expose any one hardy enough to questionit, to the certainty of attack and worthless imputation.The necessary consequence has beenthat conditions have been imposed (as I haveno doubt in consequence of the excited expectationsof France), that cannot be fulfilled, andeven if much reduced, must check the improvementof the country to an indefinite period.In the preceding Notes I have faithfully recordedmy own observations, and such statementsas I found worthy of credit, immediatelyconnected with these observations. In the latterportion of my labours, I shall present theresult of my researches into the more importanttopics connected with the country, its government,inhabitants, and resources.My stay at this time at Port-au-Prince (asthe late Mr. Canning had given me leave toreturn home on account of my health,) wouldhave been very short ; for I felt the gradual approachesof an indescribable something thatwarned me to go. But there was so much toconclude that it was impossible for me to leavemy post with any degree of satisfaction. I hadnearly accomplished all that I had planned, onthe 7th of July, 1827, when I was attacked by334 NOTES ON HAITI.fever that very nearly closed my career. Forseven days I was in a state of delirium, duringwhich period neither my medical attendants,nor any one about me, deemed it possible thatI could survive. I was partially paralyzed onthe left side, and I could not pronounce articulatesounds. An immense crop of boils burstout on every part of my body, and probablysaved my life. There are, I believe, few instancesof recovery from so serious an attack ofyellow fever, the severity of which was veryconsiderably augmented by the intense bodilyand mental exertions I had previously made.My recovery was more rapid than might havebeen anticipated, for by the 12th of August Ihad embarked for Jamaica.During my illness, my brother, two of thevice-consuls, and my excellent friend. CaptainElliot of the Harlequin, were also laid up withdangerous sickness ; most cheering informationfor Sir John Louis, who had brought up theBashan to convey me to Jamaica, as AdmiralFleming had no vessel that he could send directto Europe.In His Majesty's ship Valorous, under thecommand of the late Earl of Huntingdon, fromJamaica I visited Cuba, and afterwards theFINAL DEPARTURE. 335United States, whence I made my way in thepacket-ship Corinthian from New York, andlanded at Portsmouth, on the 27th of November,after a most boisterous and unsatisfactorypassage of twenty-seven days, in a conditionthat required constant medical treatment fornearly twelve months afterwards.END OF VOL. I,PRINTED BV A. J, VALPY, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET