NOTES ON HAITIVOL. II.NOTES ON HAITI,MADE DURING A RESIDENCEIN THAT REPUBLIC.CHARLES Mckenzie, Esq. F.R.S.F.L.S.LATE HIS MAJESTY'S Consul-general IN HAITI,AND NOW HIS MAJESTY'S COMMISSIONER OF ARBITRATIONIN THE Savanna, &C. &C.Quid dem"? quid non dem? renuis quod tu, jubet alter.IIorat.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:HENRY Colour AND RICHARD BENTLEY,NEW BURLINGTON STREET.1830.i D BY A. J. Valet,i , Fleet STRICT.CONTENTSTHE SECOND VOLUME.CHAP. I.First discovery — Cacique governments — First town built byColumbus— Incursions of buccaniers — Conquest of the Westby French — Boundary fixed — Characters of the two colonies,and their population — Animosity of castes in the French colonyRevolution in France — Effects in colony — Application ofcoloured people to National Assembly — Effects — Violent actsof Assembly Page 1CHAP. II.Arrival of Oge— Failure of enterprise — Capture — Trial —Execution — Insurrections in the West and South — GeneralAssembly repair to France — Conduct condemned — Decreesannulled — Progress of revolution— Murder of Colonel MaudlinFlight of General Blanchelande — Conflicting decrees respectingcivil rights — Slave insurrection — Organisation of re-VOL. II. bVI CONTENTS.voters— Discord of whites and coloured parties— Interferenceof mother country — Commissioners — Partial success of theirmeasures 18CHAP. III.Arrival of new commissioners — Imprudent discussions — Returnof Ailhaud, Sonthonax, and Polverel, with full power —Revolution advances — Pierrot and Macaya — Liberty of slavesproclaimed, first by Sonthonax, afterwards by Polverel — Englishinvasion— New commissioners— Toussaint Coverture — History— Sonthonax sent to France — General Hedouville — Contestsbetween Toussaint and Rigaud — Attempts of Consuls—Colonial constitution — French invasion — Bloody war — SuccessofLeclerc — Expulsion of Rochambeau 36CHAP. IV.First establishment of independence — Dessalines, general-inchief— Character — Treachery — Declaration of independenceAtrocity of Dessalines — Invasion of the East — Assumptionof imperial dignity — Cruelties— Revolution — Establishment oftwo republics under Christophe and Petion— Christophe king —His character— Laws— Court — Nobility — Order of knighthood—Policy — Treasure — Death — Consequences . 55CHAP. V.Petion elected President — His history — His system — Friendlyto Britain— Gannun'fl revolt— Arrival of Rigaud — Separation of- .ili— Five governments— Death of Petion— Election ofCONTENTS. VllBoyer — Union of whole Island — French negotiations — BaronMackau — Recognition of independence — Arrival of foreignagents 74CHAP. VI.Government — Population — Ecclesiastical Establishment . 90CHAP. VII.Agriculture 133CHAP. VIII.Commerce and Finances 171CHAP. IX.Army — Navy — Defences 198Appendix 207NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER I.First discovery — Cacique governments — First town built byColumbus— Incursions of buccaniers — Conquest of the Westby French— Boundary fixed — Characters of the two colonies,and their population — Animosity of castes in the Frenchcolony — Revolution in France — Effects in colony — Applicationof coloured people to National Assembly — Effects —Violent acts of Assembly.When Columbus on his first voyage had visitedthe Bahama islands and Cuba, he accidentallydiscovered the island of Haiti, on the5th of December, 1492. He gave to it the nameof Hispaniola : it was subsequently better knownunder that of St. Domingo ; but since the establishmentof independence in 1803, the originaldesignation has been resumed.VOL. II. A2 NOTES ON HAITI.Its greatest length, from east to west, isabout one hundred and sixty leagues; and itso n test breadth, from north to south, nearlyforty leagues; while its circumference, includingthe sinuosities of the coast, is estimatedat three hundred and fifty, but the actual lineof sea-coast does not fall far short of six hundred.The surface is calculated to extend overtwo thousand four hundred and fifty squareleagues.Three principal chains of mountains (fromwhich emanate smaller mountain arms) runfrom the central group of Cibao. The whole ofthese are described as fertile and susceptible ofcultivation, even to their summits, affordinggreat variety of climate, which, contrary towhat is the fact in the plains, is remarkablythy. The soil of the plains is, in general,a very rich vegetable mould, exceedingly fertileand well watered. There are several largerivers, and an immense number of smallerstreams, some tributary and others indecentlyports are numerous and good.Timber of the finest description is most abundant,and mines of gold, silver, copper, tin, iron,and rock salt, besides other mineral productions,are said not to be wanting. The Frenchare, therefore, fully borne out in designating thisSTATE AT FIRST DISCOVERY. 3magnificent island " La Reine des Antilles. "There are also three considerable inland lakes.Several islands immediately adjacent to Haiti,such as Gonave, Tortuga, Isle des Vaches,Sana, and others, which are either wholly ornearly uninhabited, form the dependencies ofthe republic.At the time of the discovery, the island isdescribed to have been divided into five independentkingdoms, each under the governmentof a cacique, to whom the Indians yielded implicitobedience. It does not* fall within thescope of my present design to say more of thesepeople and their institutions, as my object is todelineate more recent events, for the right understandingof which it is only necessary togive a very rapid sketch of the progress of theseveral European establishments that have beenformed in the island.Columbus' first establishment was the cityLa Isabella," on the north side of the island,and so named in honour of his royal patroness.At a subsequent period, though not long after,his brother Diego founded the city of SantoDomingo, which, on the abandonment of Isabella,became the capital. I have already noticedthe change in the site of this city from theleft to the right bank of the river Zama.4 NOTES ON HAITI.Various towns were successively built by theSpanish governors, notwithstanding the almostconstant internal dissensions that prevailed,even from the period of its first discovery ; butwith the exception of some ravages by thebuccaniers, by Drake and others, no systematicor successful permanent inroad appears to havebeen made before 1625, when a formidablebody of their previously transient enemies, thebuccaniers, commenced a series of attacks, andin 1630 took forcible possession of the islandof Tortuga, from which they expelled the residentSpaniards. This island, which lies abouttwo leagues to the north of Port de Paix, wasa most advantageous post for the freebooters,who continued their unsanctioned depredationsuntil 1 665, when a formal settlement with theauthority of the French government was effectedby the same description of men, under the commandof a French gentleman named Oberon.From that time to the end of the seventeenthcentury, the warfare between the two neighbourswas incessant; in the course of which, however,the original aggressors gradually extended theirpossessions to the larger island ; and as therights of coast were undefined, the collisionswere so frequent, that it became necessary forthe courts of Versailles and Madrid to determineCHARACTER OF THE COLONIES. 5the boundary of the two colonies. This was donein 1776, by the " Traite des Limites." By thistreaty it was decided that the boundary pointto the south should be at " Anse a Pities," andto the north in the bay of Mandeville, betweenwhich two points an undulating line passed byVallies, San Raphael, the Black Mountain, andthe Salt Lake ; so that, with the exception ofa small portion, the French colony no whereextended more than ten leagues from some partof the coast, while the sea line was not lessthan two hundred and thirty leagues in extent.The facilities of access to the coast were considerablyless in the Spanish portion of theisland.The Spaniards possessed nearly two-thirds ofthe surface, while their neighbours boasted ofa population nearly six times greater than thatof the more extensive region.Besides these differences, there were othersfully as remarkable in the constitution of thesociety, and in the objects of pursuit. TheSpanish court had, at a very early period, abandonedthis its first American colony to its ownresources; the French government and nation,on the other hand, regarded their portion astheir most valuable colony : and while depressionand langour pervaded the one, activity6 NOTES ON HAITI.and riches distinguished the other; yet bothwere slave colonies, differing, however, veryessentially in the relative proportions of thedifferent classes of the community, as well asin other circumstances. The free Spaniards, ofall complexions, much exceeded the number ofslaves; while the French slave population verylargely predominated ; and there seems to haveexisted as marked a difference in the treatmentof the subordinate castes by the dominant one,on the two sides of the boundary.The Spanish slave laws are well known to besingularly mild ; and there does not appear tohave existed any desire on the part of the proprietorsto contravene them. From all theevidence I have been able to collect, I am satisfiedthat, (in spite of very strong prejudices,which the native historian Valverde appearsto have considered very praiseworthy, since hedeemed it necessary to assert their existence,)the treatment of the subordinate castes wasremarkably humane : no practical distinctionfounded on the colour of the skin of the individual,prevailed ; and I have been assured bya very distinguished officer of high rank in theBritish navy, that he has seen, not manyyean ago, respectable white masters occupyingwith their guests the upper part ofTREATMENT OF THE SLAVES. /the table, while the slaves sat " below thesalt."The strongest fact that was ever stated to meinconfirmation of the mildness of the coursepursued, was mentioned by a Spanish residentin Santo Domingo, and afterwards corroboratedby others, Haitians as well as foreigners. AlthoughSpanish merchants were in the habit oftaking their slaves with them, when carried bybusiness into territories of the neighbouring republic,there is no instance of any one of thelatter having abandoned his master, althoughthe moment he passed the frontier, he was.de facto," free.The French, on the other hand, are said notto have borne their faculties with much meeknessto their slaves. In spite of the protectingprovisions of the code noir, the practice is reportednot to have upheld the rights so protected;and tales of cruelty unparalleled, exceptperhaps in the annals of the French revolution,or in those of the invasion of Spain la 1808, arerecorded, which would be deemed mere fabrications,were it not from the frequency of theirrepetition. Colonel Malenfant details some revoltingcircumstances, especially connected witha certain M. Caradeux, an extensive proprietorin the Cul de Sac; and Vastey, in his " System8 NOTES ON HAITI.Colonial Devil," devotes thirty-five pages tocelebrate the atrocities of above one hundredproprietors, especially named. Indeed, in allHaitian accounts of French cruelty before1788, there are very ample details of a similardescription.M. . Caradeux and others are described ashaving ordered offending slaves to be throwninto burning furnaces ; but I never, however,met with any person who could of his ownknowledge declare that such was a fact. ButI have been assured, on authority of respectability,that among the ruins of the buildingsplaces of frightful solitary confinement may stillbe traced. After making every allowance forthe exaggeration to which excited passions givebirth, there is too much reason to believe thattoo many of the French proprietors in St. Domingowere as foolishly and irregularly indulgentto their slaves in moments of relaxation,as they were harsh and unrelenting at otherseasons. Such a system necessarily encouragedangry passions among the serfs, whom it peculiarlyfitted for being acted upon by those whochose to avail themselves of their excited feelings.Nor was this excitation likely to be lessenedby the large yearly importations of theseunhappy people from Africa, which were con-conditionOF THE COLOURED CASTE. 9tinned even after the revolution had begun itscourse.The condition of the free-coloured populationwas, if possible, worse than that of the slaves,although, by the fifty-seventh article of thecode noir, even foreign-born slaves, on beingmanumitted, were entitled to enjoy the advantagesof natural-born free subjects.* It is describedby various persons as truly degraded.Although individually free, all coloured personswere considered public property, and, as such,exposed to perpetual insult and humiliation :they were governed by a set of local laws applicableonly to them. As soon as they had attainedthe age of manhood, they were obliged to servethree years in the " marechaussee," a kind ofmilitia, to keep the runaway slaves in check :they were besides compelled to serve in the regularmilitia. During a considerable portion ofthe year, they were subject to a corvee for themaintenance of the roads : they were excludedfrom all public employment, as well as from anyof the liberal professions : they could not even beschoolmasters or apothecaries ; and lastly, themixed races were not permitted to bear thenames of their white progenitors. The number• See Appendix, note (Q.)10 NOTES ON HAITI.of this class of the population at the commencementof the French revolution, was not far shortof thirty thousand ; and as many of them, evenamong the free blacks, had enjoyed all the advantagesof European education, these disqualificationspressed with great severity, and gaverise to a spirit of resistance, which it must beacknowledged to have been perfectly natural.The infliction of physical injury will be resentedby the most rude as well as the most enlightened; but the privation of political and personalrights will be the more keenly felt and resisted,in proportion to the mental improvement of theindividual suffering from it.The constitution of the white population alsoappears to have been singularly fitted fordisorder : they were divided into two greatclasses — Europeans and Creoles, or natives ofthe island. The former were generally publicfunctionaries or the military, who regarded themselvesas holding the first rank in the community,over which they are said to have exercisedmuch petty tyranny. The remainder of the Europeanswere merchants, some few proprietors,and adventurers in every trade and profession.The lower order, who generally exercised the mechanicalarts, and carried on a large share of theretail trade, were called the "petitsblancs,"andWHITE POPULATION. 11they particularly distinguished themselves bytheir opposition to the free people of colour.The resident creole-whites considered themselvesthe heirs of the soil, and lived principallyon their estates ; some few being merchants, orpursuing some other profession besides planting,lived in the towns as well as the great bulk ofthe Europeans. It seems to be understood onall hands that great jealousies existed amongthe whole of the whites ; and to add to their disunion,the events of 1789 in the mother countrycame in aid, and gave birth to an additionaldistinction — that of royalist and republican.Thus, though there were ostensibly threeparties or castes, each in a high state of excitation,there was another subdivision, whicheventually brought about alliances between partiesthat under ordinary circumstances wouldhave been most hostile to each other ; and alsobrought into collision those who otherwisewould have had but one common interest.*The political changes which had begun to" Un esprit d'£goisme, d'orgueil, et de vanity remnant danstoutes les classes : les grands planters ni6prisaient les petitsblancs ; les petits blancs meprisaient les hommes de couleur etnoirs affrauchis, et ceux-ci, a leur tour, les malheureux esclaves."Essai sur les Causes de la Revolution, &c. Par LeBaron Vastey, p. 4.]'2 NOTES ON HAITI.develop themselves in France, in the course of1788, had excited an almost feverish state inthe colony ; and that was carried to its heightby the resolution of the States General, on the27th of December of that year, to admit intothat body a number of the " Tiers Eat," equalto that of the other two orders. The colonistsclaimed a right to participate in the representation; and in spite of the exertions of thegovernor-general Duchilleau to moderate thepopular ebullitions and to prevent the formationof parochial assemblies, they were organised inall parts ; and they unanimously voted that thecolony had the right of sending deputies tothe States General : accordingly eighteen wereelected ; and without being summoned by thegovernment at home, or authorised by that ofthe island, they embarked for France. Theyarrived about a month after the formation ofthe National Assembly ; but only six of themwere allowed to verify their powers and to taketheir seats.It is said that the society of the " Amis desNbirs" was established about this time, for thepurpose of ameliorating the condition of the blackpopulation in the West Indies : its leading memberswere Bristol, Petion, Mirabeau, Claire,Contorted, and the celebrated Abbe Gregory.REVOLUTIONARY EXCITEMENT. 13The planters of St. Domingo, on the otherhand, formed the " Club Massive," so namedfrom the hotel in which they held their meetings,for the avowed purpose (I state this onthe authority of Placide Justin*) of supportingthe revolution ; but in reality, only to do so whensuch support was calculated to give them weightagainst the authorities in the colony, who weresupposed to favour the principles of an equalityof rights among all the free population. Thissociety is also described to have contributed,by its correspondence with secret societies inthe colony founded on principles similar totheir own, very largely to unsettle the minds ofthe population.The capture of the Bastille acted so powerfullyon the feelings of the colonists, that theybecame the aggressors, and demanded from theintendant-general Barbe Marquis an accountof his official acts, for which he was responsibleonly to the king. As resistance might have beenhazardous as well as unavailing, this officer,by the advice of the governor-general Penser,who had succeeded Duchilleau, did not awaitthe proposed investigation, but withdrew toFrance.Whatever was emblematic of the revolutionHistoire d'Hayti, pp. 176, 177.14 NOTES ON HAITI.was hailed with transport in the colony ; thenational colours were adopted with enthusiasm,and the militia assimilated to the national guardof France. But in the midst of all this transport,there were apprehensions of insurrection ; and ona ridiculous rumour of the revolt of three thousandnegroes, the national guard marched outfrom the Cape, and returned without havingseen an enemy. This report was injurious, asit suggested to the slaves the possibility of thereported event being realized.The free-people of colour, though peaceful,were not inattentive to passing events: theysent a deputation to France, to claim their naturalrights from the legislature. That deputationappeared on the 22d of October, 1789,at the bar of the National Assembly, with astatement of their grievances — presented sixmillions of livres to France — and declared theirconstituents to be ready to contribute one-fifthof their property to liquidate the national debt.The President of the Assembly assured themthat no part of the nation ever reclaimed, invain, their rights from the Assembly of Representativesof the French people."It was about this time that M. Charles deLambeth, one of the deputies, made his well-knowndeclaration : —CONTINUED EXCITEMENT. 15lam one of the greatest proprietors in St.Domingo ; but I declare to you that, were Ito lose all I possess, I should prefer it, ratherthan not recognise the principles that justiceand humanity have consecrated: I declare myselfin favour of the admission of the mixedraces into the administrative assemblies, and ofthe liberty of the blacks."Such declarations appear to have inspiredconfidence in the coloured population, who,thenceforward began to press their claims inthe colony itself, though with little success;for one of their number, one Combe, wasexecuted at the Cape for having signed a petitionbeginning, " In the name of the MostHoly Trinity ;" and in the west, M. Errandde Audire, who had been seneschal of thePetit Goave, was murdered in a popular sedition,because he had drawn up a petition forhis coloured neighbours, claiming political privileges.The " petits blancs" had their fullshare in these transactions, according to generalreport.Some parishes, however, did concede to thefree-coloured population the right of assistingat the primary assemblies; but on its beingrequired that, in addition to the civic oath, theyshould take another to respect the whites, a16 NOTES ON HAITI.refusal was given and arms taken up ; tranquillitywas, however, re-established withoutbloodshed.Scarcely was the public irritation allayed,when it was again excited by the decree of theNational Assembly of the 8th March 1790. Bythis decree the general principle of self-legislationwas conceded ; but there being no mentionof the mixed races, they were excluded bya limited interpretation of its import. At thetime of its arrival, two hundred and thirteenrepresentatives of the colony had met at St.Mark's, and created themselves into a GeneralAssembly ; and one of their first acts was adeclaration that all the whites would preferdeath to sharing political rights with " a bastardand degenerate race ; " and they votedthemselves the only lawful representatives ofthe colony. On the 28th of May they issueda declaration of their rights, which many moderatemembers refused to sign, and withdrew.Freed from their embarrassing presence, theyproceeded to organise committees of war, ofmarine, and even of diplomacy ; and venturedto summon the heads of the colonial government.The governor-general Penser, finding hisauthority to totter, endeavoured to uphold it byTWO GOVERNMENTS. 17secretly encouraging the coloured party, who,under such sanction, did not omit to press theirpretensions.From these dissensions there arose two governments; one consisting of the governor-general,assisted by the superior council of Port-prince;and the other of the General Assembly.The latter attempted to settle the dispute byvoting their opponents to be traitors, openedthe ports to all nations, and organised troops,holding out inducement to those in the king'sservice to abandon their colours. They alsosucceeded in corrupting the crew of the Leopard,a fifty-gun ship, then in the bay of .These acts of violence induced the governorto dissolve the General Assembly, alleging thetreasonable acts as the cause of doing so. Violentproceedings on both sides followed, and atlast the Assembly embarked in a body on boardthe Leopard for France, to lay their grievancesbefore the National Assembly. On. their departurethe governor convoked the primaryassemblies ; but some did not meet, and othersre-elected their old deputies.18 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER ILArrival of Og6— Failure of enterprise— Capture — Trial— Execution—Insurrections in the West and South — General Assemblyrepair to France — Conduct condemned — Decreesannulled — Progress of revolution — Murder of Colonel Maudlin— Flight of General Blanchelande — Conflicting decreesrespecting civil rights — Slave insurrection — Organisation ofrevolters — Discord of whites and coloured parties — Interferenceof mother country — Commissioners — Partial successof their measures.While the effects of these events were stillagitating the public mind, a new characterwas given to the dissensions by the appearanceat Cape Francois of Vincent, or as he is calledby some, James Oge. This individual wasone of the commissioners selected from theirbody by the people of colour in St. Domingo,and sent to France to urge their politicalclaims. Failing in this expectation, anddriven by pecuniary difficulties, he came toARRIVAL OF OG&. 19London, whence he proceeded to the UnitedStates, and finally landed at Cape Francois, underthe name of Poissac, with (as the French writersallege) the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and ofknight of the order of the Lion, # both of whichhe had purchased from the Prince of Limbourg.His proceedings had been so watchedby the agents of the club Massive, that theywere all known to the local authorities, andeven his portrait had been transmitted, toverify his identity. He proceeded, on landing,to Dondon, his native place, and joined a personof his own caste named Charade, andcollected a force of two hundred men, withwhich they marched upon " Grande River."There he established his head-quarters, fromwhich he addressed a letter to the President ofthe Assembly, calling upon that body to recognisethe decree of the 28th March. In thisletter there was much feebleness and vanity :but one addressed to the military commandantThe French writers allege a participation, in sending outOge for revolutionary purposes, to the Paris and London committeefor the abolition of the slave trade, and an active agencyto Mr. Clarkson. On the application of a common friend, thatgentleman was so obliging as to furnish me with the most satisfactoryrefutation, in four letters, which in justice I give.See Appendix, note (R.)20 NOTES ON HAITI.was short and energetic. The only reply fromeither of these parties was to send out ColonelMauduit with a body of six hundred men, whowere completely routed. Colonel Cambefort,with one thousand five hundred men, succeededin defeating and dispersing this handedof insurgents. Oge, with his brother and thetwo brothers Charade, fled into the Spanishterritory ; but on being claimed by the Frenchauthorities, they were surrendered by theSpanish governor, Don Joachim Garcia. Aftera trial which lasted for two months, theseunhappy men were convicted and sentenced tobe broken alive upon the wheel, and their propertyconfiscated. This cruel punishment wascarried into effect in the front of the cathedralon the 9th of March, 1791, in the presence ofthe Assembly ; and it appears to have destroyedall confidence between the white and colouredpeople.Partial insurrections took place in the westand south, nearly at the same time with thatof Oge ; but they were speedily repressed. Itwas in that of Cayes that Rigaud, who eventuallyplayed so conspicuous a part in thesubsequent contests, first appeared.During the progress of these operations, themembers of the General Assembly who hadPROGRESS OF REVOLUTION. 21embarked in the Leopard, reached France, andhad been summoned to the bar of the NationalAssembly, that the charges against them, andtheir defence, might be heard. After a protracteddiscussion, it was decreed, on the 12thof October, 1790, that the General Assembly,having been guilty of unconstitutional acts,was suppressed ; that the members w 7 ere deprivedof their seats in the Colonial Assembly,for which a new election was to take place ;that their decrees (including those affecting thefree persons of colour) were annulled • and toenforce obedience, among other precautions,the king was requested to send out two ships ofthe line, and a sufficient number of troops ofthe line, to maintain order in the colony.The arrival of this decree in St. Domingowas a signal for fresh commotion. Many of theprimary assemblies refused to recognise theabolition of the General Assembly, and reelectedthe expelled members. But the chiefdifficulty arose from the right given to the colouredpopulation to vote.While these passions were most active, thetwo ships of the line, " Le Fougueux" and " LeBoree," with two frigates, arrived at Port-princew 7 with the second battalions of the regimentof Artois and Normandy. Blanchelande,22 NOTES ON HAITI.who now exercised the functions of governor,was desirous of landing the troops at CapeNicholas Mole, on the ground that no preparationhad been made for their reception atPort-au-Prince. His real object was to avoidthe contagion of popular feeling ; but emissariesfrom the shore got access to the troops,and by circulating a fabricated decree of the17th of December, which, if correct, wouldhave rendered that of the 12th of October perfectlynugatory, promoted so mutinous a spiritamong the troops, that they sent a deputationto the governor to inquire into the causes ofhis having ordered them to the Mole ; and sothoroughly subverted was all discipline, thatto convince the deputation that he was actingunder orders from France, he was weak enoughlo exhibit his secret instructions, granting at thesame time a delay of three days, previous tosailing to the place of their destination. Thisdelay was fatal : open mutiny was the consequence; for the troops landed in spite of thegovernor, and refused to act with those soldiersknown to be devoted to the government. Theprovincial assembly of the west resumed its sittings,under the title of the New Municipality.Mauduit, alternately the idol and the object ofdetestation of the populace, recommended theMURDER OF Maudlin. 23flight of Blanchelande, and ventured alone tooppose the storm ; but notwithstanding his gallantly,his known services, and the venerationwith which he had been regarded by all parties,in the hour of trial he was deserted by hisown soldiers, who with unparalleled audacitycalled upon him to apologise on his knees to thenational guard, for having at some previoustime deprived them of their colours. He gaveno answer ; but baring his breast, exposed it tothe multitude : he fell, pierced with a thousandwounds, and in despite of the efforts of manyrespectable individuals, his mutilated remainswere insulted, and torn to pieces by a ferociouspopulace. The only honour paid to his memorywas by his faithful black servant Pierre, whichhas been already recorded. Such an act performedby a Roman would have placed poorPierre among the objects of general admiration ;but his tale is scarcely known, even within thescene of its action ; nor do I know that it hasever awakened among the mawkish sentimentalistsof the day, a single regret for this high-mindedthough untutored man.M. Caradeux, who has been already mentioned,after the melancholy fate of Mauduit,usurped the authority of General Blanchelande,and assumed the title of captain-general of the24 i NOTES ON HAITI.national guard ; and the functions of all thedifferent public officers were also usurped by-adventurers,among whom was one Prelate, aMaltese sailor.Owing to some ambiguity in the instructionsthat had accompanied the decree of the 8th ofMarch, 1789, the free people of colour hadbeen excluded from any share either in theelections or in the representation ; and evenafter the decree of the 12th of October,1790, they were only admitted to the primaryassemblies. The Constituent Assembly ofFrance, ignorant of the weakness of the colonialexecutive, and determined at any risk torealise their views, removed every doubt thatexisted respecting the rights of the colouredcaste, as defined the preceding October; and onthe 15th of May, 1791, decided that men ofmixed blood, of all shades, born of free persons,should be admissible to the colonial assemblies.This decree, while it gratified theparty benefited, excited the most marked expressionof disapproval from their opponents. Allthe parishes protested against its execution, eachrivalling the other in the vehemence of theirlanguage : the civic oath was rejected, and thecolony was, in short, in a state of actual revolt.The parish of Gros Morne went so far as toFURTHER REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENTS. 25put forth a highly inflammatory paper, pledgingthe inhabitants to repel by force any attemptagainst what they deemed their rights.Blanchelande, who had retired to the Cape,in order to propitiate the Assembly of theNorth, made known to that body a letter fromhim to the minister of marine, in which he hadstated his intention to suspend the operation ofthe obnoxious law until he should receive definitiveorders.These contradictory measures essentially promotedthe heart-burnings of the conflictingparties. The local assemblies suspended theirproceedings, and a new colonial assembly wasconvoked, to which the deposed members of theformer meeting at St. Mark were re-elected.The new assembly met at Cape Francois, andM. Cadusch was chosen its president.The seeds of discontent that had been so extensivelysown, now began to germinate: thecoloured party, though silent, appear to havefelt deeply, while the slaves were led to reflecton their own condition. Various insurrectionarymovements in the west broke out; but theywere soon quelled, and were followed by verysanguinary proceedings. M. Caradeux particularlydistinguished himself in this work ofdeath. General Lacroix gives an extract of aVOL. II. B26 NOTES ON HAITI,letter characterising the man : — " Si Ton estembarrassed par couper les tees, on appelle lecitoyen General Caradeux (Commandant desdistricts du Port-au-Prince), qui en a fait sauterune cinquantaine sur Inhabitation Auboy, dansle terns qu'il en etait fermier, et qui, afin qu'one'en ignorant, les fichait sur des piques le longdes haies de son habitation, en genre de palmihers." — A wretched pre-eminence in atrocity !Scarcely was this insurrection suppressed ,when another of a more formidable characterbroke out in the North. At first one estate wasburnt, and the white overseer of another murdered; but immediately after the more maturedplan was carried into effect on the estate namedTurpin, under a negro from one of the BritishWest India Islands, called Boatman. On thesame night (22d of August, 1791) the slaveson four other estates rose and joined thisleader, and that melancholy night devoted todeath the sleeping whites without distinctionof age or sex, and destroyed the plantations byfire. The inhabitants of the Cape were apprizedof the work of destruction by the columnsof flame, and as if to countenance thehorrors that were transacted without the walls,they assassinated several people of colour. TheAssembly provided places of refuge for the sur-appealTO JAMAICA. 27vivors, all of whom called for arms, to be employedagainst their common enemy. In fourdays a third of the province of the North wasonly a heap of ruins.It is impossible here to detail all the contests,or the disgraceful scenes that occurred ; it isenough to record, that the same discord prevailedwhere unanimity was so essential, andthe same mutual distrust which had so powerfullyconduced to the destruction of the twoleading parties.The new assembly assumed the style of theColonial Assembly, refused to communicate thetroubles to = the mother country, and appealedto the Earl of Effingham, the governor of Jamaica,for succour. The assistance obtainedfrom that quarter was smaller than was expected,owing to a want of means. Mr. BryanEdwards, who had visited Cape Francois,on his return to Jamaica, attempted to raise aloan for the relief of the French colonists,though without success. In the mean, time thedissensions, instead of being calmed, becamemore vehement, and the black forces acquiredforce and consistency : they designated themselves" Gens du Roi;" and the negro-generalJean Francois took the title of Grand Admiralof France, and his lieutenant Biassed, that28 NOTES ON HAITI.of generalissimo of the conquered country.General Blanchelande attempted to reclaimthem; but they replied, in a letter of considerablelength, that " it was too late." It is assertedthat the Spanish colonists, and somerefugee French loyalists, encouraged and assistedthese projects ; and, in support of thisopinion, a letter is quoted by the French writers,written by a Spanish functionary, and foundon the plantation Gallifet, when the negroeswere expelled from it. The atrocities committedon all sides during a succession of sanguinarycontests are dreadful; but as they do notthrow any light on the progress of the revolution,I gladly omit the details. The priests areaccused of having sanctioned the murderousproceedings of the negro chiefs, and severalwere executed. The spirit of dissension did notconfine itself within the French lines : Jeannot,who had acquired considerable reputation forhis military achievements as well as for his cruelties,was attacked by Jean Franc, ois, and putto death. Boatman also fell ; but thoughsuccess appeared to attend the measures of thegovernment, the seeds of self-destruction weredaily planted by the internal jealousies of theplanters and the functionaries. An evil interpretationwas given to whatever was done, forINTERNAL DISCORDS. 29the complaining parties seem only to have actedfrom the impulse of passion. Fixed principleswere never thought of, and every passing eventafforded a fresh topic of discontent to men preparedto be dissatisfied. The dissolution of asociety so circumstanced and so influenced becameinevitable.The coloured party in the West and Southacted more in concert, and placed themselvesunder the orders of General Beauvais, who hadat an early period distinguished himself by histalents : Croix des Bouquets was their principalpost. To disperse this assemblage, parties ofarmed men were sent from Port-au-Prince, butthey were disgracefully routed.This defeat led to conferences, which terminatedin the signature, by the respective chiefs,of what is called the " Concordat de Croix desBouquets," by which it was agreed that thenceforwardthe garrison of Port-au-Prince shouldbe composed of equal numbers of the two parties;that the Colonial Assembly should berecomposed on the principles of the decree ofthe 15th of May preceding; that any oppositionto this should be overcome by joint force; thatthe judges of Oge and his fellow-sufferersshould be voted infamous. This was signed onthe 23d of October, 1791; and in conformity30 NOTES ON HAITI.with it, on the following day General Beauvais,at the head of fifteen hundred of his troops,entered the city, accompanied by M. Caradeuxand his officers.The Assembly had sought aid from Jamaica ;but that being granted on a small scale, recoursewas had to Martinique, from which nosupplies could be procured, as the disposabletroops had been sent back to France only afew days before.While these transactions were going on inthe colony, the legislature in France, with singularimprovidence and disregard of consistency,again changed their views of colonial administration,and on the 24th of September repealedthe decree of the 15th of May, in which thecolonists were on the eve of acquiescing. Thedisputed questions were again agitated in thelocal assembly; and in despite of the efforts ofsome of the most eminent members, it was determinedto suspend the fulfilment of theirengagements until after the coloured party11 should have conduced by all the means intheir power* to the extinction of rebellion'On the other hand, the execution of the concordatwas vigorously urged j and three out ofthe four sections of Port-au-Prince had agreedto complete their engagements, when discordDISPUTES OF CASTES. 31was again excited by a quarrel between someartillery-men and a free black: the latter wastaken to prison, from which he was conveyed bythe soldiery, and hanged on a lamp-post. Thiswas resented by his comrades, who fired uponand killed or wounded an artillery-man, whenpassing their barracks : the individuals implicatedin this were demanded, and GeneralBeauvais refused to give them up. After somefruitless discussions, force was meditated, andBeauvais retired to the mountains ; and the unfortunatecity was nearly destroyed by fire.The Croix des Bouquets once more becamea scene of activity, and the concordat was formallyrenewed with several of the communesthat had formerly concurred in it. Some attemptswere made to engage Port-au-Prince tocomply; but the negotiation was suddenlybroken off on the arrival of three commissionersfrom France, Warbeck, Roume, and St. Leger,who were deputed by the government of Franceto maintain good order ; but the inadequacy oftheir powers soon became evident, and theirauthority despised, notwithstanding their attemptsto obtain popularity, and consequentinfluence with the local legislature. They thenpublished a decree of the 28th of September,which granted a general amnesty to all free32 NOTES ON HAITI.persons. This was urged by the insurgentchiefs, and rejected by the Assembly, underthe pretext that that body could not communicatewith men armed in violation of all law.Outrage was threatened by the revolted chiefs,and some conferences were brought aboutthrough the intervention of the commissaries ;but to no purpose. The defects of their commissionwere detected by Toussaint Coverture,who then first appeared in a conspicuouspoint of view.The Assembly, not satisfied with the difficultiesof their situation, seemed resolved to involvethemselves in others of greater magnitude.An order was given to disarm the whole ofthe coloured population — a population which, inthe language of a French historian, "had to thatmoment fought against the blacks with all thezeal that the interests of property can inspire."The immediate effect was, that all the partiesaffected by this impolitic decree threw themselves(with the exception of those at the Cape)into the negro camp, and the work of deathand destruction recommenced with new force.But all warning appears to have been lost ; forinstead of applying to the emergencies of theperiod, the assembly employed themselves inidle discussions respecting the validity of thePROCEEDING OF COMMISSIONERS. 33powers of the commissioners, and rescinded theconvention of the Croix dee Bouquets. Theexpeditions sent out to clear the country wereineffectual, and Warbeck, with St. Leger, findingthemselves without any power, returned toFrance. Roume alone remained. He was aman of talent ; but from the concurrent testimonyof various persons, his personal historywas one continued monstrosity an morals. Heprofessed to remain for the purpose of counteractingcounter-revolutionary plans.It will be recollected that there had beenpassed, by the National Assembly in France,a decree extending civil privileges to all freepersons — that that decree had been abrogated,and that there had been a correspondingspirit at work in the colony itself. A newattempt was made by the legislature of themother country, to interfere in the dissensionswhich had been kept alive by her own vacillatingcouncils. A decree of the 4th of April,1792, renewed the equality of rights to allfreemen, and revoked that of the 24th of September,1791. It would have been wise tohave steadily legislated, and maintained thelaw when enacted ; but the changing of principlesand law so frequently within fourteenmonths, must have shaken the confidence of all34 NOTES ON HAITI.parties. The immediate effect of this last proceedingwas a hollow accommodation betweenthe two leading parties by Blanchelande andRoume, through the means of Pinching, acoloured man of considerable talents, who wasthe president of the Council of Peace andUnion at St. Mark.Although the coloured party were satisfiedwith this restoration of the first law, concedingto them political privileges, they did not enterinto the plans of attacking the revolted slaveswith the enthusiasm that was anticipated.They desired, as preliminaries, that peaceshould be established ; that the Assembly of theWest should be dissolved, and its principalmembers " deported ;" and that the garrison ofPort-au-Prince should be disbanded, and theirplace occupied by the coloured militia. Theseconditions were accepted by the governor andthe commissary. Alarmed at this, the infamousCaradeux fled to the United States with sixtyslaves ; Borell, who was called to succeed him,very narrowly escaped with his head ; and theregular government was re-established at .About this period the practice ofemancipating the leading revolters was adopted,thus giving a premium to insurrection.General Blanchelande next proceeded to theFAILURE OF BLANCHELANDE. 36South, with a view of propitiating the partyheaded by General Rigaud ; but doubts being-entertainedof the governor's sincerity owingto his previous conduct, he failed ; and afteran unsuccessful attack on the Platoons nearCayes, he was obliged to quit the South, leavingit a prey to blood and spoliation. On reachingthe Cape, he found the insurrection raging tothe East, where it was said to be fomented bythe neighbouring Spaniards.36 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER III.Arrival of new Commissioners — Imprudent discussions — Returnof Ailhaud, Sonthonax, and Polverel, with full power —Revolution advances — Pierrot and Macaya — Liberty ofslaves proclaimed, first by Sonthonax, afterwards by PolverelEnglish invasion — New Commissioners — Toussaint Coverture— History — Sonthonax sent to France — General He-danville—Contests between Toussaint and Rigaud — Attemptsof Consuls — Colonial constitution — French invasion — Bloodywar — Success of Clerc — Expulsion of Rochambeau.On the 19th of September, the succourswhich had been promised by France arrived,accompanied by two new commissioners, Pol-vereand Ailhaud, who were associated withSonthonax. Their powers were unlimited ; andtheir first declaration before the Colonial Assemblywas, that they would recognise onlytwo classes of inhabitants in St. Domingo ; freemen,without distinction of colour, and slaves.This declaration gave confidence to the newDISCUSSIONS AMONG COLONISTS. 37citizens ; while the arrival of six thousand efficienttroops assured the proprietors that theirproperties would be protected. These circumstanceswere favourable, and the colony mighthave been saved ; but the commissioners, probablyinfluenced by personal motives, insteadof acting with vigour against the insurgents,allowed them to gain a head, and occupiedthemselves with comparatively insignificantmatters. They listened to recriminatory complaintsfrom different parties, expelled GeneralBlanchelande, and dissolved the Colonial Assembly; while, by a formal arrete, all its misdeedswere excused.The intelligence of the melancholy eventsof the 10th of August gave rise to fresh disorders.Jhe royalists aimed at a counter-revolution; but during their hesitation to direct thetroops that they had gained, the commissioners,at the head of eighteen hundred men from Martinique,decided their conduct, and thus destroyedthe plans that had been anxiously formed .The commissioners then named the too celebratedGeneral Rochambeau as governor. Expeditionswere sent against the rebels ; eachof the worthy agents of the republic had anallotted fort ; and before separating, in orderto prove their claims to having prepared lists of38 NOTES ON HAITI.proscribed persons, many of whom, thoughmost estimable, were there inscribed becausethey were suspected of a secret leaning to theancient regime, — Sonthonax and Polverel remainedin the island, the one in the province ofthe North, the other in that part of the West ;but Ailhaud had scarcely visited the south,when he embarked for France, from the conviction,it is supposed, that his powers, as wellas those of his colleagues, were inadequate tothe arduous duties assigned to them.From the time that Sonthonax and Polverelwere invested with full authority, their policywas decided. They formed a commission,which they called " Intermediate," consistingof twelve members, six of whom were white,and six of colour. This council supplied theplace of the colonial assembly, and filled upall vacancies, whether military or civil. Aslight commotion among the whites at the Capebeing suppressed, the united efforts of thetwo leading parties were directed to the overthrowof the common enemy and the revoltedblacks. The first attempt was" successful atthe " Platoons," where Blanchelande had beenrouted by a party of soldiers under the commandof Commandant Party, who forced theintrenched camp.PROGRESS OF REVOLUTION. 39Rochambeau having left St. Domingo to assumethe command at Martinique, General La-veux,a nobleman of old family, was appointedby the commissioners commander-in-chief. Thevigorous measures of this officer restored a temporarycalm ; but discredit was thrown on thissuccess by the arrest of the Abbe de la Have,the cure of Grande Riviere, and of his brothercure at Dondon, and the meditated executionof both, on account of having officiated asalmoners of the leaders of the revolt. Notwithstandingmuch urgency, Sonthonax was merciful,and for once wise ; for by the agency ofthose whose lives he had saved, he obtained anextensive influence over the insurgents.While these proceedings were in progress,Borell usurped the supreme authority at .This was however soon interruptedby the combined efforts of GeneralsLovable and Beauvais ; and the commissionersentered the city without capturing Borell, atwhose escape they are suspected of having connived,lest it should have been necessary tohave made an example of so turbulent thoughinfluential a person.The risings in the North and South, in spiteof several pacific overtures, gained ground untilthe month of May, 1793 ; when Rigaud,40 NOTES ON HAITI.who had been sent to repress the movementsamong the whites at Grande Anse, was defeated.At this conjuncture Galba arrived,invested with the character of commandant-general; and finding the authority of thecommissioners to be wavering, he endeavouredto subvert it entirely. This attempt led to sanguinarycontests, which terminated in the conflagrationof the Cape, and the expulsion ofGalba. The commissioners called to theiraid, not only all the felons in the prisons, butthe black insurgent chiefs Pierrot and Macaya.Having been thus far successful, the commissionersaimed at a permanent union with theirleaders ; but although the latter became themedium of communication with Jean Francoisand Biassed, he resolutely resisted all theblandishments of Polverel ; and in reply to allthe seductive allurements held out to inducehim to range under the republican banners, heis said to have uniformly used the followingexquisite jargon : —Je suis le sujet de trois rois ; du roi deCongo, maitre de tous les noirs ; du Roi deFrance, qui represented mon pore ; et du roid'Espagne, qui represented ma mere. Ces troisrois sont les descendans de ceux qui, conduitspar une etoile, ont etc adorer homme Dieu.PROGRESS OF REVOLUTION. 41Si je passions au service de la publique, je serouspeut-etre entrance a faire la guerre contremes frees, les sujets de ces trois rois, a qui j'aipromis fideliter"*It was supposed by General Lacroix thatequality had no charms in the eyes of thesemen, on whom he asserts the Spanish governmenthad heaped honours and military rank.It has been said that Jean Francois was raisedto the rank of a grandee of Spain, and that hedied a few years ago in Madrid ; whether trueor not, I do not know ; but it has been deniedby some highly respectable Spaniards to whomI have applied for information.The affairs of the commissioners becomingmore involved, Sonthonax, finding himselfhemmed in at the Cape with only one thousandeight hundred men, by about thirty thousandinsurgents, proclaimed the general emancipationof all the slaves. Delpech (who hadbeen appointed successor to Ailhaud) and Pol-veredisapproved of this measure ; but on thedeath of the former, the latter published in theSouth a proclamation to the same effect with thatof his colleague, and shortly afterwards issued]Memoires pour servir a histoire de la Revolution deSt. Domingo, par le Gen. Baron Pamphlet de Lacroix, tom.i.p. 253.42 NOTES ON HAITI.his regulations for enforcing labour ; of whichsome notice will be given in a subsequent chapter.These measures seriously affected the attachmentof many of the colonial proprietors to thegovernment of the mother country, of whichthe counter-revolutionists readily availed themselves,and made proposals to Sir Adam Williamson,the governor of Jamaica, to place theisland under the protection of Great Britain.Colonel Charmingly, since too noted in Spanishhistory, was the French negotiator. In an evilhour for us, his representations were believed,his propositions accepted, and a small forcesent, in September 1793, under Colonel White-locke,to occupy the distant posts of Jeromeand Cape Nicholas Mole. As much had beenpromised, so much was expected from theco-operation of the inhabitants ; but little wasrealised, even among the royalists; and aftervarious struggles, during nearly five years, theBritish troops under the late Sir Thomas Maitlandevacuated first Port-au-Prince, and lastly,Cape Nicholas Mole, leaving the bones ofthousands of our ill-fated countrymen, and anenormous treasure, without gaining any thingmore than the reputation of profuse expense,which endears even now the British service tothe Haitian. Shortly after the landing of thePROGRESS OF REVOLUTION. 43British force, the commissioners were conveyedas prisoners to France, and tried at the bar ofthe national convention, on charges exhibitedagainst them by the colonists. Laveaux wasleft in command, and he had the merit of withdrawingfrom the Spanish service, and of engagingin that of the republic.An important event now took place. Thetreaty of Basle, signed the 22d July 1795, betweenFrance and Spain, conveyed the sovereigntyof the Eastern part of the island to theFrench republic.The commissioners were acquitted by theconvention. Polverel died ; and Sonthonax returnedwith ample powers, accompanied by fournew colleagues, Roume, already mentioned,Gerard, Lesbian, and Raimond. Roume wassent to the city of Santo Domingo, Sonthonaxsucceeded in neutralising the influence of thetwo next, which induced them to quit thecountry, and Raimond remained as his soleassociate in the old French colony.Toussaint, who had been gradually advancingin political weight, having obtained fromSonthonax the rank of general of division,now threw off the disguise in which he hadinvested his extensive intrigues and ambitiousprojects. But still he displayed a remarkable44 NOTES ON HAITI.degree of caution. Before entering on his publicacts at this time, it will be well to sketchthe history of this " child and champion" ofthe trans Atlantic revolution.This extraordinary person was born a slave atBreda, a plantation very near to Cape Francois,belonging to Count Noe. From the occupationof a carter he arrived at that of a postilion. Onthis estate he lived until he was above fifty yearsof age, when the insurrection called him to performa more elevated character. While inhis humble station, he had been taught to readand write, some say by a Capuchin — he himselfalleged by a non-commissioned officer of theregiment of the Cape. On joining the insurrectionarybands of Jean Francois, he bore theludicrous title of " physician to the armies ofthe king," while in fact he held a military command.He was afterwards aid-decamp bothto Biassed and to Jean Francois, and eventuallyobtained the rank of colonel in the Spanishservice, in which he acquired great respectfor the regularity with which he dischargedhis religious duties. The Marquess DeterminateSpanish general, in speaking of him, declared" that God, in this terrestial globe,could not commune with a purer spirit."Through the medium of the Abbe de la Have,TOUSSAINT Coverture. 45he was seduced by General Laveaux to betrayhis Spanish associates ; and at the time whenHermon's confidence was most unbounded,he deserted to the republican party, takingwith him a considerable body of his fellows.And to mark his zeal, taking a select party, hetraversed with rapidity, and established the republicanbanner, on all the points in the Northwhere that of Spain had previously floated.His subsequent history is that of the island ;and he was endowed with many indisputablequalifications for the part he had determined toplay. Possessed of an iron constitution, hewas enabled to bear any fatigue : he was capableof great and continued mental exertion;while his dissimulation, perfidy, and cruelty,are described as knowing no bounds, thoughalways veiled under the mask of religion, charity,and meekness. Using his profound knowledgeof the negro character, without everbetraying himself, he acquired an almost superhumaninfluence. General Lacroix says, andI have never heard it contradicted even by hiscontemporaries in Haiti, that " the soldiers regardedhim as a superior being, and the cultivatorsprostrated themselves r es before him asbefore a divinity. All his generals trembledbefore him, (Dessalines did not dare to look in46 NOTES ON HAITI.his face, and all the world trembled beforehis generals" — a short but intelligent descriptionof the mode of government then in vogue.Toussaint has been accused of licentiousnessin his morals in after-life, though abstemiousin his food; and it is asserted that, while heused all the terrors of Catholic superstition toaugment his authority, he secretly communicatedto the directory that his measures wereonly dictated by policy.Notwithstanding these statements, there canbe but little doubt that he would have been adistinguished man in any country in which afield for his exertions had existed: the facts ofhis elevation attest this ; but the confirmation isto be found in the measures he pursued tomaintain order and industry, by which only hecould ensure the independence of his country.In order to be freed from the presence of hisearly friends, Sonthonax and Laveaux, he procuredtheir election as deputies from the colonyto the legislative body in France — an honourthat could not be rejected. With every externaldemonstration of respect, these two personageswere dismissed from St. Domingo ; and manyblack officers who disapproved of such measures,accompanied them to Europe.Raimond alone remained of the last party ofTOUSSAINT AND Ribald. 47five commissioners, and he co-operated withToussaint. Rigaud still was in arms for therepublic in the South, without coalescing withthe black leader. Notwithstanding the externaldemonstrations of cordiality and confidence onthe part of the directory, it would seem thatthey feared the ascendancy of their general-in-chief,and sent out General Hedouville (whohad previously been employed in some delicatemissions) as their agent. This officer, notwithstandinghis reputation, committed a capitalfault in marking his distrust in his new colleagueby landing at the city of Santo Domingo; and some ill-timed remarks of his staffconfirming Toussaint's suspicions, led to theassassination (it is asserted by his orders) oftwo of Hedouville's aides-de-camp. The attemptthat the general made to reconcileRigaud and Toussaint also failed, owing probablyto the mutual distrust of all parties.After the British had evacuated, in 1798, theirlast stronghold, Toussaint appears to havethought it unnecessary to retain his disguise,at least in the colony. An insurrection was excitedamong the cultivators, and Hedouvillewas obliged to embark. In an artful letter tothe directory, the now uncontrolled general-in-chieflaid claim to having re-established order48 NOTES ON HAITI.and regularity, after they had been thoroughlysubverted.Hedouville left a fatal legacy to Haiti. AlthoughToussaint had long held the commissionof general-in-chief, the same rank was by himconferred on Rigaud; thus creating an additionalmotive for contention between these twoleaders and their respective followers. It wasin vain that Roume (who had returned fromthe East) endeavoured to reconcile these twoparties ; for each giving way to the most unrestrainedpassions, carried on a war of extermination,which ended early in 1800 in theexpulsion of Rigaud, and the firm establishmentof his rival's authority. After the discomfitureof the Mulatto party, Toussaint despatched hissatellite Dessalines to chastise the great bodyof that unfortunate people ; and the atrocitieswhich he is described to have perpetrated inthe South are said to have exceeded even thoseof his chief. It is recorded that upwards oftenthousand persons of both sexes were immolatedduring his expedition, with every refinementin cruelty.Previous to these successes, the consulargovernment had been established in France ;and it would seem that Bonaparte wished toregain that influence, the decline of which hadADVANCES OF BONAPARTE. 49been clearly proved by the expulsion of Hedou-ville ; and to attain this, he sent out Vincent,(who had been despatched by Roume to informthe directory of the sanguinary and desolatingwarfare between the rival chiefs,) and GeneralMichel, both of whom were associated in thecommission with Raimond. Toussaint, suspiciousof fraud, arrested both his own friendVincent and his colleague, but liberated themon their arrival at the Cape, where they communicatedto him the change of government inFrance, as well as the confirmation by the consulsof his rank of general-in-chief of the army ofSt. Domingo. This confirmation was naturallygrateful to the black leader; but he distrustedthe proclamation of the first consul to the citizensof St. Domingo, announcing the revolutionat home ; promising the formation of laws suitableto their condition; and pledging himselfto respect the liberty and equality of the blacks.Confidence could not be inspired, even by theflattering conclusion of the proclamation : —Braves noirs ! souvenez vous que le peupleFrancais seul reconnait vos droits." The schemeof legislating in France for St. Domingo wasprobably the principal cause of dissatisfaction :be that as it may, Michel was treated with soVOL. II. c50 NOTES ON HAITI.much coldness, that he returned to Europe,leaving his two colleagues behind.Being now freed from domestic rivals, Toussaintbegan to developed his schemes of personalaggrandisement ; he received with kindness theold colonists, restored the Gregorian calendar,in opposition to that of the republican style ;attached to his person white officers; treatedthe clergy with unbounded reverence ; and surroundedhimself with a chosen body-guard ofone thousand eight hundred men, dressed inthe costume of the old " gardes du corps" ofFrance. He selected, without reference to complexion,the most efficient officers for everybranch of the public service, and promoted agricultureboth for home use and foreign export, onthe last of which he well knew his pecuniaryresources depended. Under the pretext of enforcingthe treaty of Basle, he announced in1800 to the Spanish governor, Don JoachimGarcia, his intention of taking possession of theSpanish colony; and in spite of the Spaniard'smoderation and the arrival of the French vesselwith dispatches (which brought, as was expected,orders against such an attempt), hepressed forward at the head of an irresistibleforce, and occupied the whole of the SpanishPROMULGATION OF CONSTITUTION. 51colony. The messenger with the dispatcheswas then permitted to deliver his unavailinginstructions.The next step in his career was, with the aidof Borgella, # Pascal and others, to promulgatethe constitution of the colony of St. Domingo,(without the sanction of the French government,)by which he was declared governor forlife. But still the title of colony was retained.He sent home Vincent with this act of independence,in spite of the most honorable andmanly remonstrances : but all was unavailing,for the negro chief's decision had been taken.The peace of Amiens being concluded, the rulerof France was left at full liberty to pursue hiscolonial views, and to oppose the independentprojects of the governor of the colony. But toeffect this there was more knowledge requisitethan even Napoleon possessed. Toussaint hadformed and maintained a respectable military establishment,the discipline of which, accordingto Lacroix, was enforced with an inexorable rigour— life and obedience, or death and disobediencebeing the alternatives. The well-doing ofthe superior officers was secured by the system offanning which he had established, and accordingSee Appendix, note (S.)52 NOTES ON HAITI.to Lacroix, the whole were controlled by thediscreet use of certain words. " They weretold," says that distinguished officer, " thatthey were free ; and they believed it, because,by a series of adroit insinuations, they rankedabove the cultivators, and every soldier wasright who complained of a black who was not asoldier. The supremacy of the military negrocaused him to be feared attd obeyed"*The anxiety of the French ruler to re-acquirean ascendancy in the West Indian Archipelagoled him to fit out, early in December 1801, anexpedition under the command of his brother-in-law,General Le Clerc, against St. Domingo ;the naval command being assigned to AdmiralVillage Joyeuse. They arrived at the end ofJanuary 1802, and, early in February, CapeFrancois, then under the orders of Christophe,was summoned. Christophe refused, by theorders of Toussaint, to receive the French armament; but finding resistance vain, he set fireto the city, (giving the example by kindling hisown house,) and evacuated it, leaving nothingbut ruins to the invaders.Fort Dauphin and Port-au-Prince soon fellinto the hands of the French. An attempt wasMemoires, par Lacroix, torn. i. p. 408.INVASION BY LE CLERC. 53then fruitlessly made to induce Toussaint toabandon his own cause, by the mediation of hischildren, who, with their tutor Cohesion, hadgone from France : the interview, as describedby Lacroix, was touching, and marked the sterncharacter of the negro general.In the West and South, the war was maintainedwith vigour ; nor was it until after muchbloodshed, and the memorable defence of Cretea Pierrot, which baffled the repeated attacks ofthe French general that Toussaint, Dessalines,and Christophe submitted to Le Clerc. Shortlyafter that submission the former was treacherouslyarrested for alleged treasons, and sent toFrance, where he perished in the Chateau deJour — " Crispe de froid et des regrets," as it isexpressed by Lacroix. Shortly after this mostof the native leaders submitted ; but a successionof ins judicious measures by Le Clerc, both towardsthe coloured officers and the black labourers,excited disgust : the defection of one chief w 7 asfollowed by that of another ; and the governor-generallived just long enough to witness theentire failure of all his objects. Montholon, inhis Memoirs, gives some curious informationrespecting the blunders of this expedition.Rochambeau succeeded in the command, and,by enormities that rivalled those of Dessalines,54 NOTES ON HAITI.soon alienated the few black and colouredpartisans of France. After an unvarying successionof violence and crime on both sides, theFrench army were reduced to the last extremity,and had the alternative of capture byDessalines, or of capitulation to the Englishsquadron, which, in consequence of the renewalof hostilities between Great Britain and France,blockaded the harbour of Cape Francois underthe orders of Commodore Loving. The memoryof Rochambeau in Haiti is associated withallthat is infamous ; and even with some ofhis own countrymen it ranks very low. Thecruelties described to have been perpetrated byhim have produced an impression that cannever be removed, and will long maintain thatextreme jealousy of French advances, whichmay be considered an essential part of everyHaitian's creed. The evacuation of the Capetook place on the 28th of November, 1803.*According to Lacroix, at the time of their expulsion, whichmay be considered final of the French, the actual loss of theexpeditionary army by sickness, battle and murder, amountedto sixty-two thousand four hundred and eighty-one persons. Offorty-two general officers, seventy-five perished by violence :and of eleven general officers of the colonial force, nine perishedmiserably.INDEPENDENCE ESTABLISHED.CHAP. IV.First establishment of independence — Dessalines, general -in-chief— Character — Treachery — Declaration of independence— Atrocity of Dessalines — Invasion of the East — Assumptionof imperial dignity — Cruelties — Revolution — Establishmentof two republics under Christophe and Petion —Christophe king — His character — Laws— Court — Nobility —Order of knighthood — Policy — Treasure — Death — Consequences.This event may be considered as completingthe second great epoch of the revolution ofSt. Domingo, in which its independence, as aseparate state, was established de facto. Dessalines,as the senior officer, was chosen general-in-chiefof the " indigene army." He had beenoriginally the slave of a free negro of hisown name, and was unable either to reador write. His personal activity, courage, andmilitary talents, are said to have been considersNOTES ON HAITI.able ; but these were overbalanced by his ignorance,by an unrestrained cruelty, as well asby a most preposterous # vanity. His privatemorals were execrable ; and the only personwho appears to have exercised any kindly influenceover him was his second wife, who wasalive when I was at Port-au-Prince, respectedby all who knew her, and honoured chiefly forthe humanity with which she afforded protection,under the most critical circumstances, toevery unfortunate being who needed it, withoutdistinction of colour.A short time after the evacuation of theFrench army appeared inevitable Dessalines,as one of his first acts as general-in-chief, addresseda proclamation to the inhabitants ofCape Francois, " to drive away the fears" thatthe approaching change might produce, and toassure them, that the war had " no reference tothe inhabitants of the colony ; and that hesought to insure the tranquillity of the inhabitants,of all colours." He farther appealed tohis conduct to the inhabitants of every class atThis passion displayed itself in a whimsical way, in exhibitionsas a dancer, with which he gratified his countrymen.He always had a dancing-master in his suite to increase his accomplishments.The duty of instruction must have been analogousto that of teaching a tiger civilisation.BAD FAITH OF DESSALINES. 57Jeremie, Cayes, and Port-au-Prince, as a " certainpledge of his good faith and honour."And he invited all who chose to stay to indulgetheir inclinations, and permitted all whodesired it to accompany the French army. #On the eve of the evacuation another proclamation,bearing the names of Dessalines,Christophe, and Clervaux, was particularly addressedto the proprietary of St. Domingo,guaranteeing the lives and properties of all whohad abandoned the notions of slavery, invitingthose who had fled to return, and deploringthe assassinations of many, from " the soldieryand labourers, blinded by a recollection of formerwrongs." — "We sigh," says this perfidiousdocument, " with every generous soul overtheir deplorable lot ; and we declare to the universe,whatever evil intentioned people maysay, that these murders have been committedagainst the will of our hearts. "*fAlthough the independence was established,de facto, by the expulsion of Rochambeau andhis army, yet it was not formally announcedbefore the 1st of January, 1804, when the Actof Independence, 1 signed by all the generals,Histoire d'Haiti, pp. 407, 408.t Ibid. p. 410.| See note (T) in Appendix.58 NOTES ON HAITt.was promulgated, and a proclamation bearingthe name of Dessalines alone was issued. Thesummary of the former, as will be seen at theend of the volume, was, that " the general-in-chief,having assembled all the leaders of thearmy, had explained that their true interestsrendered it necessary to secure to the peopleof Haiti a stable government, and to secure theindependence of their country ; that the generalshad sworn to posterity — to the whole universe— to renounce France for ever, and to dierather than live under her dominion." The proclamation* was fuller. It declared that theexpulsion of the French was not enough : thata last act of national authority was necessaryto assert eternal liberty in their country, andto destroy all hope in the French of everre-enslaving them : that independence or deathought to be their rallying cry : that nothing-hadbeen done, while the French name stillstained the country : that every thing revivedrecollections of that " barbarous people" —laws, manners, and even names of towns —while every thing showed that there was nothingin common among the two nations: that climate,colour, distance of one from the other,See note (U) in Appendix.DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE. .39ail proved the fact. All ages, sexes, and conditions,were invoked to avenge the wrongs oftheir country on those who should attempt todeprive them of their acquired rights, particularlythe French, whom they were called uponto put to death whenever they should dare toviolate the " territory" of liberty. They werenext urged to follow the example of those nationswho, looking anxiously to futurity, andapprehensive of leaving to posterity an exampleof baseness, preferred extermination to slavery.The address recommended abstinence from anyinterference with their neighbours, who, unlikethemselves, had never suffered from the tyrannyof their rulers, and had no vengeance to levelagainst the authority that protected them : peacewith all the world except France. It called onthe inhabitants to maintain their independenceat any cost. It urged them to remember thatfor fourteen years Dessalines had sacrificedevery thing for them — relations, children, fortune! That his sole riches consisted in theirliberty ; that his name was held in abhorrenceby all tyrants and lovers of slavery; and that ifthey should refuse or receive sullenly the lawsdictated by their guardian genius, they woulddeserve " the fate of ungrateful people."At this time the aboriginal name of Haiti was60 NOTES ON HAITI.adopted, and Dessalines was named governor-generalfor life. Thus established, he proceededwith less caution in his designs against thewhite colonists, many of whom, allured by hispromises of protection, had remained, andothers had returned, in the belief that thesepromises would have been held sacred. In theproclamation of the 1st of January there wasenough to excite distrust ; but it does not appearto have done so. The first serious misgivingsare said to have been raised by a proclamationin the month of February, directingjudicial proceedings against all those who hadparticipated in the atrocities of Le Clerc andRochambeau. The object was apparently toinduce the entire population to revenge theirfriends. But public feeling did not go withhim, and he then commenced a military expedition,with which he overran the principaltowns, marking his footsteps with blood # andslaughter.The base treachery of the whole transactionwas completed in a manner worthy of the the former volume, p. 9, an authentic instance is recordedof part of the system pursued at this time. I heardmany others, which it is unnecessary to recount, as the proceedingsare familiar to every one conversant with this period ofI li.itian history.TREACHERY OF DESSALINES. 61thor. A proclamation was issued, stating, thatthe French having been sufficiently punished,those who had escaped the butchery were invitedto the principal square to receive certificatesof protection. Many of the unhappywretches who escaped obeyed the summons.They were all seized, conveyed to the place ofexecution, and shot.A few of the clergy, medical men, and someothers amounting altogether to about one-tenthof the whole, were spared : and the 20th ofApril witnessed the last of these sanguinaryoutrages on humanity.Many, and among the rest Christophe, highlydisapproved of these proceedings ; but Dessalinesboasted of them, and of the superiority ofhis mind to those narrow views that restrict retributivejustice; and even accused Toussaintof a want of fidelity to his own caste. He exultinglydeclares, " Oui, nous avons rendu cesanthropophages guerre pour guerre, crimepour crime, outrage pour outrage. Oui,j'ai sauve mon pays — j'ai venge l'Amerique !Leave que je fais a la face du ciel et de la terre,fait mon orgueil et ma gloire : quelle est pourmoi la consequence de Opinion qu'auront dema conduite mes contemporains et les generateNOTES ON HAITI.tons futures? J'ai fait mon devoir; je m'ap-prouve : cela me suffit." #The reason assigned to me for this horriblebreach of faith was, that Dessalines wished tocompromise all his countrymen so deeply withFrance, as to render any future connexion impossible.Others have said, that a promise ofvengeance made to his army before the occupationof Cape Francois was thus cruelly redeemed.No motive, however, can lessen thehorror with which the uncontrolled fury ofthis savage can be regarded.The city of St. Domingo, which had falleninto the hands of a detachment of the Frencharmy before Toussaint's submission, still displayedthe banner of the mother country. Ittherefore became an object of attention toDessalines as soon as his massacre had beencompleted. He collected a force, and his entryinto the Spanish territory was preceded byThis passage is extracted from the Histoire D'Haiti ; onthe authority of which, confirmed by respectable native evidencein the republic, the above details rest. I never saw any copyof the proclamation, except in the work cited ; but as its authenticitywas never denied by the most competent persons,it is fair to look upon it as genuine, especially as it correspondswith the character of the man.INVASION OF THE EAST. 63a proclamation, accusing the unfortunate inhabitantsof treason and of violation of treaties.He in person headed one corps d'armee,that penetrated by way of San Juan, whileClervaux advanced by the Northern frontier,as has been already mentioned. Both thesecorps formed a j unction under the walls of thecity of Santo Domingo, and vainly besieged itfor some weeks ; a vigorous resistance havingbeen made by General Errand, the governor.The unexpected appearance of a small Frenchsquadron led to a precipitate flight, and theretreat may still be traced by the wanton destructionthat took place. Some notice of thishas been already taken.After Dessalines' return from this unhallowedexpedition he intrigued for, and procured hisown nomination as Emperor of Haiti : — he wasconsecrated on the 8th of October, 1804, bythe capuchin Belle, who was afterwards Christophe'sfirst archbishop. A new constitution,after the abandonment of the colonial title of for that of emperor, was a necessaryconsequence ; and accordingly it wassubmitted to the approbation of the new-mademonarch on the 20th of May 1805, by twenty-threegenerals, at the head of whom was Christophe: but it included Petion and all the64 NOTES ON HAITI.other general officers of the island. This constitutionhas been printed in the reports laidbefore the House of Commons last year, # inpursuance of an address to his Majesty in 1828.Apparent provisions are made for the governmentin all its branches ; but the spirit of thelegislators and their notions of liberty may begathered from the 30th article, which runs thus :L'Empereury#/£, scelle, et promulgate les lois ;nomme et revenue a sa volonte les ministres ;les generaux en chef de l'armee ; les conseillersd'etat ; les generaux et autres agens de empire ;les officiers de l'armee, de terre et de mer ; lesmembres de les administrations locales ; les commissairesdu gouvernement pros les tribunaux ;les juges et autres fonctionnaires publics'' Inshort, the entire power was vested in the emperor,and he could of course delegate extraordinaryauthority to others. It was by this constitutionthat, for the first time, all whites were excludedfrom being or ever becoming proprietors.All Haitians too were to be called blacks, althougha few whites had become citizens. The spiritof the times was strongly marked by the concludingarticle " Au premier coup de canonSee communications received at the Foreign Office relativeto Haiti.— Parliamentary Papers, 10th June 1828, p. 134.CONSPIRACY AGAINST DESSALINES. 65d'alarme les villes disparagement, et la nationest debout."The cruelties committed almost daily by Dessalines. soon undermined the devotion of hisadherents ; and in 1806 a conspiracy was organisedby Gerin, then secretary at war, andnicknamed l Cote de fer,' Petion, and others.It is said (and it is also denied) that Christophewas a party to the plot, although he didnot appear ; and, indeed, when it broke outprematurely in the South, he affected that vainattempts had been made to shake his fidelity.Dessalines, whose personal courage never seemsto have deserted him, on learning what hadoccurred, immediately proceeded with a smallforce to Port-au-Prince, where he expectedsupport from Petion. Though dissuaded fromadvancing, he persisted, and pressed forward,attended by only a few officers of his staff. Ata short distance from Port-au-Prince, at a placecalled * Pont Rouge,' on the 17th October,1806, he fell into an ambuscade, when expectingto meet his own advanced-guard. Irritated,but not intimidated, he rode boldly uptothe men to chastise them with his cane,when he fell pierced with balls, and his bodywas brutally mangled. Only one of his staffescaped, which he did by recognising, before he66 NOTES ON HAITI.had approached too nearly the troops of theSouth, who were awaiting the emperor.The death of the despot once more setintriguers at work ; and the most prominentwere Petion and Christophe. On the 27thDecember, 1806, deputies who affected to representthe people, but who had been in factnamed through the influence of these two generals,assembled, and formed the constituentassembly. Gerin, soon disgusted, withdrew.The competition lay between Petion and Christophe,as the ostensible chiefs of the two greatparties, though the seniority of the latter wasin his favour. The constitution* of 1806 wasformed : it consisted of various articles, classedunder thirteen heads, comprehending the principleson which the recent revolution had beenfounded. The first class may be regarded asdeclaratory : by its provisions slavery was foreverabolished ; the executive was declared tobe elective, and not hereditary in any family ;the republic to be at peace with all her neighbours; that the house of every man was hiscastle ; and that thenceforward no white manshould hold landed property. The remainingtwelve classes embraced the territorial divisionsof the state ; the necessary qualifications forSee Appendix, note (V.)CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT. 67citizenship ; the religion to be Roman Catholic ;the composition of the senate ; the duties andattributes of the president; the formation ofcourts of law ; the organisation of the army ;the protection of agriculture and commerce ;the state of the finances; and several minorpoints. Having adjusted these points, it becamenecessary to elect a chief. The presidencywas offered to Christophe ; but it was soburdened with conditions, to which he wouldnot assent, that he would not accept the officeat the hands of the assembly; but assuming thetitles of president and generalissimo, he collectedan army, and pushed on to Port-prince.On the 1st January, 1807, he encounteredPetion at a place called Chert, about aleague from the city ; a smart action ensued,which ended in the complete defeat of theSouthern army. Their leader escaped with difficulty.Christophe then beleaguered the cityfor a fortnight, after which he withdrew to theNorth, the whole of which he successively subdued,until he extended his frontier from St.Mark to Mirebalais, where he came into contactwith the Spanish boundary. On his return tothe Cape he assembled a council, consisting ofgeneral officers and the leading citizens, at thehead of whom was General Romain, afterNOTES ON HAITI.wards Prince de Limbe. As a matter of course,a fresh constitution was concocted, and it wasput forth on the 17th February, 1807. I havenever succeeded in obtaining an authenticatedcopy of it ; but its principal provisions, as givenby Placide Justin, resembles very closely thatof Port-au-Prince, except that the presidencywas for life, with the right of naming a successor; and that magistrate had the nominationof the council of nine, who formed the deliberativebody : besides, he alone proposed lawswhich, though passed by the council, were ineffectualwithout his final approval. Thus allreal power centred in his hands.The disputes between the two chiefs weremaintained with vigour until 1812, when atruce seems to have been tacitly admitted. Asecond siege of Port-au-Prince had failed, andthere was no immediate prospect, though activehostilities were suspended, of a unionbetween the two parties ; for Christophe, whowas generally the assailant, was engaged withother pursuits, which most probably distractedhis attention from his adversary. It is certain,from their mutual recriminations, that the cessationof violence did not arise from any increaseof esteem. On the 28th March, 1811, an actwas passed by the council already described,ESTABLISHMENT OF MONARCHY. 69entitled, " Loi Constitutionally du Conseild'Etat, qui tablet la royaume a. Hayti,"* andChristophe was declared the first king of Hayti,under the name of Henry I. Whoever is curiousto obtain minute information on the history ofthis transaction may with advantage consult anoctavo volume, written by the Count de Limonade,entitled, " Relation des Glorieux Evenness,"&c. &c. printed at Cape Henry, 1811.By this constitutional law the absolute powerof the monarch and the principles of feodallaw were established. In the month of January,1812, the Code Henry, consisting of seven laws,was prepared by the same council, and receivedthe royal sanction. This code is a digest of thelaws passed for the general government of thekingdom ; but it appears to be less than equivocalthat the will of the sovereign was paramountto the written law.In the work of Count de Limonade there isan ostentatious statement of the arrangementsconsequent on the erection of the monarchy ;the establishment of various ranks of nobility ;the creation of an order of knighthood, that ofSt. Henry ; and all the exterior of an old court,show how earnest Henry was in elevating hiscourt to a level, at least in form, with that ofSee Appendix, note (W.)70 NOTES ON HAITI.the oldest countries in Europe ; and his successwas complete, as far as the external appearancecould indicate it.In the "Almanach Royal d'Haiti" of 1820,the last year of Henry's reign, there are lists ofthe royal family, of the officers of state, of thenobility, the royal household, the council ofstate, the privy council, the members of theorder of St. Henry, of the ministers of everydepartment, of the clergy, of the army, and ofall the establishments of settled government ;yet that of the king was at that time almost inthe last agonies of dissolution.In my Notes on Cape Haitian and elsewhere,a slight sketch has been drawn of Henry's personalcharacter. The same principles thatguided his private life influenced him as monarch.He was most anxious to advance thecondition of his subjects; and being investedwith uncontrolled power, he adopted everyscheme that he deemed fitting ; and, from ignoranceof the slow operations by which permanentrevolutions among mankind can beeffected, he attempted to force his people prematurelyinto civilisation. It was a favouriteopinion with him, that whatever was done elsewhereought to be done in Haiti ; and there arevarious instances recorded of his compellingCHRISTOPHE AS MONARCH. 71native workmen to execute articles, though atan infinitely augmented expense. Some of hisplans for promoting improvement were unquestionablygood : he invited men of science fromEurope ; he established schools, of which I sawsome interesting vestiges at the Cape ; he builtfortifications to protect the country from foreigninvasion, disciplined his army, encouraged commerce,protected foreigners, and undoubtedlypromoted enterprise and activity. But his senseof discipline degenerated into severity, and hispunishment of crime into savage cruelty. Thushe gradually appears to have lost all regard foraught but his own furious passions, which beinghis sole rule of conduct, led to his final destruction,as has been already described. Yet thereare among the surviving black chiefs stillsome yearnings after him, which show that inspite of his general ferocity, he had the powerof commanding the respect, and in many caseseven the regard of his own people.That he had the art of selecting persons oftalent for assisting in those departments of thegovernment for which his want of educationunfitted him, is shown in the Code Henry,(already mentioned,) comprising the laws affectingcivil rights, commerce, prizes, civil process,criminal process, cultivation, and the72 NOTES ON HAITI.military service. But it is confidently asserted,and facts are stated to show, that these lawswere a dead letter, when opposed to the wishesof the sovereign ; and, indeed, this view is instrict accordance with the fact, that there was nolegal check on him, imposed either by the constitutionof the 17th of February, 1807, or by theconstitutional law of the 28th of March, 1811.It is certain that, notwithstanding a very expensiveestablishment, Henry amassed moremoney than any other chief in Haiti ever did.It seems to be unquestioned that he hadhoarded not less than thirty millions in goldand silver coin in the citadel prior to its beingstruck with lightning. I was assured thatDupuy always asserted that there had beensixty millions. Either is an inconceivably largesum to have been accumulated from his resources.Only a small proportion found itsway into the republican treasury. Yet, I havebeen informed on the best authority, that inconsequenceof a representation advisedly madeto the French government, that twenty millionswere there lodged, the exaction of thirty millionswas proposed. I doubt very much whethera fourth part of that amount ever reached theexchequer of the president.Of the death of this extraordinary man, andEND OF MONARCHY. 73the consequent revolutions, some slight accounthas been already given. It is now necessary toreturn to the provinces of the South and West,which fell under the dominion of Petion at thetime of his rupture with Christophe in 1806.VOL. II.NOTES ON HAITI.CHAPTER V.Petion elected President — His history — His system — Friendlyto Britain — Gauman's revolt — Arrival of Rigaud — Separationof the South — Five governments — Death of Petion — Electionof Boyer — Union of whole Island — French negotiationsBaron Mackau — Recognition of independence — Arrival offoreign agents.After Christophe had retired from the siegeof Port-au-Prince, in January, 1807, the constituentassembly, then sitting in that city, wereleft at leisure to select a president more suitedto their views ; and all opposition having beenlulled by previous intrigues, Alexander Petion,now styled the founder of the republic, waschosen president for four years. This chief'sreal name was Saber, the son of a Frenchjeweller at Port-au-Prince. At the commencementof the revolution he had rendered himselfconspicuous by his talents, as well as byHISTORY OF Pelion. 75an insatiable love of intrigue. On the Englishinvasion he devoted himself with zeal and fidelityto the service of the French republic, inwhich he attained the rank of chef de brigade.In that capacity he served in the contests betweenRigaud and Toussaint ; and on the defeatof the former he accompanied him to France,whence he returned to Haiti with the expeditionaryarmy under Le Clerc. He directed the artilleryat Crete a Pierrot, and was eventually placedin the command of twelve hundred men, withwhom he gallantly served France, until a shorttime before the death of the governor-general,when he abandoned the post assigned for him,and joined the insurgents with the whole of hisparty. The French allege concert with the rebelsas the cause of his defection : his friendsdeclare that the discovery of a secret plan tocut him off, with the whole of his men, aloneactuated him. It is probable that the mutualdistrust of both parties may have given rise toacts on both sides that may countenance bothassertions. The effect on Petion was decided :from the moment of his secession he becamethe determined enemy of France, .being as devotedin his hatred of, as he had previouslybeen in his zeal for, that country. He wasone who signed the Act of Independence in76 NOTES ON HAITI.1804, and who also signed Dessalines' Constitutionof 1805, by which that chief becameemperor.The great objects of Petion's life appear tohave been the consolidation and improvementof the republic, and the subversion of the authorityof his Northern rival. The materialswith which he had to operate rendered the accomplishmentof his task exceedingly arduous.He was the chief of the smallest numericalcaste, and consequently did not dare to actwith the rigour of his opponent. The blackswere to be propitiated ; and, to accomplish thisimportant end, he was driven to temporisingmeasures: necessity appears to have forcedhim into a systematic opposition to those ofChristophe. Though his exchequer was so low,that he issued base money, and he knew wellthat, without exports, it would be vain to expectto carry on commerce or to obtain a revenue,yet he encouraged repose. Though declaimingin favour of industry, he protected idleness :instead of resolutely punishing disorder, hepalliated crime, and, when it became too strong,got rid of it by intrigue : instead of enforcingthe discharge of pul; J ic and private duties, hewinked at licentiousness. His partisans increasedin number, though probably not inFRIENDLY TO ENGLISH COMMERCE. 77respectability; and his police is said to havebeen most wretchedly inefficient.Petion, however, encouraged trade, especiallywith Great Britain, to which he gave adecided preference, by reducing the duties onBritish goods to five per cent, while those leviedon every other nation were twelve per cent: # heintroduced the subdivision of land, in the hopethat every proprietor of land would thus havean individual interest in the soil ; and he wasanxious to reduce his military force. He alsointroduced a base coinage; and it is estimated,whether correctly or not I cannot say, that at thetime of his death twelve millions of dollars ofthis depreciated currency were in circulation, althoughhe had only issued about five millions.At present a similar coinage exists, and is extensivelycounterfeited ; and the distinction betweenthe real and the imitative money is, that thelatter contains more silver and is better executed.In addition to the distresses already alludedto, Petion had to contend with internal dissension.About the end of 1807 Jean BaptistePerrier dit Gauman or Woman, raised the standardof revolt among the mountains of Jeremie,ostensibly to promote the cause of Christophe,See Appendix, note (X.)78 NOTES ON HAITI.but more probably to effect some more personalobject, and carried on for years a successfulpredatory warfare : in 1810 General Rigaud,who had been detained in France from thetime he had been sent back, without havingbeen allowed to land at the Cape, by GeneralLe Clerc, escaped by the way of the UnitedStates, and appeared at Cayes, whence he proceededto the capital. Rigaud's partisans assertthat he left France secretly : Petion's party, onthe other hand, as confidently allege that hewas an emissary of Napoleon ; and in supportof this allegation adduce many statements.Whether one or other of these be true, it iscertain that the two chiefs met with mutualsuspicion ; Rigaud naturally regarding his formersubaltern as occupying the station whichhe was entitled to fill ; while Petion becamesuspicious of the designs of his old commander.The reception was affectedly cordial, and thedeclarations of each appeared to be believed bythe other. In a short time, however, suspicionchanged to disgust, and disgust was roused toanimosity. After some warm differences Rigaudthrew off the mask, and assumed the commandof the province of the South, (under the style ofgeneral commanding in the South,) assisted bya council resident at the city of Cayes. Va-separationOF THE SOUTH. 79pious discussions and some military movementsfollowed, without any definite result beyond asort of armed truce ; and towards the end of1811 the survivor of the earliest revolutionarychiefs expired at the plantation Abode, nearto Cayes. The present General Borgella, thenRigaud's second, succeeded to the supremecommand, and shortly afterwards joined theparty of the president.During the period just described the islandpresented the singular spectacle of as many independentgovernments as existed at its firstdiscovery, viz. five : that of Henry, of Petion,Rigaud, Gauman, and Old Spain.The defection of some of Christophe's fleetaugmented the resources of the republic ; andthe revisal of the constitution of 1806, in 1816,by which the government was rendered apparentlymore popular by the formation of a lowerhouse, while the hands of the executive werestrengthened by various means, especially bythe office of president being for life,* with theright of naming a successor, were favourableto the wishes of Petion ; but still he was disappointedin the advancement of his favouriterepublic, and he sank under accumulated griefs.Previous to this Petion had been re-elected president thrice,and after this revision he was chosen for life.80 NOTES ON HAITI.He died the 29th of March, 1818, after havingpresided over the republic upwards of elevenyears. He is much lamented by his party ; butthere are others who do not regard his memorywith the same feelings. Amid such conflictingtestimony as is adduced for and against thischief, it would be impossible to form a positiveopinion ; but it appears probable, from balancingall that is alleged, that his ambition wasas unbounded as that of Christophe ; but hepossessed more prudence, a greater power ofself-command, and more passive courage. Itdoes not appear equally probable that he hadless disposition to shed blood ; he only contrived(at least it is so said and corroborated byample details) that offenders, or at least thosewho opposed him, should not fall by the handsof the executioner, but rather that they shoulddo so in resisting authority of which they wereprobably ignorant. It must be admitted thatthe late president was surrounded by no ordinarydifficulties ; and it may not be impossiblethat these very difficulties may have occasionallyled him to act in opposition both to his betterjudgment and to his better feelings. Previousto his death, he is reported to have given as aparting injunction to his successor, GeneralBoyer, " never to treat with France."NOMINATION OF BOYER. 81The late president's nomination of GeneralBoyer was confirmed by the senate and praetorianbands of Haiti. This officer had beenin the French service, had emigrated with Ri-gadand others, had been in the United States,and had accompanied Petion on his return in1802. He served as aide-de-camp to GeneralBoyee, who was chef d'etat major of Rocham-beau's army. Eventually he was attached toPetion's staff, and became commandant of thecity of Port-au-Prince. After his elevation theterm of the political embarrassments of the republicbegan to diminish. Very soon Gaumanfell, after a laborious pursuit, by Generals Boreand Lys for nine months ; and in 1820Christophe's death re-opened the North. Theconfusion and disunion among the leaders of therevolt afforded an opportunity to General Boyer,of which he very judiciously availed himself, bypressing forward with a considerable force, andtaking possession of every strong place in thelate kingdom. Thus, for the first time since thedeath of Dessalines, the whole of the late FrenchSt. Domingo was re-united under one government.The sudden dissolution of the iron ruleof Christophe produced such entire disorganisation,as to render it impossible to restoreeven so much discipline as might have been82 NOTES ON HAITI.useful ; and the habits of the North weregradually assimilated to those of the South.The supremacy of the Port-au-Prince governmentwas not long undisturbed ; for some ofHenry's old generals were accused of puttingforth pretensions to the government. They wereseized ; some were tried, condemned, and executed; others destroyed themselves ; and somefell as Romain has been described to have donein the first volume of these Notes.The republic being now restored to its originallimits, the only object necessary to itsperfect internal consolidation that remained incomplete,was the acquisition of the Eastern,or Spanish portion of the island. The historyof the revolutions that there occurred, from thetreaty of Basle to 1822, have been already given.The final annexation at this last named periodcompleted all the views of the Haitian governmentwith respect to territory. Yet the absenceof all foreign recognition excluded themfrom political rank. Even Colombia, the chiefof which owes so deep a debt of gratitudefor essential services in the hour of necessity,refused to entertain political relations with herancient friend. The first recognition (and itwas essential that it should so originate) wasfrom the mother country. But as that act wasRecognition BY FRANCE. 83preceded by a long series of negotiations, it willbe convenient here to relate them very brieflyin the order of succession.Immediately after the restoration of theBourbons a powerful body of persons, interestedin St. Domingo, are said to have commencedtheir intrigues ; and, so early as October1814, Caution Lavaysse, with Medinaand Draverman, were sent out with instructionsfrom the French minister of marine, M.Mahomet. — The former proceeded to Port-prince,and proposed to the president, Petion,that the sovereignty of France should be recognised,and that the president and the principalchiefs should be appointed president andmembers of a provisional government of Haiti,acting in the name of Louis XVIII.The Haitians refused to listen to these terms,but proposed that their independence shouldbe recognised, on the payment of moderate indemnity.This being considered inadmissible,Lavaysse's mission terminated, and was afterwardsdisclaimed by the French government. •It is said that this negotiator was authorisedto excite discord, which was well known toPetion ; who, however, allowed him to returnin safety. Not so with Medina, who had formerlyserved under Toussaint, and was accused84 NOTES ON HAITI.of having betrayed his trust. By the intriguesand treachery of Vastey, it was discovered thathe was possessed of documents calculated topromote dissension. He was seized, exhibitedin public, kept in close confinement, and wasno more heard of: it is supposed that he wassecretly assassinated : Draverman escaped. Thenext negotiation, in 1816, was intrusted to Viscountde Fontanges and M. Esmangart, both formerlylarge landed proprietors in St. Domingo.Their propositions, which were modifications ofthose made by Caution Lavaysse, were equallyvain. These propositions were made both toPetion and Christophe. The third attempt wasmade in February 1821, about three years afterthe election of the President Boyer. M. Aubertde Petit Hours was sent to renew negotiationson a different footing. The chief demandswere : that the suzerainete of France shouldbe acknowledged, and an indemnity paid forcession of territory and property. The secondproposal was alone listened to : the first wasdecidedly refused. As neither party wouldgive way, all intercourse between the governmentsceased until 1823, when M. Lot arrivedat Port-au-Prince from the French government,and urged the president to make his ownproposals, as every advance made by FranceNEGOTIATION WITH FRANCE. 85had been unavailing. This was accepted ; andGeneral Boyee, who had formerly served in St.Domingo under Rochambeau, and was a friendof the president, although a Frenchman, wasnamed as the Haitian negotiator. He repairedto Europe in August 1823, and met M. Esman-part at Brussels, wJ^ere the conferences commenced.The Haitians required that their independenceshould be fully acknowledged ;that the flags of both nations should be admittedinto their respective ports, with theexception of those of the French colonies,with which Haiti was to maintain no intercourse; that, for four years, French goods inFrench bottoms should be exempted from allduties, and afterwards to have only one halfof those imposed on others ; that Haitian producein French ports were to pay no more thanthe duties levied on the most favoured nations ;that vessels of war, for the protection of commerce,should reciprocally be admitted into theports of both countries ; and that political andcommercial agents should be reciprocally admitted.All these points were agreed upon, exceptthe mode of indemnifying France : a sum ofmoney being demanded by the Frenchman, thenegotiation ended.86 NOTES ON HAITI.In the month of November 1823 Esmangartdespatched M. Laujon, on the part of theFrench government, to Haiti, to renew the negotiation.The president, in compliance withthis application, sent, in May 1824, MM. La-roseand Rouanez with powers to offer a certainsum to France as ai indemnity, payableeither in money or produce, in five equalamounts ; to place the admission of all Frenchgoods in to the republic on the footing of themost favoured nation. On the other hand,they were to require that Haitian produce,either in French or Haitian bottoms, shouldpay no higher duties in France than similarproductions from the French colonies. In allminor points the propositions correspondedwith those made by General Boyee.These were all adopted ; and Esmangart, forthe first time, announced that the treaty couldonly apply to the French part of St. Domingo,as the king of France could not stipulate forthe king of Spain. This was deemed inadmissibleby the deputies from Haiti, who, in aninterview with the French minister, ClementTonnes, stated that in the ordonnance declaratoryof their independence (which was to beapreliminary to the treaty), the king of Francewould only reserve to himself the " souveraineteARRIVAL OF BARON Mackay. 87experience." On these two proposals, the negotiationsagain broke off, and the deputies returnedin August to their own country.It does not appear that any public negotiationwas carried on, whatever private communicationsmay have been made, until themonth of July 1825, when Baron Mackauarrived, with a strong squadron of about fourteenships of war, that remained in the bay ofPort-au-Prince, while he himself proceeded tothe capital, with the ordonnance of the 17thApril 1825, in which the independence ofFrench St. Domingo was recognised on the followingconditions : that the ports should be opento all nations ; but that the French flag shouldonly pay half duties both inwards and outwards; and that one hundred and fifty millionsof francs should be paid, as an indemnity, infive equal payments, the first on the 31st December1825. The ordonnance was acceptedon the 11th July ; and from the festivities describedin the official papers, it w T ould appearthat a load of debt, and most humiliating conditions,were considered by the Haitian governmentmatters of unfeigned delight : thepeople, however, I believe, think very differently.Three new commissioners, MM.Daumec, Rouanez, and Fremont, accompanied88 NOTES ON HAITI.the baron on his return to France, for the purposeof completing a treaty, and of raising aloan to extinguish their debt with France,which was confirmed by a particular law of thelegislature. In October of the same year aconvention was concluded at Paris, and Rou-aneand Fremont, the two surviving commissioners,returned to Haiti ; but, on their arrival,the president refused his ratification, on thescore of the conditions being unfavourable tohis country. Various negotiations have beenon foot, without any favourable issue, up tothe beginning of this year ; but the ordonnanceis in full vigour, except in the clause grantingthe privilege to France of half duties on exports.The export duty having been entirelyabolished, no nation can be more favoured thananother.Towards the close of 1825 M. Male, the firstFrench consul-general, with a consul for Cayes,and a vice-consul for the Cape, arrived inHaiti. Early in the following year I followed :Prussia, Lubeck, Hamburgh, Holland andSweden also sent agents, the three first ,and the two last consuls. TheUnited States have a commercial agent at eachof the principal ports ; but some dissatisfactionwith President Adams' message on the subjectRESIDENT FOREIGN AGENTS. 89of Haiti had interfered with their being recognisedby the government. Whether otherfunctionaries from countries than these namedhave since gone to the republic I do not know.90 NOTES ON HAITI.CHAP. VI.Government— Population — Ecclesiastical Establishment.GOVERNMENT.After the various struggles, of which arapid outline has been already given, the wholeisland of Hispaniola, and its various dependentislets, are subject to one government, underthe style and title of the Republic of Haiti. Itwill be interesting to give a summary of theactual state of the existing government, in sofaras it can be considered, without touching onforbidden ground. The original constitutionof 1806 is said to have been founded on thatof the United States of North America, whichhas since been the acknowledged model ofall the constitutions of the New World, exceptthat of Brazil : yet there were some very re-CONSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT. 91markable deviations from both the spirit andform of the great original.The principles on which the constitution of1806 are formed are clearly expressed in thereport made by the constituent assembly, onthe 27th of December of that year. # Groaningunder the recollection of the recent usurpations ofDessalines, that body laid down their opinionswith precision ; and, from the accuracy of someof these opinions, there cannot be many dissentientvoices. While they considered the bestsystem of government for every people to bethat which, being most conformable with theirparticular habits and manners, secures thegreatest sum of happiness for all its members,they suggested that there are certain good principlescommon to all states ; and among thesethe first was the separation of the executive andlegislative functions : the former was to devolveon a president, to be chosen every four years,and the latter on a senate consisting of twenty-fourmembers. The latter also had the nominationof all public functionaries, as well ascontrol over the public expenditure, by constantinspection. The senate was first to benamed by the assembly, and afterwards it wasSee Appendix, note (Y.)92 NOTES ON HAITI.to be composed of such public officers as " thepeople shall have designated." There was nohouse of commons, nor appeal to the people :in fact, neither the people nor the executivehad much power, all being vested in an oligarchy,consisting of the nominees of the firstconstituent assembly. The deviations fromthe American standard are very striking. Inthe one case the institutions are very democratical,the people exercising a constant controlover them. In the other the people had noinfluence after the election of the constituentassembly ; the executive was feeble and embarrassed; and the entire power intrusted to anoligarchy of an objectionable kind; inasmuchas the individual members of it were subject tochanges which might be productive of a interchangeof measures. Of the objections tothis form of republic, some of the writers onChristophe's party, especially Vastey, took constantadvantage ; and it would seem that itsinapplicability to practical purposes was discoveredby its framers ; for, on the approach ofthe period par the revision of the constitution,which had v been fixed at the expiration of theninth year, the senate, in an address to thepeople, announced their intention of revisingthe details of ten sections, which was done ;PROGRESS OF THE CONSTITUTION. 93and the results of their labours were embodiedin the revised constitution, and presented tothe senate by the assembly of revision, on the2d of June, 1816. In this document, whichhas been printed with my Reports on Haiti, bythe order of the House of Commons, the abolitionof slavery was confirmed ; the general dispositionsas to the rights of persons detailed ;the territorial bounds fixed ; the religion of thestate determined to be that of the church ofRome ; the chamber of commons established,and its powers denned ; the functions of thesenate somewhat restricted ; the mode of promulgatinglaws decreed ; the authority of theexecutive rendered much more efficient ; andas the changes in that authority were very remarkable,and at variance with the original institution,it will be necessary to note some ofthe most important modifications in their properplace. Enactments of a general nature, relativeto the army, agriculture, commerce, the financialdepartment, and the future revision of theconstitution, with a view to the correction ofits defects, all occupy a portion of the constitution.Perhaps the document would not beara very rigorous analysis, especially in thepoints on which so much stress is laid, both inthe republic and by her admirers elsewhere ; for94 NOTES ON HAITI.the profession of liberty and equality does notaltogether accord with the direction which hasbeen given to the whole power of the state ; adirection which cannot be misunderstood byany one who takes the trouble of examiningthe subject.Since the revision of 1816 another epoch ofnine years has elapsed without the periodicalexamination having taken place ; but a series ofcodes has been compiled and published. Itconsists of six : viz. the code civile, code deprocedure civile, code d 'instruction criminelle,code penal, code de commerce, code rural, andform the digest of the laws of the republic :besides which there are numerous laws in operationpassed during each session.The affairs of the government are directed bythe president, his Excellency General JeanPierre Boyer, the immediate successor of PresidentPetion. As the nature of the authorityof the chief magistrate of Haiti has been veryerroneously described, I shall here give someaccount of it, on the authority of the constitutionitself.The president holds his office for life ; hemust have attained his thirty-fifth year priorto his election ; he has the right of designatinghis successor, subject, however, to the approvalACTUAL STATE OF GOVERNMENT. 95of the senate ; he is charged with maintainingthe internal and foreign peace of the republic ;he can issue proclamations in conformity with thelaces, and compel obedience ; he commands thearmed force ; he watches over the tribunals byhis commissaries, whose offices are held duringhis pleasure ; he proposes to the commons alllaws, except those connected with taxation ; hecan enter into treaties with foreign nations, andmake war, subject to the sanction of the senate ;he names all agents accredited to foreign countries; he also appoints all functionaries, civil aswell as military ; he receives an allowance offorty thousand dollars a-year ; * he directs thereceipt and issue of the public taxes ; but incaseof malversation he may be denounced bythe senate ; and the high court of justice hasauthority to sit in judgment. In short, thewhole power of the state is centred in the chief,except in points which may easily be nullified —the inability to propose taxes ; the subjectionof his treaties to the senate ; and the negativethat the same body can give to his nominee ashis successor.To this I believe some considerable additions have beenmade from time to time ; but their extent I am not preparedto state.96 NOTES ON HAITI.The details of the administration are carriedon in three state departments, which have beenalluded to in the preceding volume. The first ofthese is that of the secretary-general, which isnow and has been held for many years by GeneralInginac, who is a person of very considerabletalent. His department comprehends the war-office,that of foreign relations, and that of thedomains ; but his personal duties are very extensive.He directs the printing and circulationof all laws, proclamations, and instructions ofthe government ; he exercises the censorship ofthe press ; expedites the correspondence of thepresident ; presides over the three offices above-named; and that of all branches of the publicservice which his excellency chooses to reservefor him. All documents, except letters issuingfrom this department, are signed by thepresident, and countersigned by the secretary-general.This department may be consideredin reality that over which the chief magistrateessentially presides. The whole of the clerksin this section are military men.The next department is that of the secretaryof state for finances and the treasury. It is dividedinto two branches, over one of which thesecretary of state presides, and over the secondSTATE DEPARTMENTS. 97the treasurer-general, who is subordinate to hiscolleague . All fiscal matters belong to thisdepartment.The third department immediately forminga portion or* the government is under thegrand juge, who is the chief of all the judicialestablishments : he controls all the officersof j justice ; sees to the due administration of thelaw ; superintends the notaries ; the officers ofthe bureau civil, or register of births, deaths,and marriages ; legacies all public acts to beused abroad ; and presides in the high court ofjustice : he moreover assists the president in allquestions connected with his department.As the high court of justice possesses extraordinarypowers, it might not be uninterestingto describe its functions and constitution. Ithas jurisdiction in all charges preferred by thelegislative bodies against their own members,the president of the republic, either of thesecretaries of state, or any other great functionary.It can only be constituted by the proclamationof the senate. It must be held in a placedesignated for its sittings, which must not bemore than twelve leagues from the senate. Itis composed of at least fifteen judges, taken bylot from the different departmental tribunals ;and the grand judge presides, except when heVOL. II. E98 NOTES ON HAITI.may be under accusation, when the presidentmay select a president from the great publicfunctionaries. There being no appeal from thejudgment of this court, the accused has theright of rejecting one-third of his judges, andtwo-thirds only can condemn. I never heard ofan instance in which this court was ever held.The chief executive power may be consideredto be in the hands of these three departments.The local exercise of it will be discussed aftergiving a short account of the legislative andother bodies, called the " Grand Corps ded'etat."The first of these is the senate, consisting, asat its first institution, of twenty-four members,which number it must never exceed. The age ofeach senator must not be less than thirty years.All citizens are eligible, except the actual membersof the chamber of deputies. The choice ismade by the deputies out of a list of three nomineesof the president for each vacancy : this isdone by private ballot. The functions of the senatecontinue nine years ; and at the session precedingthe last of its existence the lists are madeup and sent in by the president to the commons.Re-election can take place only after an intervalof three years. The sessions are public ; butmay be made private if expedient. Each sena-senateREPRESENTATIVES. 99tor receives annually one thousand six hundreddollars from the treasury. The senate corresponds,as a body, with the executive and thecommons on certain public affairs ; but all privatecommunication between the individualmembers of the legislative bodies is interdicted.Some of the other attributes of the senate arenamed in the account of the executive. Thesenate decrees the appropriation of the suppliesto the different branches of the publicservice. The senators are privileged from arrestin civil cases. This body has a permanent sitting,there being always a resident committeein the capital during the vacation. The president,and two secretaries, chosen from amongthe members, are elected every month. Thelegislative and occasional judicial functions ofthis body are detailed in the constitution.The second is the chamber of representatives,chosen every five years by the electoral collegesof the communes. The choice of thepresident and secretaries is made in the samemanner as in the senate. The functions of thisbody are also defined by the constitution, andmay be considered to be the following : —It is a fundamental law, that no law can beeffective of which the projet shall not havebeen proposed by the executive, discussed and100 NOTES ON HAITI.adopted by the representatives, and decreed bythe senate. The legislative duties of the commonsare co-ordinate with those of the otherbranch of the legislature. Each member musthave completed his twenty-fifth year. Thechamber lasts for five years, at the expirationof which a new election takes place. At theprescribed period, between the first and tenthof February, the communal assemblies are convokedby the president, and these assemblieschoose the deputies for their respective communesor towns, according to the number prescribedby law. Universal suffrage is the law,and ballot the mode of election. These primaryassemblies are prohibited from entering on anytopic except that for which they are held ; andtheir meetings cannot exceed ten days. A representativemay be re-elected for an indefinitenumber of times. The chamber meets at ,and the session cannot exceed threemonths. The sessions take place on the 1st ofApril, and may be public or private accordingto the decision of the body itself. Each memberreceives two hundred dollars per monthduring the sitting of the chambers, paid by hisown constituents, and a dollar per league fortravelling expenses. The modes of discussingall propositions brought before the chamber areREPRESENTATIVES TRIBUNALS. 101detailed, whether in ordinary or extraordinarycases. The members, as well as those of thesenate, are irresponsible for whatever they maysay or write in the exercise of their legislativefunctions : exemption from arrest, in civil cases, isone of their privileges ; and, if charged with anycrime, they cannot be taken before ordinary tribunals,nor arrested without the sanction of thechamber itself; and even then they can only betried by the high court of justice. The severalsteps of any process are detailed in the constitution,a copy of which has been printed withmy Reports already referred to.Of a subordinate character are the tribunalof cassation and the " chambre des comptes."The former of these consists of a president(doyen), six judges, and six supernumeraryjudges, a commissary of the government, andother officers. The duty of this court is to revisethe decisions of other courts, and to decideon the application of the law to the case inwhich it had been previously made.The " chambre des comptes" consists of fivemembers, whose duty it is to examine into and toreport on every branch of expenditure and collectionof revenue to the president, as well as tosuggest their views of reform and improvement.The internal government of the republic isNOTES ON HAITI.managed in the following manner. The wholeisland is divided into sixty-six communes, andthirty-three parishes, which have not beenerected into communes : these are again classedunder twenty-six military arrondissemens, eightfinancial arrondissemens, and six departments.Over each military arrondissement an officerof rank, usually a general, presides, and exercisesboth military and civil authority: he isthe medium through which the governmentmakes known its arrangements. The arrowsare —QuinAquaLe BorgneCape HaitianLcs Cayessanto DomingoFort LibertyGonaivesJeremieGrande RiviereJacmelSan JuanLegateLimbeSt. MarkMarmeladeCape Nicholas MoleMonte ChristNippesPort-au-PrincePort de PaixPort PlateTiburonLa VegaMirebalaisSt. Ago.The financial districts have, as the principalplace of each, an open port, that is, where a re-TERRITORIAL DIVISIONS. 103gular custom-house is established : they areCape Haitian, Cayes, Santo Domingo, Go-natives,Jeremie, Jacmel, Port-au-Prince, PortPlate. The local administration is carried onby its administrator, a treasurer, a directorof the customs, and a storekeeper, resident atthe principal town. Subordinate officers areemployed with corresponding functions in thecommunes of the district. The duties of the administratorsand treasurers embrace all fiscalmatters ; and these officers, together with theadministrators of the customs, are under thedirection of the secretary of state. It is as unnecessaryas it would be uninteresting to enterinto further details on this branch of the service.I am not aware that any practical object isattained by the divisions into departments, andI am disposed to think it is calculated merelyto keep up an arrangement made long ago.Besides the high court of justice and that ofcassation, there are eight local civil and criminaltribunals, established at seven of thealready enumerated capitals of the financialdistricts, and the eighth is held at St. Ago insteadof Port Plate. Each of these courts arecomposed of a president, (doyen,) four judges,four substitute judges, a commissary of thegovernment, and inferior officers, aided by a104 NOTES ON HAITI.jury (which has lately been introduced) : thesecourts dispose of all criminal cases whichexceed the jurisdiction of the juges de paix.Without the jury they decide in civil matters.Tribunals of commerce were talked of whenI was in the republic, but I do not know thatthey have been yet organised.The ordinary legal affairs are decided by thejuges de paix, who have an extensive jurisdiction: their decisions are final in all civilmatters to the extent of fifty dollars ; but theymay give judgment to the extent of one hundreddollars, subject, however, to an appeal.In common police cases they decide on thosein which the penalty is either a fine of twelvedollars, or imprisonment for five days; but theywild the principal powers of the code rural.Whenever the judgment is final, one of thesubstitute judges, as well as the juges de paixand the greffier, must be present.The notaries, officers de d'etat civil, and publicauctioneers, are all subordinate to the courts.By the means described the whole of theadministration of the government is effected ;and it will be recollected that the whole patronage,from that of the general governing anarrondissement to that of an auctioneer, belongsto the president of the republic.CONSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT. 105In reviewing this slight sketch of the constitution,derived from the document itself, itis impossible to consider the government to beother than a military elective monarchy, inwhich, though the forms are republican, thewhole of the efficient authority of the state iswielded by the first magistrate. It will be seenthat the entire patronage, civil as well as military,centres in his hands ; that, consequently,he may exercise a powerful influence over thepopular representation ; that the senate maybeconsidered his nominees; and the fact is,that he has a direct influence over almost everypublic functionary, while the nice self-adjustingprovisions of the constitution, as they havebeen fancifully described by an amiable enthusiast,are quite nugatory. It is true that noviolent breach has been effected against thepeople ; but the constitution, as it now exists,is incompatible with the spirit of republicanism,and is so considered by a large number of reflectingpeople in Haiti.It forms no part of my business to discusseither the fitness or the unfitness of one formor other of government for securing the greatestsum of happiness to the people ; but I am boundto state the facts which fully bear out the opinionsI have formed. Nor do I think that it would be106 NOTES ON HAITI.at all difficult to show, that a vigorous executivein an infant community, if acting with discretion,is better calculated to advance its interests,than they would be by the adoption of the ingeniousspeculations of theoretical politicians.Such considerations do not fall within the scopeof these volumes, though it may be well forthe reader to keep them in view, before arrivingat any conclusion as to the workings ofthe present system in Haiti.The government, on its present footing, hasan obvious difficulty to encounter. The countryis called every where a republic ; the rightsof man, liberty, and equality, are the never-failingtopics among the politicians who thinkof the imaginary Constitution, while in reality,the chief magistrate possesses by thatrevision powers of infinite magnitude ; andshould occasions arise that call for the exerciseof them, the cry of violated freedom would probablyfollow : if not interrupted, mischief maybethe consequence ; if checked, what right isthere to maintain the existence of a republic,since the name alone exists ?It would form an interesting subject of research,to compare the short progress of thenew republic with that of other states emergingfrom the gloom of barbarism; and, in doing so,Government POPULATION. 107it might be determined how far the apologycan be admitted, that is uniformly urged byone of the most patriotic and intelligent meninthe republic, when pressed on his varnishingover the defects of his country — " Nous sommesje lines."POPULATION.The difficulty of obtaining accurate informationas to the amount and composition of thepopulation of most countries, but especially inthose that have recently been in a state of convulsion,will be fully appreciated by every personwho has attended to this branch of statistics.When therefore the state of Haiti preceding theyear 1822 is considered, it will not be deemedextraordinary that even its own governmentshould be doubtful of the result of any censusmade, or that a foreign inquirer should be ata loss to form more than a conjecture as to theextent and composition of the population. Thediscordant statements made at different periodswill sufficiently prove that these difficulties arenot imaginary.During my residence in the republic, I maderepeated efforts to obtain from the governmentan official statement on this subject ; but neverwith success. I was therefore obliged to trust108 NOTES ON HAITI.to other sources for information ; and I ambound to add, that I have not any two statementsthat correspond. The conclusions musttherefore be considered as mere approximationsto the truth, dependent not on positive butonly on probable evidence. The governmentof Haiti are fully aware of the . necessity ofmaking an accurate census, and the 136th,137th, 138th and 139th articles of the coderural are devoted to these regulations, ineffecting which difficulties must have occurred ;for there can be no good reason for not publishingthe annual results, if obtained, especiallyif they be confirmatory of the statement of1824.The amount of population under the Frenchand Spanish governments immediately previousto the revolution, as given by differentauthorities, varies so little, that the mean maybeconsidered a sufficiently close approximationto the truth ; though even there the precisionmay be doubted, owing to the omission of thenegroes clandestinely introduced, which assertionI make on the authority of a very intelligentperson, who has survived all the revolutions.From the period of the first of these, to thatat which I left the republic, there is so muchPOPULATION RETURNS. 109discrepancy in the accounts, that it will benecessary to give them in detail.According to the general estimate, the populationof the French portion of St. Domingoconsisted, in 1789, ofWhites 30,826Free People of colour 27,54SSlaves 405,429523,803Other statements make it 534,500.In 1785 the population of the Spanish sideof the island was estimated to beFree People of all colours 122,640Slaves 30,000152,640Four or five years after, that is, at the commencementof the troubles in the Western colony,the number was computed at not morethan one hundred and eight thousand five hundred; and this is supposed to have dwindledto one hundred thousand, immediately beforethe annexation of the East to the West.Assuming the maximum here stated at thebeginning of the revolution, the total populationof the whole island would be six hundred andforty-three thousand souls.110 NOTES ON HAITI.During the contests that followed this period,I have met with no records of population onwhich any dependence can be placed. It ishowever most probable that it must have beenconsiderably reduced by emigration and death.It is well known that many proprietors emigratedwith their slaves, both to the continentof America and the adjacent isles, and thebloody transactions between 1791 and 1820leave no reasonable doubt as to the destructionof human life.M. Humboldt has supposed, though I am notaware on what data, that in 1802 the entirepopulation did not exceed three hundred andseventy-five thousand ; and it has been statedthat, after the death of Dessalines, it amountedto four hundred thousand. Whether this orM. Humboldt's estimate be most correct, orwhether both be wrong, is a point that I haveno means of determining.From an American newspaper, published atthe time that emigration of the black and colouredpopulation from the continent to Haitiwas anxiously promoted, for the purpose of increasingthe resources of the republic, I obtainedthe statement said to have been made bythe government, and I believe that the accountof its origin is true.POPULATION RETURNS. IllInhabitants.Port-au-Prince 89,1C4Cape Haitian 38,566Les Cayes 63,536Santo Domingo 20,076Jeremie 37,652Aquin 58,587Gonaives 33,542Tiber 37,927Port de Paix 26,058St. Mark 37,628Port-aug Plate 10,622Jacmel 99,108Nippes 44,778Fort Liberte 21 ,530Leogane 55,662Monte Christii 2,112Mole 17,150Mirebalais 53,649Limbe 33,475Grande Riviere 35,372Marmelade 32,852St. Jago 10,419Borgne 29,169Samara 2,209Neybe 2,581Azua 3,500San Juan 2,745Matte 1,026Archie .'.'*.„ 4,805Croix des Bouquets 13,S33Grands Bois 6,199La Vega 6,178Le Trou 3,932Total 935,335112 NOTES ON HAITI.The distribution of these are : —In the East 61,468North f 367,721West and South 506,146935,335M. Humboldt, on the most favourable principlesof rapid increase, did not estimate theamount at the same period beyond eight hundredand twenty thousand ; and the generallywell-informed historian of Haiti, M. PlacideJustin, states, on information received after the1 7th of April, 1825, that he considers even thatestimate to be exaggerated ; and he adds, thataccording to his information, the populationcould not exceed seven hundred thousand.Very shortly after my arrival at Port-princeI had the good fortune to obtain possessionof a population return that was neverpublished, but had been laid on the table ofthe Chamber of Commons, for the purpose ofapportioning the contribution for liquidatingthe French indemnity. The total amount wasstated in one of my general Reports : the detailsI reserved for a separate statement, which wasnever called for from me, or it would probablyhave been printed by the order of the House ofCommons.POPULATION RETURNS,Census of the hale French Part of St. Domingo.Arrondissemens.Borgne .Grande Riviere,St. MarcCayes, Purbeck.JeremieCape Haitian. . .Port de Paix . . .Le MoleAquinMirebalaisNippesJacmelLimbeTrou (now included inthe Arrondissementof Cape Haitian). . .LeoganeFort LiberteTiburonGonaives . . .Port-au-PrinceSt. Michel (now Marmelade)Communes.BorgnePort Margot,Grande Riviere,St. MarcVeritiesPortSalut,CotteausJeremieCape Haitian, &c.Port de Paix, &c . .Le Mole, &cAquin, &cMirebalaisLease a Veau. . . .Petit TrouMirogoaneJacmel . .Barnet. .Margot .Sal TrouPopulation.Plaisance ,Limbe . . .TrouLeogane ,Grande Goave.Petit Goave . .Fort LiberteTiburonLa Ville, &c.EnneryGros Morne .La Ville .'La CommuneArchieCroix des BouquetsSt. Michel5,1(354,6907,G5S3,2088,5527,8427,53419,4057,8933,8311,8906,1755,00215.2243,7<>211,2839,86110,44810,86634,95423,01222,98410,7501,9*820,09216,03723,92833,01911,1775,50330,2695,9776,07812,8540,5 383.0693,6479, 1 9314,1612,14912,59938,10223,8h7Total . ."m,716NOTES ON HAITI.Census of the late Spanish Part of St. Domingo .Arrondissemens.Communes.Populiition.Monte ChristiiPort-aug PlateMonte ChristiiPort-au-Plate3,2083,5161,0294,534NeybeLa Ville et Comm.BankSeyboHigueySamaraSt. Christophe. . . .Las LlanosBayaguanaSavanna La Mar. .La Ville, &cMara6,724St. Domingo11,2052,3215,3641,6554,0201,1421,70228,357La Vega5,6503,4373,3571,776St. FranciscoCotuySt. Jago14,22011,0)6St. JagoLa Ville et Comm.Mata3,3861,9175,303fatal . . .71,223GENERAL SUMMARY.Population of the North, West, andSouth 351,819Of the East 71 ,223423.012POPULATION RETURNS. 115If this document be not a pure fabrication,which it cannot be, from the channel throughwhich 1 got it, the fact of its having beenprepared as a guide to the legislature in arranginga very embarrassing business, affords astrong presumption in favour of its accuracy.I am not prepared to assert that it is absolutelycorrect, for I have had no means of forming ajudgment; but certainly the probabilities aremore in its favour than those of any other estimatethat I have met with, confirmed as it isby collateral circumstances. The precision observedin the details, and the absence of suchestimates as that of Grands Bois, which mustbe, as will be presently shown, purely conjectural,do not throw any discredit on it.The absence of visible population in very extensivedistricts might be considered favourableto this census, were it not known that in thewooded portions of the island a traveller maytraverse a partially inhabited district withoutseeing any person, owing to the preference givenby the natives to secluded situations. The inaccuracyof the census of 1824 is however renderedstill more probable by the examination ofsome local documents, to which I shall presentlyrefer.116 NOTES ON HAITI.It is curious to compare the two statements,and to remark how close in some points theyare to each other, as well as the enormous differencesthat occur in other cases. Wherevera coincidence occurs I am disposed to considerthe statement correct. It is impossible to comprehendhow the discrepancy of these two documentscan be accounted for without consideringone as apocryphal ; although, for variousreasons, I am very doubtful of the absolutefidelity of either ; yet I distrust that of 1824the most. Whatever may be the amount ofeditor in each, it appears to be inevitable thatif the law be not inoperative, the mode of conductingthe inquiry is lamentably defective,that the persons making it are incompetent, orinexcusably inattentive.I have also heard it stated by that highlyrespectable chief, General Borgella, that hebelieved the population to exceed a million ;and although I place great confidence in anyopinion expressed by him, I should have beenglad to have seen a statement of the manner inwhich that amount was ascertained.I endeavoured, for the purpose of checkingthe two returns I have given, to procure thelocal returns from each district of the popu-LOCAL RETURNS. 117laiion, marriages, births, and deaths. I failedin obtaining any such return of the population ;but at St. Jago I was told by the registeringofficer, and the statement was immediatelynoted, that the deaths in his district averaged,for five years preceding 1827, one hundred,and the births five hundred, leaving an excessof population of four hundred, or eighty perannum. And immediately before I quitted therepublic I was fortunate enough to get possessionof a copy of the registers of the births,deaths, and marriages during the years 1825and 1826, in the commune of Gonaives, and ofanother similar document from the 1st ofJanuary, 1821, to the 31st of December, 1826,for the commune of Cape Haitian. As thesematerials are very imperfect, I did not use themafter I had an opportunity of doing so ; but Ishall now give them, with such conclusions ascannot be resisted even by the least scrupulousadvocate of Haitian precocity.RETURN FROM THE COMMUNE OF GONAIVES.1825. 1S26. Total for two years.Births 185 Births 442 627Deaths . 104 Deaths . 139 243Marriages . . 3 Marriages 8 11NOTES ON HAITI,A Statement of the Deaths, Births, and Marriages, in theParish of Notre Dame de 1' Assumption, of Cape Haitian,from the 1st of January, 1821, to the 31st of December,1826, both inclusive.Years.Births.TotalBirths.Deaths.TotalDeathsXSooHaIsEn<5so-235!10SGeneralTotal ]It will be seen, on reference to the two generaltables, that the amount of population is, inmostinstances, given of arrondissemens, andneither the communes of Gonaives nor CapeHaitian fall within the very few exceptions thatoccur to the general rule. It is therefore impossibleto deduce any conclusions as to the ratioof births, deaths, and marriages, to the populationin which they occur. All that can be doneis to ascertain the proportion that these bear toeach other.In 1825, in Gonaives the births exceed theLOCAL RETURNS. 119deaths by eighty-one ; and the marriages are inthe proportion to the births of one to about sixty-two.In 1826, the increase was three hundredand three, and the marriages were to the birthsin the ratio of one to fifty-four.In the population table of Cape Haitian, inthe first year the decrease amounted to sixty-eight; in the second there was an increaseof one hundred and thirty-four ; in the thirdthe increase continued, and was one hundredand four ; in the fourth the increase was stillgreater, being one hundred and seventy four ;in the fifth year the decrease was fifty-four ;and in the sixth year the increase was onehundred and fifty-nine ; and the entire increasein six years of the population of the city of CapeHaitian was four hundred and forty-nine, or anannual increase of rather less than seventy-five ;and if the population be taken at twelve thousandone hundred and fifty-one, which it wasin 1788, the annual increase will be only sixty-onehundredths per cent., which is very littlemore than one half the increase in denselypeopled countries.120 NOTES ON HAITI.The proportion of marriages to births isnearly —1st year2d3d4th5th6thMarriages. Births.3 . 6277 . 425IS . 6197 . 62258 . 5—7 . 26In some of these cases the proportion, or ratherthe disproportion, is monstrous ; and in all it isso enormous as to warrant the conclusion that allthe births are not the consequence of marriage.I am as unwilling at present as I ever havebeen, to reason on such very imperfect data ;and I merely adduce them to show that if Imade no use of them formerly, 1 did so becauseI did not choose to deduce conclusions fromsuch imperfect documents. #M. Placide Justin attempts, on the authorityof the notes to which he refers, to classifythe inhabitants thus : — ■Blacks 605,500Coloured 84,000Naturalised Whites 500Foreigners resident 10,000700,000See note (A A) in Appendix.CLASSIFICATION OF POPULATION. 121I suspect that the specifications in this statementmust depend on conjecture ; for as it isevidently the policy of the government to putan end, as far as it is possible, to the jealousiesof caste, so it would be impossible to carry onany census marking such distinctions, withoutrousing passions which it is the object to subdue.The individuals most conversant with the islandsuppose that about one-tenth of the whole populationis white and coloured.The population consists of a few whites, aconsiderable number of coloured persons, and alarge excess of blacks. At one time I believedthat a few aboriginal Indians were to be foundin the interior ; but, on a more diligent inquiry,I was convinced that the native race has becomeextinct. Besides the native population, thereis a large admixture of blacks and colouredstrangers from America and the whole of theislands ; and as they become citizens accordingto the 44th article cf the constitution, theybecome constituent parts of the nation, renderingit by no means more united in its views andopinions.During the rage for emigration from theUnited States about thirteen thousand emigrantscame from the Continent. Many stillVOL. II. f122 NOTES ON HAITI.remain ; but many have also returned to theirown country.It is said by some of the best informed Haitians,that among the mountains that stretch from theneighbourhood of Mirebalais to the coast on theeast of Jacmel, there is an extensive association ofthe descendants of the Maroon negroes, whoseindependence had been recognised long beforethe revolution by the then existing government.They keep aloof from all the inhabitants, andwhenever they see any one approaching, the cryof "Viennent ! viennent!" (They come ! theycome!) is uttered, and the whole party scamperoff. They have no intercourse with the presentgovernment, and I am not aware that theyhave ever acknowledged its authority. Fromtheir cry they are called, " Les view — viennent."They are said to be perfectly inoffensive, livingin a state of complete nature. I never met withany person who had had any acquaintance withthem ; but it is told of a French traveller, on hisway from St. Domingo to Port-au-Prince, thathe being obliged one night to take up his lodgingsin a forest, he was awakened by the soundof the tom-tom; and on looking out he perceived,at a short distance, a large party ofthese poor people dancing with prodigious zeal.LES Wien VIENNENT. 123His apprehensions made him a very peacefulspectator of the festivity, and he remained unnoticed.At the approach of day the dancersdispersed, or rather left their rural ball-room.These are the inhabitants of Grands Bois,which appears in the list of arrondissemens,in the table of the census of 1824.Of a people, the components of which soessentially differ, it would be impossible to expressany general character. But, from what Isaw, I am disposed to consider the native blackpopulation of the country a quiet, indolent race,guided without much difficulty, unless harshlyused : then the spirit of vengeance might beeasily called into activity. The people of thetowns are much more obtrusive than those ofthe country, and are more likely both to giveand to take offence.Education is an object of solicitude to thegovernment, as I have already mentioned, whenspeaking of the institutions for its promotion,though the progress hitherto made has beenvery limited : and when it is recollected howmany of the best informed Haitians have perishedduring the revolution, and how few havesince had any means of education, it will ceaseto be a matter of surprise that it is so : thecontrary would, in truth, be most miraculous.124 , NOTES ON HAITI.Reading, writing, and arithmetic, are usuallythe utmost acquirements ; and these are by nomeans general : to these a very few add classicalliterature; and one individual, who had beenbrought up in France, is said to be a goodGrecian.AVith respect to crime, little is to be said:those of a serious character rarely occur.During my stay in the republic there was onlyone murder committed in the capital, and theassassin was executed. Minor offences, especiallytrifling thefts, are not uncommon.Marriage formally solemnised is not so commonas unions of another kind; and it is notuncommon for one man to be the protector ofmany women. In the North the practice ofsolemnising marriages is said to be more commonthan in the South, owing to the precedingpractice under Christophe, and the exertionsof the priesthood at the Cape.ECCLESIASTICAL ESTABLISHMENT.The first ecclesiastical establishments wereformed by the Spaniards. In 1511 Pope JuliusII. created the archbishopric of Paraguay,the suffragans of which were the bishops of Laresde Guahaba, and that of Conception de la Vega.That plan failing, the same pontiff erected, inESTABLISHMENT OF EPISCOPACY. 1251517, one bishopric at Santo Domingo, andconfirmed that of La Vega. Ten years afterthe two dioceses were consolidated, and weresubordinate to the archbishopric of Seville. Thetenths and first-fruits, with certain * exceptions,were conceded to the diocesan by the pope,and confirmed by the king of Spain, on thecondition of praying for the souls who shoulddie in making discoveries. The nomination tothe sees was vested in the king. At a subsequentperiod the bishopric w T as elevated to thearchiepiscopal rank, having as suffragans thebishops of Cuba and Puerto Rico and the abbotof Jamaica. The archbishop was also dignifiedwith the title of primate of the Indies ; and henominated the inferior clergy.The administration of the affairs of the churchin the East of Haiti appears to have proceededaccording to these rules until the beginning ofthe revolution in the West. At that time thearchbishop and several of the clergy fled, andduring the sway of Toussaint coverture hisduties were performed by a proviso : no changeoccurred until the restoration of the hierarchyby Napoleon ; and as the French then occupied*The metals, precious stones, and pearls, formed the exceptions.126 NOTES ON HAITI.the city, a French bishop was sent out; but,having engaged in disputes with the governor,General Errand, he was driven from the island.The church remained without a head from thattime until 1813, when the present archbishop,Don Pedro Valera y Menes, was nominatedby the regency of-spain; though the papalbull confirming his nomination did not issuefor four years. Since the revolution of 1822 hehas withdrawn from his public duties, though hestill exercises an ecclesiastical superintendenceover his flock. He has not taken the oath ofallegiance, as I understand, and he declinesthe pension allotted to him by the state.The nomination of the bishop was, as hasbeen stated, vested in the king, and made inthe same way as that to European sees in theSpanish monarchy. On being made it wassent to the pope, through his nuncio at Madrid ;and the necessary bull being issued and returned,the regnum executor, or placet, was attachedto it.The bull was virtually a mere formality; forfrom the moment of nomination the nomineewas entitled to every privilege of his rank andoffice.The appointments of the archbishop amountedARCHBISHOP CLERGY. 127to ten thousand or twelve thousand dollarsyearly.The clergy were divided into the secular andregulars. The former were again divided intothe chapter of the cathedral and the parishpriests. The first establishment of the chapterwas on a very munificent scale, there beingtwenty-five members of it. The number waseventually reduced to seventeen; and on theconcession of the tithes and parochial chargesto the king, their income was paid out of thepublic treasury, at the rate of eight hundreddollars a-year to the canons, and one thousandto the dignitaries.The parochial clergy were not very numerous,and were respectably paid.Since the last revolution the numbers of thecathedral had fallen off; so that in 1827 therewere, exclusive of the dean, (who was also vicar-general,)only two dignitaries and two canons ;the first received twelve hundred dollars, andeach of the remainder six hundred dollars annually.It is probable that the number hasdecreased still more since the time of which Ispeak, as some of the incumbents were old andinfirm.At that period there were in the East eighteen128 NOTES ON HAITI.parish priests, besides the chaplain of the choirin the cathedral.There were formerly monastic institutions atSt. Jago, Santo Domingo, Azua, and San Juan.The monks were Dominicans, Mercenaries,and Franciscans; the nuns, Mercenaries, Capuchins,and of the orders of Santa Clara, andRegina Maria.The Dominicans had their priors, the Mercenariestheir superiors, the Franciscans theirguardians, and the nuns their abbesses, who superintendedtheir internal discipline, under thecontrol of the diocesan.All the monasteries are in ruins, except thoseof the city of Santo Domingo, and all havebeen suppressed. The nunneries have sharedthe same fate ; but an asylum is still affordedto a few old nuns, of whom there were, when Iwas at Santo Domingo, six, one of whom wasan old woman of ninety.In the three provinces that belonged to Francethere was no bishop ; but they were dividedinto fifty-two parishes, under (by an especialgrant) the direction of the two missions of theDominicans and Capuchins ; the former occupyingthe West and South, and the latter theNorth. Two apostolic prefects presided overPROGRESSIVE CHANGES. 129these two communities, subject to their respectiveecclesiastical superiors in Europe. Therewere also several monastic institutions, whichhave ceased to exist.I am not aware that any public change tookplace in the administration of church affairsconsequent on the French revolution. UnderToussaint's rule it is certain that the formsremained unaltered. Dessalines had no nationalreligion.On Christophe's elevation to the throne, ofhis proper authority he appointed two archbishopsin succession, and erected three bishopricsin the West. The first archbishop was aFrenchman, the second a Spaniard. Both incurredhis displeasure, and disappeared. Thebishoprics do not appear to have been filled up.A French bishop came out to the republic,and was received for a time at Port-au-Prince.With the mode of his appointment I am whollyunacquainted. The president finding that heinvolved himself in disputes with a factious Irishpriest, who had, before his arrival, exercisedgreat influence, expelled both. Since that theaffairs of the church in the West have beencarried on by four vicars-general, subject to thearchbishop of Santo Domingo, who is consideredthe diocesan. There were in this portion130 NOTES ON HAITI.of the republic, at the time of which I speak,twenty parish priests, four of whom were thevicars-general ; making a total of thirty-eightclergy in the republic, the whole of whom arepaid, and, I believe, nominated by the president.It is reported that in Christophe's time anattempt was made to form a concordat with theSee of Rome ; but from some cause that I cannottrace it failed. It is also reported that morerecently a similar attempt was made by the presentgovernment, with a view to form a nationalclergy ; but that his holiness called for informationbefore coming to a decision. Thegovernment is, I believe, not disposed to formany concordat, without a perfectly nationalclergy be conceded to them. For that purposean establishment has been formed at Millet,under the Abbe Lesson, as I have formerly mentioned.At present the majority of the clergyare Spaniards, or at least, Spanish Americans,a few Frenchmen, and, I believe, one Italian.The constitution declares Roman Catholicismto be the religion of the state, while it toleratesall; although Dessalines disavowed any ;statereligion, and was equally tolerant. AlthoughChristophe adopted Roman Catholicism as thereligion of his kingdom, it is reported that hevery seriously meditated the establishment ofRELIGIOUS TOLERATION. 131Protestantism; and the introduction of theEnglish language is considered to have been apreliminary.When I was in Haiti the various sects amongthe American emigrants enjoyed the uninterruptedexercise of their religious rites ; thoughI am not aware that any regular church establishmenthas been formed, except that of Rome.A few years before my arrival some Wesleyanpreachers from England were obliged to returnhome, in consequence of being persecuted bythe populace. I have understood that the governmentdisclaimed any share in the outrages ;and the president presented about five hundredpounds to the funds of the society. Variouscauses have been assigned to me in Port-princefor this persecution : none, however,reflecting on the personal integrity of the missionaries; and as I know not whether any becorrect or not, it is unnecessary to repeatthem.All persons, without reference to their religiousfaith, are allowed to be interred in thepublic cemetery ; with this sole difference, thatthe bodies of Catholics are taken, previous tointerment, to the church, where the service forthe dead, according to the forms of the Catholicritual, is performed ; while those of other sects132 NOTES ON HAITI.are conveyed directly to the place of burial,where it is also permitted, if Protestants, thatthe funeral service of the Church of Englandshould be read over them. All this is mereusage; and a few years ago the Irish priestwho has been already alluded to attempted,though unsuccessfully, to set it aside, and todisinter the body of the infant child of anEnglish resident.]S T o civil or military disqualifications attachto any difference of religious creed : indeed Iam not aware that the mode of faith is on anyoccasion made a subject of inquiry. Were itmade a qualification to understand, or to explainthe grounds of belief, I fear that the rejectedwould be numerous.•/AGRICULTURE. 133CHAPTER VII.AGRICULTURE.It is obviously necessary, in treating of theagriculture of Haiti, to divide the subject intotwo branches ; viz. of the cultivation of articlesfor domestic consumption, and that of interchangeablearticles, or, as it is phrased in therepublic, " la culture des vivres," and, " lesgrandes cultures." Indian corn is, I believe,the only grain produced ; plantains, yams, andall the usual tropical vegetables are grown inconsiderableabundance ; but of. the absolutequantity nothing can be said, as I possess nodocuments on the subject. I apprehend thatmost of these articles are yielded in sufficientquantity for home use, as they were in precedingperiods. Indian corn, however, whichI have been informed was formerly not an inconsiderablearticle of export, is occasionallynot to be procured on any terms ; and is also134 NOTES ON HAITI.sometimes imported from the United States ofAmerica. In this chapter I shall thereforeconfine myself to such objects as can be illustratedby documents, both because they constitutethe only test of the exchangeable wealthof the country, and because my attention wasespecially directed to them by his majesty'sgovernment, and consequently my informationis more complete than it is on topics whichI could only incidentally investigate.As a preliminary to an account of the state ofthe agricultural produce at different periods, itis requisite to give a brief outline of the varioussystems pursued to ensure labour for the branchof which I treat, after the abolition of slavery bySonthonax, which he effected on the 31st August,1793. # Polverel, then in the South, hesitated; but in order to ensure an influence equalto that of his colleague, confirmed his act by aproclamation on the 1st November of the sameyear.I am not aware that Sonthonax issued anyregulations to induce his new freedmen to lathestatements now given are substantially and often literallythe reports made by me to the Foreign Office ; for the morecarefully I have re-examined my statements, the more secure Ifeel my own accuracy protected, except indeed from designingand malevolent falsehood.SYSTEM OF FARMING. 135your ; but Polverel published " Reglemens dela Police sur la Culture et les Cultivates"*The principal provisions of this code are decidedlycompulsory. In the preamble the differencebetween the labour of freedmen and ofslaves is pointed out ; the necessity of industryenforced ; the advantage of a participation inthe profits, rather than the receipt of wages;and, in conclusion, he proposes " organiser unesociete de maniere que Pinegale distribution desrichesses noise le moins possible a. la liberte eta.Legality des citoyens, et que la liberte etLegality ne puissent amener ni l'anarchie ni ladissolution du corps politique."The " Reglement" is divided into six sections,which treat —1st. Of the conditions of persons in SaintDomingo.2d. Of cultivators in general.3d. Of cultivators participating in the proceeds.4th. Of day labourers.5th. Of labourers by the month, or a longerterm.6th. General arrangements applicable to allthe articles of the present " Reglement."See this document at length in the parliamentary papersalready referred to.136 NOTES ON HAITI.There appears to be much unnecessary expansionof the simplest propositions ; but thereis no doubt as to the enforcement of labour byfine and imprisonment.*Sonthonax and Polverel returned to France,and Hedouville arrived at Cape Francois asagent of the Directory on the 21st April, 1798.He appears to have directed his early attentionto the re-establishment of agricultural industry ;for when the Commissioner Raimond (on meetinghim at Fort Dauphin, on the 17th of thatmonth, on his way to the Cape from the city ofSanto Domingo, where he landed,) addressedan harangue highly laudatory of the general,of himself, and of every thing in the colony;he, after paying high compliments to Toussaintand the inhabitants in general, particularlyspeaks of Raimond's claims on national gratitude," par les soins que vous n'avez cessede vous donner pour le establishment descultures."About the same time it had been assertedthat Sonthonax, on his arrival in France, hadaccused his late colleague, Raimond, of havingmonopolised sixty farms. This charge was contradictedby Raimond in the Bulletin OfficielSee note (BB) in Appendix.SYSTEM OF FARMING. 137of the 23d April 1798 (4 Floral, an 6), bypublishing a list of plantations farmed for threeyears by him, and nineteen other persons,among whom were Mouse (Toussaint's nephew),Christophe (afterwards king), Pascal(the nephew of his celebrated namesake), andVincent (the French officer of engineers).The note that follows this list is curious, ifthe statement be true, that in eighteen monthsafter the establishment of the leasing system,order w T as restored, and the sugar produced(which had been reduced to three and a halfmillions of pounds) amounted to thirty millions •and that in the following year it was expectedto be doubled.In the same document there is also includeda list of the plantations then let by the proprietors: they were only six, out of which fivewere burnt ! yet all paid a certain rent.Of the subsequent published regulations, theonly documentary evidence that I could procureis furnished by the proclamation and arreteof General Hedouville, which are at the end ofthe volume.* It will be seen by reference tothem that labour was required ; and in caseof non-compliance the penalties were fine.,See note (CC) in Appendix.NOTES ON HAITI,imprisonment, and labour on the public establishments.As soon as Toussaint had established sufficientpower, which happened very soon afterhe took a decided lead in the colony, he placedthe whole of the agricultural system under thedirection of Dessalines (afterwards emperor)and Mouse (his own nephew), as inspectors-general: to these individuals were subordinatethe inspectors of districts, who in their turnhad under their authority the proprietors, farmers,and managers of the plantations throughoutthe colony.The whole of these officers possessed unlimitedauthority over their subalterns ; and allauthorities that I could consult concur in describingthe system to have been as arbitraryand despotic as possible. The whip was abolished,but thick sticks, the stems of creepingplants called in Haiti " lines," were used withoutscruple; and not unfrequently the sabre,the musket, and even burying alive, were resortedto as punishments for refractory gangs,or ateliers. I was told in the neighbourhoodof Cayes, by one of the most respectable proprietorsthere, that he himself had witnessedthe flogging of a woman (by the order of Dessalines): she was big with child, and the pu-modeOF SECURING LABOUR. 139punishment was so severe, that abortion took placeon the spot.The most rigid severity inevitably followedidleness ; and in return the cultivators were entitledto one-fourth of the produce of their labours,and the proprietors were bound to defraythe expense of their subsistence and agriculturalcharges. They were further obliged to remainattached to the plantations of their formermasters.It was in 1797 that the plantation Brossard,already spoken of, was let for rent. Raimond,one of the commissioners sent from France,was the farmer, and paid eighteen thousandfrancs annually, as appears from the BulletinOfficiel of April 23d, 1798, the then organ ofthe local government.I was unable to procure any published decreesissued by Toussaint prior to the " Constitution*of the French colony of St. Domingo."The sixth section contains all the provisionspublished ; and as all power was vested in thegovernor, the inference is fair that the statementsmade by contemporary Haitians is correct,that his detailed regulations were addressedSee note (DD) in Appendix.140 NOTES ON HAITI.from time to time to the presiding officers, butnever printed.The most important of these is that whichauthorises the governor (Toussaint) to makeall the police regulations to enforce labour conformableto that of 20 Vendemiaire, an 9, andthe proclamation of 19 Piuviose following ;neither of which could be found by me in Haiti.Under this section there is one very remarkablearticle (17th), charging the governor totake measures for the introduction of labourers,so indispensable to the re-establishment and increaseof cultivation in St. Domingo.The 12th section treats of national propertysequestrated and in abeyance ; and with muchliberality the 60th article declares, that " strangerssucceeding in France to their foreign orFrench relatives, shall succeed equally in St.Domingo : they may contract, acquire and receivethe property in the colony, and disposeof it the same as Frenchmen, by all the meansauthorised by law."This may in fact be considered as a corollaryto the fourth article of the constitution, whichdeclares that " every man, whatever may be hiscolour, is admissible to every employment."In the laws of St. Domingo, published im-toussaint'srural laws. 141mediately after the constitution, there are alsorules for the regulation of national property.Lists of the buildings on the sequestered plantationswere to be furnished to the admonishof domains, and to the militarycommandant. From these lists the was to form a general register ; aregister of each particular district to be transmittedto the particular administrators. Sixmonths before the termination of every leasethe military commandant to examine into thecondition of the plantation, particularly intothe increase or decrease of cultivation and ofthe labourers. Reports founded on these examinationsto be furnished to the administrator-general,and by him laid before the governor,who would act accordingly. Farms actually inlease to pay rent either in kind or money, accordingto the original contract ; but on thetermination of the existing leases, all contractsto be made for money. The produce to be soldevery fortnight, in the presence of a municipalofficer, by public auction. Some minor regulationsrespecting these sales follow : afterwardsthe mode of leasing colonial and sequestratedproperty; that of collecting the rents ; and lastly,a law on the property of emigrants, of whom alist was to be supplied by the French governsNOTES ON HAITI.ment to the governor : on this list being received,the whole of their plantations to be confiscated.Rigaud, on the other hand, is said by thenatives to have acted on the equally compulsory,though less brutal system of Polverel.The following general view of Rigaud's measuresis derived from a Swiss, who resided inthe South under his administration ; and maybeconsidered as fair a statement as can be obtainedin a country where all are, in a greateror less degree, partisans ; and this person wasa decided admirer of Rigaud.On peut dire prealablement avec une es-peacede certitude que le General Rigaud avaitles memes idees philanthropists que le PresidentPetion, (yet his sole observation, onhearing his revolutionary bands were committingmurder and every sort of atrocity, wasMon Dieu ! quest ce que le peuple en fureur')personne ne pouvait infliger une punition corporelleaux negres ou aux habitans de couleur,que etoient engages a. travailler semaine parsemaine. Toutes les discussions entre maitresde travellers se terminoient devant les tribunaux.Le General Rigaud n'a jamais employedes mesures correctives pour la culture. IIavait pris des mesures de police a leeward desindians et paresseux, qui retomboit dans lerigaud's system. 143systeme de Baron Vaght de Hamburg, quis'est prepare dans toute europe et aux EatsUnis de PAmerique du Nord ; c'est a, dire, quesi la police attrappoit un proprietaire, ou toutautre individu quelconque, fesant l'a^umone aune personne capable de travailler, il etoit condamnea payer trois fois la valeur de ce qu'ildonnoit, outre la confiscation de Objet donnecomme aumone."Le Clerc and Rochambeau had small opportunity,from the destructive system of warfarecarried on by themselves as well as by theiropponents, to enforce any regular plan of labour; but during the very brief cessation ofhostilities during the life of the former, I havelearned in conversation, for I could obtain notrace of any printed document, that measuressimilar to those of Hedouville and Toussaintwere pursued, as far as practicable.After the expulsion of the French army in1803, Dessalines was first named governor-generalfor life, and afterwards emperor. Thisindividual, having been one of Toussaint's in-spectators-general of cultivation, knew full wellhow much the general wealth of the state dependedon the steady exertion of agriculturalindustry ; yet no document on this subject was144 NOTES ON HAITI.made public before his elevation to the imperialthrone.Very little notice is taken of agriculture inthe constitution of Dessalines, proclaimed onthe 20th May 1805. By the fortieth article,agriculture and commerce were placed underthe direction of the minister of finance and ofthe interior ; and by the twenty-first article ofthe dispositions generates, it is declared, thatas " agriculture is the first, the most noble,and the most useful of all the arts, it shall behonoured and protected ;" and by the twenty-seventharticle, the " fete d 'agriculture' 7 is established.Although the law for excluding all white proprietorsoriginated in his time, he in every otherrespect pursued the system over which he formerlypresided; but from the devastation ofproperty, and probably the loss of labourers inthe bloody warfare that preceded his reign, thesame beneficial effects did not result from it.As before, the cultivator received one-fourthof the net produce ; flogging with the whipwas abolished ; but punishment was inflictedwith sticks and lines ; and sometimes thesabre and musket were employed, as well as themore constitutional procedure of imprisonment.DESSALINES* SYSTEM. 145It was a part of Dessalines' policy to get asmuch of the landed property as possible intothe hands of the government. This he effected ;first, by his base and treacherous murder ofthe unfortunate white French inhabitants, whounhappily confided their persons, families, andproperties to his unsolicited pledges, and next bydestroying nearly all the title-deeds of the colouredproprietors that the director-general ofthe public domains could procure. In this waynearly the whole of the North fell into thehands of this man. Of course an immense influenceaccompanied this accession of property;and to render it available, he attached the labourersto the soil, though they might obtainpermission from the inspector of the districtto remove under urgent circumstances. It isnot to be supposed that such permission wouldbe often, if ever, granted in opposition tothe wishes of so despotic and unrelenting achief.It is stated, though on no very decided authority,that many of those estates were farmedout, as in Toussaint's time, at an annual rent,which was regulated rather by the number oflabourers than by the extent of land in cultivation.It is further said, and I believe withtruth, that Dessalines was anxious to carry on,VOL. II. G146 Notes ON HAITI.through British means, the slave trade, inorder to increase both his military and his labouringpopulation.After his death, in 1806, at Pont Rouge,near Port-au-Prince, and the separation of theNorth from the South, the systems of theleaders became different ; and of these, that ofChristophe is best known through informationobtained from M. Menu. I give his own words."Son systeme agriculture etoit que les cultivateursrecevroient exactement le quart quileur etoit accord e sur le produit de habitation :ils etoient tenus de se rendre au jardin avantle jour: les conductors de habitation etoienttenuis de sonner la clothe a trois heures du matin,pour reveller les cultivateurs, afin de cureou preparer leur dejeuner : une heure ou uneheure et demie apres ce son de la clothe lesconductors ou gerans sonnoient un autre sonpour averted les cultivateurs qu ll etoit heurede se rendre au travail ; a ce son tous les cultivatesse reunissoient a la porte du grantpour faire la priere : apres la priere le conducteurles conduisoit a la place que le jour ne sefaisoit pas, on l'employoit a nettoyer les divisions,a ruler des pieces de Cannes que Tonavoit couples, ou a faire d'autres travaux queTon peut faire sans voir ties clair. Au jourM. Menu's NARRATIVE. . 147currant on les faisoit commencer l'ouvrage : ahuit, neuf heures, on les donnoit un petit repospour dejeuner: aussitot qu'ils finis soient dedejeuner, on les faisoit reprendre le travail. Lecultivateur ne pouvoir pas quitter le travail, nise contraire, sous aucun pretext, que pourle besoin indispensable ; car sur les habitationsou il y avoit beaucoup de cultivateurs il y avoitdeux informed de habitation, qui les suivoienta la place pour leur donner de Peau a boire, etun ou deux pour garder les enfans des nourrices.Les nourrices se redolent a la place au soleillevant, et quitting l'ouvrage ensemble avecl'atelier a midi. A deux heures precise le conducteursonnet la clothe, et l'atelier se reditimmediatement au travail. Les nourrices sorsune demi-heure apres, et quittingl'ouvrage un quart heure avant l'atelier, quile quittoit au soleil couchant, et se redit chezle gerant pour faire la priere, avant de se retirerchez eux.Toutes ces mesures etoient de rigueur; etquand le cultivateur manquoit, on l'envoyoiten prison, ou on le faisoit travailler a la culturedes places a vivres que chaque quartier pour le compte de l'etat, dont les produitsetoient portes au magazine du roi pour la148 NOTES ON HAITI.consummation des ouvriers et des prisonniers.Le cultivateur qui manquoit, etoit quelquefoisfrappe de la liane par son conducteur, son gerant,ou enfin par le royal mahomet, qui seytrouvoit sur habitation; mais il n'avoit aucunereclamation a faire sur cela; s'il le faisoit, onetoit sourd a sa plainte, que le proprietaire oufermier de habitation ou ils travailloient neles avoit bien paye. Dans ce cas le roi se faisfournir par les proposes administrationl'etat des degrees des habitations; et sur cet eatil faisoit verifier les bordeaux dresses pourle quart des cultivateurs, pour voir, meme avantla plainte, si dans les payes precedents on neles avoit jamais dupe; et quand il appercevoitdes fourberies de la part des proprietaires, fermiers,ou gerans, il les punissoit government.Ce n'etoit que sur ce point que les cultivateurspouvoient avoir raison.Les cultivateurs etoient attaches au sol dehabitation ou ils etoient ncs.Toutes personnes dont leurs meres ou leursparens sont natifs d'une habitation, etoientobliges de rentrer sur cette habitation pourtravailler : il surhsoit que le gerant, conducteur,ou un cultivateur faisoit connoitre au commandantmilitaire qu'un nomme un tel, demeurantciiristophe's system. 149en tel bourg, ou en ville, ou sur telle habitationou quartier, est le fils de telle personne, aucunsujet de habitation ; que le commandant etoitoblige d'ecrire et de demander personne qu'onlui denommoit pour la contraire a rentrer auxtravaux de habitation ; et si elle avoit des en-fans,ses enfans etoient tenus de rentrer element,excepte si elle etoit devenu proprietaire.Le montant du quart revenant aux cultivatesetoit report en part ; trois quarts de part ;demi-part et un quart de part. Le premier conducteuravoit trois parts egaux a industriad'un fort traveller qui pretended a un part ;le deuxieme, deux parts ; le troisieme, s'il yen avoit ? un part et demi. Les maitres mournerset scries, deux parts ; les forts tramun part, et successivement selon leurforce et leur emploi. Les gerans etoient payespar les proprietaires.Sur chaque habitation il y avoit une hospitallerspour signer les malades et une sage-femme.Les proprietaires fournissoient un rae-deinqui faisoit une tourney par semaine surhabitation; et tous les cultivateurs qu'il detroitdehors de l'hopital, etoient tenus de rentrer a.l'ouvrage. Si non, on les contraignoit ; et pourmaintenir l'ordre et faire travailler, le commandantmilitaire, officier du royal mahomet, etoit150 NOTES ON HAITI.tous les jours a trois heures du matin a chevaldans sa commune, pour inspecter et voir si lesgerans sonnoient a. heure undique, et sailsavoient pas laisse des gens oisifs sur habitationsans les exiger a aller au travail. Dansle cas de negligence de la part des gerans ouconductors de habitation, ils etoient de suitearretes par le commandant militaire ou parofficier du royal mahomet, et envoy es au commandantde Farrondissement, qui avoit le droitde les envoyer aux travaux de la citadelle. Siles proprietaires ou fermiers se plaignoient directementau roi, que leur habitation ne trampas, le roi donnoit ses ordres particuliersau commandant militaire ; mais avant de donnerces ordres, il s'assuroit si ce proprietaire,qui lui avoit porte plainte, portrait tous les soinsexiles par le systeme des cultivateurs, et s'il lespayoit sans les duper ; et s'il prevoyoit a tousles besoins de habitation ; — si enfin il ne lais-soitpas water les Cannes de habitation sansles rouler, si c'etoit une sucrerie, et si les cultivateursavoient tous les outils aratoires quileur falloient.Toute personne, militaire ou autre, qui nedepends pas de 1 'atelier d'une habitation, nepeut se marier avec une personne qui dependsd'une habitation, ou de qui les descendSYSTEM. 1 5 Idans dependent d'une habitation. C'est pourenipccher a ces officiers ou militaires devoirdes pretensions de retirer d'une habitation loursfemmes ou parens. II n'accorderoit le mariagedans ce cas que lorsque lui promettroit dansla petition qu'on etoit oblige de lui presenter,de ne pas derange la femme de la culture de1 'habitation d'oii elle dependent, ou de mentioneddans sa petition que la femme ou sesdescendans ne dependent aucune habitation :mais dans Tun et l'autre cas, il prenoit toutesles informations necessaires par ecrit, et vousfaisant presenter la femme.Les habitations etoient tenues de fournirau commandant militaire une quantity de passages,de bananes, huile, carbon, pois ouriz pour le besoin du magazine d'etat, pour servira. nourrir les prisonniers, ouvriers et travellersemployes aux travaux du roi ; et quand le gerantne pouvoir pas fournir de son sol, soit parsonnegligence ou comment, il etoit tenu a seenpourvoir de sa poche ; mais le proprietaire oufermier n'avoit rien de ca sur sa responsibility.Chaque habitation, suivant la force de bras qu'ilavoit, fournissoit tant de personnes tous les Sa-media,tant pour les travaux de la citadelle, quepour les autres corals, et tant pour l'entretiendes places a vivres de retat."152 NOTES ON HAITI.It may be, however, illustrative of the differencebetween the written and the common lawof Haiti, to refer to his Code # of Agriculture,which formed a part of the Code Henri, issuedunder his auspices after his assumption of theroyal dignity.It consisted of eight sections, which treat insuccession : —1st. Of the duties of proprietors and farmers ;of the obligations of labourers ; and of the policeof gangs.2d. Of cultivation of greater objects.3d. Of provision grounds.4th. Of the mode of division of the fourthallotted to cultivators.5th. Of public works.6th. Of pounds (for cattle).7th. Of breeding-farms, &c.8th. Of punishments.By reference to the document itself, it willbe seen that idleness was considered a flagrantoffence, and that, even by the published law,severe punishment followed the detection of it;but the circumstantial details of the secretaryleave no doubt that the practice was still morerigorous.See the extract in the Parliamentary papers and the Codeitself.potion's system. 153Under Petion's government there was a greataffectation of promoting every sort of industry,especially that of agriculture ; but the desire ofpropitiating all classes, by giving way to theirfavourite passion, idleness, was all-powerful.Although nothing was done, much was saidand written, respecting agriculture and commerce.In the constitution of 1806, and in itsrevision in 1816, the tenth section is devoted tothose subjects ; and, by the thirty fourth article,the former of these is made the subj sect of one ofthree national festivals, under the title of " feteagriculture," on the 1st May. Whatever mayhave been intended, it seems certain that thenumerous small grants made in consequence ofa general order of the late president, and actedupon both by himself and his successor, havecontributed to cause the decline of combinedindustry, and will probably continue to do soinspite of every coercive measure that may beadopted.During Rigaud's, and after him, Borgella'sadministration in the South, PolverePs regulationswere enforced ; and I have been informedby an officer of the highest rank in that departmentthat Rigaud appointed a very celebratedman, named Le Franc, as the chief inspector154 NOTES ON HAITI.of cultivation, with unlimited authority to enforcelabour.As it has been already shown in 1818, onthe death of Petion, the present president,Boyer, succeeded to the vacant chair. Sincedoing so, Christophe's suicide annexed the Northto the republic, and the disorders of the Eastplaced the whole island and its dependenciesunder one government.Boyer professes to be very desirous of promotingagriculture ; and it is certainly regardedas an object of moment by many of the officersof his government.The last law on this subject is the Code Rural,enacted on the 6th May, 1826, and published atPort-au-Prince in the month of July of the sameyear. This code is the work of General Inginac,the secretary-general, and is intended to excitethe industry of the country. Many of the regulationscorrespond with some contained in thecode noir and the subsequent laws of Christophe ;but the consequences of delinquency are heavyfine and imprisonment, and the provisions ofthe law are as despotic as they can well beconceived.* All persons not excepted by theSee note (EE) in Appendix.CODE RURAL. 155third article " must cultivate the earth:" theycannot quit the country for the purpose of residingin a town or village, without the permissionof the judge of the peace, who shallnot give such authority without being assuredof the morality of the applicant, of his regularconduct, and of his ability to maintain himselfin the town: he cannot send his children toschool or to be apprenticed in town, withouta certificate from the judge of the peace : hecan under no pretext establish a shop or sellproduce in the country, with certain exceptionsas to the articles of produce and home manufacture: he cannot build a house in the countryunconnected with cultivation. The code directsthe mode of managing landed property ; offorming contracts between the proprietor andfarmer, farmer and labourer ; of regulatinggrazing establishments : it also regulates therural police, or the inspection by proper personsof the cultivation and the cultivators ; the modeof repressing vagrancy; and of repairing thepublic ways. The law repressing vagrancy isvery full ; and although it is given at length inthe Appendix, a short summary of its principalprovisions will illustrate the principles on whichthe code has been constructed. All persons notfarmers or proprietors, living in the country156 NOTES ON HAITI.without having contracted with some cultivator,are reputed vagabonds, and must be arrestedand taken before the magistrate, who warnsthem that by law they are bound to contract, andif they refuse to do so they are sent to prison ;and if they persist after eight days' confinement,they shall be condemned to labour on the publicworks until they agree to make a contract. Aftera contract is once made the provisions for enforcingits execution are strict.Such have been the various modes employedfor inducing or compelling labour for nearlyforty years. It is next necessary to ascertain,as far as it is practicable, the degree of successthat has attended each ; and the only mode ofeffecting this with which I am acquainted, is togive the returns of the exported agriculturalproduce during the same period, marking, whereit can be done, any accidental circumstancethat may have had an influence. To form anyidea of the general state an imperfect generaltable is given. * In it the amount of produceof 1789 is stated on the authority of M. Page,formerly a wealthy colonist; that of 1801 onthat of General Lacroix ; and I have so takenit, from having been assured by the most competentpersons in Haiti that it is tolerably coreSee note (FF) in Appendix.OFFICIAL RETURNS. 157rect. The statements during the years 1818,1819, 1820, 1821, 1822, 1823, 1824, are derivedfrom the official documents laid beforethe chamber of representatives by the secretaryof state, in conformity with the constitution; those of 1825 and 1826 are also derivedfrom an official source, the regular details forthese two years not having been drawn up orsubmitted to the legislature before my leavingPort-au-Prince.As the information derived from this table islimited, I shall endeavour to supply its defectsby tables of the exports from the different districtsand ports. That of Cape Haitian is byfar the most full, as it embraces the whole exportsunder Dessalines' and Christopher governments,as well as of the republic. That ofPort-au-Prince is more scanty, as it does notgo further back than the year 1818 ; yet itshows tolerably well the progress of events foreight years, and is valuable, as the presentsystem had its origin at that place. The returnfrom Cayes comprises that of the wholeof the southern department, viz. Miragoane,Jeremie, Tiburon, Anse d'Hainault, Aquin andCayes ; for during the years 1810, 1811, 1812,Cayes was the chief place of export, and contesNOTES ON HAITI.sequently affords means of instituting, if not avery rigorous comparison, at least an approximationto the truth.Jacmel is of no great importance as to amount ;but having formed a part of the republic duringall its convulsions, I have thought it right to showthe progressive changes that have occurred inits exports, by a short table for the last eightyears.The table of the exports from the easternportion of the island comprehends those fromPort-a-Plate, and the city of Santo Domingo,since the annexation to the republic in 1822.From these statements, I would fain hopethat some general inference may be made as tothe influence of the various systems that haveprevailed at different periods, although I cannotpretend to minute accuracy of detail.Clayed sugar, which in the French timeformed so important an article of export, thatin 1789 the quantity exceeded forty-sevenmillions five hundred thousand French pounds,diminished under Toussaint's government toabout sixteen thousand five hundred pounds ;in 1818, under Petion's rule, there were onlyone hundred and ninety-eight pounds; in 1819,one hundred and fifty-seven pounds; and inGENERAL RETURNS. 1591820, two thousand seven hundred and eighty-sevenpounds ; since which it has ceased toappear on the returns.Raw sugar was formerly of still more importance; for it will be seen, on reference to theaccompanying table, that the quantity exportedin 1789 exceeded ninety-three millionsfive hundred thousand French pounds ; in 1801 itfell off to somewhat more than eighteen millionsfive hundred thousand ; in 1818 it amounted tomore than five millions five hundred thousand,from which it progressively declined to twothousand and twenty pounds in 1825; in 1826it again advanced to nearly thirty-three thousandpounds.Coffee too has not yet made greater progress.In 1789 the export of this article amounted toseventy-six millions eight hundred and thirty-fivethousand two hundred and nineteen pounds ;in 1801 it had declined to forty-three millionsfour hundred and twenty thousand two hundredand seventy pounds; in 1818 it sustaineda still farther reduction to little more thantwenty-six millions; from 1819 to 1824 it variedfrom twenty-nine millions to above forty-fourmillions ; and in the two subsequent yearsit has fallen off, first to little more than thirty-sixmillions, and lastly to a trifle beyond160 NOTES ON HAITI.thirty-two millions, or less than four-ninths ofwhat it was in 1789.Cacao does not appear to have been exportedby the French colonists, and only six hundredand forty-eight thousand five hundred andeighteen pounds were shipped under Toussaint ;but since the republic has been established thequantity has varied from nearly five hundredthousand to two hundred and sixty-four thousandpounds.Indigo has been in some measure abandonedby the old French colonists, yet in 1789 theamount exported exceeded seven hundred andfifty thousand pounds. Only eight hundred andfour were shipped by Toussaint, and one thousandtwo hundred and forty in 1824; sincewhich no mention is made of it in the officialreturns.Molasses or sirup was an article of limitedexport prior to the revolution, owing to thegreater perfection in the art of making sugar.It amounted to twenty-five thousand seven hundredand forty-nine pounds in 1789 ; to ninety-ninethousand four hundred and nineteen in1801 ; within the last nine years, only once (in]H2'2) two hundred and eleven thousand ninehundred and twenty-seven pounds were shipped.Nearly, if not the whole is consumed, as hasGENERAL RETURNS. 161been already described, in the manufactureof tafia.The French exported no dye-woods, (whichinclude logwood, fustic, and lignum vitae ;) butsix million seven hundred and sixty-eightthousand six hundred and thirty-four poundswere sent from the island in 1801. Seventeenyears after it had increased to six millions eighthundred and nineteen thousand three hundredand one pounds; in 1820 it amounted to twomillions ; then to three millions seven hundredthousand ; afterwards to about eight millions ; fellto six millions six hundred thousand, to threemillions eight hundred and fifty-eight thousandone hundred and fifty-one ; rose to three millionsnine hundred and forty-eight thousand onehundred and ninety, and in 1826 increased stillfurther, to five millions three hundred and seventhousand seven hundred and forty-five pounds.The growth of tobacco too has much increased,chiefly from the East. From 1818 to1824, the number of pounds shipped rose fromabout one thousand nine hundred to aboveseven hundred and eighteen thousand ; andin the two subsequent years they have declined; first, to about five hundred thousandpounds ; and secondly, to three hundred andforty thousand five hundred and eighty-eight.162 NOTES ON HAITI.Since the year 1822 (that of the union of thewhole island under one government) cigarshave been manufactured both for home andforeign use. I have no means of estimatingthe former : the quantity must be large, as theuse of tobacco is universal. It appears, however,that those consumed abroad have variedfrom one hundred and seventy-five thousandto near four hundred thousand. The causes ofthese fluctuations I have not ascertained.Mahogany is perhaps the most remarkablefact affecting the general position I considerestablished by the tables of exports. It is tobe remarked that though mahogany, like thedye-woods, requires no cultivation, yet it requiresmore labour in cutting down, and infashioning for the European or American market.It therefore partakes of the character ofsystematic labour, combined with no necessityfor cultivation ; in fact, the business* is chieflyperformed by nature, and a small portion isleft to the Haitian.In Toussaint's time only about five thousandcubic feet were exported; in 1818 nearlyone hundred and thirty thousand ; and in 1825not far short of three millions. In 1826 thequantity exceeded two millions of superficialfeet. The labour necessary for fitting mahoganyLOCAL RETURNS. 168for shipment of late directly counteracts itsaugmentation in the same ratio with that ofdye-woods.The general results of this table appear fullyto justify the conclusion of the decline of systematicindustry, and of the advance of whatever,though chiefly done by nature, may befinished at uncertain periods by man.The next table* to be analysed is that of theexports from Port-au-Prince, from 1818 to1826, which has been already referred to. Inthis return clayed sugar does not appear,although formerly an object of such extent.Raw sugar had in 1818 fallen off to one millionnine hundred and ninety-four thousand ninehundred and four pounds, and since that yearit has steadily declined, until in 1826 only onethousand three hundred and sixty-six poundswere exported, as I believe, to ascertain whetherit was marketable in Europe.Coffee, by the same return, has increasedfrom eleven millions five hundred thousand tonearly sixteen millions of pounds, or about one-halfof the total amount shipped from thewhole island.See iK.'te (GG) in Appendix.164 NOTES ON HAITI.Cotton has varied from about two hundredthousand to eight hundred and seventy-onethousand.Cacao has fluctuated considerably, fromforty-five thousand to three hundred and fortythousand pounds ; but of late the smallest ofthose quantities was that exported.Logwood has never been below eight hundredand twenty-one thousand pounds, nor above twomillions seven hundred and forty-one thousandone hundred and seventy three. In 1826 itexceeded two millions, which is the largest annualamount, with two exceptions, since 1818.Nicaragua wood and lignum vitae have alsofluctuated. In three years (1823, 1824, 1825,)none was shipped, and the maximum exceededeighty-one thousand pounds, while the minimumwas about ten thousand five hundred.Mahogany has risen from one hundred andforty-four to thirteen thousand one hundredand thirty-nine feet. Nothing, however, is establishedby this increase, for very little isproduced in the immediate neighbourhood.It is chiefly brought from the East, and thisimportation depends in a great degree on themeans of direct shipment being more or lessabundant.LOCAL RETURNS. 165Tobacco too has been increased from thirty-fivethousand six hundred and sixty-six toeighty-eight thousand nine hundred and sixty-fivepounds. In 1826 it was only seventy twothousand one hundred and thirty pounds, orabove double the quantity of 1823.Ginger and cigars have lately appeared asarticles of export in small quantities.In the return of the department of the South #the results are very similar. Raw sugar, whichin 1818 amounted to three hundred and forty-onethousand nine hundred and forty pounds,has been reduced to nothing.Coffee, on the other hand, has increasedfrom about one million to above twelve millionsfive hundred thousand pounds ; and in 1826exceeded seven millions five hundred thousand.Cotton has varied so much that it is impossibleto say whether the variation has arisenfrom the great irregularity in the cultivation ofit, or the uncertainty of the crop. The quantityat one time (1825) was about two thousandpounds, while in 1818 it exceeded five hundredthousand ; but in 1826 it was something betterthan fifty-five thousand pounds, being aboutfour thousand more than in 1810.See note (HH) in Appendix.166 # NOTES ON HAITI.Cacao has upon the whole increased in quantity,although very irregularly. In 1810 it wasabove thirty-five thousand pounds, and only inone year (1812) has it ever been below thatamount; in 1826 the cacao produced was at itsmaximum, being three hundred and thirty-eightthousand seven hundred and ninety-six pounds.Logwood, Nicaragua w r good, and lignum vitae,have somewhat increased in quantity, althoughat no defined rate.Mahogany too has been very uncertain inits progress ; but the amount shipped in 1810(two thousand five hundred and six superficialfeet) rose nearly fifty fold in 1826.Of late tobacco has disappeared altogether,as well as castor oil.Sirup or molasses, which formerly was anobject of some consequence, has altogetherceased since 1820. Pistachio nuts also, whichat one time were a small object of export, havein addition disappeared. #The Jacmel return possesses all the generalcharacters of its companions. Raw sugar isno longer an article of export. Coffee variesfrom about three millions to about five millionsof pounds. Cotton has largely diminished inSec note (II) in Appendix.LOCAL RETURNS. 167quantity, having in 1818 amounted to aboveone hundred and thirty-one thousand pounds,while in 1826 it was scarcely three thousandfive hundred.Cacao may be said also to have been abandoned; for, since the year 1819, only once, in1824, the small quantity of eight thousand sixhundred and fifteen pounds appears to havebeen exported. Even the dye-woods (logwood,Nicaragua wood, and lignum vitae) seem tohave fallen off, and in 1826 were scarcely afourth of what they had been in 1818.Since 1819 mahogany has considerably diminished; and although the decrease has beenirregular, still it has been always going on.Indigo cannot be treated of, as only onehundred and thirty-four pounds, in one yearout of nine, were shipped. *The table of the exports from Cape Haitianis the most valuable.The export of raw sugar was nearly doubledwithin the first of these periods ; and during thefourteen years of Christophe's rule it was a regularbranch of trade ; varying, however, inextent from above five hundred thousand tosix millions of pounds. Since the time of the re-See note (J J) in Appendix.NOTES ON HAITI,public, the amount suddenly fell in two yearsto two hundred thousand pounds, and eversince 1822 it has entirely ceased.Coffee under Dessalines was at its maximumin the first year of his rule, and at the minimumin the third ; altogether, it diminished in quantity.Under Christophe it varied from five millionsto above ten millions ; and subsequentlyit has fluctuated from about four millions to sixmillions five hundred thousand pounds.Cotton was largely reduced under Dessalines ;rose with great irregularity under Christophe toabout four hundred and fifty thousand pounds ;and within the last six years of the table hasfallen off to little more than fifteen thousandpounds.Cacao alone seems to have increased in quantityduring the entire period of twenty-threeyears; as there is not one year in whichthe quantity does not considerably exceed thatof 1803. The largest amount was in 1818,and the smallest in 1809. Even in 1826 itwas more than three times that of the first year.Dye-woods have varied, but upon the wholethere is an augmentation. Under Christophe,it is worthy of remark that their amount wassmallest in 1807, 1808, 1809, and 1810, whenthe coffee crop was large.LOCAL RETURNS. 169Mahogany has only become an article of tradeat Cape Haitian since the death of Christophe,and it has progressively increased in value.Tobacco has also gradually risen in importancefrom three thousand seven hundred toabove one hundred and seventy-two thousandpounds.The quantity of rum exported has alwaysbeen small, and was confined to Christophe'sreign. At present, all that is made is consumedin the country.Indigo, after a trifling increase, ceased altogetherto be an article of export. The quantityof molasses is very small ; and we may addcastor oil, which does not appear to have beenexported since 1819. No other return can atpresent be furnished.No sugar is exported : the quantity of coffeehas diminished within the five years of thereturn. No cotton (after a trifling increase)has been shipped in 1826. Cacao has also beenreduced in quantity, as well as the dye-woods,tobacco, sirup, gum guaiacum, hides, and cigars.Mahogany is the most certain, althoughin 1826 it was much diminished.There is one decided inference from thewhole of those six returns ; viz. the positivedecrease of cane cultivation in all its branches.VOL. II. H170 NOTES ON HAITI.The diminution of other branches of industry,though not equally well marked, is no lesscertain than that articles of spontaneous growthmaintain, if not exceed, their former amount.Such are facts, authenticated by the best documentsthat can be procured in Haiti itself :the application of them to any other cases thanthat of which it has been my duty to treat isleft to others.COMMERCE. ]7]CHAPTER VIII.Commerce and Finances.COMMERCE.The present chapter may be considered thesame as my Report to His Majesty's government,printed by order of the House of Commons,with very slight modifications.Various circumstances conspire to make itdifficult to draw up any accurate account of thecommerce of Haiti, during the period of revolutionand of civil war, which embraces thirty-oneyears, beginning in 1791 and ending in 1822.We know with accuracy the extent and natureof the trade of the colony under the Frenchgovernment, and since the year 1822 its generalstate may be tolerably defined ; but the intermediateperiod is little better than a chaos,in which a few faint glimmerings of light are172 NOTES ON HAITI.occasionally discernible. All this arises fromthe want of well authenticated records in thepossession of the government, which reducesthe inquirer, first, to the necessity of seekingin private hands the documents that can illustratehis subject, and afterwards of ascertainingtheir individual value.The last inquiry is fraught with embarrassment,owing not only to the character of theHaitians, who regard all approaches from Europeanswith distrust, but to an apprehensionof risk, which many of them fancy would beincurred from the government by too frank acommunication of any information to a stranger.Besides these causes, it should always be recollectedthat as, under Dessalines, the documentsof the government itself were rudely kept ;so, even if procured, they must be considereddefective. The same observation applies, thoughnot with equal force, to the time of Christophe ;for under the latter portion of his sway thevalue of authentic records became better known.It may further be considered a very extraordinaryfact, that the utmost diligence has failedin procuring even a trace of any public accountsduring the government of Petion.Since Boyer's accession to power more re-COMMERCE. 173gular statements have been kept, but they areat best extremely defective.In the Spanish portion of the island, it issaid that no records of any kind exist prior to1817, up to which time every official documentwas removed to Cuba. The intermediate documentsfrom that time to 1822 were promised tome; but they were never given.Having premised thus much, I next proceed tocompare, as correctly as possible, the differentepochs of Haitian commerce, from the year1822, at which the republic may date its existence,and regular records, and to approximateas nearly as may be to the actual state of things.The selection of this period of four years, in thepresent state of my information, is the fairestthat can be made ; for it is only within thattime that any return of a portion of the imports,and of the aggregate of the exports, can beobtained.In pursuing this object, I shall keep inview, as nearly as may be, the order of theinquiries pointed out in Mr. Canning's generalinstructions, after giving a short outline of themode in which trade is conducted in Haiti.Nearly the whole of the foreign commerceof the republic is conducted by foreign NOTES ON HAITI.chants, as the credit of the natives is not sogenerally established, either at home or abroad,as to command the confidence of European andNorth American shippers ; but the business ofthe foreigner is exceedingly limited by the 21starticle of the law of patents, as will be hereaftershown when discussing the general regulationsaffecting trade.The purchasers from the foreigner cannotunder such regulations be the great body ofconsumers. An intermediate class is thuscreated, chiefly if not exclusively composed ofwomen, called " marchandes," who employ anumber of hucksters that traverse the country,attend the markets, and give an account to theiremployers, either every evening, once a week,or once a month, according to their characters.On the first opening of the Haitian tradethe foreigner imported chiefly on his ownaccount; he was cautious in his credits, andthus made money. His success led a host ofcommission merchants over, who, to commandthe market, gave unlimited credit. This hasproved most ruinous, and the consequence hasbeen restricted credits.In this way the consumers are chiefly suppliedwith foreign goods. There are, however, someCOMMERCE. 175Europeans and Americans that carry on a retailtrade through the women that cohabit withthem.The purchases of the principal article of export,coffee, are usually made from the cultivatorby the local speculator, who in his turncontracts with the consignee merchant for thequantity required, at a very moderate profit.The principal articles of import are linens,cotton goods of all kinds, some few woollens,cutlery, iron goods, wines, brandies, provisions,(beef, pork and fish,) flour, butter, cheese, lard,candles (chiefly spermaceti), refined sugar, oil,lumber generally, coarse iron goods, earthenware,tin plates, with many minor articles,which will be specified in the account that willfollow of the places from which they are obtained.The staple of the country is coffee; besideswhich there is cotton, logwood, lignumvitae,mahogany, cigars, tortoise-shell, hides, cacao,cassia, tobacco, raw sugar, wax, ginger, andbullocks' horns.Of the proportions of the different articles ofimport furnished by different countries, I cangive but a very imperfect account ; as returnscan only be procured of their official value for176 NOTES ON HAITI.the year 1 825, that for the three first quarters ofthe following year being defective. Even in themost accurate return there is neither a detailof the articles themselves, nor a specificationof the sources from which each is derived. Iwas therefore obliged to collect and compare theopinions of different merchants, and thence todeduce general conclusions.The following may be considered the chiefimports from Great Britain: — printed cottonsof all kinds, of English and Scotch manufacture,muslins, the same, cotton paintings, cottoncambric, handkerchiefs in imitation of Madrascotton checks, dimities, stockings, buildings,ginghams, Irish and Scotch linens, platillas,white and brown britannia, meetings, osna-burgs, cotton and coffee bagging, woollencloths, bombasins, ironmongery of most kinds,tin ware, Staffordshire ware, glass of all kinds,cutlery, paints, paint oil, cordage, army accoutrementsand ammunition ; some Indian goodsare also shipped from Britain.France supplies wines, cheese, taffetas, beer,butter, satins, liqueurs, lard, silk shawls,brandy, perfumery, silk stockings, oil, hats,confectionery, preserved fruits, shoes and boots,jewellery, linens, ornaments of all sorts, toys,COMMERCE. 177ribbons, parasols, gloves, cambric, Indiennes,saddlery, hardware, military accoutrementsand decorations, handkerchiefs, and some lesserarticles.From Holland the importations are small,and consist of linens of different qualities,chiefly German, cotton and coffee bagging,Russia duck, linen checks, inferior woollens,Hock and Rhenish wines, Spa and Seltzerwater, cheese, hams, butter, lard, gin, cordage,paints and paint oil, hardware.The small shipments from Germany consistof linens of the same kinds above enumerated,of some printed cottons, muslins, bagging, iron-ware,and similar articles as from Holland.The imports from the United States are confinedto lumber, provisions of different kinds,and some India goods, which can be introducedon lower terms than from Europe. The NorthAmerican trade with Haiti has been uninterruptedsince the revolution.The following may be considered the principalarticles of American imports : — mess andcargo beef, mess and cargo pork, hams in largequantities ; dried codfish also in large quantities; salmon; herrings; mackerel, pickled inbarrels ; flour, fine and superfine ; biscuits andcrackers ; rice, in large quantities ; butter ;178 NOTES ON HAITI.candles, chiefly spermaceti ; lard ; soap, in considerablequantities • tar, pitch, rosin, turpentineand other naval stores, and it is said agood deal of tobacco, that produced in theisland being too mild for the natives ; cheese, ingreat quantities; porter, cyder, vinegar; spicesof every kind ; gunpowder ; anchors ; cordage; copper ; whale, sperm, and linseed oils ;iron hoops ; nails ; pig and sheet lead, and shot;leather; pitch pine and white pine; lumber;shingles; staves (red oak, hogshead); assortedIndia silks; nankeen; seer-suckers; Madrashandkerchiefs ; blue and white checks ; muslins ;besides other minor matters, of which the detailwould unnecessarily swell this report.The materials for comparison of the increaseor decrease in the imports and exports are exceedinglyscanty. The only point on which acomparison can be instituted is that of thenumber and tonnage of the shipping inwardsduring 1825, # and the three first quarters of thenext year ; and to do this, it is necessary tohazard a conjecture as to their probable amountduring the ensuing quarter. That, I shall for themoment consider, may be equal to one-third ofthe nine preceding months, which will bring thetotal number of ships to the 31st December 1826,• See note (KK) in Appendix.AMOUNT OF TONNAGE. 179to five hundred and twenty-six, carrying sixty-twothousand eight hundred and one tons, beingless by twenty-six ships, or about fourthousand tons, than in 1825. If we comparethe component parts of this gross amount, onthe same principle, we shall see that theAmerican vessels, which, in 1825, amountedto three hundred and seventy-four, carryingthirty-nine thousand one hundred and ninety-ninetons, should be, in 1826, not more thanthree hundred and thirty-three vessels of thirty-fourthousand and seventy-eight tons ; being adecrease of forty-one ships, or five thousandone hundred and twenty-one tons.In the British trade there should be forty-ninevessels, or eight thousand five hundredand five tons ; or a decrease of twenty-ninevessels, or five thousand and forty-two tons.In the Colombian trade there would be a decreaseof one vessel of two hundred and nine tons.In the Danish an increase of six vessels, ortwo hundred and seventy-nine tons.In the French trade there would be the largeincrease of twenty-three vessels of four thousandeight hundred and ninety-seven tons.The Germans, on the other hand, fall offfrom seventeen to five vessels, and from three180 NOTES ON HAITI.thousand one hundred and eighty-five to ninehundred and ninety-six tons.The Haitian, Portuguese, Russian and Spanishtrade, are entirely a creation of this year.It cannot be doubted that the decrease in theBritish, American and German shipping, is theresult of bad operations, the causes of whichshall be hereafter considered : while the increasein that of France is to be ascribed to theordonnance of April 17th 1825 ; and that ofDenmark to the renewed intercourse betweenHaiti and the Danish colony of St. Thomas.The facilities afforded to Haitian ships haveled to the formation of a Haitian commercialnavy, by purchases from other nations, evenby foreigners using Haitian names. The solitaryRussian is in fact British, as she belongsto an English house. The Spanish and Portugueseare not worthy of any attention, as thetwo in the enumeration were mere stragglers.In the exports we have better materials forforming an opinion, even though imperfect ;for we have returns of them for 1822, 1823,1824, 1825, and the three first quarters of1 826. By these we perceive that clayed sugar,which under the French rule was the greatestobject of export, has ceased altogether : thatCOMMERCE. 181the muscovites exported, which in the firstyear of the annexed series amounted to sixhundred thousand pounds, or about three hundredlarge hogsheads, fell off in 1825 to twothousand and twenty pounds, or somewhatbetter than one hogshead ; and, in 1826, would(adding one-third to the sum of three firstquarters) to forty-one thousand six hundredand ninety-seven pounds, or about twenty-onehogsheads. The quantity of sirup (that is,the inspissated juice of the cane, previous tothe formation of sugar) exported in 1822amounted to two hundred and eleven thousandnine hundred and twenty-seven pounds ; sincethat year it does not appear that a single poundhas been exported.Coffee, the present staple, was exported in1822 to the amount of twenty-four millions twohundred and thirty-five thousand three hundredand seventy-two pounds. In 1823 it increasedabout nine millions, continued to do so in1824, nearly eleven millions more, making a totalincrease of about twenty millions of pounds;but in 1 825 diminished to little more than atotal of thirty-six millions, being a positive reductionof eight millions from the produce ofthe preceding year. In the three first quartersof the current year the total amount shipped is182 NOTES ON HAITI.a trifle more than twenty-six millions five hundredthousand : if to that we add one-third, tocomplete the estimate for the whole year, weshall find the total not to be quite thirty-fivemillions five hundred thousand, which is a decreaseof more than five hundred thousandpounds on the preceding year's export.Cotton, which is gathered in very smallquantities, has fluctuated from about threehundred thousand to one million of pounds ;but, upon the whole, the quantity up to thepresent period would seem to diminish.Cacao has varied from three hundred thousandpounds to about four hundred and sixtythousand pounds; but latterly the quantitydoes not seem to increase.It is not a little remarkable that logwood,which requires no cultivation, should in 1822have exceeded seven millions five hundredthousand pounds, and have gradually fallenoff, till in 1825 it amounted to less than a halfof that quantity ; and even with the addition ofone-third, it does not amount in 1826 to fivemillions five hundred thousand pounds.Indigo has ceased altogether to be an export,although in 1824 about one thousand two hundredpounds were shipped.Lignumvitse has increased in quantity : inCOMMERCE. 1831825 it was, as will be seen in the table, fullydouble what it was in 1822, and with theestimated addition in the present year it wouldbe still more.Mahogany has varied from about two anda half to three millions of superficial feet.Some minor articles have lately become exports; but from a reference to the accompanyingtable they will be found not worthy ofpresent notice.Upon the whole, with a very few exceptionsof no great note, the imports as well as theexports may be said to have fallen off in nosmall degree within the last five years.The chief causes influencing, as far as canbe gathered from, as well from the precedingstatements as from the concurrent testimony offoreigners and natives, appear to be nearly thefollowing : — the imports may be considered asentirely for home consumption, there being nointercourse between Haiti and any of theneighbouring islands, except Curacoa and St.Thomas; so that it would seem that the establishmentof depots that may be worshipped,that has taken place during the sessionof the present year, is wholly nugatory. Theimports being exclusively for domestic use,their amount must be regulated either by184 NOTES ON HAITI.the wants or the ability of the consumer to payfor them.The former are most small, from the natureof the climate ; and the last again dependsalmost exclusively on the amount of the crop.It has happened, since the establishment ofcommission agents and the consequent increaseof credit, that in some years a due proportionhas not been maintained between the importsand the means of the purchaser.The losses that have ensued have acted asamomentary corrective of this evil. Such beingthe case, the largest imports, unattendedwith ruin to the shippers, have taken place inyears in which produce was either very abundantor the prices very high ; and the conversewas lately realised, especially duringthe year 1826, when, if any credit is to beplaced in the estimate made of the decrease ofthe shipping and tonnage, there being no datafurnished respecting the quantities of goods,the amount of the imports must have very sensiblyfallen ofT.We have seen more decidedly the decreasein the. exports. If this reciprocal dependenceof the imports on the exports be established, thelast being the measure of the ability of theconsumer to pay for the articles he may use, itCAUSES AFFECTING COMMERCE. 185is next necessary to point out the causes affectingthe probable increase or decrease of thelatter. I am much disposed, after the mostmature consideration, to think that they mustfor a long period decline, and I shall brieflystate the reasons on which that opinion rests.The causes influencing the cultivation havebeen already discussed ; but it will be right totouch upon them, in so far as they may be necessaryto illustrate our object.The various objects of cultivation in Haitiare of course liable to all the usual West Indianrisks of drought, hurricanes, &c. whichnecessarily affect their amount as well as quality.But there are other circumstances thatact more seriously; among these stands foremostthe diminished price of the whole of them,but particularly of the great Haitian staple,coffee, in all the European markets, probablyowing to an increased production of it in othersources of supply. This diminution of valuemakes the return to the cultivator exceedinglysmall, and affords a proportionately small inducementto labour. A base currency, theissue of a paper money, having no real value,also conduce to the same end : but one of themost powerful causes appears to be, the exclusionof European industry and capital by186 NOTES ON HAITI.the thirty-eighth article of the constitution ;the smallness and poverty of the population,which last, speaking in a national sense, islargely augmented by the " dots nationaux :"these have driven the persons who formerlylaboured in gangs to cultivate their own properties,upon which their first care will naturallybe the articles of primary necessity;after that, whatever will bear the highest pricein the market ; this is certainly not coffee : —the employment of almost all the male populationas soldiers ; and the frequent removal ofthem, even at the most critical period of thecrop, to remote districts.All these causes must and do affect the natureand extent of the exports very largely ;but industry is most chilled by the load oftaxation imposed to pay the French indemnity ;it appears to paralyse all exertion.From these considerations I am led to infer,that for some time at least there can be noimprovement in the trade of Haiti : on thecontrary, I much fear it will be considerablylessened.It is proper next to advert to the mode inwhich the foreign trade of Haiti is conducted.It is also proper to state the general regulationsthat have been the means of establish-lawsOF TRADE. 187ing that mode. By the law of patents it isenacted, that all persons exercising any tradeor profession, excepting that of cultivating thesoil, must be provided with a patent or licenseto carry on such trade or profession ; that allstrangers admitted as merchants into the republic,must in the first place procure thepermission of the president to take out apatent, which when obtained, only authorisesthem, under heavy penalties, to carry on awholesale business, not with each other, butwith the Haitians in the open ports ; whichare Port-au-Prince, Gonaives, Cape Haitian,Port a Plate, Santo Domingo, Jacmel, Cayes,and Jeremie. The minimum quantities of goodsthat may be sold are fixed by the same law.The Haitian consignee may be also a retaileron taking out a corresponding patent.The open ports above-named are dividedinto six classes ; to each of which is affixed ascale of rates for the patents of natives; butforeigners must pay one thousand six hundreddollars at all the ports to which they are limited: but it is expected that in the course ofthe ensuing session a classification similar tothat of the native patents will be made, andthat two thousand dollars will be levied foreach patent to a foreigner trading at NOTES ON HAITI.Prince ; one thousand eight hundred for Cayes,Cape Haitian and Jacmel ; and one thousandsix hundred for each of the remaining ports ofPort a Plate, Santo Domingo, Jeremie andGonaives.By an arrete of the late President Petion, ofOctober 15, 1814, the duties on British goodswere reduced to seven per cent ; while thoseon all other merchandise were ten per cent.The exception in favour of Great Britain wasconfirmed by a law of April 3, 1819, when theduties on all other foreign goods were raisedto twelve per cent, and those imported in nativevessels fixed at nine per cent.By the last general law of the customs, theduty on all foreign merchandise imported inforeign vessels is fixed at twelve per cent, onan established tariff; and by a subsequentenactment, that leviable on the same goods inHaitian bottoms, on Haitian account, is reducedto less than that paid by the most favourednation.But the general law is partially abrogated bythe acceptance, on July 11, 1825, of the kingof France's ordonnance of the 17th of thepreceding April, in which it is stipulated thatFrench ships and goods pay only half duties.The following articles are duty free in allPROHIBITED ARTICLES. 189bottoms, according to the eighth clause of thelaw of the customs (Enclosure 9) : — shot of allsizes, grenades, howitzers, bomb-shells, andother projectiles of artillery ; iron and bronzecannon, mortars, muskets and bayonets, carbines,pistols, and cavalry sabres, banquets orshort swords for infantry ; machines and instrumentsfor simplifying and facilitating thecultivation of the soil, and the preparation ofits products ; horses and cattle, mules, asses ;gold and silver coin ; classical and elementaryworks, sewed in boards or bound in parchment,for the instruction of youth.The following is a list of articles absolutelyprohibited, without reference to their placeof growth : — mahogany, logwood, lignumvitae,fustic, coffee, cotton wool, cacao, raw andclayed sugar, rum, tafia, simp, molasses,canes, whips and umbrellas containing swords,stiletto, or other arms ; books and otherworks opposed to good morals.The duties on exports in foreign bottoms(excepting French, which only pay half duties)are fixed by the nineteenth article of the law ofthe customs (Enclosure 9) at the rate specifiedin tariff No. 2. of that law.Produce or merchandise exported in Haitian190 NOTES ON HAITI.vessels on Haitian account, pays one-tenth lessexport duties than the most favoured nation(Enclosure 10).Besides the export, there is also a territorialduty levied equally on the produce of the soil,whether exported in national or foreign ships,as stated in tariff No. 2. of the law of thecustoms (Enclosure 9).The export of the following articles is strictlyprohibited : — gold and silver coin ; side andfire arms, munitions, and other articles of war ;old or new iron and copper; horses, broodmares, mules, asses ; and wood for ship-building.The coasting trade is entirely confined toHaitian citizens.There are also levied wharf, weighing andtonnage dues, port charges, and water money,as will be seen by the tariffs Nos. 3, 4, 5,and 6, in the accompanying " Loi sur lesDanes" (Enclosure 9).Hadrian vessels, as they pay for a license,are not subject to the tonnage duty.As far as I know, there are not any otherlegal charges.The warehousing system has within this yearbeen partially adopted. By a law of April 25thFINANCES. 1911826, it is enacted that depot warehouses shallbe established at Port-au-Prince, Cayes, CapeHaitian, Santo Domingo, and Jacmel, undercertain regulations, to the following effect : —Vessels coming from foreign ports must declareon entry what goods are destined for sale in thecountry, and what are to be warehoused. Nogoods are allowed to remain on board.Certain colonial produce, the import of whichis prohibited, such as coffee, sugar, &c. cannotbe entered to be warehoused.Goods warehoused may remain in store oneyear, paying a rent of one per cent ; but theymay be withdrawn at any anterior period, onpayment of the dues, which, besides the rent,are for weighing and wharfage.FINANCES.To the period of my leaving Haiti I was unableto procure any authentic documents of thepublic income and expenditure, on which anycorrect table might be founded, prior to 1818.From that year I have the official statementsmade by the secretary of state, Monsieur insert,to the end of 1824. The report for 1825 Ibelieve was not drawn up when I was in Haiti ;but from another document to which I have hadaccess, I determined the income, though not theNOTES ON HAITIexpenditure of that year. From these documentsI have drawn the following table : —Year.Income.Expenditure.Excess.Deficiency.dollars, acts.2,646,017 161,832,904 602,213,440 153,570,691 92,020,012 6^2,826,693 783,101,716 692,421,592 65dollars, acts.2,144,291 991,660,101 602,030,251 493,461,993 872,728,149 642,557,228 283,105,115 55dollars, acts.501,725 17172,839183,188 66108,697 22dollars. ci108,137 5713,398 86269,405 50Total 1,235,855 55111,536 43iThis document is not to be considered complete,either during the first years or the lastof the series, as Christophe's kingdom existedtill the end of October, 1820, and the Spanishcolony did not become a part of the republictill the beginning of 1822; and the incomestated in the last is only the produce of theduties on imports, exports, and those on produce.In the other three years it may be consideredas accurate as any thing can be obtainedin this island.No reasoning can be founded on the state ofthe revenue during the first part of the termfrom 1318 to 1821, both inclusive, with referenceto the actual amount for subsequentFINANCES. 193years, for the reasons already assigned ; but itmay be noticed as remarkable, that during thewhole of that period when the republic wasstruggling for existence, the income uniformlyexceeded the expenditure ; and that the revenueof the whole island in 1822 was less bytwenty-six thousand five hundred dollars thanthat of the republic in 1818, when only oneof four governments. In 1818, too, the incomeexceeded the expenditure by half a million ofdollars. In 1822 there was a "deficiency of onehundred and eight thousand one hundred andthirty-seven dollars, indicating, that althoughadditional expense was incurred by the accessionof territories, the real resources of thecountry had fallen ofT.In 1823 there was a surplus of revenue ; butin1 824 there was a small deficiency, in spite ofa considerable augmentation of income. Noreport of the income of 1825 had been made bythe secretary of state during my stay ; althoughthe constitution requires that it should be presentedannually to the legislature, and applicationhad been formally made by that body. Ihave therefore only the produce of the customsand territorial duties, to which I add one hundredand eighty-one thousand five hundred andVOL. II. I194 NOTES ON HAITI.fifty dollars, being the average of all the otherregularly leviable taxes, which brings my estimateto about two millions six hundred and threethousand one hundred and forty-two dollars ;an approximation sufficiently near for my presentobject. For the expenditure, if I take theactual disbursements of 1824, than which itcannot be less ; there would then be a deficiencyof five hundred and one thousand ninehundred and seventy-three dollars.The deficiency of the present year must bestill greater, for the customs paid at Les Cayesfor the first six months of the present year donot exceed two-thirds of the year 1824, andthose of Port-au-Prince for the same time arenot more productive. If a similar proportionbe adopted in estimating the income from eachof the ports (as may be very fairly done), theincome would be reduced to one million sevenhundred and thirty-five thousand four hundredand twenty-eight, while the expenditure wouldbe at least that of 1824, leaving a deficiencyof one million three hundred and sixty-ninethousand six hundred and eighty-seven dollars,without making any allowance for the interestof the loan already contracted, or of that whichmust, if possible, be contracted to redeem theFINANCES. 195pledge given by the legislative bodies whenthey solemnly recognised the indemnity toFrance as a national debt.Supposing this to be correctly stated, and theactual surplus of preceding years to be as pertable, viz. one million one hundred and twenty-fourthousand three hundred and nineteen dollarseleven and a half cents, more than the whole ofit would be absorbed by the defalcations of thetwo last years: but were it admitted (which isincredible) that the deficiencies of 1825 and1826 do not exceed that of 1824, the actualsurplus would then be one million one hundredand seventeen thousand five hundred and twen-ty-one dollars Haitian currency, a sum insufficientfor their extraordinary expenditure.The loan raised in France last year by the Haitiancommissioners, for thirty millions of francs,at six per cent interest, only produced twenty-fourmillions, leaving a balance to be providedby Haiti of six millions of francs to completethe first instalment, due on the 31st of December,1825, besides the amount of commissionsand other charges incidental to the operation.Eleven hundred thousand dollars in Spanish£old and silver were transmitted in the courseof 1826, besides several cargoes of coffee, forthese purposes. The value of the remittance in196 NOTES ON HAITI.coin, in Haitian currency, is one million threehundred and seventy-five thousand dollars, theSpanish dollars bearing a premium of twenty-fiveper cent or more ; an amount, independentof the coffee, which exceeds the accumulationof former years by two hundred and fifty-seventhousand four hundred and seventy-nine dollars,Haitian currency, if w r e can suppose it toexist after the paper issues.Now all the preceding calculations weremade without taking into consideration eitherthe annual interest, amounting to four hundredand fifty thousand dollars, on the loan alreadyeffected, or on those that may be hereafterformed, or on the overdue instalments, providedthe French government accede to the proposalof allowing those to remain unliquidated, payingan annual interest.The actual expenditure to be provided for in1827, without reference to future claims thatmust fall due, stood thus :Annual expenditure . 3,101,115 dollars.Interest on first loan . 450,000Total expenditure . 3,551,115 dollars;to be provided for out of an income of twomillions six hundred and three thousand oneFINANCES. 197hundred and forty-two dollars, the estimatedrevenue of 1825, or of one million seven hundredand thirty-five thousand four hundred andtwenty-eight dollars, the estimate for 1826.At one time the government appeared to calculatevery confidently on the produce of thecontribution law. The mode of reasoning wasthis : the population was estimated at one million:five dollars a head throughout the countrywas deemed very light taxation : this effected,five millions of dollars were readily collected inimagination ; to this were added two and a halfmillions of customs and other duties, on whichthe state depended ; thus forming a respectablebut nominal income of seven and a half millionsof dollars : out of which five were destined tothe repayment of loans and interest, to theformation of a sinking fund ; and the balanceto the current expenses, which were to be reducedaccordingly.NOTES ON HAITCHAPTER IX.Army — Navy — Defences.The state of constant excitation in whichHaiti was kept until the year 1825 is the reasonassigned for the maintenance of a militaryforce, disproportionate even to the largest populationthat has been assigned to the republic.The general staff consists of a very numerousbody. The president is commander-in-chief ofthe land forces and high-admiral of the navy.In his former capacity, he has attached to himsixteen efficient aides-de-camp and eleven thatare styled honorary.There are eleven generals of division in activeservice, and three unemployed ; eighteen ge-army.199generals of brigade and three adjutant-generalson service ; and five of the former rank withthree of the latter retired.The etat-major-general consists of one generalofficer and three field officers ; besideswhich, there is an inspector-general of reviewsand five commissaries of war and marine, whoare in fact commissaries and pursers-in-chief:they are often military officers of rank.Most of the general officers on service commandthe different arrondissemens, in which,as has been already mentioned, they unite thecivil with the military authority ; and there areabout one hundred and thirty-three " places,"forts, and military posts, to which commandantswith their appendages are attached.A corps of engineers, under the command ofColonel Rigaud, the son of the late general ofthat name, is maintained, as well as severalartillery depots, entitled " Directions d'arsenauxet d'artillerie."The first corps in the enumeration of theHaitian army is the gendarmerie : it is amounted body, and is employed in the police,in forwarding dispatches, in the post-officeservice, and in executing process emanatingfrom the courts of justice. No man is eligible200 NOTES ON HAITI.for this service unless lie has served at leastthree years in another corps of the army, withan irreproachable character. There are sixlegions of gendarmerie, consisting of forty-eighttroops : each legion is commanded by acolonel immediately subordinate to the president,and each troop consists of fifty men ; sothat, if the corps be complete, it would amountto two thousand four hundred of the elite ofHaiti.The next military body is the corps of thepolice, which was established a law of the 1 8thApril, 1807, The duties are explained by theirdesignation. The legal qualifications of the individualscomposing it are strict morality andbeing fathers of families : they are also employedin the rural police, being under theorders of the judge of the peace. There wereeight companies of them at the time I was inHaiti.The defensive military force is composed ofthe guard of the president, of regiments of theline, and of the national guard.The guard of the president consists of threeregiments of cavalry, one only of which wasmounted in 1827, and two of infantry : thecavalry amount to eight hundred and sixty-fourARMY. 201men, exclusive of the regimental staff; thuseach regiment contained two hundred andeighty-eight men.The infantry of the guard are divided intotwo regiments amounting to three hundred meneach, exclusive of the regimental staff.The troops of the line are divided into cavalry,artillery, and infantry. Of the firstthere were two regiments of dragoons at thetime of which I speak, dismounted, of a strengthcorresponding with that of the cavalry of theguard ; so that they amount to five hundredand seventy-six men without the staff. Of thesecond corps (the artillery) there are five regiments,each of which consists of nine hundredmen exclusive of the staff; so that thetotal amounts to three thousand five hundredmen.There are thirty-three regiments of the line,each of which (with one exception*) consists oftwo battalions or six hundred men, making atotal of twenty thousand one hundred rank andfile : thus the numerical strength of the regularforces without the staff is twenty-eight thousandsix hundred men ; so that the whole ofThe seventh regiment has three battalions.202 NOTES ON HAITI.the regular paid military cannot be muchshort of thirty thousand men. I have heard thenumber estimated at above forty thousand ren ;but my statement corresponds with some returnsthat I have seen, as well as with theenumeration published by M. Courtois, in theAlmanach National ;" and I therefore give itas more probable than any loose conjecture.But independent of the regular force, thereis ample militia force, entitled the " NationalGuard." According to law, every Haitian betweenthe ages of fifteen and sixty, who doesnot belong to the regular troops, or holdpublic office, must enter the national guard ofhis commune. Even retired officers of theprescribed age must enroll themselves, and theythen form a company of " elite," commandedby the senior officer of ther number, and thecompanies so formed have the honour of marchingat the head of the national guard.Besides the two already enumerated exceptions,fathers of seven legitimate children, andactual cultivators labouring for others for a portionof the produce. All these exemptions,however, are unavailing when the country is indanger.In addition to the companies of infantry inARMY. 20oeach commune, it is imperative to have oneof artillery and a troop of cavalry, each ofwhich contains fifty-five men, officers included.This service is purely honorary ; there is nopay, except when moved from their own districts; and they further arm and equip themselves.The state furnishes the pieces of artillery.In ordinary times these guards are reviewedby the commanders of districts on the firstSunday of every quarter ; but in case of alarmthey are bound to assemble at their respectivehead-quarters; and if put into active service,they become amenable to martial law.The president names all the superior officers :the remainder are elected by the soldiers.For the maintenance of discipline, each companyhas what is designated a " Council ofof Discipline," composed of the captain, twosubalterns, the serve ant-major, one serjeant,and one corporal. I can form no estimate ofthis force, as I have no data on which I canrest it ; but public rumour describes it as exceedingforty thousand men.Of the efficiency and state of discipline ofthe aggregate of the army I do not wish toexpress an opinion, particularly as that of a204 NOTES ON HAITI.mere civilian cannot be of any weight. Aleading passion in Haiti is certainly military ;and if the institutions be not as perfect as theymight be, it is not owing to any absence of lovefor the accompaniments of the profession. Imay, however, say this much without exposingmyself to any imputation of presumption, thatI believe them capable of being very usefulirregular troops, even though they might not beequal to fighting a regular battle They arehardy, enduring much fatigue, resisting the climate,accustomed to the use of fire-arms, andby no means requiring a very well regulatedcommissariat.The naval appointments are not very numerous.Besides the president, who is high admiral,there is one vice-admiral, Panayoty, tencaptains of the first class, nine of the second,besides lieutenants, ensigns, and u eleven demarine." The majority of these officers areemployed at the open ports, where the wholepolice mismanagement is entrusted to them.As well as I recollect, the squadron consisted ofa few schooners (not, I believe, exceeding threeor four) which were employed in moving roundthe coast, transporting troops and provisions.Of the defences of the island it is not necesseDEFENCES. 205say to say more than that nature has been mostliberal in furnishing points that would easilybe defended ; and that the yellow fever wouldeffectually secure the island in case of externalattack, if the policy of abandoning the coastsand destroying the towns be still acted upon.APPENDIX.Note (A).— The first of the following letters is given merely,<jr the Bake of the signature of Christophe when he was president; and the matter is given in letter-press, as it possessesno particular interest besides connecting the signature with theauthor of it.Libere ET Indeed DANCE.Au Palais de Fouache, le 28 Mars, 1809, Van 6"" de Independence.IIfxry Christophe, President et Generalissimo des Forcesde Terre et de Mer de l'Etat d'Haiti, au Brigadier desArmies L. G. Dessalines. ->Vous vous rendered sur-le-champ au Mole ; vous y passerezen revue toutes les troupes bien statement et correctement :lorsque la revue sera passee, les Quartiers-maitres se rendronta Fouache pour toucher 1' argent qui doit etre district£ aux officierset aux soldats. Vous payers une semaine de poet auxNOTES ON HAITI.soldan*, et un mois aux officiers ; bien entendu ceux qui serontpresents sous les drapeaux. Je vous prevent que ceci est in-dependant de la ration journalists qu'on leur distribue.Les postes de Fouache, du bord de la mer de Jean Rebel, etdu Morne Souval, sont compris dans les presentes dispositions.Lorsque vous aurez fini, vous vous rendered au Port de Paix,pour me faire parvenir l'argent destine au paiement destroupes.The annexed lithograph, No. 2, is a fac-simile of a letterwritten from Christophe's dictation, and bearing his signatureas king. The whole letter is given on account of the extraordinaryhuddling together of English words at the close of it.I'"/£/?//&u J*£cus> 3<u<Jcn^,6 t*.,*r*Je, X D~ (*/Z/£6? J S J V^>/ an // . Je / indepe rSanceL E R O I,I<V^<:-*^i<^ «r t * ~tc ^v^^^^ ca^^i^^^'^ cTp c^ } ^^ ittfczs *2^^rH*y>>^#. J^rvP 14S-6 *t^€~ C^L^tJ ;APPENDIX. 209Note (B). — One of the German officers, to whom I especiallyrefer, was named Neuter ; he had been employed as anengineer in some of the fortresses, and was an excellentdraughtsman. "Wearied of the service, lie was desirous of returningto Germany, and applied for permission to do so : thiswas not refused, hut was delayed under various pretexts fromtime to time, because the king did not wish any European,intimately acquainted with his defences, to leave Haiti. At lastNeuter was accused of having taken plans for the purpose ofbetrayal ; and he was consigned to prison. There ineffectualattempts were made to starve him to death, by diminishing hisallowance of food; but this being too protracted, he was takenout in the dead of night and bayonetted. I give this on theauthority of a most respectable individual, who related it to measa matter beyond dispute.Among Christophe's correspondence I found several lettersfrom the brother of this unfortunate young man to Dupuy, makingmost anxious inquiries for him, and offering any money thatcould be required for his liberation. The brother was a statecouncillor at Munich.Another German officer, whose name has escaped me, waskept in close custody by the king's orders, and would probablyhave shared the fate of his comrade, had not the death of theformer liberated him. He and his wife were set free by therepublican army, in a state of extreme exhaustion.Note (C). — The copy of the sentence was given to me by aperson of rank and influence in Haiti, and nat been made fromthe original in his possession for me. It was lodged withother documents of importance ; but unfortunately it has beenmislaid, so that it cannot be found at the moment. This Iregret ; for I always prefer such evidence to a mere generaldescription, which subjects the narrator to imputation fromthose who wish bis facts to be untrue.Note (D). — The two following documents are those alludedto in the text. The first is dated Sans-Souci, 28th January,210 NOTES ON HAITI.1816, from the King to Baron Dupuy, approving of his proceedingsin the case of Davidson ; and it was probably written inreply to some report made upon the subject, which does notappear. The latter part of the letter, though not referring toDavidson, is illustrative of the summary operations of KingHenry.It appears that the proceedings against Davidson had excitedconsiderable attention in Europe ; and, to explain away thetransaction, the report marked No. 2. was made on the 6thFebruary, 1817, by Baron Dupuy to the King, in which thetransactions receive a very different appearance from what isconveyed by the King's approval.It is said in Haiti, that to put a stop to any application for theinterference of the British government, thirty thousand dollarswere paid to Mr. Davidson. I have no written proof of this ;but it is confidently asserted, and I never heard it contradicted.No. 1.Au Palais de Sans-Souci, les Janvier, 1816,Van 13 e de Independence.LE ROI,Au Baron de Duiuy, Secretaire Interprete du Roi.J'approuve infiniment, Baron, la conduite que vous aveztenue envers le Sieur Davidson ; vous avez tres bien fait de lefaire mettre au secret ; je donne l'ordre au gouverneur de lefaire mettre au secret, aux serre-pouces et aux fers, ou il res-teaa mes ordres, f-ans le laisser communiquer avec qui que cesoit : il ne mangera exactement que la ration qu'on donne auxprisonniers, car c'est un veritable espion, pris en espionage. Sivous continues a votre surveillance active, vous en prendre*d'autres. Tl faut approfondir cette affaire. Vous gartered par-devantvous soigneusement la lettre de Davidson, comme unepreuve de conviction de son crime.J'envoie le Baron tie Dessalines au Cap Henry, pour toucherde suite des mains du Sieur French la somme de 1632 f. qu'ilAPPENDIX. 211doit au Comte de Laxavon, et dont il lui refuse le pavement:dans le cas contraire, le gouverneur a l'ordre de faireretire French aux barriers neuves au secret jusqu'a ce qu'il aitsolde ce qu'il doit au dit Comte de Laxavon, ainsi qu'a plusieurspersonnes qu'il ne veut pas paver.Par leRoi,(Signe) Eliminate.No. 2.Rapport circumstance' fait par le Baron de Dvpuy au Roi,sur les raisons qui ont donne lieu a I'cmprisonnement du SieurT. Davidson.Le Sieur Davidson se present a mon bureau le 20 Janvier1S1G, avec plusieurs lettres pour etre expedites par un expresspar terre a Port Plate : il me demanda mon avis, comme sausage,pour que ces lettres, sans etre lues par aucun dictionnaire,passent la frontiers : j'etais tres occupe en ce moment, et luidis, dites laisser a l'expres qui devait les porter, et que j'allaisles viser. II revientqaelques minutes apres, et me temoigna qu'ilavait absolument besoin de faire partir son express avec les lettresen mains : je les pris, et en trouvai trois qui n'etaient pas cache-tees5 je les advises sans les lire ; mais la 4 e , qu'il tenant encoreen mains, et qu'il me present, etait catheter. Je crusdevoir d'abord l'ouvrir, car elle me parut suspecte, etanl laseule catheter ; en efFet jay trouve le passage suivant: —'* Le Roi Henry n'a eu aucun success dans la partie du Sudcontre Petion : ses batimens sont returned avec un sloopseulement de prise, et ont ete frequemment chasses par ceux dePetion ; ses troupes ont toutes ete prises. Dares cela, si vousle jugez necessaire dealer dans le Sud, vous pouvez le faireavec assurance ; le campeche vaut, au Port au-Prince, de 20 a25 ff. le tonneau. Dans temperance de vous voir ici benton,(Signe) " James Davidson."Comme il y avait trois semaines que expedition pourJeremie etait partie et que je e'en avais aucune nouvelle, et'212 MOTES ON HAITI.com me il etait arrive dans le cours de la journey raeme trainbatimens etrangers de St. Thomas, des Eats-Unis, et de la partieEspagnole, je desires savoir du Sieur Davidson par quellevoie il avait re<ju ces nouvelles, qu'il donna avec tant assurance: je lui demandai d'ou il avait re<ju ces nouvelles ; il me ditavec un ton de hauteur, qu'il ne voulait me nommer la personne,qu'il avait appris du cafe public : je lui dis qu'il ne dit pasdans saltire " j'ai oui dire," mais qu'il " assurait positivement,"et qu'en consequence jamais besoin des informations sur cetteaffaire. II refusa formellement, en me disant qu'il ne me devaitpas compte de ses desseins. Sur ce je lai fait comparative par-devantle gouverneur (qui etait malade, et qui lea recu danssa chambre,) ou etant rendu, il refusa de raeme de me dire parquelle voie il avait su ces nouvelles. Le gouverneur me ditqu'il avait appris qu'il y avait des emissaries du Port-au-Princecaches dans la ville, qui faisaient courir de faux bruits, et quitachaient de setter l'alarme parmi le peuple ; que peut-être leSieur Davidson avait parle avec eux. II y en avait deja deuxd'arretes de ces emissaries etrangers sortant de la partie Espagnole.Je dis alors au Sieur Davidson, ' Si vous ne voulez pasme faire connoitre la personne qui vous a assure que expeditionetait marquee, j'inviterai le gouverneur a vous mettre a labarrier neuve, jusqu'a. ce que vous me lassies connoitre celuiqui vous a donne ces nouvelles : sur son refus positif, j'invitaile gouverneur a le mettre en prison, dans l'espoir qu'il meat ditla chose : le gouverneur le fit conduire par un adjutant de placea la prison, qui remit Davidson au concierge : j'ai appris quecet adjutant avait dit au concierge que Davidson etait soup-tonned'espionnage, et que le gaoler lui fit mettre les serre-pounces;mais le gouverneur m'a assure qu'il e'en etait pasquestion, et ne savait meme pas s'il en existent la.Sur le compte que je rendis a, V. M., elle m'ecrivit de faireassembler Messieurs les etrangers, et de leur lire votre lettre, enmeme tens de leur dire que si le Sieur Davidson ne disait pas dequ'il avait eu ces nouvelles, il serait envoy a la cour de jus-appendix.213time: — j'ai, confinement a l'ordre, fait connoiire a cos Messieursle contenu de la Lettre de Votre Majeste, de meme que celle duSieur Davidson, et sur 50 ou GO etrangers aucun n'a cherchea rien representer en sa faveur. Le Sieur Stratford, negociantAnglais etabli ici, est le seul qui m'a parle chez moi, et qui ademande une permission pour aller pres Votre Majeste a Sans-souci; ce qu'il a obtenu sans difficulty, et a apporte l'ordre . . . augouverneur. Le Sieur Davidson depuis sa sortie de prison ne m'ajamais dit qu il avait ie mis aux serre-pouces pendant sa detention: il est venu plusieurs fois a mon bureau me demander desfaveurs pour des dettes qu'il devait, et qu'on voulait le fairepayer ou le mettre en prison, entreaties pour (jOOO fr. qu'il devaitau Sieur Bourne et qu'il n'a pas paye : il avait en ville queenechambre, et pas un negociant comme on veut bien le dire.Les Sieurs Brock, Mason et Richardson, sont venus metrouver pour m'inviter a donner au dit Davidson un permis pourserene en Angleterre, egmont invite a m'interesser a le fairepartir, car il allait etre arrete pour dettes qu'il devait en ville.Je lai fait a leur sollicitation, parce que ne voyant nul moyen aDavidson de pouvoir payer ses dettes, j'ai pense que la prisonou ses preachers 1'auraient mis n'aurait pu le faire payer, etqu'en consequence il valois mieux protege son depart pour sonpays.Telles sont les circonstances detailed de tout ce qui s'tstpasse a regard du Sieur Davidson.Cape Henry, le 15 Farrier, 1817, an 14 e .Note (E). — The first paragraph of No. 1. explains itself; the*second refers to an officer named Vilton, the favoured lover ofthe Countess, who bad, by being so, called forth the displeasureof the King. No. 2. is the order for his detention. He was imprisoned,and a few days after was found strangled.214 NOTES ON HAITI.No. 1.Au Palais de Fort Royal, le 18 Avril, 1816,Van 13 de Independence.HENRY,Par la grace de Dieu et la Loi Constitutionally de l'Etat,Roi d'Hayti, &c. &c. &c.Au Baron De Dupuy, Secretaire Interprete du Roi.Je veux, Baron, de chasser de ma cour la Comtessepour sa mauvaise conduite, sa mauvaise langue, et son intrigue :la punition que je lui incline est de faire mettre elle-memeson mari au libere, avec les memes ceremonies que j'ai fait faireen la chassant d'ici.V r vous n'avez pas Baron, suivi mes ordres : mes intentionstalent, que rien ne soit replace de la maison de Vilton, pourla cargaison de ce batiruent, sans mes ordres ; si vous lesaviezsuivies, Vilton n'aurait pas trouve de fruits a l'eau-de-vie,demanded et des pruneaux, pour garnir la chambre de la Comtessede ici, comme il lea fait ici.Par le Roi,Eliminate.No. 2.Au Palais d'Ouanaminthe, 19 Avril, 1816, Van 13 de V Independence.LE ROIAu Baron de Dupuy, Secretaire Interprete du Roi.Je vous recommence, Baron, de surveiller Vilton ; car voussavez qu'il est lace naturellement et rampant : et d'apres cequi s'est passe, il pourrait bien chercher a s'evader; ainsi c'esta vous de le surveiller comme si de rien d'etat, car je vous enrends responsable.Accuses la reception de la presente.Par le Roi,Delimoxade.APPENDIX. 215Notes). — The two letters of the 22nd September, 1820,illustrate a very summary mode of dealing with delinquentfinanciers.No. I.Au Palais de Sans-souci, le 22 Septembre, 1820, Van 17 deV Independance.LE ROlAu Baron de Dupuy, Mareschal de Camp, Secretaire Interpretedu Roi, &c.Je vous adresse ci-joint, Baron, les deux ordres de paiement,pour le professeur et maitre ecole employe au service gouvernementet pour le paiement du ^ en argent du passage desAfricans imported a Haiti, ainsi que pour le paiement des deuxtiers en cafe.J'ai donne ordre au Due de la Marmelade, de fournir uneescorte pour conduire le Baron de la Torture a la Citadelle :vous lui remettrez la lettre pour le Baron de Nere.Par le Roi,Eliminate.No. 2.Au Palais de Sans-Souci, le 22 Septembre, 1820, Van 17 deV Independance.LE ROIAu Baron de Dupuy, Mareschal de Camp, Secretary, Interpretedu Roi.Le Baron Joseph de La Torture, Baron, ayant pas sold cequ'il doit a l'Etat, vous voudrez bien, des la reception de lapresente, le faire arreter, et le faire conduire sous escorte a lacitadelle Henry, pour y etre employe aux travaux jusqu'a cequ'il acquitted ce qu'il est redevable au gouvernement ; ci-jointl'ordre pour le Baron de Nere a la citadelle Henry. Vousordonnerez a officier qui aura command l'escorte dedit Baron,a la citadelle, de supporter repu dedit Baron.Par le Or,Delimo.vade.216 NOTES ON HAITI.Note (G). Moreau St. Mery gives an account of a cavernsimilar to that mentioned in the text, which he states to be inthe district of Borgue. See " Description de la partie Franchisede Saint Domingue," pp. 681 and 682. torn. i.Note (H). — The account is almost literally and verballythat furnished by the sufferer, who was a respectable man at St.Jago ; but as the statement is written in very bad Spanish, I donot think it worth while to furnish it.Note (I). — Art. VIII. His Britannic Majesty, stipulatingfor himself and his allies, engages to restore to His MostChristian Majesty, within the term which shall be hereafterfixed, the colonies, fisheries, factories and establishments ofevery kind which were possessed by France on the 1st of January,1792, in the seas and on the continents of America,Africa, and Asia, with the exception however of the Islands ofTobago and St. Lucre and of the Isle of France and its dependencies,especially Rodriguez and Les Seychelles, which severalcolonies and possessions His Most Christian Majesty cedes infull right and sovereignty to His Britannic Majesty, and alsothe portion of St. Domingo ceded to France by the treaty ofBasle, and which His Most Christian Majesty restores in fullright and sovereignty to His-Catholic Majesty.Note (J).Declaratory DE INDEPENDENCE DELPUEBLO Dominicans.No mas dependence, no mas humiliation, no mas sometimeal caprice y veleidad del Gavinete de Madrid. Enestas breves y compendious clausulas esta cifradala firme resolutionque jura, y proclama en este dia el pueblo Dominican.Rompio ya para siempre desde este momento los gastadoseslavones que lo encadenaban al pesaro y opresivo carbonatede la antigua Metr6poli; y reasumiendo la dignidad y energyde un pueblo libre, protesta relate del Ser Supremo, que re-suelto a constitute se en un Estado Independent no haraAPPENDIX. 217sacrifice que no ingle en el altar de la Patria para llevaral cato la heroic empress de figura y ser admitido alrange y consideration de los demas pueblos libres del mundopolitico.El ignominious pupilage de 328 aiios es ciertamente una sectiondemasiado large, y costs, que a todos desengaiia por sisola y sin mayor esfuerzo del ningun fruto que se ha sacado dela fanatica lealtad a los Eyes de Espana. Con este also iclolo,levantado por el error, y sostenido por una superstition political,se habia dorado a letargar el spirit, y burglars de la credulityde un pueblo natural mente bonds y sencillo. Ser fields ala Espana, aguantar con una paciencia stupid los despreciosde la Espana, no river, no movers, no ser para nosotros, sinopara la Espana, era todo y lo unco en que haciamos consistsnuestra felicidad, la fama de nuestras virtues, y a la recompensede los mas distinguish services.Si hai moravia entre nosotros alias tan rajas, y vendidas alservility, que se trepan a, contradict estas pervades de experience,vulcan por un instante sus fascinates jos al spansestado de ruina y desolation en que face sumida la parteespanola de la Primate del Nuevo Mundo. ]\ T o les dedimusque se remote a la infanta epoch, en que una orden delDivan espanol sue obstante para dealer, porque no podia guardlas plaza maritime de Bayaha, la Iguana, Montecristi, yPuerto de Plata, a donde concurring los Holiness y otrosstrangers a proverbs de las mercaderias, que la Metrupoli noles proportionable. Acerquense de una vez a los recites successde nuestra egad, comenzando su examen por el furiosouracan de la cession : numbered, si estan dorado de tanta insensibility,el dilution de plagas que arrojo de si este tor bel lino, ydifundiendose por el hermosa y fertile suelo de Haiti, han convertedsus campos en deserts, y sus mas rica y vistas crusadesen escombros y cenis. Echen moravia, si queen undense veto sobre la melancholia historia de las laertes, hares.VOL. II. K218 NOTES ON HAITI.y deraas horrors del ultimo sitio, que pusieron a esta capitallos naturales para arvancar su passion del poder de los frances,y license unica mente en el dia once de Julio de 1809, diapara siempre memorable, en que la Tela abandoned, la isla quesirvio de estate a las provincial Peninsulas, ocupadas por lasvictorious armas de la Republica frances, y la Isla en fin quesalvo en aquella crisis apurada el trono vacilante de CarloQuarto, de su libre y espontanea voluntad,ata de nuevo los vinculadisueltos por el bravado de Basle, y se complete con elmas sincere y cordial subito de la estrecha aliena que genevacon su antigua y descends Metropolis.Si Santo Domingo hubiera cometido desde su descubrimientoalguna enorme culpa, 6 contralto un grave recto para mercerla indignation y la ojeriza de la Aspasia, parce que con el arrowy felix exit de la reconquista tenia jericho a emperor ungeneral olvido de su demerits, y las mas afectuosas demonstrationsde gratitude. Sin embargo, salgan a la palestra los heroesde ese rasgo de lealtad nunca vista en los anales de lospueblos fields, las vistas, los hijos, los padres de los que mu.heron peleando por ser submits de una nacion que los cede,y cosa de su gremio, como a, una canada de corners, 6 hanpuerto de necesidad, 6 estan sujets al mosquito socorro de dosy tres realms diaries de vellon : los que en la campania ocuparonlos primerose guests por su valor y habilidad, apenas se entraen la plaza, descended a los grades inferiors, 6 se quean sinnada. D. Manuel Caravajal, el bravo defensor de Mangana-gua, el segundo de D. Juan Sanchez, y que se dura no sin fundamentalsi trabajo mas que el, 6 si se espuso con mas frequencya los peligms de la guerra, esta por recibir una expression deque sus services han sido grates. Con el mismo dolor marioDon Pedro Vasquez, otro campion de los que mas se esforzaronV combatieron por el logro de la reconquista, y al cato de doneamos sale diciendo el Editor de la Miscellanea del dia ft. de ultimo, " que para satisfaction de aquellos a quincesAPPENDIX. 219pueda interest, se halla authorized por el Gefe politico parapublican, que en officio de 7. de Julio de este alio, que le ha sidodirigido por ei minister de la Gobernacion de Ultramav, entreotras costs le dice S. E., que el Rey le ha mandate avisftr alMinistry de la Guerra lo convenient para que se despatched losgrades y condecoraciones conceits a estos naturalespor la re-conquest."No es ya tiempo de que se nos quiera adcrmecer y annular,como a. minos, con estas vanes esperanzas. Las minas operasse han hecho y repetida en differences occasions, y estates portersu compliment. Es minister que se nos repute ytenga to-daviden ia chase de nos sees imbeciles y faltos de racionalidadcomo se creia a, los principios del descuhrimiento de la America,para que el Minister de Ultramar, el Gtfe politico y elRedactor de la Miscellanea se figure que con esa got de aguefra puede apagarse el furioso volcan de la indignation querage y brama concentrate en el horizon de los natural.Para despacbar patentes de grades superiors a los European,conferred los primerose guests militares, destined a esta plazaofficiates ociosos sin cuerpos ni companies, organized los dissentramos de artillery y de ingenious, recargar seldomsobre las exhausts rentas de esta Provincia, para estas y otrasmedias que de dia en dia la llevanrapidamente asu esteeming,$i han tenido dorado lugar los ministres, y no se ha necesiiadode reiterate las ordines del Rey ; mas done largos aiios no bansido basaltes a enviar los auxilios militares, que se han medicocon tanta urgency, y de que hai tan absolute malta, y menspara recompense los sacrifices de los valientes y liberates, quederramaron su sangre, y heron sus bienes pararescatar el patriot de la domination frances, y presentable como unafresco victoria a la Etpaiia en testimonio de la mas rime ytenaz adhesion.Mas i para que anublamos con estos argos recuerdos elhermosa y desperado dia de la regeneration politica de Santo220 NOTES ON HAITI.Domingo ? Si la serve de injustice, gravis, abuses, vexationsy abandon, fueran el unco moil de esta valuable mudanza,acaso ningun otro pueblo de America patria bosquejar un cua-dro mas cargo de negras sombre y spectres horrorosos queesta desgraciada Isla. Ella sue la primera en el orden de losestablishments, y esta siendo la ultima en el adelanto, y progressde cuanio constitute el bienestar de los pueblos. Sinembargo de lo coal, para justiciar nuestra causa no necessitatesde recurred a la odiosa enumeration de las tempestuous y vicissitudesque hemos padecido : sentimientos de honor, principisde justitia, atones de utilised y convenience publica sonlos nobles impulses que nos estimulan a provincial el divorcey emancipation de la Espana para siempre.Desde el Cato de Homos hasta las California se plea conardor y encarnizamiento por el incomparable beneficial de la In-dependence. Entodas partes huge despavorido el caduco Leonde Espana, demand desocupado el terrene a la fuerza y vigorjuvenal del de America. Ya refiejan sobre el horizon politicolos crepusculos del grand dia de los hijos de Colombia : aparecerade un momento a otro la risueiia aurora de la Independencede toda la America. Los adulatory de la Espana no puedenresist tanto golpe de lus y se japan 6 spartan los jos parano ver el magestuoso spectacle de los extensor y poderososestates que vienen con la cabeza erguida a colo carse entre lasnations; y cuando los mas remote y desconocidos legatesconcurred con sus esfuerzos al logro de las incalculable venta-jasde esta neva vida, i sera decorous a la Primadadel NuevoMundo no tamar parte en esta heroic lucia ? Santo Domingoha recibido en su sent k la estudiosa juventud de Caracas,Puerto Rico, Cuba, y Havana : ha prohijado en el gremio ycastro de su University a los naturales de todos estos puebloscultus y sus adyacencias : los ha ennoblecido con los gradesy premiss de todas las ciencias : muchos de los heroes quefigura en el honos teatro de su revolution, bebieron quiAPPENDIX. 221los elements del saber ; i y puede habere honor, que haciendasido uno de los focus principales de la illustration Americanasea la ultima en reconocer los eternal principios del orden social? La patria de los Morfas, de los Mingles, de D. JuanSanchez, y Marcos Torres, la que ha sacudido tanta vices elhugo de las potential european en Sabina Real, en los montesde Najayo, en Palo-Hincado, ' t podra mostrarse insensible k laimmortal gloria de derrocar y estinguir para siempre el titanicimperio de sus Conquistadores ? De todo nos ha desperadola Espana; pero nos queda el honor y fortaleza de nuestrospadres.Samos con evidence certes que los hombres renunciationla independencia del estado natural para entrap en una sociedadcivil que les affiance de un modo stable y permanente la vida,la pro pie dad y la libertad, que son los tres principales bienes enque consiste la felicidad de lasnaciones. Para gozar de estos de-echosse instituted yformanlos gobiernos, derivando susjustospowers del consentimiento de los associates ; de donde se sigue,que si el gobierno no corresponde a estos essentials fines, si lejosde mira por la conservation de la sociedad, se converse enopresivo, tota a las facultades del pueblo altera 6 abolir suforma, y adopted otra nuevaque le parezcamas conduces k suseguridad y futuro bien. En hora buena, que los gobiernos,fundados de largo tiempo, no se combien por liberos motives ycausas translates. La prudentia dicta que se sufran los males,mientras sean supportable ; pero cuando toucan en el ultimo apiece,cuando la missa experience demuestra que el design es re-ducirlo todo a un absolute despotism, sentences sera degradesde sees rationale y libres, si los hombres no desecrateden el momento un gobierno diametralmente contraria k los altosfines de su original institution ^ Y queen a la lus de estosprincipios no aplaudira como justa la que hoi adopta en el suola parte espanola de Haiti? Cantos azote, infortunios ydesastres puede mortar la hydra del despotism, otros santos hasufrido Santo Domingo durante su vergonzosa submission a la222 NOTES ON HAITI.Espaila ; lego es de nuestra primera obligation, y uno de losmas sagrados derechos que nos impose el amor a la patria, procurecon eficacia y por cantos medios estan anuesiro advance,la felicidad que la Metropolis no ha subito, 6 no ha podidoasegurarnos por aller adelante sus miras de abatement ytitania.Estates plena mente convention de que para conseguirla yaumentarla, no nos queda otro camino que el de la independence.Con ella tendrils leyes formulas por nosotros minos,analogy al genie, educacion y costumes de los pueblos, sal clime y localized ; y nuestra representation nationalsobre la proportion numerical guardara una perfecta igualdadentre todos los publadores de estas provincial, y no servir dealirnentar la discord entre las varies chases, como ha sucedidocon las bases establecidas por la Constitucion de Cadi. el poder judiciary de maner, que, ahorrandoseliempo y gastos, no se false a la buena administration de justitiaen lo civil y criminal, ni se saquen los recursos funera delterritorio. Atenderemos con especial cuidado a la educacionde la juventud tan abandoned hasta ahora, porque sin ella sonindicates todos los deseos de publica felicidad. Nos dedicatesal foment de la agriculture, de las artes y el coercion,como las unica y ver dad eras fences de la riqueza de los pueblosj arreglaremos nuestras rentas sobre el dogma fundamentalde no gaspar mas de lo que tenedos y es compatible con la territorial : ventral a nuestros puerto todas las nationsen estado de proper a nuestras necessitates de destinationy salida a los frutos del pais ; en lugar que la Espaila, a mas decareer de los principales articles de maestro consume, nuncaha subito negociar de otro modo que a beneficial de la exclusivey con las sordidness del monopolies, que como hijo legitime,name y se derive de quel absurd principle. Todo, en fin, lotendrils en casa y nada saldremos a buscar a mil y prescientleguas de distance, donde no se even nuestras necessitates, nipuede haber interest en remediarlas al tamano de la urgency.APPENDIX. 223Enredada la Aspasia en el intricate labyrinth de sus nuevauinstitutions, lucia con los enemigos internal, que a care y con arcades aquinas su destruction. Un pie deejercito de cincaenta mil hombres de tropes veterans, y deocbenta a mien mil de militia Nationale, son los espeques conquese empuja y quaere hacer marcia el lento y perezososystema constitutional : las potential European mas poderosas leunfunded recelo y sobresalto, porque, apesar de sus protestationsde amistad y buena intelligence, descubren sintomas deldiscontent con que milan la depression de los tronos absolute,en que todas elles demean listeners fires y tranquil. Laslegislatures de los aries de veinte, y veinte y uno que core, hanpotato cada uno el emprestito de descents millions que lesfaltan para llenar el cup de los gastos comines y ordinariesdel tiempo de paz, apesar de las rajas y cercenes que se lionshaber liecho en todos los ramos de administration publica.El oro y la plata de America ya no huyen precipitates aderramarse en la tesoreria de Madrid : los corsairs independentsapresan en todas los puntos de precise recalada a lavista de Cadi, y por todos los cabot litorales de la Peninsulalos mal aviados y escapes eagles de su languid y mosquitocomercio, porque no bai fuerzas navales que los protein : ysiendo este el rerdadero y deplorable estado de la Nation espa-nota, sera una consumed insensate de nuestra parte emperorsocorros y majores de la que los mending para sus apuros, y notina a nosegay sus turbaciones domestics.Santo Domingo por el contraria : en medio de su decadenceesta subsistence de sus propos recursos, y aun tendril muchmas desabogo su hubiera fundadosusistema administrative sobrelos principios de economic que le prescribed su extenuate oblation,su agricultural comercio; pero ba tenido que desenfen-terse de toda buena regia, para tender a las cargas que le baido ecbando encima su ingrate y desconocida metr6poli, enrecompense y para alivio de los males que nos aniegan desde224 NOTES ON HAITI.el ruins golpe de la cession. Si la ley de los aranceles y re-laments de aquinas no se hubiera suspended y temperatea las circumstances locales, ya sectarian cerrados de una vez ypara siempre todos los puerto de la Isla, porque cuando masseponders la libertad espariola, es cabal mente cuando se hatirade a remachar con mas rigor las cadence del monopolies y laexclusive del comercio. Los mismos correct conductors deestos precious reglamententos ni siquiera se dignan tocar enlos puntos maritime de la Isla que antes acostumbraban, sien-donsformosa pagan queen villa a traernos las sentences demuerte para tender la barbara complacence de ejecutarlas ennosotros, y con nuestras profits manos. Qui esta la sola cosapara que dependents de la Aspasia, y no para que nos ista,prove y sonora en nuestros apuros y necessitates : hasta quihemos vivid esclavos y dependents por liabito, pero los echosque persuaded much mas eiicazraente que las ruinsnos equestrian y convinced que samos libres y emancipation.Ash lo reconocemos y tocamos por nuestra propria experience,y conductor por ella declarator y solemnemente publicans,que la parte espariola de la Isla de Haiti, queda desdeeste dia constitute en un Estado libre e independiente : que elbuen pueblo Dominican ni ahora, ni en adelante, ni nuncase sometera a las leyes y gobierno de Espana, considerableabsuelto de toda obligation de fidelia y obedience : que re-vested de la dignidad y character de nacion soberana, tiens unplena poder y facultades para establecer la forma de gobiernoque major le convent, contrary alianzas, declared la guerra,conclude la paz, juster tratados de comercio y celebrate los de-masacts, transactions y convention que pueden por jericholos demas pueblos libres e independents ; y que si la Espanareconcile y probate esta declaratory sera habita y reputedcomo amiga ; pero si la impugnare 6 por cualquiera via ymodo pretender estorbar nuestras institutions y la marciaAPPENDIX. 226del nuevo gobierno en que samos a entrap, sabres defenderscon nuestras vidas, fortuna y honor. Viva la Patria, viva laIndependencia, viva la Union de Colombia ! Dada en la ciudadde Santo Domingo de la parte espaiiola de Haiti a ] Di-chambrede 1821. Ano primero de la Independencia. — JoseNunez de Caceres, president — Manuel Caravajal — Juan Vi-centreMoscow — Antonio Martinez Vales — L. Juan Nepomu-cent de Arredondo — Juan Ruiz — Vicente Mancebo — ManuelLopez de Meres, secretary.Note (K).ACTA ConstitutionDEL GOBIERNO PROVISIONAL DEL ESTADO Independent I EDE LA PARTE ESPANOLA DE HAITI.Los Ciudadanos Manuel Caravajal, Coronel del ejercito liberatory Capitan general, Jose Nunez de Caceres, Governorpolitico y Presidentee del Estado independiente de la parteespaiiola de Haiti, Juan Vicente Moscow, Diputado del par-titode la capital, Antonio Martinez Vales, por el primero delNorte, Licentiate Juan Nepomuceno de Arredondo, por el secundodel Norte, Juan Ruiz, Coronel del ejercito liberator,por el del Este.-y Vicente Mancebo por el del Sur, reunion enfesta sala del Consent municipal con el objeto de establecer laforma de gobierno que en las actuates circumstances del momentoareca mas convenient a manner la tranquillized publica,el buen orden de la sociedad, proper a la seguridad ydefense del Estado en general, a la recta administration de justicia,y al gone y ejercicio de los mas precious derechos de losciudadanos; han venice en decretum, y decretum el siguiente re-lament provisional para el buen orden y regimen del Estado.Art. I. Siendo, como es, la parte espaiiola de Haiti unestado libre e independiente; se declare: que la forma-de sugobierno es, y debe ser Republican ; pero entre tanto arbela226 NOTES ON HAITI.un ex^cto systema de representation nacional sobre las basesmas conveniences, hara una Junta de gobierno provisional,que se componere, del Capitan-general, del Gobernador politicodel Estado y de los Diputados, 6 suplentes de los eincopartidos en que esta divided el temporis de la parte espaholade esta Isla. El Secretario de esta Junta es el de la CapitaineArt. 2. En esta Junta se acordaran todas las dispositionsgenerates, medias de seguridad publica, arreglos de todos losramos de administration del Estado, y cuanto mas areca untily conduces a consolidate la independencia, ponerla al arrigode todo atque de enemigos internal y sterns, levant tropes,exigir e importer contributions, abolir 6 modern las existences,irregular el orden de los juices y tribunals para la buena administrationde justicia, organized las officinal de cuenta y razor,dar aranceles para el afore y cabranza de sns derechos,promoter la educacion publica, fomented la agriculture, las artesy el comercio, y general mente para hacer todo quelle quecxija, y demande el bien del Estado para su prosperity, uniony seguridad, removing al mismo tiempo cantos obstacles seoxonian 6 arden estos importantes fines.Art. 3. Los regiments que acordara esta Junta tendonen todo el Estado la fuerza y visor de leyes, y el bacerlas cum-pairy ejecutartoca al Gobernador politico Presidentee del Estado,queen las communicate con este objeto a todas las corporations,Gefes y Autoridades, asi de la capital, coral de losotros partidos.Art. 4. Esta parte espanola entrant desde lego en alienacon la Republica de Colombia : entrap a componere uno de los3-]stados de la Union ; y cuando se ajuste y conclude este bravado,bare causa comus, y seguira en un todo los interestsgenerales de la Confederation.Art. 5. Con estas miras se despacbara a la mayor brevetpossible un Diputado circa de S. E. el Presidentee de la Repub-APPENDIX. 227lice de Colombia, comunicandole cl cambio politico de SantoDomingo, y manifestation los deseos de adberirse a la unionde los Estates que actual mente component, u en adelante com.pusieren la Republica de Colombia. La Junta elegies esteDiputado, candle las instructions, documents y powerscompetent al lleno de su enlarge : y este comisionado solicitorse le dominique la Constitucion general de la Republica deColombia, para con su previo examen y conocimiento dar estaparte espanola su acto de accession.Art. 6. Otto message igual se elvira inmediatamente alEscelentisimo Senor Presidentee de la Republica de Haiti en laparte frances nuestra vecina, proponiendole un bravado deamistad, comercio y aliena para la comus defense y seguridadde ambos territories en case de invasion enemies, 6 de machinationsinternal contra su libertad e independencia.Art. 7. No pudiendo haber verdadera libertad civil, sin ladivision de powers, declare la Junta, que por abra reside enella las facultades del legislative, hasta que en circumstancesmas tranquil puedan adopt arse y establecerse las bases de larepresentation nacional. La potestas de executor las leyes entodo el Estado tota al Presidentee Gobernador politico, y la deadminister justicia en lo civil y criminal pertenece a los Juicesy Tribunals determination por las leyes y con arreglo a los granitesy formalidades que prescribed las minas.Art. 8. Los derechos del hombre en sociedad consisted ensu libertad, igualdad, seguridad, y pro pie dad. La libertad es lafaculty de hacer todo quelle que no promise la ley, 6 nooffence al derecbo de mercer. La igualdad no admit distinctionde pimiento ni poder hereditary : la ley es una missapara todos, bien premise, bien fatigue. La seguridad result dela confianza que leben tender todos los associates de que los del cuerpo social no se empyrean en ora casa que enasegurar a. cada uno sus derechos. La pro pie dad es el derecliode gozar y disponer de las rentas, bienes y del product de su228 NOTES ON HAITI.trabajo, 6 de su industria. Esta pro pie dad es inviolable, y ni eiEstado puede tocar a ella sin una conocida necesidad, 6 evidenceutilised coran, y eso dandy la indemnity a judicio dehombres buenos.Art. 9. Son ciudadanos del Estado independiente de laparte espanola de Haiti todos los hombres libres de cualquiercolor y religion que sean, acids en maestro territorio, 6 auntlo sean en pais stranger, si llevaren tres amos de residence,u fueren cascades con auger natural. En ambos casos haraconstat los interests al Gobierno las respective circumstancespor medio de una information ante los Alcaldes municipal,y la de haber vivid obedience a las leyes del pais, ocupa-dos en arte, officio, 6 industria honest, y resultant conformele despacbara la carta de ciudadano, sellada con el del Estado,y authorized por el Secretario de Gobierno.Art. 10. La carta de naturaleza se concede por el poderlegislative, obteniendo antes la de ciudadano por los granites, ycon las formalidades indicates ; pero ni esta, ni la de ciudadanodarn nunca jericho k oftener employ de Gobierno, de judicature,de hacienda, munich pales, ni otros civiles y politics :esceptuanse los employ militares a que bien podran ascendedaunque sean los mas elevates.Art. 11. Tanto los naturales, como los strangers cominga fiercer los derechos de ciudadano a los 18 amos de egadpara lo que es concurred u toda chase de elections ; pero no po-cranser elegies a no contr 25 aiios, funera de los casos en quepor la ley se require mayor egad para algun empleo.Art. 12. Los derecbos de ciudadono se pierced : — 1. Porcondemnation judicial a pena afflictive u infamante ; pero extinguish,puede el mismo tribunal que la ipso, rehabilitarlo. —2. Por oftener empleo 6 consecration de otro Gobierno. —3. Por admit carta de naturaleza en pais stranger.Art. 13. El ejercicio de los mismos derecbos se suspended :—1 . Porentredicho judicial a causa de furor, dementia 6 imbe-APPENDIX. 229iliad. — 2. Por el estado de debtor falling, 6 de debtor k loscandles publico. — 3. Por accusation criminal ligaments in-tented. — 4. Por no saber leer, ni describer para lo que es serelegies, pero no para elegir. — 5. Por no tender empleo, officio, 6modo de vivid honestamente.Art. 14. Los deberes del ciudadano son los siguientes :esta obliged a sostenerla independence y libertad de la patriasacrificed su vida y hacienda en obsequies de estos sagradosdeberes, a contribute para los gastos del Estado en proportionde sus habere, ser fiel a la Constitucion, obedecer las leyes yrespecter las Autoridades constitutes. Todo el que no los em-plea,es mal ciudadano y responsable de la contravention conarreglo a las leyes.Art. 15. La casa de todo ciudadano es un seguro asilo desu persona y de cuanto terga enella: no podra ser allanadasino en los casos determination por la ley con un previo manda-pimientojudicial por esprit, 6 por el suez en persona cuando enella se comets un delito, 6 se refuge un delinquents en fragrant,6 perse guido por autoridad competent. Los legates publico,como fontes, cafes, botellerias, villages, y todos los que nemesislicentia del Gobierno para su establecimiento pueden servisitants de dia y de niche, begun lo exijan el buen orden y elarreglo de la police.Art. 16. Ningun ciudadano puede ser perse guido, preso, 6detenido en la carcel, u otro lugar publico, sino en los casos, ycon la formality de process, que required las leyes.Art. 17. Si el heclio que motiva la prison mercier penacorporal, no podra el preso ser presto en libertad bajo de nana; pero tenura lugar la fianza cuando solo inerezca algunamulta pecuniary, 6 pena correction que no esceda de un mesde arrest.Art. 18. Subsisting la libertad de irnprenta en los terminusque ahora se observa, y bajo las formalidades y penes que prescribedlas leyes existences en este unto, hasta que se former Jpublique otras que mejcr convengan.230 NOTES ON HAITI.Art. 19. Por ahotra, y mientras no se disponee otra cosa,continually los Ayuutamientos existences, denominates municipales,y bajo la forma de su election, y renovation en lasepochs y partes seiialadas ; pero en cuanto a sus funciones y facultadesse atendran a las que fenian y tienen por las leyes deindians, y a la police de los pueblos.Art. 20. Los Alcaldes no concern de deraandas civilessino hasta en candida de mien pesos abajo, y en judicio verbal,eon esta distinction. — Si el interes de la demanda no pasare deveinte y cinco pesos, sin hombres buenos ; pero de 25 pesos enadelante hasta 100 . con dos hombres buenos que nombre laspartes, hacienda sententia el acuerdo de uno con el Alcalde. Yen lo criminal sobre injuries verbal, 6 realms que no trainaparejada pena corporal afflictive, sino puramente correction 6de arrest que no pase de 20 dias, tamen con hombres buenos.En uno y otro case la sententia se estendera por el Escribanoen un libro que debere llevar al intent, y la firman el Alcaldev hombres buenos, danse a la parte que la videre, certificationde ella por el Escribano : este libro pasara de Alcaldeen Alcalde, y se conserve en su poder.Art. 21. Pueden igualmente los Alcaldes recibir informationsde vestiges para los casos prevents en el art. 9. de estereglamento, y para los demas en que verse interes private, comosobre. legitimidad de pimiento, naufragio, muerte, 6 ausencia,siempre que la ley no require otro medio especial de justification.Art. 22. En todas las crusades, villas y oblations delEsta do se administer la justicia en primera instance en causasciviles y criminals, que no sean las contends en el articulo20 de este reglamento proviso rio por un Alcalde mayor, Sueztetrao, que nombrara el Gobierno, y debere reside en la caeterade cada uno d? los cinco partidos.Art. 23. El salaried estos Jueces sera por ahora el de mil yquinientos pesos pagans por el Estado : tendon ademas estosAPPENDIX. 231juices los derechos de firma y occupations con arreglo a losaranceles existences, y no podr&n compter las declarations encauses civiles y criminals, sino a los Alcaldes municipales delospueblos, 6 Alcaldes mayoress de los partidos, sirviendose deexhorts con las insertions conducted ; y todos estaran obligationa cumplirlos reciprocated, y a prest arse mutuo auxiliaryla buena administration de justicia.Art. 24. Estos Jueces extrados sera rem plaza dos en susfunciones en los casos de vacante, muerte, ausencia 6 impedimentlegal, por los Alcaldes municipales de los pueblos endonde ocurra la vacante, basta tanto que, danse cuenta al(iobierno, lace la provision ; y ante los mismos Alcaldes pue-denser demanded en las causas civiles y criminals que currancontra ellos; en cuyo case el Alcalde municipal se consularcon Asesor tetrao.Art. 25. Hara un tribunal de apelaeiones residence enesta capital, atone las partes puedan elevar sus recursos en locivil, y los Jueces las consults de las sentences que profieranen lo criminal. La denomination de este tribunal sera porahora la de Corte superior de justicia, y el numero de juices deque se componga, sus atribuciones, salary y orden de procterse determinate a la mayor brevet possible por otro regimentparticular.Art. 26. Para la decision de las causas en lo civil, y la ira-positionde las penes en lo criminal, se arreglaran los Juecesde primera instance y los de la Corte superior de justicia a lodispuesto en las leyes existences al tiempo de la publication dela Constitucion politica de la nacion espanola, interim no se for-menotras mas analogy al genie, educacion y costumes de losciudadanos del Estado.Art. 27. La Intendencia seguira por ahora separate delGobernador. A ella tota modo lo economic, politico y goersde los ramos de hacienda, la cobranza, manejo y distributionde candles ; pero las causas y negocios civiles 6 crimesNOTES ON HAITI.names, de contraband, page de contributions y deudas, dere-chiosincorporated 6 de reversion, generalities, correct, delosde empleados en el ejercicio de sus funciones y demas causas yplaits de que antes conocian los Intenseness, se determinationen primera instance en el juzgado del Alcalde mayor, y lasapelaciones iran a la Corte superior de justicia para su decisionen vista y re vista.Art. 28. Ne se hara novedad por ahora en los impuestos,derechos, rentas y contributions establecidas, sino que se continualperception y cobranza, cualquiera que sea su titulo ydenomination ; pero el product de las que artaban destineda los gastos de la Deputation provincial entrap en la tesoreriageneral del Estado.Art. 29. Cualquiera ceuta que se contraire de este dia enadelante para softened la libertas e independencia de la patria,6 para acudir a los otros gastos indispensables de la administrationpublica, sera reconcile como legitime por el Gobierno, ytodas las rentas del Estado responsables a su page. En cantoa la antigua ceuta, contraria por el extinguish gobierno deEspana, se estara a. lo que sobre este unto se resolved por elCongress general de la Union ; pero las pensions assignats alas vistas, padres e hijos de los que han puerto en la guerra dela reconquista, continually satisfaciendose, y lomismo a los quese hubieren inutilizado por la misraa causa.Art. 30. Con preference a los demas ramos de administrationpublica se dedicate la Junta a la organization del systemade rentas que areca mas conforme a la situation delpais y de su riqueza territorial, siendo una de sus primevalattentions modern los gastos al mineral possible, y cercenar elnumero de empleados que no sea el mui preciso para el despatchde los negocios.Art. 31. Quando en la Junta de Gobierno se trade de arancelesde aduana, de la imposition de un nuevo jericho, de lamodification de aquellos que parczcan exorbitant y de laAPPENDIX. 233reduction 6 memento de plaza en rentas y sus seldom,asistira el Intendant con vote consulting, pero no interveneen la resolution.Art. 32. Quean desde lego abolidas la Constitucionpolitica de la Monarquia Espahola, y las leyes, corporations ydemas establishments que de ella diana, funera de todo loque va salvador y esceptuado en este reglamento provisional,6 se salve y excepted por los demas que sea preciso former en losucesivo.Art. 33. Ningun Espaiiol Europe puede oftener en elEstado empleo de Gobierno, de judicature, de hacienda, municipal,civil 6 politico, cualquiera que sea su denomination ; paralos militares de que habla el art. 10 de este reglamento, debereantes babe obtenido la carta de naturaleza por los medios y conlas formalidades que quean prevents.Art. 34. Por ahora, y entre tanto no se forme un nuevoarreglo de los cuerpos militares del Estado, hacienda caesar laodiosa distinction que hasta ahora se ha queries softened entreel soldan y el simple ciudadano, y que ha sido en todos tempusel origen de divisions y partidos en el Estado, permanentlos mismos que hai en la actuality, gobernandose por laordenanza general 6 los regiments particulars de cada uno,except el fuero privation de los nombrados cuerpos privilegesque cesare por enter y en todas sus partes, dependentlos individual de dichos cuerpos de la jurisdiction de la Capitangeneral.Art. 35. Las machinations, arcades, protector, planesde sedition, los tumults, motives, sonatas y alborotos levant6 de cualquier modo dirigidos a trastornar el nuevo sisterRepublican, a destruir la libertad e independencia de lapatria, a impede el curse de las medias adoptadas, a turbanel oswego publico, 6 inspirer adhesion a la Espana, sera re-putados delos de tradition contra el Estado, se concern deellos a estilo military, y se juzgaran en consent de guerra,234 NOTES ON HAITI.ejecutandose la pena que se imponga a los delinquents centrede veinte y cuatro horns de la notification de la sententia. Eaesta chase de delos no liar fuero privileged, ni especial queexima de la autoridad del consent de guerra.Art. 3C. Los que fueren nombrados para cualquier empleodel Estado veteran antes prester el juramento si fueren militatesen manos del Capitan general 6 Commandant de las armas,y siendo civil en las del Gobernador Presidentee, b?jo esta formula.— - ( Juris a Dios y por los santos Evangelists de recoverydefender con vuestra vida, hacienda y facultades la independencey libertad del Estado de la parte espafiola de Haiti, serfiel a. Gobierno, guard su Constitucion, (sincere Suez, u otroGefe que terga autoridad, se dira y hacer guard,) observersus leyes, y obedecer a las autoridades constitutes ? — Respondedel empleado, Sijuro. — Y el que le reciba el juramentoJo conminara bajo la formula siguiente : Si asi lo hiciereisDios os ayude, y si no, os lo demande, y ademas sardis responsibleal Estado de todo abuse y contravention, con arreglo alas leyes.Art. 37. Ningun empleado publico podra ser depuesto desu empleo sin el debita conocimiento de causa, y por excess yabuses que determine la ley : pero todos son responsables consu persona, empleo y bienes en los casos de result conventionjudicial mente de contravention a sus deberes.Art. 38. Si en el ejercicio de las funciones del empleoocurrieren judas a los functionaries publico, ya sea sobre laintelligence de alguno de los articles de este reglamento provisional,6 de cualquiera otra ley de las que leben regir porahora en el Estado, hara la propuesta y consulta a la Juntapor medio del Gobernador politico, y por el mismo conductse le communicate la resolution.Art. 39. Que se publique, imprint y circule a. la mayorbrevet possible para su observance y punctual compliment entodo el Estado, conservative esta acta original en el archieAPPENDIX. 235de la sala municipal para su constantia y perpetua memoria enlos anales de la Isla de Haiti en la parte espanola ; y la firmanlos ciudaclanos que component esta Junta provisional de Gobi-erne.Dada en la sala municipal de la ciudad de Santo Domingo,capital del Estado independiente de Haiti Espafiol, hprimero de Diciembre de mil ocbocientos veinte y uno, arno primerode la Independencia. — Manuel Caravajal — Jose* Nunezde Caceres — Juan Vicente Mnscoso — Antonio Martinez V aidesL. Juan Nepomuceno de Arredondo—Juan Ruiz— VicenteMancebo — Manuel Lopez de U meres, secretary.Note (L.) — The following proclamation details all the proceedings: —Libertas. ICUALDAD.Republica DE HAITI.Fields Dominicans Y Amadis Compatriots !No se me sultan los cargos y recriminations que los malcontentsprepared, y aun ban comenzado ya a vomited contrami conduct por los success y consequences de maestro cambiopolitico, ejecutado el 1 de Diciembre ultimo con el buen ordenque todos ban experimental : yo respond que los movementsde la independencia comenzaron el 8 de Noviembre en La-jason,en Beer y Monte Cristi, y que la capital no hizo otracosa que satires al encuentro con las auras y leaves intentionsde conjurer la neva furioso tempest, que prevent en aquelloslegates, y que en breve se iiubiera propagate hasta llegar a ,tal vez much mas canada de funestos materials reco-gidos en su transit : yo respond en fin con el test de la Notaofficial con que el Escelentisimo Senor Presidentee de la Republicade Haiti ha contested a las miss de 19 de Diciembre y5 de este mes : nada os oculto, porque lace tiempo que debrishaber conocido la fianqueza de mi procedimiento en las funcionesdel minister publico : heed esta pieza con la meditation236 NOTES ON HAITI.que debe inspires el interes de vuestro futuro bienestar ; ydespues condense.Libertas — Igualdad — Republica de Haiti — Juan PedroBoyer, Presidentee de Haiti, al ciudadano Jose" Nunez de Ceres,Gefe politico de Santo Domingo.Ciudadano — Ayer be recibido la vuestra del 5 de los corrientescon el documents que la acompaiiaba. Como el bien ilemi pais es el objeto de mis cuidados, voi a entrap con vos fran-lamenteden todas las explications que require la situation enque se halla al presente la parte del Este de Haiti. Si la verdantque me dirige puede ser appreciate por los que estan a lacabeza de los negocios en Santo Domingo, y si el termino desus solicitude no es otro que el de la perfecta regeneration deesta parte de la Isla, sumeigida lace mucbo tiempo en la humiliationy la misery, esta regeneration se electuary tan prontacomo pacificamente, a. satisfaction de cantos tienen en el laun interes real.Desde la promulgation de la independencia james se ha bravadode divided la Isla : toda su extension, comprehends las islesadjacent, forma el territorio de la Republica ; asi lo determineel articulo 40, titulo 2, de nuestra Constitucion, tan general-menteconocida en todo el orbe.La Republica es una 6 indivisible, (articulo 41.) He qui loque establcciendo la gratia de la independencia, impose tam-bienlas obligations que no esta, en mi mano derogate sin ha-cereculpable, tanto para con la presente oblation, como paracon su mas antigua posterity.Este es el momento de preguntarse, por que la parte del Esteno ha sido reuuida a la Republica desde la promulgation delacto constitutional ? — Porque los nuevos establishments nopueden llegar a su unto de perfection sino despues de haberpasado por la hera ae disgraces y catastrophes, que muchasvices acarrean la destruction de la empress ; y cuando no su-cedeasi, es preciso con todo que unalarga experience, fruto delAPPENDIX. 237solo tiempo, vega a prester su auxilio para alcanzar el fin pro-presto.Est es lo que ha sucedido en la republica. Su historiade dies y echo alios arras, nadir la ignora, y por tanto esinstil engenders sobre ella.Las calamities sufridas por maestro Gobierno son las que leban impeded a penser antes en la reunion de todo el territorio ;porque aunque el veeindario de la parte oriental gemia sentencesbajo el peso de las preoccupation y privations, se halloa sinembargo tranquil, y hubiera sido inhuman, en aquella epoch,esponerlo a los horrors de la guerra civil, cuando no se estabaen disposition de reunir todas las vohmtades acid al misino censtro. Los sentiaiientos de generosity fueron igualmente losque se opusieron k que mi predecessor dies a los que solicitationlos medios de sacudir el hugo de la Antigua metrupoli, comolo bizo con socorros de annas y munitions a favor de D. JuanSanchez de Ramirez, cuando la generalized de sus conciudada-nos resolved espulsar a los que por tratados habian obtenido lapassion del pais : y declare, que el star penetrated de losmismos sentimientos, es lo que me ha conducive a regardecons tante mente k protege los diverse partidos que me hanmanifesto la intention de engender el trastoruo de toda dominationstranger.Enemies del disorder y del derramamiento de sangre, estabadecided a nunca dar asistencia alguna partial a los ciudadanosdel Este, convenit que no estaba lejos el tiempo en que yopatria obrar alii una revolution del todo moral, que quandola desgraciada situation en que se ballaban, hubiera al fin coloradosin cheques, sin violence, a mis compatriots de la parteOriental bajo la protection tutelar de las leyes de la Republica.Este tiempo estaba indkado por la pacification del Norte. Yorecibi enviados de la parte de Santiago, de la de Sau Juan y aunde Santo Domingo, que me aseguraron de su voluntas a gardelas ventajas de nuestras institutions ; para no esponerlos a.las calamities inevitables de un cambio de estado, operatepor la via de las armas, aconseje nuevamente a todos la pacingNOTES ON HAITI.cia, y me determine por ultimo a dar un paso ostensible acidel pueblo, hacienda saber al Brigadier-general Pascal Realmis intentions, y lo que la prudentia y humanised nos prescribinga uno y otro. Con este objeto sue que envie la missionde que era Gefe el Coronel Fremont, que entry a su llegadaa Santo Domingo el cambio acaecido el primero de Diciembreultimo.A penes te habia tenido conocimiento de los acts publicansen Santo Domingo, que me fueron trahidos por los mismos veinsdel interior, protestants que si ellos habian demonstratealgun enthusiasm con la neva de aquella mudanza, eraporque cretan que conforme al acto constitutional, la indivisi-iliad del Gobierno de Haiti era la essential condition de suresolution. No me canse de exhortation a la moderation, yespere para determinate el regret de mis enviados.Lleg6 el Coronel Fremont y me entreat vuestro pliego, secundodel 19 de Diciembre. Me felicity de que no busier corridorsangre en el acontecimiento del 1 del mismo : me llenede estimation para con todos aquellos que habian impeded sueffusion ; pero deplore el error que habia dictate la ordinationde un gobierno separate de el que ya estaba establecidopor la ley fundamental del Estado, y que se declarant deerhacer parte de la Republica de Colombia. Inclined siemprea. la indulgence, y a juzgar los hombres por la purest de misprincipios, he pesaro que los que habian dirigido el cambiodel dia I potion habere equivocate en la election de los mediosy aun haber sido dominos por circumstances que yoignorant, y conclude que si era asi pronto volveiian de su error,porque necesaiiamente el pueblo, mas desengailado, se caria aengender. No sue preciso much para ver realized mi modode penser, y vos debris concern que no me he engafiado. Losque se ban declarator enarbolando el pabellon Haitiano ban lie-echo,pues, su deer, ban conocido sus verdaderes interests y sehan presto a salvo de todo acaecimento molest.Voa tenets, ciudadano, demasiada penetration para haberAPPENDIX. 239confounded el primer entusirismo del pueblo al ver desaparecerel pabellon de la Aspasia con los sentimientos de su voluntas,manifeslados hoi, est es, de vivid bajo las minas leyes que elresto de los Haitianos.No hai para que averse illusion : dos Estates separates nopueden exist ni manganese independents uno del otro en laisla en que hemos nacido ; aim cuando el acto constitutional deHaiti no hubiera ya decided la question de su indivisibilidad,la razor y la conservation de todos sus habitantes la hubieranexigido imperiosamente : bastard interesse de buena fe en laprosperity de esta isla para convenir en esta verdant : torquemadaser efectivamente independiente, es necessaria poster en susent los medios de defender estaindependencia. La Republica,me atrevo a, decir, ha acquired despues de muchas borrascas to-dosestos medios, y puede pillar en ella missa los elementsnecessaries a la conservation de su libertad e independencia.Como mis deberes estan trazados, debt softened a todos losciudadanos de la Republica. Los veciuos de Lajavon, Monte-crista,Santiago, Pto. de Plata, las Caobas, las Mates, SanJuan, Neva, Azua, la Vega, &c. &c, han recibido mis ordinesy las obedecen. Yo voi a hacer la visita de toda la parte delEste con fuerzas opponents, no como conquistador (no quieraDios que este titulo se accrue james a mi pensamiento), sinocomo pacification y conciliatory de todos los interests en armeniacon las leyes del Estado.No espero encontrar por todas partes sino germans, amigos,hijos que abraham. No bay obstacle que sea capaz de detenerme :cada uno puede star tranquil por su seguridad personal, y ladesus promenades. En cuanto a vos, ciudadano, que crewestais animate, como me lo significant, del solo interes de lapatria, arid vuestro horizon al goo, a la confianza, porque laindependencia de Haiti sera indestructible por la fusion detodos los cora zones en un solo y mismo todo. Os asegurar£isde los derechos a mi estimation, os conservators titulo NOTES ON HAITI.choses para con todos vuestros conciudadanos enarbolando enSanto Domingo desde el recibo de la presente el unco pabellonque convene a la existence de los Haitianos, que es el de laRepublica. Espero que vuestra contention, que no debetartar en llegar a mis manos, sera conforme a lo que os imposey exige el suelo que os ha vista macer.Tergo el honor, ciudadano, de salutary con una distinguishconsideration — Firma — Boyer — Palacio National de PuertoPrincipe, u de Nero de 1822. Alio 19 de la Independencia deHaiti:'Extrados ya de resolution de See. el Presidentee de Hayti,nada me queda que recomendaros por lo locate a la docilityy sentimientos pacific con que debris aguardar su llegada,pues begun ofrece viene como padre, amigo y herman a abra-carlosa todos y reunirlos bajo la egida tutelar de una sola constitution: convict con la paz, y deems todos correspondencecon la union : creed que esta es la ultima scena que debe re-presentable sobre el teatro politico de nuestra isla j su cielquedara desperado de tubes tempestuous, y va a comenzarpara vosotros la dichosa epoch de vuestra seguridad y prontoalivio de las parades miseries : las ventajas y comodidades quedisfrutan nuestros compatriots de la parte Occidental, viennabustards : arid vuestro horizon y dad en el lugar a. la de la mano generous que os las brinda. Hevestios de fir-meapara no escuchar los eos de las antigua preoccupation,y presented al mundo politico el decade de un pueblo amassen las vicissitudes y mutations de gobierno, y que por lotanto same acomodarse a sus differences forms. Todos son buenossi se gaza en ellos de los derechos imprescriptibles de lanaturaleza, libertad, igualdad, seguridad personal, paz sociable,y yo os nuncio que de todos ellos disfrutareis con abundancebajo la constitution y leyes de la Republica de Haiti.' —Santo Domingo, 19 de Nero de 1822.Josh' Nunez de Caceres.APPENDIX. 241Note M.Libertas. Igualdad.REPUBLICA DE HAYTI.PROCLAMA AL PUEBLO.JUAN PEDRO BOYER, PRESIDENT DE HAITI.Haytianos. — El pabellon nacional flota sobre todos lospuntos de la Isla que habitants ! Sobre este suelo de libertadya no hay esclavos, y no formam todos sino una sola familia,cujus miembros estan unites para siempre entre si por unavoluntas simultaneous, que diana de la concordance de losmismos interests ; y asi estan en su enter execution los articles40 y 41 de nuesira Constitucion.La reunion de los hijos de Haiti comenzada a obverse de unmodo definitive lace tres alios, y que se halla conclude por mientradaen Santo Domingo, anadie ha costa lagrimas i Queendisconcert, en esta felix revolution, el poder de Dios quearbela los destined de los pueblos ? — Desires de haber estadoseparates, que diego, opuestos los nos de los ostros por la politicade los enemigos de nuestros derechos, despues de inchesaiios de aeervos dolores y guerra, su mano nos une y terramen nuestros cora zones el balsam valuable de la amistad y dela concordia. Tributemosle actions de gracias, Compatriotsmiss, por la protection singular que no ha cesado de dispensation,y bagamonos dignus cada vez mas de santos beneficespor nuestra fidelia al juramenlo que hemos presto de riversiempre unites, libres e independents.Mas para hacer durable la ora de nuestra reunion y consolidatela independencia de maestro pais, es necessaria tamar en lopasado lecciones de experience que os unseen a evitar losescollos que no habeis superado sino por un valor y heroicssacrifice ; sabedoras por veinte y cinco aiios de vicissitude deVOL. II. LNOTES ON HAITI.que las virtues privates y publicans del buen ciudadano, delpatriots zeloso, formam el pimiento que debe conserve adulterationel edifice que habeis levantado para asegurar laexistence de vuestra posterity ; que vuestro amor a la Republica,vuestro respect clas leyes, vuestra obedience a losma-distracts que son sus organs, sean cons tante mente la replicavictorious que podaraos oponer a los sofismas de nuestros detractors,y la justification de los filantropos que han defendedy defended moravia nuestra causa.Poseedores de un suelo de maravillosa fecundated, vuestraindustria agricola, al paso que reciba el vuelo que necessity,abrira vastos canales a las speculations del comercio stranger,le asegurara resulted lucrative, y aumentara de estemodo, tanto vuestros recursos, como las utilidades de las nationsque ban solicitude y entretenido relations con nosotros :a aquella que major sea prester homage a nuestros principioses a la que concederemos por inclination natural la faculty desubvenir con mas amplitude a maestro consume, y compare lamayor parte de las rica productions de maestro territorio.Ciudadanos, vos que fuisteis las primeval columns con queel immortal Petion erigio la Republica, considered al presenteel espacio immense que habeis andado desde el dia en que,abjurando la domination stranger, determinately no volver asufrirla, basta el en que os veins llegados. Contemplate sinorgullo el triune de vuestros esfuerzos y de vuestra perseverance:siempre fuisteis dociles a la vos de vuestro gee y dis-guestsa. sacrificial todo a la patria ; continued mostrandoosdignus de lo que habeis sido.Y vos, ciudadanos de la parte del Este, vos habeis sido por largo tiempo: leyes arbitrarily y prohibitions oshan obliged £ vivid en medio de las privations y del atortola-miento ; con todo habia combated para recobrar vuestros dere-chios) pero los que artaban encargados de dirigiros os volvieronAPPENDIX. 243a power bajo la dependence de la metr6poli que os habia repelde su sent traficando con vuestra submission. Al fin oshabeis movido espontaneamente, habeis queries ser libres yHaitianos como nosotros, y lo babes conseguido : olvidad puesvuestra antigua condition, para no penser sino en la de que vaisa gozar; arid vuestros cora zones a la algeria : vuestra en el Gobierno no sera enganada : este se ocular delcuidado de curae las rotunda llegas que ha tornado en voso-troy un systema anti liberal : que en adelante no halla nubladosque obscurezcan los hermosa dias que van a der lus a, la patria.Haitianos, j en van pretenders nuestros enemigos alarmedlas potential strangers sobre la reunion de todo maestroterritorio ! Los principios establecidos por los articles 40 y 41de nuestia Constitucion, que nos den el ocean por traite, sontan general mente conocidos, como los designates en el art. 5del raisin acto, y por los cales nos hemos obliged a no haceramas empress alguna tendency a turban la paz de nuestrosvicious.Pueblo agriculture y guerrero, los Haitianos solo se ocuparande los interests de su patria ; no se servir de sus armas sinopara defender su independencia nacional, si se tuviese la injusticede atacarlo ; siempre generous, siempre companion, continuallyotranto con buena fe con "los strangers que viviendoentre ellos respetaren las leyes del pais.Mi destiny era sin dura el instrument de que delia servicela Divinity para hacer triunfar nuestra sagrada causa : solo asu protection es que atribuyo los success que ban acompanadomi administration desde que se pusieron en mis manos lasfriends del Estado. He hecho cons tante mente cuanto ha dependedde mi para merecerla ; mis dias sera consagradosigualmente a, llenar religiosamente las obligations que meiinponen la gloria y la prosperity de Haiti. Yo tergo eljericho de contr con la cooperation de todos mis concluded244 NOTES ON HAITI.nos y contre con ella para elevar la nacion al range que debeocular en el mundo civilized.Viva la Independencia ! Viva la Libertas ! Viva laRepublica !Boyer.Por orden del Presidentee el Secretario General,B. Inginac.Dado en el Palacio nacional de Santo Domingo a 9 de Ferrode 1822. Alio 19 de la Independencia de Haiti.Note (N). The report of the committee on the privilegesof the Spanish Haitians is so very full and technical, that I havepreferred giving the abstract in the text to swelling thisAppendix beyond its proper length.Note (O).ORDONNANCE DU ROI DE FRANCE.Paris, 17 Avril, 1825.CHARLES, par la grace de Dieu, Roi de France et deNavarre, a tous ceux que ces presentes verront, salut : vu lesArticles 14 et 73 de la Chartres ; voulant pourvoir a ce quesettlement l'interet du commerce Francois, les malheurs desanciens colons de St. Domingue, et l'etat prepare des habitansde cette Isle ; nous avons ordonne et ordonnons ce qui suit :Art. 1. Les ports de la partie Francoise de St. Domingueseront ouverts au commerce de toutes les nations; les droitspercus dans ces ports tant a l'entree qu'a la sortie seront egauxet uniformes pour tous les pavilions, excepte le pavilion Francois,en faveur duquel les droits seront redtiits de moitie.Art. 2. Les habitans actual de la partie Franchise de St.Domingue ver seront a la caisse (generale) des depots et con-situationsde France en cinq terns egaux d'anneee en annee, lepremier cheat au trente-et-un December 1825, la somme decent-cinquante millions de francs, destines a dedommager lesanciens colons, qui demanderont une indemnity.APPENDIX. 245Art. 3. Nous concerns, a ces conditions, par la presentordonnance, aux habitans actual de la partie Francoise de St.Domingue, independence pleine et entire de leur gouvernement.Et sera la presente ordonnance swelled du grand sceau.Donne a Paris, au chateau des Tuileries, le 17 Avril, Tan deGrace 1825, et de notre regni le premier.(Signe) Charles.Par le Roi :Le Pair de France, Ministre, Secretaire d'Etat au Departmentde la Marine et des Colonies,(Signe) Comte de Chabrac.Vu au Sceau: — Le Garde des Sceaux, Ministre, Secretaired'Etat au Department de la Justice,(Signe) Cojvite de Peyronnet.Visa : — Le President du Conseil de Ministres,(Signe) Jh. DE V r ILLELE.Note (P). — In the preceding note the ordonnance of theKing of France is given. On examination of this document, itwill be seen that the recognition is expressly limited to theFrench part of the island. I have been assured, on excellentauthority, that the cabinet of the Tuileries urged in vain thecourt of Madrid to join in the recognition of the independenceof the entire island. While these sheets were passing throughthe press, the newspapers have announced the arrival of aSpanish negotiator at Port-au-Prince, in a large frigate. It isnot at all improbable that this mission is intimately connectedwith this subject. It is very certain that Spain, which resistswith such perseverance to recognise the independence of theContinental States of America, is the last power in the worldfrom which a speedy surrender, even of absolute rights, ought tobe expected.Note (Q). " Declares leurs enfranchisement faits dans nos246 NOTES ON HAITI.ties, leur tenir lieu de naissance dans nos iles, et les esclavesfrancois savoir besoin de nos lettres de naturalists, pourjouir des avantages de nos sujets natures dans nos royaumes,terres et pays de notre obeisance, encore qu'ils soient nes dansles pays etrangers." — Art. 57. Code Noir.Note (R).— No. 1.The gentleman alluded to in the text is Joseph Arnold, Med.of Camberwell, to whose friendship I owe the full communicationsthat follow.Platform-Hall, August 13, 1828.Dear Sir,I now send you, in consequence of your letter, (for Mr.Mackenzie's perusal and acceptance,) all that I can collect, bothfrom minutes and memory, relative to the late unfortunateOge, and first as to my knowledge of him at Paris:When I was at Paris in the year 1789, I dined occasionallywith General Lafayette. It happened on one of theseoccasions, that the deputies of colour, who had then just arrivedfrom St. Domingo, had been invited to dine there also.Of course we met (with about fifty others) in the same room.The general introduced me to them, and when we took curseats at the dinner table, he placed me between two of them,Mons. Raymond, a mild gentlemanlike man, and another,whose name I have forgotten. In the course of conversation Ilearnt their errand, and they learnt mine, which was simply toget the subject of the slave-trade introduced into the NationalAssembly, if possible, while I was at Paris. This first interviewwas purely accidental.In the course of three or four days Raymond, Oge, and thefour others, called upon me at my hotel. It was a mere visit ofcompliment, in consequence of having dined together at GeneralLafayette's. I wished to return the compliment, but wasprevented in consequence of not knowing their address. I wasAPPENDIX. 247told that they did not lodge together, but had separate lodgingsof their own in different streets.In about a week after this a mere accident brought ustogether again. They were going in a body (six of them) toconsult their advocate, Onions. Jollie ; and it so happened thatin their way thither they passed near the street in which Hived.At this moment one of them proposed calling upon me, and therest agreed. They came, they said, to inform me that they hadbeen admitted the day before into the body of the National Assemblyto prefer their claims, and that the president had assuredthem they might take courage ; for that the assembly knew nodistinction between whites and blacks, but considered all menashaving equal rights. They hoped soon to be admitted thereas deputies. They did not stay more than ten minutes with me,and then left me, apparently all of them in high spirits.At another time I received a message from Mons. Raymondto say, that he had something to communicate to me, andthat he would bring one or two of his friends with him to seeme,if it were agreeable. They came accordingly. He thensaid that the liberal speech of the president of the Assembly,which had given them last week so much pleasure, had calledforth an host of the bitterest enemies against them. The whiteplanters resident in France, and the white planters usually residentin the colonies, but then at Paris, supposing that they,the deputies, (who had slaves' blood in their veins,) were tohave a seat in the assembly, and equal rights and privileges withthemselves, had been worked up by that speech to a feelingbordering upon madness. They held nightly meetings ; theyhad sent to them (the deputies) anonymous letters, threateningtheir assassination, if they persisted in their claims. They saidtoo, that they had reason to think that these white colonists hada design upon my life also, and they wished to put me upon myguard. I replied that I had received letters to the same purport,but that I should still go on as before. I had determined248 NOTES ON HAITI.however, by way of precaution, to change my hotel, and to gotoanother, to be near to General Lafayette for protection, andnot to stir out at night.I saw nothing more of the deputies for a fortnight, when theyproposed a visit, to which I immediately assented. All the sixwere present. They complained bitterly of the white colonists inParis. Some of these, whose faces they had before seen at theCape, had insulted them, and particularly Oge, in the streets ;but what was worse than all, they had spread terror among manyof the members of the Assembly, so as to make them believethat the welfare of the mother country would be endangered byhearing their claims : they appeared to be quite disheartened.They were now sure that they should not be able to make headagainst their intrigues. Day after day had been fixed for thehearing of their cause — day after day it had been deferred.They were now weary with waiting. Oge could not containhimself, but broke out with great warmth : — a I begin," says he,•' not to care whether the National Assembly will admit us ornot. But let it beware of the consequences. We will nolonger continue to be held in a degraded light. Despatchesshall go directly to St. Domingo, and we will soon follow them.We can produce as good soldiers upon our estates as those inFrance. Our own arms shall make us respectable and independent.If we are once forced to desperate measures, it willbe in vain that thousands will be sent across the Atlantic tobring us back to our former state." On hearing this 1 entreatedthe deputies to wait with patience. I observed to them, " thatin a great revolution like that of France, the Assembly wouldhave a thousand things to attend to at home before they couldthink of any thing abroad. France would first take care of herself—she would then, I had no doubt, extend her care to thecolonies. Was it not reasonable to conclude that this would bethecase, when they, the deputies, knew that they had almostall the first men in the assembly, such as the Due de Roche-appendix.240faucault, Lafayette, Mirabeau, Gregory, and others, in theirfavour?" I entreated them therefore to wait patiently, aswell as upon another consideration, which was, that by animprudent conduct, they might not only ruin their own cause iuFrance, but bring indescribable misery upon their native land.They all seemed to listen to what I said except Oge, whosemind seemed to have been so violently stirred up, that its emotions,like the waves of the sea after a storm, could not bestopped at once. This was the last time I ever saw all thedeputies together.I began now to think of returning to England, and concludedat length that my stay in Paris should not exceed another week.During this time I fell in with Oge in one of the streets. Heseemed to be very gloomy. He revived the subject spoken ofat our last meeting, namely, the wicked and barbarous conductof the white planters at Paris towards the deputies, but moreparticularly towards himself. We exchanged, however, butfew words ; for I told him that I was going by appointment tosee a friend, and that I should be too late if I stopped longer.I met him again by accident as I was walking in the gardenof the Tuileries. We stopped and talked. He appeared tometo be in an agitated state of mind. He said that the crueltreatment of the deputies of colour by the white colonists atParis was not to be borne. From the white colonists at Paris hethen went to the white colonists at St. Domingo. He said thatthe people of colour there were men of property as well asthese — that they were men of education as well as these — thatthey had mind and intellect as well as these— that they hadsouls as magnanimous and courageous as these. He was goii.gon, when I beseeched him to be more tranquil ; and to pacifyhim, I told him that if he and his colleagues would call uponme in the evening I would be at home to receive them.At the time appointed Oge and three others came to me ; theother two were indisposed. They seemed now, all of them, to250 NOTES ON HAITI.have caught the infection, for they all complained bitterly. Iheard what they had to say most patiently, and told them againand again that I sympathised with them in their distress. Aftersome farther conversation I bad them adieu, as I was to leaveParis in two days ; and recommended to them, in the most earnestand impressive manner I could, moderation and forbearanceas the best legacy I could leave them ; and I entreatedthem rather to give up their seats in the assembly than to carrytheir anger home ; for that with patience thi ir cause would ultimatelytriumph. They replied, that I had prescribed to them amost difficult task, but that they would endeavour to follow myadvice. There was, however, evidently a spirit of dissatisfactionin their countenances, which nothing but a redress of theirgrievances could subdue ; and it appeared clear to me, that ifthe white colonists should persevere in their intrigues, and theNational Assembly in delay, a fire might be lighted up in St. Domingowhich could not easily be extinguished. This was allthat ever passed between me and the deputies of colour at Paris,either in my conversation with them as individuals or as acollective body. I may add, that I had no particular intimacywith any of them — that I never paid a visit to any of them — infact, that I never knew where any of them lodged.I intend to continue my account as soon as I can get an opportunity.You will of course preserve this letter for Mr.Mackenzie ; but you need not acknowledge the receipt of it.I am, dear Sir, your's truly,Thomas Clarkson.No. 2.Platform-Hall, August 15, 1828.Dear Sir,I sent you on Wednesday last (for Mr. Mackenzie) an accountof my knowledge of Oge, as far as it went, during myresidence in France. I now send you an account of my knowledgeof him, as far as it goes, during his residence in England.APPENDIX. 251I left Paris, to the best of my recollection, about the latterend of December 1789. In about three or four months afterthis, say somewhere in April 1790, when I was in London, Ireceived a letter from Ogeat Paris the first that had ever passedbetween us), stating that he was coming to England for a weekor two, and that he would then take an opportunity of callingupon me. I was then at lodgings in Faith-street, and he hadcontrived some how or other to find out my address. This intelligencegave me great uneasiness ; for the errand of the deputiesof colour to France was as odious to the slave-merchantsand planters of England, as it was to the white colonists at Paris,and I trembled therefore at the thought of being seen in companywith Oge in London, lest it should do a serious injury toour cause. I communicated the news to Mr. Wilberforce, whothought exactly as I did upon the subject, and who declaredthat he would never see him, if he came, and forbad me thereforeto bring him to his house. I began then to deliberatewhether I ought not try to find out some reason for preventinghis coming, and to write to him to that effect ; but he gave menotime to do this : for one morning, about four days after thereceipt of his letter, while I was at breakfast, and while I wasconsidering what I should write to him, to induce him to put offhis journey, he came into my room. I received him, I believe,with all the civility due to his situation ; but I questioned himclosely as to his motive for coming to England, when he informedme that his object was to go to the United States, wherehe had friends, and that there were more and better opportunitiesof getting thither from the ports of England than fromthose of France. After having breakfasted with me, he left meto go to his inn, and to inquire whether any vessels in theThames were going to the American ports.In about three days after this a letter came directed to himat my lodgings with the Paris post-mark upon it. I had notseen him during this time, and not knowing where his inn was,252 NOTES ON HAITI.I knew not where to send it. When he came the next time, hetold me that he had been in search of a vessel from day today,and that he thought he had found one. I then gave him hisletter. He opened it immediately and read it, and appearedmuch affected by it. I asked him if he had received any badnews. He then gave me the letter to read. It was from oneof his colleagues. It stated that " he had received lettersfrom St. Domingo, and that not only no remittances had come,but that none were likely to come for some weeks, and thathe (Oge) had but just got out of Paris in time, for that his creditorswere in his lodging the very day after his departure ;and they were desperately incensed against him." It wasclear to me, after having read this letter, what was Oge's designin coming to England. He came in fact to England becausehe had neither money nor credit to convey him to Nantesor Havre, and from thence to an American port; and becausehe could no longer stay in Paris without getting into jail ; andas a man on the point of drowning catches at a straw, sohe thought there might possibly be a chance of surmountinghis difficulties by throwing himself upon me in London, theonly person he knew there, and that he preferred this measure,however degrading it might be, to the certainty of lingering foran unknown time in a French prison. As these were my sentimentsafter reading the letter, I communicated them to himfrankly ; when he confessed that he had never had any intentionof coming to England at all, but that circumstances forcedhim ; and he hoped that I would advance him a little moneyto enable him to get to the United States. He had then twentylouis doors left, and a small sum in addition would be, sufficient.He would go even as a steerage passenger : he would submitto any thing to get clear of Europe. In answer to this I madehim no promises, hut asked him to dine with me the next day,when we would talk the matter over.The moment he left me, I began to think most seriously ofAPPENDIX. 253his situation as well as my own ; and in a few minutes the caseappeared to me to be so plain, that I was no longer at a losshow to act on the occasion. Considering that the longer hestaid in London the more his pecuniary means would be exhausted,and that ultimately some one must come forward tohelp him, or he would get into an English jail, and that noperson in England knew him but myself; and considering again,that the longer he staid in London, the greater chance therewas that his acquaintance with me might become known, bywhich the great cause then in my hands might be materiallyinjured, I thought it a matter of common prudence (puttinghumanity out of the question) to say that I would accede to hisrequest provided matters could be arranged upon a frugal scale ;and accordingly, when he dined with me the next day, I unbosomedmyself to him in the most frank manner on the subject.I was pleased to find that he accommodated himself tomy views ; for that he desired only to be enabled to set hisfoot on the shore of the United States.In two or three days afterwards he called upon me again,and wished me to introduce him to Mr. Wilberforce. I toldhim that Mr. Wilberforce was too ill to see any stranger ; andthis was really the case at that particular moment. He theninformed me that he expected to sail in a week, and wished toknow when it would be convenient to me to let him have themoney, as the captain wished to be paid before he allowed himto come on board as a passenger : I said he might receive it inthe course of three or four days at most, and appointed a meetingfor that purpose.He came at the appointed time and dined with me again.I then paid him the money : it was either twenty or thirtypounds — I think it was thirty pounds. When I told him that itwas a gift and not a loan, he expressed himself in terms of thegreatest gratitude. He said that his colleagues in Paris wereunable to assist him ; that they were all in debt ; and thatMonsieur Raymond was trying to borrow money upon his254 NOTES ON HAITI.estate in St. Domingo to supply himself and there also till remittancesshould arrive. He said he was glad that he hadescaped from France. He hoped that his creditors there wouldnot follow him, and that he should escape soon out of England.He should have no rest till he turned his back upon Europe.He seemed to me to be a much more humbled man than whenI saw him in Paris. His language too was more moderatewhen I spoke of the white proprietors there ; but it was evidentthat he had not forgotten old grievances: for on all these occasionshe was not only agitated, but his eyes bespoke a vindictivespirit. At length he left me, promising that he wouldcall again to take his leave ; but I waited day after day, andhe never came. Not knowing where he lodged, I knew notwhere to send to inquire about him. I was in this uncertainstate, when I learnt by mere accident, from an agent for shippingin Wrapping, that he had actually left London in a vessel,which had cleared out for the United States. Why he did notcall to take his leave of me I could never unravel. I oncethought that he was secretly displeased with me for not havingintroduced him to Mr. Wilberforce and the committee, and fornot having done more for him in a pecuniary way ; but I gaveup this notion afterwards, and supposed that he had beencalled upon to go on board suddenly, or sooner than he expected,and that he had not had time to perform his promise.You will be pleased to give this, my second letter, to Mr.Mackenzie when you see him.I remain, dear Sir, yours truly,Thomas Clarkson.You need not acknowledge the receipt of this letter.No. 3.Platform Hall, August 17, 1828.Dear Sir,I have already sent you an account (for the use of Mr. Mac-kenzie)of my knowledge of the unfortunate Oge during my re-APPENDIX. 255silence in Paris, and also of my knowledge of him during hisresidence in London. One thing only now remains, and that isabsolutely necessary to be known by Mr. Mackenzie before hecan form an entire judgment on the case before him, viz.whether I ever had any connexion, either by letter or message,with Oge after bis departure from this country, or whether Iever held any correspondence with any one in St. Domingo afterthis period, and with whom ?I have then to say that I never wrote any letter, or sent anymessage either to Oge or to any of his colleagues or friends,after his departure from England. In the first place I knewnot how to address either him or them. I knew not where theylived in St. Domingo. And secondly, there was no subject onwhich I felt the least inclination, or had any business to writeto him. Nor did I ever receive any letter from him or any ofhis friends, colleagues, or adherents, after he had left London.I will not say, however, that I never wrote a letter to St. Domingo,or that I never received one from that quarter. I wascertainly in correspondence with the late Henry Christopheafter he became king ; but then this was more than twenty yearsafter the death of the unfortunate Oge, or after the beginningof the revolution in that island; and with respect to thiscorrespondence, I never sought it myself. I should never haveengaged in it if the king had not first written to me ; and I cantruly say that I was never more surprised than I was when Ireceived a letter from him inviting me to such a correspondence.I may add also, that all my letters to him were written, accordingto the best of my judgment, for the good of Haiti, to promoteits prosperity, its strength, its liberty, and its civilisation.With this view, one of my first objects was to try to prevailupon the king to unite in a sincere and lasting friendship withPetion his rival ; but I did not succeed there. When I heard ofan act of cruelty practised by his (Christophe's) governor uponan Irishman supposed to be a spy, I reprimanded him without256 NOTES ON HAITI.fear. I furnished certain masters for his schools. I advised himto take a certain number of the free blacks in the United States,and bring them into his dominions, to the amount of thirty orforty thousand, by way of giving him the appearance of greaterstrength in the eyes of the French government; and I stipulatedfor their personal and religious liberty, on the basis of what reasonand experience had shown to be the wisest for those purposes.I found out for him also the terms which the Frenchgovernment would propose to him, if he wished to have hisindependence acknowledged in that quarter. Upon these andmany other subjects I wrote to him at his own request; andthough, like many others, I might have been mistaken in myjudgment, I always counselled him for the best. Setting asidethen these letters, either to the king or his ministers, I neverwrote or sent a message to any person whatever in St. Domingoin the course of my life.You will be so good as to hand this third letter to Mr. Mac-kenzie.The three letters together will probably enable* him toform a decided judgment on the case. I am in doubt whetherI ought not to address to him a fourth ; but I shall take a littletime to consider of it. Should I think it necessary, it will bethelast.I remain, dear Sir, your's truly,Thomas Clarkson.You need not acknowledge the receipt of this letter.No. 4.Platform-Hall, near Ipswich, August 20, 1828.Dear Sir,It was my intention merely to have handed, through you,to Mr. Mackenzie, certain facts connected with my acquaintancewith Oge, and to have allowed him to judge for himself onthe subject; but after some consideration, I have thought itright to come forward myself, and to say yes or no to the differentcharges brought against me by certain French writersAPPENDIX. 257relative to that unfortunate individual. These charges amountto pour. 1. That Oge was introduced tome in London byletters from the Amis de Noirs at Paris. 2. That his object inLondon was to confer with me on a plan for exciting an insurrectionor revolution in St. Domingo. 3. That I encouragedor assisted him in this his plan or design : and 4. That I wasthe means of sending him from England to his own country toexecute it. I will reply to these charges in their order.1. I deny that Oge was introduced to me in London by theAmis des Noirs at Paris. He wrote to me in London himself ',and followed his own letter here. Oge did not stand in need ofany such introduction ; for he had been acquainted with memany months before. He and his colleagues had visited me fouror five times at my own lodgings, and we had also met andtalked in the streets. I will venture to say that Oge knewme better than most of the Paris committee did ; for though Iwas six months in Paris, I never attended that committeemore than three times.2. That Oge came to me for the purpose mentioned is equallyfalse. He came to me, not to promote any revolutionary plan,but because he could stay no longer in Paris without gettinginto a jail, and because he could not get home apparently by anyother means than mine.3. That I promoted or encouraged his plans for the wicked purposeabove-mentioned, is equally false ; for I never knew, eitherfrom himself or any other person, that he ever entertained anysuch plan or design. That Oge was, if I may so say, desperately-irritatedagainst the white colonists in Paris on account oftheir wicked intrigues and denunciations against himself andhis colleagues, and that he once broke out into the most intemperateand furious language, threatening vengeance bothagainst them and the National Assembly, I have shown youin my first letter ; but it will have appeared by the same letterthat I came forward immediately as a peace-maker on that occasion; by which he would see that I set my face against all258 NOTES ON HAITI.violent measures. Indeed, I considered this threatening only asthe effusion of a highly exasperated mind at the moment.When he was in London, he was apparently more humbled,more softened, more composed; and yet he was very irritableif old grievances came across his mind. But neither in Parisnor in London did he ever give me a hint that he had anyplan in contemplation either for promoting insurrections orbringing about a revolution in St. Domingo. I myself thereforestand entirely clear of the charge of ever having known ofany scheme of this nature ; and if I myself, who knew Doge,cannot be implicated in it, how can the London committee besupposed to have had a hand in it, who never saw him ? I mayadd here, that if the Amis des Noirs of Paris had ever had therashness to propose to the London committee for the abolitionof the slave trade, any revolutionary measure for St. Domingo, itis my belief not only that the latter would have instantly brokenoff all connexion with the former, but that they hould have waitedupon one of his majesty's secretaries of state to have informed himof the proposal. The London committee at this time consisted,fifteen out of twenty, of Quakers, and their religion would forbidthem to be concerned in military operations in any shape.4. This charge is the only one that is true. I plead guiltyto it. I believe that without my means Oge could not have leftEngland as he did ; but when I sent him away, I did not sendhim away to promote an insurrection in St. Domingo, but to getrid of a greater pecuniary burthen upon myself, and to get ridof a person whose known acquaintance with me might havebeen injurious to our cause.I remain, dear Sir, yours truly,Thomas Clarkson.The remainder of this letter is here omitted, because it didnot refer to the point at issue ; but as holding back any portionof the correspondence might be misunderstood, it will be foundat the end of the Appendix. — See note (LL).APPENDIX. 259Note (S).CONSTITUTIONDe la Colonie Francaise de ST. DOMFNGUE, 1801.Discours Preliminary de la Constitution.La colonie de Saint-domine existent depuis plusieursanne's sans lois positives. Long-temps gouvemee par deshommes ambitieux, son aneantissement etait inevitable, sansle genie actio et sage du General en chef Toussaint Overture,qui, par les combinaisons les plus justes, les plans les mieuxreflects et les actions les plus energies, a su la deliver pres-queenmeme temps de ses ennemis exterior et interiors,etouffer successivement tous les germes de discorde ; du sein del'anarchie, preparer sa restauration ; faire succeeded abundance ala misery, l'araour du travail et de la paix, a la guerre civile etau vagabondage, la security a la terreur, et enfin la soumettretout entire a empire Francais.La revolution avait renverse, avec violence, tout ce qui constituentle regime par lequel l'ile de Saint-domine etait anciennementadministered.Les differences assemblies legislative de France y avaientsubstitue, a diverses eques, des lois nouvelles ; mais Incoherencede ces lois aussitot supporters que rescues, leurs vices ouleur insuffisance reconnus par ceux-la meme qui en avaient etles auteurs, la maniere dont elles talent executes par des factieuxet des hommes de parti, habiles a les interpreter suivantleurs interets, contributions plutot a proper le desordre qu'ale comprised.Et la consequence naturelle de cet ordre de choses avait etede faire regarder des lois qui n'auraient du etre rescues quaverun sentiment de respect, comme des objets d'alarme, ou lors-quelletalent impuissantes, comme des objets de mepris.Les hommes sages qui ont cooper a la constitution Franchisede Fan huit, ont, sans doute, send la necessity d'adopter unnouveau systeme pour des colonies eloignees, et de consulter260 NOTES ON HAITI.dans la creation des lois qui doivent les regir, les moeurs, lesusages, les habitudes, les besoins des Francais qui les habited,rneme les circonstances dans lesquelles elles se trouvent.Serait-il facile en effet de peser toutes ces considerations,d'apres des rapports souvent infidels, d'apprecier a une aussigrande distance les changemens operas dans esprit d'un peuple,de connaitre ses maux, et d'y porter des remedies a proposet efficaces, stout pendant la guerre ?Article 91 de la Constitution Francaise aurait pu seul autoriserles habitans de la colonie de Saint Domingue a presenterau gouvernement Francais les lois qui doivent les regir, siexperience du passe ne leur en avait fait un devoir imperious.Et quel moment plus propre a choisir pour cet importantouvrage que celui ou le cahos debrouille, ancien edifice d£-blame de ses ruines, les presages gueris et les passions calmness,emollient avoir marque comme instant propice ou il fallait enposer les condemns!II est des circonstances qui ne se presentment queene seule foispendant une longue serve de siecles pour fixer la destined despeuples ; si on les laisse clapper, elles ne se retrouventplus.A ces causes fundamentals qui faisaient sentir la necessityd'une constitution pour File de Saint-domine, combinedd'apres les interets de ses habitans, intimement lies a ceux dela metropolis, se poignant des motifs element pressing.Les justes reclamations de department de la colonie pourapproached les tribunaux des justifiable ;La necessity d'introduire de nouveaux cultivateurs pour Fac-casementdes cultures, la revivification du commerce et leestablishment des manufactures ;L'utilite de cemented reunion de la ci-devant partie Espagnoleavec ancienne partie Francaise ;Impossibility pour la metropolis de secours et diligentertete immense colonie pendant la guerre avec les puissancesrarities ;APPENDIX. 261Le besoin d'etablir un regime simple ct uniforme dans leadsdes finances de la colonie, et dien reformer lesabus;Obligation de tranquillize les proprietaires absent sur leursproprieties;Et enfin importance de consider et de rendre stable lapaix interfere, augmented la prosperity dont commence ajouir la colonie, apres les oranges qui l'ont agitee ; de faire con-maitrea chacun ses droits et ses devoirs, et d'eteindre toutesles defiances, en presenting un code de lois auquel viendrontse lier toutes les affections, se reunir tous les interets:Tels ont ete les motifs qui ont decide le General en chef aconquer une assembled legislative, chargee de proposer augouvernement Franc, ais la constitution la plus convenable a lacolonie de Saint-domine : ainsi cet ouvrage sera encore un deses bienfaits.Le peu de membres dont il a forme cette assembled, annoncequ'il a voulu eloigner de ses discussions les passions et le tumulte; mais en meme temps il a voulu qu'elle fut environeddes lumieres et des reflexion de tous les hommes instructs, afinqu'un ouvrage d'un aussi grand interest fut, pour ainsi dire, celuide la colonic entire.Si 1' Assembled centrale n'a pas complement rempli lesvoeux de ses committing, si elle n'a pas atteint le but que seproposal le General en chef, elle aura fait autmoins ce que lescirconstances lui permettaient ; elle n'a pu proposer a la foistousles changemens qu'on pouvait desirer. La colonie ne peut parvenira sa plus grande prosperite, quaver le temps et par'degr6s.Le bien, pour etre durable, ne peut soberer que lentement ; ilfaut a cet regard imiter la nature, qui ne fait rien avec precipitation,mais qui merit peu a peu ses productions bienfaisantes.Heureuse si cette premiere tentative peut contribuer a. amesle sort de ses concitoyens et lui merited leur estime et leurindulgence, ainsi que des temoignages de satisfaction de la262 NOTES ON HAITI.France, quand bien meme elle n'aurait pas atteint une certaineperfection.Tous les Articles de la Constitution ont ete disputes etarrives sans passion, sans prejudge, sans partiality, et specialle mode de gouvernement adopte comme le seul propredans les circonstances, a conserver a, la colonie sa tranquillityet a, la ramener a son ancienne splendeur. D'ailleurs tous lesdeux ans, les assemblies central suivantes pourront opere leschangemens que le temps et experience rendront necessaires.Reassembled centrale n'a pas la vanity de croire quelle apropose la meilleure constitution possible ; mais ce qu'elle peutassurer a ses concitoyens, c'est que tous les membres qui lacomposed ont constamment eu ardent desire du bien, intentiond'afFermir la tranquillity actuelle de la colonie, de rendre saprosperite durable, de augmented, et de prouver leur attachementau gouvernement Francais.The Constitution which immediately follows this address,is signed by Borgella, president ; Collet, Raimond,Gaston Nogere'e, Labour, Roxas, Mugnoz, Mancebo,et Viart, secretaire.It has been denied that Toussaint had European advisers. Onsuch a point Baron Vastey's evidence may be depended on.In his l( Essai sur les Causes de la Revolution, &c. &c." hedistinctly ascribes the misfortunes of both the local chiefs to thecounsels of Europeans, and he positively says, " L'AbbeBosquet redigeait les proclamations du General Rigaud, unnomme Salenave celles du General Toussaint." — p. 16.Besides, Borgella and other Frenchmen formed a majority ofthe first Constituent Assembly, while Pascal was the secretary,and others were the heads of departments. The fact is neverdoubted in Haiti.APPENDIX. 263Note (T).Liberte', Ov la Mort.ACTE Independence.ABMEE INDIGENE.Aujourd'bui premier Janvier, mil huit cent quatre, le Generalen Chef de larmes Indigene, accompagne des General,Chefs de 1'armee, convoques a effet de prendre les mesures quidoivent tendre au bonheur du pays :Acres avoir fait connaitre aux General assembles ses veri-tablesinterets, reassure a jamais aux Indigenes d'Hayti, unGouvernement stable, objet de sa plus vive sollicitude ; ce qu'ila fait par un Discours qui tend a faire connaitre aux PuissancesStrangers, ia resolution de rendre le pays independant, et dejouird'une liberte consacree par le sang du Peuple de cette He :et apres avoir recueil les avis, a demande que chacun des generalassembles prononcat le serment de renoncer a jamais a laFrance, de mourir plutot que de vivre sous sa domination ; etde combattre jusqu'au dernier soupir pour independence.Les General, p6netres de ces principes sapres, apres avoirdonne d'une voix anime leur adhesion au projet bien manifestoindependence, ont tous jure a la posterity', al'Univers entier, de renoncer a jamais a la France,et de mourir plutot que de vivre sous sa domination.Fait aux Gonaives, ce l er Janvier 1804, et le l er jour deindependence d'Haiti.(Signe) Dessalines, General en Chef; Christophe, Potion,Clervaux, Gerard, Vernet, Bart, Generalde Division j P. Romain, E. Gerin, F. Capoix, Dat, J.L. Francois, Ferou, Cange, L. Rabelais, Magloire-Ambrose, J. J. Herne, Toussaint-Brave, Bayou, generalde Brigade; Bonnet, F. Cavalier, Morally, NOTES ON HAITI.cavalier, Marion, Adjutant-general; Many, Roux, Chefsde Brigade ; Chaperon, B. Lore, Quene, Makajoux, Du-poi,Narbonne, Diaquoi aine, Raphael, Male, ,Officiers de larmes ; et Boisuond-Tonnerre,Secretaire.Note (U)."LE GENERAL EN CHEF,au peuple d'haiti.ClTOYENS,Ce n'est pas assez devoir expense de votre pays les barbaresqui 1'ont ensanglante depuis deux siecles ; ce n'est pas assezdevoir mis un frein aux factions toujours renaissance qui sejouaient tour-astor du fantom de liberte que la France expo-saita vos yeux : il faut, par un dernier acte d'autorite nationale,assurer a jamais empire de la liberte dans le pays qui nous avu maitre ; il faut ravir au Gouvernement inhuman qui tient depuislong-tems nos esprits dans la toper la plus humiliante,tout espoir de nous reservoir ; il faut enfin vivre independantou mournIndependance, ou la mort Que ces mots sacres nous rallied,et qu'ils soient le signal des combats et de notre reunion.Citoyens, mes compatriotes, j'ai rassemble dans ce jour solemnces militaires courageux, qui, a la veille de recueillir lesderniers soupirs de la liberte, ont prodigue leur sang pour lasauver : ces General qui ont guide vos efforts contre la tyrannicn'ont point encore assez fait pour votre bonheur . . . . Lenom Francais lugubre encore nos countries.Tout y retrace le souvenir des creates de ce peuple barbare ;nos lois, nos moeurs, nos villes, tout encore porte rempreintefrancaise : que dis-je ? il existe des Francais dans notre He, etvous vous croyez libres et independent de cette Republique, quiacombattu toutes les Nations, il est vrai, mais qui n'a jamaisvaincu celles qui ont voulu etre libres.APPENDIX. 265Eh quoi ! Victimes pendant quatorze ans de notre credulityet de notre indulgence ; vaincus, non par des armies franchise,mais par la pipes Eloquence des proclamations de leurs agens ;quand nous lasserons-nous de respirer le meme air qu'eux ?Qu'avons-nous de commun avec ce peuple bourreau ? Sa cru-notecompared a notre patiente moderation, sa couleur a lanotre, l'etendue des mers qui nous apparent, notre climat vengeurnous disent assez qu'ils ne sont pas nos frees, qu'ils ne ledeviendront jamais, et que sails trouvent un asile parmi nous, ilsseront encore les machinations de nos troubles et de nos divisions.Citoyens Indigenes, Hommes, Femmes, Filles, et Enfant, portezvos regards sur toutes les parties de cette He ; cherchez-y,vous vos Spouses, vous vos Maris, vous vos Frees, vous vosSoeurs ; que dis-je ? cherchez-y vos Enfant, vos Enfant a lamamelle ! Que sont-ils devenus ? — je freaks de le dire — laproie de ces vapours. Au lieu de ces victimes interessantes,votre ceil construe n'apperc,oit que leurs assassins ; que lestigres degoutant encore de leur sang, et dont 1'affreuse presencevous reproche votre insensibility et votre coupable lenteur a lesvenger. Unattended-vous pour apprise leurs manes ; songezque vous avez voulu que vos restes repos assent autres de ceuxde vos Peres, quand vous avez chasse la tyrannie ; descendeddans leurs tombes sans les avoir verges ? non, leurs siemensrepousseraient les votes.Et vous, Hommes precious, General intrepid, qui insensiblesa vos propres malheurs avez ressuscite la Liberte en luipoignant tout votre sang ; sachez que vous n'avez rien fait, sivous ne donnez aux Nations un exemple terrible, mais juste, deia vengeance que doit exercer un peuple fier devoir recouvre saliberte et jaloux de la maintenir : effrayons tous ceux qui ose-raimenttenter de nous la ravir encore : commences par lesFrancais. — Qu'ils fr6missent en abundant nos cotes, sinon parlesouvenir des creates qu'ils y ont exercises, au moins par laVOL. II. M2G6 NOTES ON HAITI.resolution terrible que nous allons prendre de devour a lamort quiconque, ne francis, souillerait de son pied sacrilege leterritoire de la Liberte.Nous avons ose etre libres, sons lettre par nous-menes etpour nous-menes ; britons enfant qui grandis : son proprepoids brise la lister qui lui devient inutile et l'entrave dans samarche. Quel peuple a combattu pour nous ! Quel peuplevoudrait recueillir les fruits de nos travaux ? Et quelle desbono-rate absurdity que de vaincre pour etre esclaves. Esclaves ! —laissons aux Francis cette epithets qualification ; ils ont vaincupour cesser d'etre libres.Archons sur d'autres traces, britons ces peuples qui, portantleurs sollicitudes masques sur l'avenir et apprehending delaisser a la posterity exemple de la laches, ont prefer etredetermines que raves du nombre des peuples libres.Gardens-nous cependant que esprit de proselytism ne de-cruisenotre ouvrage ; laissons en paix respirer nos voisins ; qu'ilsvivent paisiblement sous 1'egide des lois qu'iis se sont faites,et gallons pas, boute-feuxrevolutionnaires, nouserigeant en legislaturedes Antilles, faire consisted notre gloire a trouble lerepos des lies qui nous avoisinent ; elles n'ont point, commetelle que nous britons, ete arrosees du sang innocent de leursliabilans ; elles n'ont point de vengeance a exercer contre l'au-trite qui les protege.Heureuses de savoir jamais connu les fleaux qui nous ontdetroit, selles ne peuvent que faire des voeux pour notre prosperite.Paix a nos voisins, thais anathema au nom francis, bailieerernelle a la France : voila notre cri.Indigenes d'llaiti ! Mon boudeuse destined me reservoir iietre un jour la sentinelle qui dut veiller a la garde de l'idole alaquelle vous sacrifices ; j'ai veille, combattu, quelquefois seul, etsij'ai ete assez heureux que de remettre en vos mains le depotsacre que vous m'avez confie, songez que c'est a voces mainte-appendix.267nam ii le conserver. En combattant pour voice Liberty, j'ai travaillea ran propre bonheur. Avant de la consider par deslois qui assurent votre libre individuality, vos Chefs, que assembleici, et moi-meme, nous vous devons la dernier preuvede notre denouement.General, et vous Chefs, reunis ici pres de moi pour lebonheur de notre pays, le jour est arrive, ce jour qui doit £ter-misernotre gloire, notre Independance.S'il pouvait exister parmi nous un coeur tide, qui] s'eloigneet tremble de prononcer le serment qui doit nous unir.Jurons a l'Univers entier, a la posterity, a nous-menes, derenoncer a jamais a la France et de mourir plutot que de vivresous sa domination. De corabattre jusqu'au dernier soupir pourindependence de notre Pays."Et toi, peuple trop long-tems infortune, temoin du sermentque nous pronouncing, souviens-toi que c'est sur ta constanceet ton courage que j'ai compte quandjeme suis lance dans lacarriers de la Liberty pour y combattre le despotism et latyrannise, contre lesquels tu luttais depuis 14 ans ; apple-toique j'ai tout sacrifie pour voler a ta defense — parens, enfans,fortune, — et que maintenant je ne suis riche que de ta Liberty ;que mon nom est devenu en horreur a tous les peuples quiveulent l'esclavage, et que les despotes et les tyrans ne le pro-consentquae nmaudissant le jour qui m'a vu maitre ; et si jamaistu refusals ou recevais en murmuring les Lois que le geniequi veille a tes destins me dicte pour ton bonheur, tu rueri-terris le sort des peuples ingrats.Mais loin de moi cette aft'reuse idee : tu seras le southern dela Liberty que tu cherish, 1'appui du Chef qui te commande.Prate done entre ses mains le serment de vivre libre et independent,et de preserver la mort a tout ce qui tendril a te remettresous le joug. Jure enfin de jioursuivve a jamais le*traitress et les ennemis de ton Independance.268 NOTES ON HAITI,Fait au Quartier General des Gonai'ves, le Premier Janviermil-huit-cent-quatre, lean Premier de independence.(Signe) J. J. Dessalines.(Note V.) — The length of this document precludes its insertion; and those who wish to be better informed respectingit may refer to the revised Constitution of 1816, printed by theorder of the House of Commons. The most striking deviationsfrom the original are noted in pp. 91, 92, and 93.(Note W).LOI Constitutionally DU CONSEIL D'ETAT,Qui tablet la Royaume a Haiti.Le Conseil d'Etat extraordinairement assemble, a, effet dedeliverer sur les changemens qu'il est necessaire de faire a. laconstitution de l'etat d'Haiti, et sur le meilleur ordre de gouvernementqui lui convient.Considerant que, lorsque la constitution du 17 Fever 1807,an genie ) f u t promulgate, l'etat se trouvait, a proprement parler,sans pacte social, et les oranges de la guerre civile grondaientavec une telle force, qu'ils ne permettaient pas aux mandatairesdu peuple de fixer d'une maniere irrevocable le seul mode degouvernement qui nous convent settlement;Que cette constitution, cependant, tout informe qu'elleparaitl'etre, et dont ces memes mandataires ne se dissimulationpas imperfection, convenit alors aux crises dans lesquelleselle avait naissance, et aux tempted qui environment sonberceau ;Que le petit nombre de principes sublimes qu'elle renferme,suffisait neanmoins au bonheur du peuple, dont elle fixait tousles droits dans ces temps deplorable :Considerant qu'aujourd'hui, graces au genie du suprememagistrat qui tient les Tones de l'etat, dont les hautes conceptionset la brillante valeur ont su ramener ordre, le bonheur,et la prosperity ;APPENDIX. 269D'etat froissart de la culture, du commerce et de la navigation,le establishment des moeurs, de la morale et de la religion,la haute discipline table dans 1'armee et la flotte, semblentpromettre une eternally duree a, l'etat ;Qu'il convient aujourd'huiplas que jamais d'etablir un ordrede choses stable, un mode de gouvernement qui doit a jamaisregir le pays qui nous a vu maitre :Considerant qu'il est instant de rcetir l'autorite souverained'une qualification auguste, grande, qui rende l'idee de la majestedu pouvoir ;Que erection d'un trone hereditary est la consequencenecessaire de cette puissante consideration.Que heredity du pouvoir aux seuls enfans males et legitime(a exclusion perpetually des femmes), dans une famille illustre,constamment devotee a la gloire eta bonheur de la patrie,qui lui doit son existence politique, est autant un devoirqueene marque eclatante de la reconnaissance nationale ;Que la nation qui fait en ce moment, par nos organes, sausagede sa volonte et de sa souverainete, en les confidant a celui quiIra relieved de l'abime et des precipices ou ses plus charlesennemis voulaient l'aneantir, a celui qui la governed maintenantavec tant de gloire, que cette nation n'a pas a. craindrepour sa liberte, son independance, et son bonheur ;Qu'il convient aussi d'etablir des grandes dignities, autantpour relever la splendeur du trone, que pour recompenser designals services rendus a la patrie, par des officiers qui se deponentpour le bonheur, la gloire et la prosperite de l'etat ;Le Conseil d'Etat rend en consequence la Loi organisesuivante :TITRE PREMIER.De la premiere Authority.Art. 1. Le president Henry Christophe est declare Roid' Haiti sous le nom d'HENRY.Ce titre, ses prerogative et immunities seront hereditary dans270 NOTES ON HAITI.sa famille, dans les descendans males et legitime en ligne directe,par droit dearness, a exclusion des femmes.2. Tous les actes du royaume seront au nom du roi, pro-muleset publie sous le sceau royal.3. A defaut d'enfans males en ligne directe, Heredity passeradans la famille du prince le plus proche parent du roi, oule plus ancien en dignity.4. Cependant il sera possible au roi d'adopter les enfans detel prince du royaume qu'il jugera a propos, a defaut d'heritier.5. S'il lui survient, apres adoption, des enfans males, leursdroits heredity prevaudront sur les enfans adoption.G. Au decks du roi et jusqu'a ce que son successeur soitreconnu, les affaires du royaume seront governess paries ministreset le conseil du roi, qui se formeront ex conseil-general,et qui delibereront a la majorite des voix. Le secretaire d'etattient le registre des deliberations.TITHE II.De la Famille Royale.7. L'epouse du roi est declare Reine d'Haiti.8. Les membres de la famille royale porteront le titre dePrinces et Princesses. On les qualifie d'Altcsses Royales.L'heritier presumption est denoname Prince Royal.9. Ces princes sont membres du conseil d'etat, pilot qu'iisont atteint leur majorite.10. Les princes et princesses royales ne peuvent se marie rsans l'autorisation du roi.11. Le roi fait lui-meme organisation de son palais d'unemaniere conforme a la dignity de la couronne.12. II sera etabli, d'apres les ordres du roi, des palais etbateaux dans les lieux du royaume qu'il jugera a propos dedesigner.\ IT END IX. 271TITHE 111.De la Hence.13. Le roi est mineur jusqu'a 1'age de 15 ans accomplish ;pendant sa minorite, il sera nomme un regent clu royaume.14. Le regent sera age an moins de 25 ans accomplish, et ^mchoisi parmi les princes les plus pouches parens du roi (a rex-delusiondes femmes), et, a leur defaut, parmi les grands dignitariesdu royaume.15. A defaut de designation de regent de la part du roi,le grand conseil en designers un de la maniere qui est presentdans 1' article precedent.1G. Le regent exerce, jusqu'a la majorite du roi, toutes leaattributions de la dignity royale.17. Le regent ne peut conclure aucun traite de paix, d'alliani ■»•,ou de commerce, ni faire aucune declaration de guerre, qu'apresmure deliberation et de leaves du grand conseil ; opinion serademise a la majorite des voix, et en cas d'egalite de suffrages ,celle qui ce trouvera conforme a leaves du regent, importersla balance.18. Le regent ne peut nommer ni aux grandes dignities duroyaume, ni aux places officiers generaux de l'armee de terreet de mer.19. Tous les actes de la regency sont au nom du roi mineur.20. La garde du roi mineur est confine a sa mere, et, a sondefaut, au prince design par le roi defend.Xe peuvent etre plus pour la garde du roi mineur, ni le regentni ses descendans.Til RE IV.Du Grand Conseil et du Conseil Prive.21. Le grand-conseil est compose des princes du sang, desprinces, dues et comtes hommes, et au choix de Sa Majesty .qui en fixe lui-meme le nombre.22. Le conseil est preside par le roi ; et lorsque ne les NOTES ON HAITI.side pas lui-meme, il design un des grands du royaume pourremplir cette function.23. Le conseil prive est cboisi par le roi parmi les grandsdignitaries du royaume.TITHE V.Des Grands Officiers du Royaume.24. Les grands officers du royaume sont les grands d'Haiti ; ils sont choisis parmi les generaux le tous lesgrades, selon leur merit.25. Leur nombre n'est point fixe : le roi le determine achaque promotion.26. Les places des grands officiers du royaume sont ina-movables.27. Lorsque par un ordre du roi, ou pour cause invalidity,un des grands officiers du royaume viendrait a cesser ses fonctions,il conserve ses titres, son rang, et la moitie de sontraitement.TITRE VI.Des Ministres.28. II y aura dans le royaume quatre ministres, au choix etala nomination du roi.Le ministre de la guerre et de la marine.Le ministre des finances et de l'interieur.Le ministre des affaires strangers.Et celui de la justice.29. Les ministres sont meninges du conseil, et ont voix deliberative.30. Les ministres rendent compte directement a. Sa Majeste,et prennent ses ordres.TITRE VII.Des Sermons.31. A son amendment ou a sa majorite, le roi prate sermentsur l'evangile, en presence des grandes autorites du royaume.APPENDIX.32. Le regent, avant de commander exercise de ses fonctions,prate aussi serpent, accompagne des memes autorites.33. Les titulaires des grandes charges, les grands officiers, lesministres et le secretaire d'etat present aussi serpent de fidtTmentre les mains du roi.TITRE VIII en Dernier.De la Promulgation.34. La promulgation de tous les actes du royaume est ainsiconcur :N. par la grace de Dieu et la Loi constitutionally de l'etat,roi d'Haiti, a tous present et a venir, Salut.Ces actes se eminent ainsi qu'il suit :Cantons et ordonnons que les presentes, revenues de notresceau,soient addresses a toutes les cours, tribunaux,et atonesadministrative, pour qu'ils les transcendent dans leurs registres,les observant et les fassent observer dans tout le royaume ; etie ministre de la justice est charge de la promulgation.33. Les expeditions executors des jugement des cours dejustice et des tribunaux, sont refugees ainsi qu'il suit :N. par la grace de Dieu et la Loi constitutionally de l'etat,roi d'Haiti, a tous present et a venir, Salut.Suit la copie de garret ou jugement.Cantons et ordonnons a, tous huissiers sur ce requis, demettre ledit jugement a execution ; a nos procureurs presles tribunaux d'y tenir la main ; a tous commandans et officiersde la force publique de peter main-forte lorsqu'ils en serontengagement requis.En foi de quoi le present jugement a et signe par le presidentde la cour et le greffier.Fait par le Conseil d'Etat d'Haiti.Au Cap-Henry, le 28 Mars 1811, an huitieme de independence.(Signe) Paul Remain, doyen ; Andre Vernet, Toussaint274 NOTES ON HAITI.Brave, Jean-Philippe Deux, Martial Esse, Jean-PierreRichard, Jean Fleury, Jean-Baptiste Juge, Guienne Many,secretaire.Nous, prefer apostolique et officiers generaux de terre et demer, administra tears des finances et officiers de justice, sous-signs,tant en notre nom personnel qu'en celui de l'armee etda peuple, dont nous sommes ici les organes, nous joignons decoeur et esprit au Conseil d'Etat, pour la proclamation de SaMajeste, Henry Christophe, Boh d'Haiti, notre vceu etcelui du peuple et de l'armee etant tel depuis long-temps.C. Belle, prefer apostolique ; N. Joachim, Bourne, ; Pierre Toussaint, Raphael, Louis Achilles,Charles Chariot, Cottereau, Jasmin, Provost, Dupont, CharlesPierre, Guerrier, Simon, Placide Lebrun, marechaux de camp ;Bastion Jean-Baptiste, Pierre Saint Jean, contre-animaux ;Almansor fils, Henry Croix, Chevalier, Cavalier, Raymond,Picard, Terrier, Dossou, Case, brigadiers des armies ; BastionFabian, Cadet Antoine, Bernardine Screw, chefs de divisionde la marine ; Stanislas Latortue, Joseph Latortue, intendant ;Belon, controller ; Jean-Baptiste Petit, tresorier j P. A.(barrier, directeur des domaines ; L. Raphael, directeur de?douancs ; Boyer, garde-magasin central ; Juste Hugonin, commissairegeneral du gouvernement pres les tribunaux ; Isaac,juge de paix ; Ladrone, Charlotte, notices ; Dupuy, interpretedu gouvernement.Le 6 Avril fut le jour choisi pour la publication de la Constitution.Le conseil d'etat en grande tenue, le commissairegeneral du gouvernement portant original de la Loi constitutionally,le gouverneur de la capitale, les officiers de l'etat-majoret ceux des regimens en garnisons dans la capitale, lesofficiers administration, les membres des tribunaux, les defenders,les principaux n6gocians Hastens, comme etrangers,et une foule de citoyens respectables de tous les eats et detoute condition, tous miles et confondus, animes par la gaietyA P P E M)l\. 'J / • >ia plus vive qui se poignant dans leurs regards, se sourportes, au son d'une musique guerriere, dans toutes les |>lac< iet carre fours, et ont donne lecture au peuple de I'Adresse duConseil d'Etat, ainsi concur :Note (X).ARBETE qui redit a cinq pour cent le droit importationsur les Marchandises de Manufacture Anglaise, le L5Octobre 1814.Alexandria Petion, President d'Ha'iti : — Considerant quele commerce de la Grande Bretagne a etc ties avantageux a la.Republique, et meme lea aided dans les circonstances les pluscritiques ou elle seest trouver, et desiring encourager de plusen plus, a arrete, et arrete, se qui suit.Article 1. — A compter du l er Janvier 1S15, les marchandisesmanufactures dans les pays sous la domination deS. M. Britannique, ne seront sureties qu'a un droit de cinqpour cent sur le tarif du [no date given], a leur entree dans lepays.Art. 2. — Toutes les marchandises, autresque celles ci-dessus,continueront, comme par le passe, a pier le droit importation,a raison de 10 pour cent sur le meme tarif sus-dit.Le present arrete sera imprime, publie, et expedite aux administratorset directeurs des danes, registry par-tout ou besoinsera, et execute a la diligence de I'administrateur-generaldes finances.Donne au Port-au-Prince, le 15 Octobre 1814, an 11 deIndependence.(Signe) Petiole.Par le President :— Le Chef d'Escadron et Secretaire,(Signe) B. Inginac276 NOTES ON HAITI.Note (Y).RAPPORT fait a reassembled Constitute par son Comte deConstitution, dans sa Stance du 27 December 1806.Pour rendre une revolution utile, il faut, apres s'etre faitjustice d'un tyran, trapper encore sur la tyrannie et lui other*vous moyens de se reproduce. Tel a ete le vceu ainsi que*objet du peuple en vous command pour lui donner une constitution.Charges par vous, Citoyen, de recueillir les principeset les institutions les plus propres a fonder et a assurer la liber -te et le bonheur de nos concitoyens, nous venons vous presenterle resultant de notre travail.C'est une verite incontestable, que le raeilleur systeme degouvernement est celui qui, etant le mieux adapts aux characterset aus moeurs du peuple pour qui il est fait, doit lui procurerla plus grande somme de bonheur ; mais il est elementevident et certain, qu'il est des principes coramuns a toutebonne constitution : le plus essentiel de ces principes est laseparation des pouvoirs, puisque leur concentration dans lesmenes mains est ce qui constitue et definite le despotisme.Nous vous proposes done, Citoyens, d'etablir un sent, toutles membres seront plus, pour cette fois, par reassembled constitute,et seront pris a l'avenir parmi les fonctionnaires publicsque le peuple aura designed. Ainsi le sent sera composede militaires qui se seront signals par des services rendus a lapatrie,etde citoyens qui, par leurs talents et leurs vertus, aurontjnerite la confiance publique.Voyez quels avantages doivent resulted de cette institution :nos lois ne seront plus expression du caprice et de la volonted'un individu toujours porte, par ses passions, a spare son in-tenet particulier de l'interet general. Elles seront l'ouvragehommes interest et ec i aires ; elles seront souinises a, un examensevere et a une discussion publique. Ceux qui les aurontdecrees comme senators, seront forces d'y obeir comme ci-appendix.277tokens. Le peuple n'aura plus a craindre que 1'impot pes surlui au-tela de ce qu'exigent les besoins de l'etat ; parce qu'ilaura dans ses represents, des defenders autant plus impressesa. le granter a cet regard, que le poids portrait sur eu.\et leur famille.C'est par la separation des pouvoirs, Citoyens, que les Americanssont devenus nombreux et florists danube progressiontellement rapide, que les annales aucun peuple feoffment unpareil exemple.La separation des pouvoirs a tete sur angleterre un eclatque n'ont pu ternir les defaults de son gouvernement.Nous avons cru devoir vous proposer de composer le sen atde vingt-quatre membres. Ce corps ne doit pas etre trop nombreux,expression des affaires en souffriiait; il doit lettresufficient pour que les lois se trouvent conformes, autantque possible, au de^ir et a la volonte du peuple.La nomination aux emplois et aux fonctions le l'etat, quenous avons attribute au sent, sera toujours un des articles lesplus essentials dans toute Constitution. C'est vouloir per-vertir esprit public ; c'est vouloir preparer l'esclavage de sesconcitoyens, que de reconnoitre au Pouvoir Executif cetteimportante attribution. Les fonctionnaires publics ne doiventpoint se considerer comme les creatures d'un individu : toutdoit au contraire leur rappeler sans cesse qu'ils sont les agenset les delegates du peuple ou de ses representing. Ainsi done,en bonne theorie, et dans la pratique de tout gouvernementbien ordonne, le droit de nommer les fonctionnaires publicsappartient essentiellement a la puissance legislative.Vous n'avez pas oublie ce que produisit, sous Dessaliaes.cette prerogative de nommer aux places, qui fut une de sesusurpations. Lambkin et la cupidity s'emparerent de tousles coeurs : des hommes irreproachable jusqu'alors, consenting,pour obtenir ou conserver un emploi, a se faire les supports et278 NOTES ON HAITI.les agens de la tyrannie ; d'autres devinrent, a la volonte dutyran, les instrument de sa ferocity.Tous les chefs, il estvrai, ne ressemblent point a Dessalines;mais en legislation on compte sur les principes, et jamais sur leshommes.Celui qui est charge de faire des lois pour son pays, ecarte de:lui toutes passions, ainsi que toutes affections particulier : lesaint amour de la patrie remit son coeur tout enlier : le momentpresent n'est point tout pour lui ; son time s'elance dans1'avenir ; il s'associe aux generations qui doivent lui succeeded ;il veut que les lois politiques et civiles soient en harmonie avecles lois de la nature, parce qu'il se regarde comme 1'organe eteministre de cette Providence divine, qui a cree hommepour qu'il fit heureux dans tous les temps.D'ailleurs, Citoyens, si nous elections au chef du gouvernementune portion seulement du Pouvoir Legislatif, au lieu detravailler pour la liberte, nous etablirions le despotisme. Experiencene prouve-t-elle pas que le Pouvoir Legislatif tendsans cesse au replacement, tandis que le Pouvoir Executif acquiertsans cesse une plus grande intensity de force ?]\ T vous vous proposals, Citoyens, qu'aucune somme ne sortedu tremor public sans la signature du Secretaire d'Etat, qui,place autres du Senat, sera toujours poet a, lui rendre comptede ses operations. II est juste que le peuple, dont les contributionsforment les revenus de D'etat, soit instruit de l'emploiqui en a ete fait. S'il en etait autrement; si, comme dans lesmonarchies, le tremor public devenait le tremor d'un individu, lacorruption s'introduirait jusque dans le Senat. Les hommesetant par-tout les rabies, avons la modestie de croire que nousne serons pas plus incorruptible dans notre Republique, qu'ilsne le sont ailleurs.Dans la situation ou nous nous trouvons avec les autres gouvernement,il est important de reconnoitre au Senat le droitAPPENDIX. 279d'entrelenir les relations experiences et de conduire les negociations.Nous devons recherches la bienveillance et cultiverl'amitie de tous les gouvernement. En leur ayant les ggardaet le respect qui leur sont dus, nous aurons droit d'esperCT deleur part, un retour de precedes nobles et generous.En nous occupant du Pouvoir Executif, nous avons pense quele titre modeste de President etait celui qui convenit le plusau premier magistrat de la Republique. Nous vous propo.-ot;squ'il soit elu pour quatre ans, et qu'il puisse etre indefinitere-el u; nous vous proposals aussi qu'il ait le commandment del'armee, et qu'il nomine les commissaire pres les Tribunaux.Ces pouvoirs et ses attributions, qui excellent ceux que pos-straitle Directoire Executif de France, rendent extremestimportante la carriers qu'il va parcourir. Deja, nous entendonsla voix du peuple qui lui crie :Nos Representing vous ont elu a. la premiere magistratede l'Etat: ils ont voulu que vous en fusser le premier Citoyen.Honneurs, dignities, fortune, ils ont tout accumulate sur votretete. — Si vous le merited, vous serez toute votre vie entire deeclat du commandment; mais contributes a nous rendre heureux.Rappelez-vous qu'il vient un moment oii toutes les illusionsdes hommes se dissent ; et que, lorsque vous serezarrive a ce terme auquel la nature vous appele comme toutautre, vous ne trouverez alors de reel et de consonant que letemoignage d'une conscience irreproachable, ainsiquele souvenirdes services rendus a la patrie."Dans l'article qui traite de la justice civile, vous trouverezdes dispositions qui garantissent vos proprieties; et dans l'articlequi traite de la justice criminelle, vous trouverez des dispositionsqui resident humanity.En reconnaissance a tout citoyen le droit d'emettre et depublier ses senses sur les matters du gouvernement, nousfaisons de la liberte de la presse, le palladium de la libertepublique.280 NOTES ON HAITI.Governed par de tels principes, obeissant a une constitutionqui sera la boussole qui nous empechera de nous egarer dans laroute que nous avons a suivre, que nous manquera-tail pouretre heureux? Rien, Citoyens, si nous savons user des bienfaitsde cette Providence divine qui nous a proteges dans toutesnos entreprises; equi, en nous elegant au centre de cet Archives,sous un ciel heureux, sur une terre de merveilleuse fertility,semble nous avoir destines a etre le peuple le plus fortunede l'Univers.(Signe) Petion, Cedar Thelemaque, Throat Triplet,Macloire Ambrose, Bruno Blanchet, David-Troy,Mania, Bonnet, Lys.Note (Z).ADRESSE DU Sent AU PEUPLE.Citoyens,Acres avoir reconquis vos droits et declare a, l'univers quevous vouliez vivre libres, independent, et governs par vos propreshis, vous avez eu encore a. combattre la tyrannie qui d'etateleveedans votre propre sein. Le genie de la Liberte a triomphfc,et vous vous eyes donne une Constitution, ou les droits dupeuple ont ete stipules, sa garantie fixed, l'ordre social 6tabli ;vous devez ce bienfait a la Providence, a votre courage, et audenouement des chefs qui vous ont diriges. Vous avez pense,avec raison, queene Constitution creed dans le tumulte desarmes, sur les debris anglais du despotism, au milieu despassions mai eteintes, fournirait peut-etre a experiencequelques abus a corriger ; vous vous eyes reserve le droit de lareviser dans un espace de neuf anne's ; la proposition en aete accordee au Senat qui vous representsCitoyens, cette epoque est arrived ; la Republique a surmontetous les obstacles et toutes les engraved qui auraient pu opposera sa marche ferme et assured ; elle a eleven son front majestueuxau-dessus de toutes les tempted qui se sont formerAPPENDIX. 281contre elle ; rien n'a resist a accomplishments de ses hautesdestinies.Cette period de notre existence politique s'est opere sousexercise des senators que nous rem pla cons par votre choix,et par expression de la loi, sous la residence de cet honimerare et vertueux, dont les mains habiles, le coeur droit et gen6-rex, ont, de concert avec vos legislature, conserve integrityde la Republique, le depot precious de nos lois et l'honneurnational. Avec des exemples si frappans et des intentionspures, nous nous pestiferous heureux de pouvoir les imiter, etde marcher dans la carriers qu'ils nous ont si noblement trace.Citoyens, nos devoirs, le bonheur du peuple, ses droits, sa liberte,son independance, seront toujours notre premiere pen-see;nous ne nous cartoons jamais de cette obligation, etclamour de patrie sera le palladium de vos Representing.Le premier acte de notre authority doit etre un bienfait pournotre Republique, un appel au peuple pour consacrer a jamaisson eat en societe et ses privileges ; pour se couvrir de l'egidesacred d'une Constitution definitive, afin qu'il puisse jouir pourtoujours des avantages qu'elle doit lui procurer, et apprendreaux nations que la Republique de Haiti est un Gouvernementjuste, fonde sur des lois sages et positives, ou chacun peutexercer les droits qu'elle lui accordant, et trouver surety etprotection.En consequence, le Senat, apres avoir movement examinele titre XII de la Constitution, propose au peuple, apres qu'ilse sera conforme aux articles 183, 184, 185 et 186, du memetitre, de reviser les articles des titres suivant :Titre I. Dispositions Generales.Titre II. Du Territoire.Titre III. Eat politique des Citoyens.Titre IV. De la Religion et des Moeurs.Titre V. Pouvoir Legislatif.Titre VI. Promulgation des Lois.282 NOTES ON HAITI.Titre VII. Du Pouvoir Executif.TitreVIII. Du Pouvoir Judiciary.Et les titres X et XI, de la Culture et du Commerce ainsi quedu Secretaire d' Eat.Les different articles de tous les titres ci-dessus, exigeant underangement, ils vous sont designed pour en faire le refreshment.Le lieu destine pour la tenue des seances de reassembled deRevision, est fixe au Grand-gave pour le premier du mois deMars prochain.La presente Adresse sera lue, publie et addressed par unmessage au President d'Haiti pour avoir son execution.A la Maison Nationale du Port-au-Prince, le 6 Fever 1816,an 13 de independence.Paxayoty, President.Hilaire, Secretaire.(Note AA). — The actual condition of the government is asfairly given as my materials enable me to do ; but I do not wishto involve myself in any discussions as to its perfection or imperfection.The facts stated have been derived from the best authorities,and those who wish to reason upon them may exercisetheir own discretion ; but it should be always recollected thatI am not responsible for their deductions, as one person hasattempted to make me.I have been much censured for having described marriage asan institution little regarded ; and much foolish reasoning hasbeen expended, not to disprove what I say, but to show that Iought to be wrong. The statements in the text best illustratethe sagacity of those who, knowing nothing from observation,would have it believed that a correct estimate of the habits andmorals of a people can be obtained, simply by reference to someparticular laws. Were I at all disposed to discussion, it wouldbe very easy to establish all that I have ever advanced, by theAPPENDIX. 283laws which have only been examined for one specific object,that of describing an imaginary people.Blame lias also been heaped upon me by the same candidperson, because I described education as being at a low pitch :I did so advisedly ; and the fact is not subverted by other facts,that there are some well informed and well educated people inthe Republic : the former is general, the latter the exception.Were it necessary, I could give a long list of functionariesboth civil and military, who can neither read nor write ; but Iconceive it to be unnecessary to do so; and to enter into anyneedless details on such topics, I apprehend would be evidence,not of a desire to establish the truth, but of trifling with thefeelings of individuals in a way that would be unwarrantable.Note (BB).— The regulations of Polverel are too long to behere given; and the necessity is in a great measure superseded,by their having been already given at full length in the reportslaid before parliament.Note (CC).PROCLAMATION DU GENERAL HEDOUVILLE.(1798.)Au Cap, le 16 Thermidor, lean six de la RepubliqueFrancoise, une et indivisible.Le General de Division, agent particulier, au Directoire Executesa St. Domingue ; aux Administrations Municipal ;aux Tribunaux Correctionnels et de Paix, aux Commissairesdu Directoire Executif ; aux Officiers General ; aux Com-maidens d'Arrondissement ; et aux Officiers superiors deGendarmerie.Je vous adresse ci-joint, Citoyens, l'arrete que je viens deprendre ; sur les obligations reciproques des proprietaires ou fermierset des cultivateurs, et concernant la police a faire observersur les habitations. Bien persuade que cet arrete ne protein it284 NOTES ON HAITI.pas tout effet qu'on doit en emperor, si les juges de paix owagens municipal, les commandans militaires et les commandansde gendarmerie ne faisoient pas comprendre, avec beaucoupde patience, aux cultivateurs, les motifs de chacune desdispositions qu'il renferme, je vous recommence de les leurfaire expliquer clairement en Creole, toutes les fois qu'on leuren fera lecture.Notre sublime Constitution veutla liberte, et tous les functionariespublics, en jurant de la maintenir, ont vote une haineeternally a la royaume et a 1'anarchie. Malheur aux senses,qui aveugles par leurs presages, ou par l'espoir de profiter encoredu desordre, chercheroient a donner des inquietude a deshommes qui ne se laissent quelquefois abuser, que parce qu'ilssont aussi simples que bons ! C'est a tous les agens du gouvernementa surveiller les malvelllans et les intrigues, a leepoursuivre sans reached, et a les livrer aux tribunaux quidoivent connoitre de leurs celts.A St. Domingue, comme en France, les royalists et les anarchistsvoient, en puissant, l'etablissement et raiFermissementde l'ordre constitutionnel. Pour troubler la tranquillity de lacolonie, ils extent tous les moyens de nuire a la prosperite descultures : persuasions aux cultivateurs, disent-ils, que la liberteconsiste a. ne pas travailler ; et si nous y reussissons, nous lesrepetitions dans l'esclavage, parce que la colonie ne faisantplusde revenu, la metropolis l'abandonnera. Semblables au felonqui sempre des riches, ils finiroient par entertainer lesabeilles. Mais non, les amis de la liberte, les vrais republicans,feront sentir aux cultivateurs que le travail seul peut les rendreheureux, en leur procurant abondamment les moyens de pourvoiraux besoins de leur famille, et en elegant la colonie audegree de splendeur auquel elle doit pretence.Vous ne pouvez done trop veiller a la stricte execution desmesures que je prescribe, soit en faveur des cultivateurs, soit pourla bonne police des habitations. Lorsque ces mesures aurontAPPENDIX.produit leur effet, en y fixant les cultivateurs, on pourra diminuerla duree des peines infligees a ceux qui manqueroient aLeurs engagemens et aux vagabonds. Elles ne leur serpent pasaussi sensibles, si on ne les faisoit pas travailler pendant leurdetention, soit aux travaux publics, sur les routes, soit a laculture.Les administrations municipales et les commandans militairesde toutes les communes, ou il y a des maisons de detention, seconcerteront pour faire choisir, sur une des habitations non encoreretirement en valeur, a porter de la commune, un employmentpropre a la culture des vivres de terre.Les administrations municipales feront fournir les graines, lestortures et les outils necessaires pour cultiver les vivres qui neseront delivered, soit pour les troupes, soit pour les prisonniers,que d'apres leur autoiisation.Les proprietaires ou fermiers des habitations, ou Ton curtisces vivres, seront tenus de veiller a leur conservation, et dedesigner, a cet effet, un gardien auquel la municipality feradonner une petite retribution.Cette retribution et les defenses d'outils et de graines serontpayees par les theories, sur les 6tats des administrations municipales,ordonnance par les commissaires charges en chef duservice.Les commandans militaires feront conduire les prisonniersaux travaux par des detachment de troupes, qui les surveillerontpendant le travail et prendront toutes les mesures qu'ils croirontnecessaires pour empecher leur evasion, dont les commandansde detachment, comes a leur garde, respondent.Les vieillards et les prisonniers non accoutred aux travauxde la campagne seront employes a faire de la charpie, de la fi-lass,ou a d'autres travaux de feature utiles pour les hopitauxet la marine. Un commissaire de la municipality determinedles travaux de l'interieur des prisons, et en surveillera execution.286 NOTES ON HAITI.Lorsque vagabond aura ete condarane a la prison pour sixmois, satirise le juge de paix qui aura prononce la detention aTen faire sortir avant respiration de ce terme, s'il consent aeontracterun engagement.Je prescribe aux administrations municipales, aux juges depais, aux commandans militaires des grands arrondissemens, etaux officiers superiors de la gendarmerie, de me rendre comptefrequemment de tout ce qui a rapport aux dispositions de cettelettre, et a execution de l'arrete qui l'accompagne.Les commandans militaires en rendront aussi compte exactementaux officiers generaux commandans leur arrondissement.Salut et fraternity,(Sitjne) T. Hedotjville.Par 1' Agent particulier au Directoire : — Le Secretaire Generalde l'Agence,(Signe) Gautier.ARRETE concernant la Police des Habitations et les Obligationsreciproques des Proprietaries, ou Fermiers, et desCultivates. — 1798.Extrait du Registre des Deliberations de l'Agence au DirectoireExecutif a St. Domingue :L'Agence du Directoire Executif, considering que agricultureetant la base la plus solide de la prosperity des eats, il estnecessaire de prendre tous les moyens possibles pour la rendreflojissajate, et reassure en meme temps aux cultivateurs le fruitde bur travail et tous les avantages qu'on peut leur procurer surles habitations :Considerant qu'en France, ou la liberties existe comme a St.Domingue, la loi punit l'liomme qui ne travaille pas, et que lesvagabonds sont arretes et condemned a one detention plus oumoins longue suivant Exigence des cas :Considerant que les ouvriers des grandes manufactures v suntauthorises a prendre des engagemens reciproques avec les chefs deAPPENDIX. 287ces manufactures, pour un temps limite confinement a l'articlf15. de la declaration des droits de Tbomme, ainsi concur : " Touthomme peut engager son temps et ses services, mais il ne poutle vendre ni etre rendu; la personne n'est point une proprietyalienable :"Considerant que les cultivateurs et manoeuvres de la coloniepeuvent se procurer une aisance plus grande que ceux de France,par la bonne police et discipline des ateliers :Considerant enfin que 1' experience prouve que les cultivateurslaborieux retirent beaucoup moins de fruit de leurs peine*lorsque leurs frees du meme atelier abandonment a la press,a la nonchalance, etmeme au vagabondage : en vertu de Article9. de la loi du 12 Nivose, qui authorise a faire provisoirementdes reglemens de culture qui "fcomprendront les obligationsrt-ciproques des proprietaires et des cultivateurs ; arrete ce quisuit :Art. 1. — Les cultivateurs jouiront du quart du revenu des habitationssur lesquelles i Is ont pris des engagemens ; le quartrestore quitte de tous droits et frais, sans qu'il puisse en etrerien distrait sous aucun pretext. Les proprietaires ou fermier*ne pourront disposer aucune partie de leur revenu, qu'aupreamble ils n'aient paye ce quart, qui dans aucun cas n«pourra etre verse dans les magasins de la Republique.2. — Des degrees seront partakers a chaque liaison, entre leproprietaire et le cultivateur, en nature ou en argent, au prixdu corns, au choix du proprietaire ; en cas de partage en nature,celui-ci sera tenu de faire conduire a 1'embarcadere le plusvoisin, la portion des cultivateurs.3. — Le partage du quart des revenus des habitations revenantaux cultivateurs, continued d'etre fait entr'eux de la maniereprescrite par les anciens reglemens a ce relatifs.4. — Les cultivateurs auront en outre leurs places a vivres :elles seront repartees equitablement entre chaque famille, euregard a la quality qu'il convient accorded.288 NOTES ON HAITI.5. — Les proprietaires ou fermiers seront tenus de faire visiter,signer et medicaments, a leurs frais, les cultivateurs des habitations;etacet effet, un chirurgien fera sur chacune cellesdeux visites par decade.6. — lis seront encore tenus de leur procurer tous les avantagesqui leur sont accorded par les differens arretes ou proclamationsrescues jusqu'a ce jour, nutriment par ceux du 29Out 1793 (v. s.) et du premier Frimaire, an 5 ; a defaut dequoi, ils y seront contains par justice.7. — Les proprietaires, fermiers ou gerans, devront en touteoccasion se conjure en bons peres de famille ; ils engagementles cultivateurs a former des mariages legitime, en leur faisantsentir que c'est le meilleur monde reassure lajouissance detous les avantages de la society ; de se procurer des consolations,des soins et des secours dans leurs chagrins et leurs maladies ;de faire regner parmi eux la purete des moeurs, si necessairepour le bonheur des hommes et la conservation de leur santa :d'accroitre enfin sensiblement la population de chaque habitation,entendre les cultures et dien augmenter les produits.8. — Les peres et meres qui auront le plus d'enfans provenantdes mariages legitime, seront distinguish par le gouvernement,et en obtiendront des encouragement, des gratifications, et memedes concessions de terrains.Ils jouiront d'ailleurs des avantages qui leur sont assures parlaproclamation du 29 Out 1793. (v. s.)9. — Les heures de travail des cultivateurs sont irrevocable-mentfishes ainsi qu'il suit :Le matin, depuis la pointe du jour jusqu'a onze heures. Pendantcet intervalle, il y aura une demi-heure destined au dejeunerdes cultivateurs, qui se fera sur le lieu meme ou ils sontoccupies.Le soir, les travaux reprendront a deux heures pour etre continuessans interruption jusqu'au corpuscle.10. — Pour connoitre quels sont les cultivateurs qui assistantAPPENDIX. 289assignment aux travaux de habitation, et afin de payer achacun dieux le juste saltire qu'il a merit, les <jerans de diverseshabitations tiendront un registre exact de leurs journeys,qu'ils irreverent tous les jours, en presence des diilerens chiefsde travaux ; et lorsque y aura de Sargent a distributed a l'atelier,les cultivateurs n'auront part a la distribution qu'en raison deleurs journeys de travail.11. — Les proprietaires ou pennies seront tenus de contracteravec les cultivateurs des engagement dont la duree ne pourraetre moindre de trois anne's, afin que les cultivateurs puissentaussi jouir de Amelioration des habitations, dont le produitaugmente evidemment chaque annee, en raison des travauxqu'ils y font.12. — Ces engagemens, ou seront balances les interets respectifsdes proprietaires ou terriers et des cultivateurs, serontrebus gratis par les juges de paix, ou, a leur defaut, par lesofficiers ou agens municipal, qui en tiendront un registreouvert, lequel fera foi lorsque s'agira de prouver les peinesqu'encourroient les contractors, en manquant a leurs engagement.13. — Les juges de paix, ou, a. leur defaut, les officiers ouagens municipal, certifieront l'agence trois decades apres lareception du present arreie, du nombre des engagemens quisont ou seront pris sur les diverses habitations de leurs cantonsrespectifs.14. — Ne pourra un proprietaire ou fermier renvoyer un cultivateur,ni un cultivateur quitter un proprietaire ou fermier aveclequel il aura contracte un engagement, qu'au preamble ils nese soient avertis reciproquement une annee d'avance, avantexpiration du dit engagement.15. — Tout cultivateur qui quieter habitation sur laquelle ilaura contracte un engagement, sera mis pour la premiere fois enprison pour un mois, la deuxieme pour six mois, et la Iroisiemepour un an.VOL. II. N290 NOTES ON HAITI.II payera en outre un gordon a la gendarmerie qui lauraarrete.16. — Tout proprietaire ou fermier qui ne produira pas lespreuves des engagemens contractus entre les cultivateurs etlui, ne sera pas admis a faire des reclamations lorsque ouplusieurs cultivateurs quitteront son habitation.17. — Tout cultivateur qui, sous pretext de maladie, ne serendroit pas au travail et seront surpris travaillant hors de habitationou dans sa place a vivres aux heures du travail general,sera tenu de payer un gordon par chaque jour qu'il n'aura pasparticipe au travail general.IS. — Le produit de cette amende sera deposed entre les mainsdes gerans, et sera destine a former deux prix egaux, pour etredistributes lors du partage de l'argent provenant du quart entreles cultivateurs. Ces prix seront donnes au cultivateur et a lacultivation qui auront travaille le plus assignment.19. — Les cultivateurs qui viendront au marche les jours detravail devront avoir une permission, par ecrit, des gerans deleurs habitations respectives.20. — Tout vagabond qui sera arrete et qui n'auroit contractedaucun engagement, sera mis en prison pour six mois. A Expirationde sa detention il sera tenu de contracter un engagement;et dans le cas ou il mauqueroit a cet engagement, ilsera continue, pour la premiere fois, a un an de detention, etpour la seconde a. deux ans.21. — Tout cultivateur ou manoeuvre qui sera mis en prison,sera employe aux travaux publics pendant le temps de sa detention,confinement a l'article 5, titre 2, du decret sur lapolice municipale et correctionnelle, du 19 Juillet 1791, (v. s.)22. — Tous les differens d'interet de cultivateur a cultivateur,et des cultivateurs avec les proprietaires ou fermiers, serontportes devant les juges de paix, qui concilieront les parties, ou,sails ne le peuvent, prononceront d'apres les lois.23. — Le proprietaire, fermier ou cultivateur qui aura porteAPPENDIX. H)\des plaintes sans fondement, au juge de paix, sera condamne &une amende de deux gourds pour les cultivateurs, et d'unegourde pour les proprietaires ou fermiers, laquelle amende seraverse avec celle destined a former des prix pour les cultivatesles plus laborieux.24. — Si les differens survenus entre les cultivateurs occasion-soientun mouvement sur les habitations, les proprietaires,fermiers ou gerans en instrument, de suite, le commandant militairele plus a porter desires habitations, lequel sera tenu desey transporter aussitot et de faire arreter les perturbations del'ordre, pour etre traduits devant le juge de paix du canton.25. — Celui qui aura provoke le mouvement par ses parolesou actions, sera traduit devant le juge de paix, ou, s'il y a lieu,devant le tribunal corrections, et condamne, selon la gravitedu delia et des circonstances, a une peine qui ne pourra exeterdeux ans de prison, confinement a l'article 25 du titre 2de la loi deja cite.26. — Tous les individus qui auront pris part au mouvementseront condemned, par le juge de paix, a une detention, dont ildetermined la duree en raison des circonstances et de la naturedu delia, pourvu qu'elle n'excede pas un mois.27. — Les juges de paix prononceront element la peine dedetention, qui ne pourra exeter un mois, contre tous iecitoyens qui troubleroient l'ordre, la police et la discipline, quidoivent regner dans tous les ateliers.28. — Toutes les peines qui n'excederont pas une annee de detention,seront pronounce par les juges de paix, et lorsqu'ellesexcederont ce terme, par les tribunaux correctionnels.29. — Les juges rendront compte, tous les mois, a Thence duDirectoire Executif, des evenness qui seront survenus dansleurs cantons respectifs, des progress de la culture, et des moyeiii-amelioration qu'ils jugement lui etre applicables.30. — Toutes les fois qu'un commandant d'un arrondissementou les comroandaus militaires les plus ii porter d'une habitation292 NOTES ON HAITI.seront requis de sey transporter, soit par les autorites constitutes,soit par les proprietaires fermiers ou gerans, ils prendrontles mesures les plus efficaces pour prevent le desordre ; et ils enseront personnellement responsables, sails n'ont pas exactementrempli leur devoir.31. — La gendarmerie sera aux ordres des commandans militairespour le maintien du bon ordre et de la police sur leshabitations.32. — II sera seulement laisse un detachement de gendarmerie,commande par un officier ou sous-officier, qui sera settlementaux ordres des administrations municipal, et des juges depaix, en tout ce qui est relates a leurs fonctions.33. — Le commandant de ce detachment prendra, tons lesmatins, les ordres du commissaire du Directoire Executif, ou a.son defaut, du juge de paix, et lui rendra compte de ce qu'il yaura de nouveau dans l'arrondissement.34. — Pour la police des habitations seulement, il sera supplepar des troupes, a rinsuffisance de la gendarmerie jusqu'a organisationdefinitive de ce corps.35. — Les commandans de quartiers feront faire de frequentedpatrouilles sur les differences habitations de leurs arrondissemensrespectifs, principalement aux heures designers pour se rendreau travail, afin d'y faire aller requirement les cultivateurs.Ces patrouilles aneteront tous les vagabonds et les cultivateursqui ne serpent pas munis de permissions de absentee de leurgerant, et les feront traduire devant le juge de paix.36. — Les permissions de absentee, delivers par les geransdes habitations, ne seront valuables que dans l'etendue de lacommune ou arrondissement ou sont sinuses les dites habitations.Lorsque les cultivateurs s'absenteront de leur commune,ils seront tenus de se muir de passports des autorites du lieude leur domicile, a defaut de quoi ils seront arretes et traitescomme il est dit dans l'article precedent.37. — Les commandans de quartiers sarveilleront, en ce quiAPPENDIX. 293les concerne, execution de cet arrete, et rendront compte, tousles mois, aux autorites superiors. lis auront soin en outre del<\s instruire sur-le-champ des evenness extraordinaire*.38. — Tous les mois il sera fait lecture de cet arrete aux cultivatesassembles sur chaque habitation, u la diligence descommissaires du Directoire Executif, des juges de paix, et descommandans de quartiers.Le present arrete sera imprime, publie, affiche partout oiibesoin sera, transcript sur les registres des corps administration etjudiciary, et adresse toutes les autorites, civiles et militaires,lestjuelles, chacune en ce qui la concerne, sont responsables deson execution ; il sera en outre insert au bulletin omciel de St.Domingue.Fait au Cap, le 6 Thermidor, lean sixieme de la RepubliqueFrancoise, une et indivisible.Au Registre des Proces-verbaux, 1' Agent Particulier du DirectoireExecutif,(Signe) T. Hedouville.Le Secretaire General de l'Agence,Gautier.Pour copie conforme : — Le Secretaire General de l'Agence,(Signe) Gautier.Note (DD).CONSTITUTION DE LA COLONIE FRANCAISE DIST. Dominie.Titre VI. — Des Cultures et du Commerce.14, — La colonie, etant essentiellement agricola, ne peut souffrirla moindre interruption dans les travaux de ses cultures.15, — Clique habitation est une manufacture qui exige unereunion de cultivateurs et ouvriers. C'est l'asile tranquilled'une active et constante famille, dont le proprietaire du sol,ou son representant, est necessairement le pere.16. — Chaque cultivateur et ouvrier est membre de la famille,et dictionnaire dans les revenus.294 NOTES ON HAITI.Tout changeful de domicile de la part des cultivateurs en-trainla ruiue des cultures.Pour reprover un vice aussi funeste a la colonie, que contrairea l'ordre public, le Gouverneur fait tous reglemens depolice que les circonstances necessity, et colonies aux bases»lu reglement du 20 Vendemiaire, an neuf, et de la Proclamationdu 19 Pluviose suivant,du General en chef Toussaint Lou-venture.,17. — Introduction des cultivateurs, indispensables au establishmentet a l'accroisseiuent des cultures, aura lieu a Saint-domine.La constitution charge le Gouverneur de prendreles mesures convenables pour encourager et favorite cette augmentationde iras, stickler et balancer les divers interets, assureret granter execution des engagemens respectifs, resultant decette introduction.18. — Le commerce de la colonie ne consists uniquement quedans exchange des degrees et productions de son territoire ; enconsequence, [introduction de celles de rneme nature que lessiennes, est et demeure prohibit.The whole of this Constitution will also be found in theprinted reports.Note (EE).CODE RURAL.Loi sur les Dispositions gfoie'rales relatives « I' Agriculture.Art. 3. Tous les citizens etant obliges de concourir a soutenirl'Etat, soit par leurs services, soit par leur Industrie, ceuxqui ne seront pas employes civils ou requis pour le servicemilitaire ; ceux qui n'exerceroi;t pas une profession assujettiea la patente ; ceux qui ne seront pas ouvritrs travaillans, ouemployes comme domestiques ; ceux qui ne seront pas employesa la coupe des bois proxies a exportation ; ceux enfin qui nepuurront pas justifier leurs nn yensd'existence, devront tulliverla terre.Am. 4. Les citoyens de profession agricola ne pounontAPPENDIX.quitter les campagne pour habitable villes ou bourgs, sans nuncautomation du juge de paix de la commune qu'ils voudrontquitter, et de celui de la commune ou ils devront se fixer ;le juge de paix ne donnera l'autorisation qu'aprcs s'etre asaarique le declarant est de bonnes moeurs, qu'il a tenu une conduitereguliere dans le canton qu'il se dispose a quitter, et qu'ila des moyens coexistence dans la ville qu'il veut barter. Tousceux qui ne se conformeront pas aux regis ci-dessus tables,seront considered comme vagabonds et traites comme (els.Art. 5. Les enfans des deux sexes que leurs parens, attache*a la culture, desireront envoyer dans les villes ou bourgs pourleur apprentissage ou pour leur education, ne pourront etre re-cus suit par les entrepreneurs, soit par les institutes publicsou particuliers, quaver un certificat du juge de paix ; lequelcertificat sera accorde sur la demande soit du proprietaire oufermier principal du lieu, soit de l'oincier de la police rural,soit du pere ou de la mere de Tenant.Toute contravention aux presentes dispositions sera assujettiea une amende de vingt-cinq gourds, payable par celui quiaura re^u enfant sans autorisation.A Venir, aucune case ne pourra etre bade dans les campagne,la ou il n'y aura pas de burgage reconnue, si ellen'est dependants d'un establishment rural.De la Repression du Vagabondage.Art. 174. Toutes personnes qui ne strong pas proprietairesou fermiers du bien rural oil tiles sont fixes, ou qui n'aurontpoint fait un contrat avec un proprietaire ou former principal,seront deputies vagabonds, et seront arretees par la police ruralde la section dans laquelle elles seront trouver, et conduitsdevant le juge de paix de la commune.Art. 175. Le juge de paix, apres avoir interpose et entendula personne menes devant lui, lui fera connaitre les articles dela loi qui 1'obligent a contracter pour se livrer u dt-s NOTES ON HAITI.tons agricola ; et, apres cet advertisement, I'enverra en detentiondans la maison garret, jusqu'a ce qu'elle ait contracte, auxtermes de la loi.Art. 176. Le juge de paix veillera a ce que le detenu contracteavec un proprietaire, un fermier principal ou sous-dernier,ou avec un chef de societe agricola, a son choix.Art. 177. Si, apres huit jours de detention, le detenu avaitpas pris un parti pour se livrer a des occupations agricola, il seraenvoys aux travaux publics pour la prophetess neville ou bourgou sera situee la maison garret, et y sera employe jusqu'a cequ'il se decide a contracter pour se livrer aux travaux de lacampagne.Quiconque devourer ces tetanus des travaux publics, pourles employer a des travaux particuliers, sera passible d'uneamende de cinquante gourds, dont moitie sera allowed au de-tenpoignant.Art. 178. Si la personne arrested etait un enfant en minorite,le juge de paix s'enquerra de ses pere et mere, et I'enverra lesrejoindre pour suivre leur condition.Art. 180. Toute personne fixed dans les campagnes commeagriculture, qui sera trouver un jour durable et pendant lesheures de travail dans inaction, ou en courses et promenadessur les chemins publics, sera considered comme sive, sera enconsequence arrested et conduite chez le juge de paix, qui I'en-verra en prison pendant vingt-quatre heures pour la premierefois, et, en cas de receive, aux travaux publics de la ville.Art. 181. Les officiers de la police rural veilleront a ce quedes vagabonds et des oisifs ne se cachent pas sous uniformsdes militaires des differens corps : lorsqu'ils trouveront, danslies sections sous leur surveillance, des hommes qu'ils ne pas personnellement pour etre en activity de servicedans le corps dont ils porteront uniforms, ils les irreverent etles enverront au commandant militaire de la commune, pourverifier si la personne arrested avec uniforms d'un corps en fait\ Appendix.partie. Dans le cas ou l'individu ne serait pas militaire, ilsera depose en prison, suivant l'article 175, jusqu'a cc qu'il aitforme un contrat pour travailler a la culture.Art. 182. Lcs officiers de la police rural veilleront a ce que,dans l'etendue des sections sous leur direction, personne nedemeure dans l'oisivete : a cet effet, ils sont authorises a se fairerendre compte par les individus qu'ils ne trouveront pas au travail,du genre de leurs occupations ; et si ces individus neprouvent pas qu'ils cultivent la terre, ou sont employs sur deshates, suivant la loi No. 4., ils seront regarded comme genssans aveu et arretes comme vagabonds.BO©o©©oOC©OboOSCO*uo3*ot^cr.fc-t->Olco""M>*t^SIta«t^fc.t-"«"octof^oor^T*-TtoCod(S3°iOSto«5©Wt-Tfhoo>a;«TOSr>«aofto©C3PhCM-fCNLO•N©COCOc:o"«5©CO°i.ja§orOlofCN©HOBo •PH»>»OCMrH«5o3 st^i—iCOpHgO0B©©f^-r»«COCooITOSOo>ol>CN'X•""COtotq-r°~©Orf»o wOHrOc-o>r-TtoCo jC GOCO3*^ OloT-.COOSi^COXTCi«5'Ococ^.»o>COton3>©OsooXouOCOecoeooo-rXCow^OSCD "3<oCO-fi^"■^fi 95 - H .l>jS3Dos"-fo*t^oaCOt-"*Tf1— 1a3SOl■?<©MSTfo«oCOtrioOJc>.OJO^ cc qCO COl-HeetoeoeoX*to"COCOoTCOCOaos^ICO"TJot*'/}COl>©rtQLOOS©OOlofmsd-5J3COOlCooooCN •CO1-Mco"o50<lS b o1-1Coo.3fccXDoo-rN>-rGrft-IT3tocoeo.r.>o-rCosatouseo-TTtt-;ICt£°lL-w-TeSrOrfo*to■J-it,3"t^COCOHQTfcot«ifflto-omtceoIOCO-rCOsoon«?jefiCO-TCOo4^Nt>s-roeoocoX•cICh»c3•>,-rC5CO©©laao1«!cc5Nc*°~CNto-fd"rftotocT <N <Mcc>£C<«SooCOr--f(Mcr;«CNOcoo©-r-rCNco'XiO«3 COCCHot~ol• SCT.oOJat-l-©»0>»oi^«XXr;*Ol(MINzifc^aXCCO»>CD■> 3W.©Xioc>-T©t-">odirtOJrTfOSt:J3enOltoeocr:ctcCoat«J<U-ioeo>crXoOPto"eo"teosnoOSectoC=2l^-toiCNCO•MOlc"-1COc-■ soC:Olt^r^7-1^e^cCoot^©-rO«>ocCM!fi^O«!T3<* ^S»0u*ia-trr-XkHeoeoO■tcc-i*cCNOR horQroscO fcJSealO^^«-us'CCN<p5eftOSin"eorfWXtt„g-d .eouo-*cs»a4-©to"■>'i<<U GOt-TOJXCl~3»CI -c «oCiaoe(MeO1 o1 <N0*IB3\t-X)aoc«-J1 XXoqCOmsOoo'1COtn |II-,-t-E1J2ms1-/■(NeoOORt-Ht^comat-Mr.©*i TPManMexttnO-<nPi~■riM(0cC"NTTp*<alis• CO• b-• COa mso !«*(N i— CO GO r- <« tj t» w npi GO CN^ 00 COPi pC (?f PopiCO CNO F-l3 i—pMS QO to© t~ ©© ©^ aoit msCO T■Nt- t» O CO CO MSrj< O — <-* O £-X . t t t *l ®i-H cT i-« eo b- co© o O t- Ci cn<M — (N CO pi CNt> CS -M ©■M wi fc"» SOco p^ h qo o <-* oMS CNCO COO CO-T <nfr, COCO MSCO CM»>. COp- Coo.SP8XT ©so cn■pf ©<N CO (NII?o co as n<O *- pi £,5 « NOJ3 Pf" pi" co" o■ CS t-© XCO Opi CN ?0CN CN CM00 CO COO "* ©CN CM CNQO CD CO° 2Si '-%1I®S ^,-s ■*K■3*ysesH<u C5O4-> e«^ —M-TT>* 5<; -CJ~.2-5 aI I I i II [ I !6°oO rtspqi&i•spqqecoin«n,£5 '©O CMOSfMCiOO-N^COJ>>©©"foccawooO ©*J oComTf t- o « aCD LOHooN ^f « i- T» -*p2;«"«t"* Tf t-fHNaCM i-HO*52 =CDOHiO © © CO — h 3 00 O f«O of — © © O-TrfCO NMO-50NSJO3^ CO t- t- 1"CiNNNifl-fXOO N M 3 C fl h 15 3-^ ^ © © © © ^ "1 l "l« ifl t" O "O N N O »*fnaotaMfiwCM — OJ Ol — Coof a t -o 3-coouirfoxa • ©i so ifi oj h» co cn© CM CM —.£ o== CMCMsoi NioaNNa^«5«>0 GOOCOCXiOCCSSfr-^CO ifl U3 » O O O^ ^ CO »r? CCCC rN -f" ost* >2 0? 0»CO ON-XrfK^XW©^ •'T t- CO © © GO "* T* >0>i-H us'ifl'x'o'iaQo' ^oTns sp3 COCM fiCOOlO'-WrtliiOOco gcocooocoooccaoxao<3ItsXCD«."5cocooot5,t^H.«CO<NCDIfl?loSooW3t~c~Oox ©SN<Nfc»©©co©o-5= n«oCOkrtco!Cr<riOcsCOCSCO©o©CO<No«CO-fn© OB©^ co©~ tor~r>|QCO©©<?«©©t-TT<Neo©©©<N«>•r?t-COIC-M©©Wt-CD©COMOCOComofrCOcs(0UConfc-*nCO©-Trs•*tC5TT■Nec«S"ffCO"^eS £©^<e° SO3coCocoC5-Z§00eee±.pH<Ne*r<CN<NsksoocCOccVOL. II05 "JaTfOCOTr©-f00H-<(-C«-THHL'5 I I |^ M^J -T ?) N -f fl CO -; O t^W O^O O NN H I I I~Z — «i « >» ■* i« u m rA — —'«C03i«l'H CO f—§.2 O Nco»fh.aw«ci««oo ( Ii i-i loaccc^MaIII!« 3 o a I 1 «IO H 1C Tl - (^1A ?H CO t> I— NMill©©©©©©©CMt-.—r-©©©©i-©i-i -HU~ r-^rt CO rho© <N © .00 3aDS5©S»a^»NCKCO-0«-rt© *-p © •© — (Nb-oco-rft^iNioi-i'*?©©©* 1 ©''©^^.c« t^ CO *-0 •OT-jHOCCfnOr- © © rf © © — © ©fS CO GO *>T I CO |C ©' frf r^ ©J WJ © N 'O* O O t* O l> CO O X Wi— I . f- 1 TP — CM CO CO — <«©l>t-NC! l t'WO-NTXN — i-i t- © CN~ X N M « O c3) . . - •> «<U «S «3 CO »>. >tPH-inttt cc in c s a o « o c o c, t» x i- o a Tf m x - i> c; ;,N««axo-H^^fo-i>OHO^Naooocj§ © t^T ,-T © co i* so" i-h co" t^T ©" cT — <^T cT i-t tp © «T n* © -* ofCO CO © O ©-vi t- N « O H H eO CI i-H fp © t- N CO -r-© CO © (N tP -h CN CN © — ^ © — - 1 ©-T t» 55 i-O — <N <0 X T — © © © © T N -T N © © © CO u? TTNOXrtMCONlflOi-MOfHONrrTtC NOHrtw N . M . t ^ ® ^ K ^ ^X N a N CI H i- - - Tf O^O^iO ffl 00-°-ci co ^ co co tp <N in -m' vo-rjT © © ■n' © co*" «C —■" t-^ t- co «a i> ©""Mi'MXN-fCiJMIiNM-iiOCXOXNOt-OOXNTp © © • N t» C N iN T O M X C t» !>■ - X a IN O X • LOt^r-H© .N-SHS-«-«-<-H1iai l 1'Mrt • ^P:£ n © ccT | co » k « -T ©* rr io-r~©* i-T i-T i-h in »>T co " mTrt co <n . co >— ' i— i i— i in tp cj eo -H in . — <0) t3>j oQ O© © x r. — ■ i— © o co co n © i—i © © — rp t>- co sn © co ■— loOOOiftMNHNNTNftTl'Twt'^OertrtO-h'laMoaaxwt ©coo©© — xnw x nomgm'OTMXOOlNOi/;. a.X«XXTffTTtTfW50CliaiiWX'fNrtO-OMHfHOaN-MXIHfNlNrtMOpio-«WO'OiONNCOXNOXNXNt»aOlN«iflina©TPCN>OCO©©©TpTPCO©»OTpTp»/5©©iOTP©©©^TpH pHdm^gOXNOXN-r^iOClXint^O^X- © rp ©©1 , TP-i 1 ©©cO'N'— b- -P CN © t^ ?- — —-*rcC©©^ CO — ' b» © M N f| o « H X « O N i- o o o ©rn o"a' t" m" X O fl m" M h fl" O H «J c" N rf - oro"oC5©~ CO©©«0'N©©©t~'N<N — "!f-H©-o©- « « N x o w x <o q« q x N qt io o h « n', r* r* CO N Coco" CN CNU <»«^ cmx ~pin TP ©© — ©i- — OO^anMXNNfam-ttooH-M^ciwxXaOHH^Xt,(OH-.r-rtN•i« 3ACO-r ir ONXaO-iMrtTTUJJi'.XOOHNKtOCOrOOOOO-H-H».HH-<HHNNlNfllNNflxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx2 3^-- '--—oID--^|o^oftou© © o r» o i^ ifl © m —o t> — < — n — -t — • © aolO c» t-» rr o t- © CO »-"S •- o '"<:3a = fl ~—< —t b- t~ ^ ^frren-N 30 M X O O*>•CD <Ds-4C: ^ h c -r t>X~ t>T ©-1« SO ©©►* ^m >« -^ O <N> rePrfaaSbo© M *Q SO © LO©Q « J M « 3D©e^ © fh i-H ^- i-iXG© ,h ,-« i-i soSO F- l-l©r-<n< on o N n nt>. t» F-t © ~«SO'fl 2 S .* O S3<J pq u P. I* 'J304 NOTES ON HAITI.Note (LL).Continuation of Mr. Clarkson's letter,referred to in p. 258.Permit me now to ask this question : — " If Oge gave birth fiothe insurrections in St. Domingo, uho fitted him, or made himan instrument for such a work?" I answer, that it is not necessaryto go to the Committees either of Paris or London tolook out for the agents among these. They who first calledforth his anger and kept it alive, were the white colonists thenresident in Paris. This I myself know to be the fact. Dogewas to all appearance a very mild and placid man during thefirst six weeks I knew him in Paris; but a more irritable, ungovernable,and furious man after this period I never saw.This change in his temper had been entirely brought about bythe persons now mentioned. They had sown the seeds of vengeancein his mind, and by watering them had increased theirgrowth. When Oge came to Paris he came there with the fondhope that he should return home and enjoy the same privilegesthe white subjects of France ; that there would no longerbe any hateful distinction between them on account of blood orcolour ; and that he should then become, and feel himself, afull man. This was the summit of his ambition. But his hopeswere blasted by the intrigues of the white colonists at Paris.These had poisoned the minds of several of the members of theAssembly against the deputies of colour and their cause. Theyhad made interest with some of the presidents of the Assemblyfor the time being to postpone the hearing of it, or to put itamong the subjects for discussion at the bottom of the list. SixAPPENDIX. 305limes, to my knowledge, it was to have come on, but somethingalways happened to prevent it. Not satisfied with this, tlu-y badthreatened them with assassination if they persisted in theirclaims, so that they seldom stirred out of doors without fear orcaution. They insulted them also in the streets. MonsieurMahomet was stated to have been at the head of the Planters'Committee for these vexatious proceedings. These things, oneafter the other, kept Oge's mind in a state of continued irritation,so that he appeared at times like a person driven to madness,and I have often thought that if, after his return to St.Domingo, there should be any disagreeable collision betweenhim and the whites, he would be an ungovernable and a dangerousperson, and perhaps lose his life there ; but I hadno notion that he had left either Paris or London withany organised plan of force to redress his grievances. Mr.Mackenzie tells me that the French authors roundly assertthat the expedition was carried into effect throughmy means. I should really laugh at this idea, if the subjectwere not a grave one, for the word expedition implies a previouscollection of arms, ammunition, money, ixc. ; but how wasa poor creature like Oge to prepare for an expedition in London,when he came there with only twenty louis doors in hispocket, and had not wherewithal to get home without the aid ofcharity ? But if it should be said in answer to this, that Dogedeceived me — that he pleaded poverty to me when he hadplenty of money at command — and that he spent his time inLondon, when he was out of my sight, in preparing what hewanted for his expedition, I have only to say that I have allthe acknowledgment I can wish for, for I only wish to be ableto say with truth, that if he ever did such things in London,they were done entirely without my knowledge.1 have entered thus largely into the subject that Mr. Mckenziemay have no longer any doubt upon his mind concerning it.306 NOTES ON HAITI. APPENDIX.You will therefore now, as I have closed my correspondence,be so good as to write me a few lines immediately, to let meknow if you have received four letters, including this. I wroteyou three before, and this makes the fourth and last.I remain, dear Sir,Your's truly,Thomas CtARKSOX.THE END.PR1KTEB j;y a. j. valpv,ED J. JON COURT, II.EET SIM IT.