ADIARY IN AMERICA,&c. &c.It%\V\V,,U)Mary IN AMERICA,WITHREMARKS ON ITS INSTITUTIONS.Part S^ttoKb.BYCAPT. MARRYAT, Cab.^IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. II.■> J-^— 7LONDON:PRINTED FOR.ONGMAN, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS,PATERNOSTER ROW.1839.Printed by J. L. Cox and Sons, 75, Great Queen Street*Lincoln s-Am FlelJs.i-61Ml• / • * • •• • ^ •- • ■ • • • •••• • • • • • ^• «• •« .tI*•SOCIETY.— WOMEN,The women of America are unquestionably,physically, as far as beauty is concerned, andmorally, of a higher standard than the men:nevertheless they have not that influence whichthey ought to possess. In my former remarksupon the women of America I have said, thatthey are the prettiest in the world, and I haveput the word prettiest in italics, as I consideredit a term peculiarly appropriate to the Americanwomen. In many points the Americans have,to a certain degree, arrived at that equalitywhich they profess to covet ; and in no one,perhaps, more than in the fair distribution ufgood looks among the women. This is easilyaccounted for : there is not to be found, on thisonc'hfitid, that squalid wretchedness, that half-starvedgrowing up, that disease and misery,'flor on the other, that hereditary refinement, that'inoculation of the beautiful, from the constantassociation with the fine arts, that careful nurture,and constant attention to health and exercise,which exist in the dense population ofthe cities of the Old World ; and occasion thosevariations from extreme plainness to the perfectionof beauty which are to be seen, particularlyin the metropolis of England. In theUnited States, where neither the excess ofmisery nor of luxury and refinement are known,you have, therefore, a more equal distributionof good looks, and, although you often meetwith beautiful women, it is but rarely that youfind one that may be termed ill favoured. Theeoup-cTonl is, therefore, more pleasing in Americaenter society, and turn your eyes in any direction,you will everywhere find cause for pleasure,although seldom any of annoyance. The climateis not, however, favourable to beauty, which.WOMEN,compared to the English, is very transitory,especially in the Eastern States; and when afemale arrives at the age of thirty, its reign is,generally speaking, over.The climate of the Western States appears,however, more favourable to it, and I think Isaw more handsome women at Cincinnati than inany other city of the Union ; their figures weremore perfect, and they were finer grown, not receivingthe sudden checks to which the Easternwomen are exposed.Generally speaking, but a small intervalelapses between the period of American girlsleaving school and their entering upon their dutiesas wives; but during that period, whatever itmay be, they are allowed more liberty than theyoung people in our country; walking outwithout chaperons, and visiting their friends asthey please. There is a reason for this : thematrons are compelled, from the insufficiencyof their domestics, to attend personally to allthe various duties of hoikeeping :theitII sifathers and brothers are all employed in theirrespective money-making transactions, and aservant cannot be spared from American establishments; if, therefore, they are to walk outand take exercise, it must be alone, and this canbe done in the United States with more securitythan elsewhere, from the circumstance of everybodybeing actively employed, and there beingno people at leisure who are strolling or idlingabout. I think that the portion of time whichelapses between the period of a young girlleaving school and being married, is the happiestof her existence. I have already remarkedupon the attention and gallantry shewn by theAmericans to the women, especially to the unmarried.This is carried to an extent which, inEngland, would be considered by our youngwomen as no compliment ; to a certain degree itpervades every class, and even the sable damselshave no reason to complain of not being treatedwith the excess of politeness ; but in my opinion,(and i believe the majority of the Americanwomen will admit the correctness of it,) they doInot consider themselves flattered by a species ofhomage which is paying no compliment to theirgood sense, and after which the usual attentionsof an Englishman to the sex are by some consideredas amounting to hauteur and neglect.Be it as it may, the American women are notspoiled by this universal adulation which theyreceive previous to their marriage. It is not thatone is selected for her wealth or extreme beautyto the exception of all others ; in such a case itmight prove dangerous ; but it is a Battery paidto the whole sex, given to all, and received as amatter of course by all, and therefore it does nomischief. It does, however, prove what I haveobserved at the commencement of this chapter,which is, that the women have not that influencewhich they are entitled to, and which, for the sakeof morality, it is to be lamented that they havenot ; when men respect women they do not attemptto make fools of them, but treat them asrational and immortal beings, and this generaladulation is cheating them with the shadow,while they withhold from them the substance.I have said that the period between her emancipationfrom school and her marriage is thehappiest portion of an American woman's existence; indeed it has reminded me of the fatesand amusements given in a Catholic country toa young girl previous to her taking the veil, andbeing immured from the world ; for the dutiesof a wife in America are from circumstancesvery onerous, and I consider her existence afterthat period as but one of negative enjoyment.And yet she appears anxious to abridge eventhis small portion of freedom and happiness, formarriage is considered almost as a business, or, Ishould say, a duty, an idea probably handeddown by the first settlers, to whom an increaseof population was of such vital importance.*the United States fromgreat a hurry to marry, and not■ Bigamy la not iobtaining Sufficient information relative to IbtTbe punishment is chipping stone in Sing Sings for afew years. It must, however, be admitted, that when aforeigner is the party, it is rather (difficult towhether the gentleman has or baa not left aa oliwo in the Old World.However much the Americana may wish todeny it, I am inclined to think that there aremore marriages of convenance in the UnitedStates than in most other countries. The menbegin to calculate long before they are of an ageto marry, and it is not very likely that theywould calculate so well upon all other points,and not upon the value of a dowry ; moreover,the old people " calculate some," and the girlsaccept an offer, without their hearts being seriouslycompromised. Of course there are exceptions:but I do not think that there are manylove matches made in America, and one reasonfor my holding this opinion is, my having discoveredhow quietly matches are broken off andnew engagements entered into ; and it is, perhaps,from a knowledge of this fact, arising fromthe calculating spirit of the gentlemen, who art-aptto consider 20,000 dollars as preferable to10,000, that the American girls are not toohasty in surrendering their hearts.I knew a young lady who was engaged to anI8 SOCIETY.acquaintance of mine ; on my return to their citya short time afterwards, I found that the matchwas broken off, and that she was engaged toanother, and nothing was thought of it. I doHot argue from this simple instance, but becauseI found, on talking about it, that it was a verycommon circumstance, and because, where scandalis so rife, no remarks were made. If a younglady behaves in a way so as to give offence tothe gentleman she is engaged to, and sufficientlyindecorous to warrant his breaking off thematch, he is gallant to the very last, for hewrites to her, and begs that she will dismisshim. This I knew to be done by a party I wasacquainted with ; he told me that it was consideredgood taste and I agreed with him.On the whole, I hold it very fortunate that inAmerican marriages there is, generally speaking,more prudence than love on both sides, for fromthe peculiar habits and customs of the country,a woman who loved without prudence wouldnot feel very happy as a wife.Let us enter into an ex ami nation of the marriedlife in the United States.Al] the men in America are busy ; their wholetime is engrossed by their accumulation ofmoney ; they breakfast early and repair to theirstores or counting-houses ; the majority of themdo not go home to dinner, but eat at the nearesttavCTn or oyster-cellar, for they generally live ata considerable distance from the business part ofthe town, and time is too precious to be thrownaway. It would be supposed that they wouldbe borne to an early tea ; many are, but the majorityare not. After fagging, they requirerecreation, and the recreations of most Americansare politics and news, besides the chance Ofdoing a little more business, al! of which, withdrinks are to be obtained at the bars of the principalcommercial hotels in the city. The consequenceis, that the major portion of them comehome late, tired, and go to bed ; early the nextmorning they are off to their business again.Here it is evident that the women do not haveB 3LI10 SOCIETY.much of their husband's society ; nor do Iconsider this arising from any want of inclinationon the part of the husbands, as there is anAbsolute necessity that they should work as handwas others if they wish to do well, and what onedoes, the other must do. Even frequenting thebar is almost a necessity, for it is there that theyobtain all the information of the day. But theresult is that the married women are left alone ;their husbands are not their companions, and ifthey could be, still the majority of the husbandswould not be suitable companions for the followingreasons. An American starts into lifeat so early an age that what he has gained atschool, with the exception of that portion broughtinto use from his business, is lost. He has notime for reading, except the newspaper ; all histhoughts and ideas are centred in his employment;he becomes perfect in that, acquires agreat deal of practical knowledge useful formaking money, but for little else. This he mustdo if he would succeed, and the major portionconfine themselves to such knowledge alone. Butwith the women it is different ; their educationis much more extended than that of the men,because they are more docile, and easier to controlin their youth ; and when they are married,although their duties are much more oneroiiKthan with us, stilt, during the long days untilevenings, during which they wait for the returnof their husbands, they ijave time to finish, [may say, their own educations and improve theirminds by reading. The consequence of this,with other adjuncts, is, that their minds income,and really are, much more cultivated and refinedthan those of their husbands; and whenthe universal practice of using tobacco and drinkingamong the latter is borne in mind, it will hereadily admitted that they are also much morerefined in their persons.These are the causes why the American wc-ran are so universally admired by the Englishand other nations, while they do not consider themen as equal to them either in manners or per-Lsonal appearance. Let it be borne in mind thatI am now speaking of the majority, and that theexceptions are very numerous ; for instance, youmay except one whole profession, that of thelawyers, among whom you will find no want ofgentlemen or men of highly cultivated minds ;indeed, the same may be said with respect tomost of the liberal professions, but only so becausetheir profession allows that time for improvingthemselves which the American in general,in his struggle on the race for wealth, cannotafford to spare.As I have before observed, the ambition ofthe American is from circumstances mostly directedto but one object — that of rapidly raisinghimself above his fellows by the accumulation ofa fortune; to this one great desideratum all hisenergies are directed, all his thoughts are bent,and by it all his ideas are engrossed. When Ifirst arrived in America, as I walked down Broadway,it appeared strange to me that there shouldbe such a remarkable family likeness among theJWOMEN, 13people. Every man I met seemed to me by hisfeatures, to be a brother or a connection of thelast man who had passed me ; I could not at firstcomprehend this, but the mystery was soon revealed.It was that they were all intent andengrossed with the same object ; all were, as theypassed, calculating and reflecting ; this produceda similar contraction of the brow, knitting of theeye-brows, and compression of the lips — a similarityof feeling had produced a similarity ofexpression, from the same muscles being calledinto action. Even their hurried walk assistedthe error; it is a saying in the United States,that a New York merchant always walks as ifhe had a good dinner before him, and a bailiff'behind him," and the metaphor is not inapt.Now, a man so wholly engrossed in businesscannot be a very good companion if he were athome; his thoughts would be elsewhere, andtherefore perhaps it is better that things shouldremain as they are. But the great evil arisingfrom this is, that the children are left wholly toLthe management of their mothers, and the wantof paternal control I have already commentedupon. The Americans have reason to be proudof their women, for they are really good wives —much hoo good for them ; I have no hesitationin asserting this, and should there be any unfortunatedifference between any married couple inAmerica, all the lady has to say is, " The factis, Sir, I'm much too good for you, and CaptainMarryat says so." (I flatter myself there's alittle mischief in that last sentence.)It appears, then, that the .American woman haslittle of her husband's society, and that in educationand refinement she is much his superior,notwithstanding which she is a domestic slave.For this the Americans are not to blame, as itis the effect of circumstances, over which theycannot be said to have any control. But theI Americans are to blame in one point,that they do not properly appreciatetheir wives, who have not half thewhich wives have in England,which II,influencequarterWOMEN. 15that legitimate influence 1o which they are entitled.That they are proud of them, flatterthem, and are kind to them after their ownfashion, I grant, but female influence extends nofarther. Some authors have said, that by themorals of the women you can judge of themorals of a country ; generally speaking, this istrue, but America is an exception, for the womenare more moral, more educated, and morerefined than the men, and yet have at presentno influence whatever in society.What is the cause of this ? It can only beascribed to the one great ruling passion whichis so strong that it will admit of no check, orobstacles being thrown in its way, and will listento no argument or entreaty ; and because, in acountry when every thing is decided by publicopinion, the women are as great slaves to it asthe men. Their position at present appears tobe that the men will not raise themselves to thestandard of the women, and the women will notlower themselves to the standard of the men ;LSOCIETY.they apparently move in different spheres, althoughthey repose on the same bed.It is, therefore, as I have before observed, fortunatethat the marriages in America are moredecided by prudence than by affection ; fornothing could be more mortifying to a womanof sense and feeling, than to awake from herdream of love, and discover that the object uponwhich she has bestowed her affection, is indifferentto the sacrifice which she has made.If the American women had their due influence,it would be fortunate ; they might savetheir country, by checking the tide of vice andimmorality, and raising the men to their ownStandard. Whether they ever will effect this,or whether they will continue as at present, tokeep up the line of demarcation, or graduallysink down to the level of the other sex, is aquestion which remains to be solved.That the American women have their peculiarities,and in some respects they might be improved,is certain. Their principal fault inLsociety is, that they do not sufficiently modulatetheir voices. Those faults arising from association,and to which both sexes are equally prone,are a total indifference to, or rather a love ofchange, " shifting right away," without the leastregret, from one portion of the Union to another ;a remarkable apathy as to the sufferings ofothers, an indifference to loss of life, a fondness forpolitics, all of which are unfeminine ; and lastly,a passion for dress carried to too great an extent; but this latter is easily accounted for, andis inseparable from a society where all would beequal. But, on the other hand, the Americanwomen have a virtue which the men have not,which is moral courage, and one also which isnot common with the sex, physical courage.The independence and spirit of an Americanwoman, if left a widow without resources, is immediatelyshewn ; she does not sit and lament,but applies herself to some employment, so thatshe may maintain herself and her children, andisis SOCIETY.seldom fails in so doing. Here are faults andvirtues, both proceeding from the same urigiu.I have already in my Diary referred to anothergreat error in a portion of the American women.Lady Blessings, in one of her delightful works,very truly observes, " I turn with disgust fromthat affected prudery, arising, if not from a participation,at least from a knowledge of evil,which induces certain ladies to cast down theireyes, look grave, and shew the extent of theirknowledge, or the pruriency of their imaginations,by discovering in a harmless jest nothingto alarm their experienced feelings. I respectthat woman whose innate purity prevents thosearound lier from uttering aught that can arouseit, much more than her whose sensitive pruderycontinually reminds one, that she is au fait ofevery possible interpretation which a word ofdoubtful meaning admits."The remarks of Miss Martineau upon thewomen of America are all very ungracious, and^WOMEN. 19some of them very unjust. That she met withaffectation and folly in America, is very probable— where do you not ? There is no occasionto go to the United States to witness it Asfor the charge of carrying in their handsseventy-dollar pocket-handkerchiefs, 1 am afraidit is but too true : but when there is little distinction,except by dress, ladies will be very expensive.I do not know why, but the Americanladies have a custom of carrying their pocket-handkerchiefsin their hands, either in a room,or walking out, or travelling ; and moreover,they have a custom of marking their names inthe corner, at full length, and when in a steamboator rail-car, I have, by a little watching,obtained the names of ladies sitting near me, inconsequenceof this custom, which of course willbe ascribed by Miss Martineau to a wish to giveinformation to strangers.The remark upon the Washington belles,* I• " A Washington belle recueil lo me the Bed storyof the death of a young man who fell from a ainitll boatLI20 SOCIETY,am afraid is too true, as I have already pointedout that the indifference to human life tn Americaextends to the softer sex; and I perfectlywell remember, upon my coming into a room atNew York with the first intelligence of thewreck of the ' Home,' and the dreadful loss oflife attending it, that my news was received witha, " dear me !" from two or three of the ladies,and there the matter dropped. There is, however,much truth in what Miss Martineau says,relative to the manner in which the women aretreated by their lords and masters, in this newcountry. The following quotation from thework is highly deserving of attention : —If a test of civilization be sought, none canbe so sure as the condition of that half of societyover which the other half has power, — from theexercise of the right of the strongest. Tried bythis test, the American civilization appears tointo the Potomac in the night, — it is supposed in itasleep. She told me where and howhis body was found ;and H-hat relationE he bad left;nd finished with " hewill be much missed al parties."JWOMEN. 21be of a lower order than might have been expectedfrom some other symptoms of its socialstate. The Americans have, in the treatment ofwomen, fallen below, not only their own democraticprinciples, but the practice of some partsof the Old World.The unconsciousness of both parties as tothe injuries suffered by women at the hands ofthose who hold the power, is a sufficient proofof the low degree of civilization in this importantparticular at which they rest. While woman'sintellect is confined, her morals crushed,her health ruined, her weaknesses encouraged,and her strength punished, lie is told that herlot is cast in the paradise of women : and thereis no country in the world where there is somuch boasting of the ' chivalrous' treatment sheenjoys. That is to say, — she has the best placein stage-coaches : when there are not chairsenough for everybody, the gentlemen stand :she hears oratorical flourishes on public occasionsI22 SOCIETY.about wives and home, and apostrophes to woman: her husband's hair stands on end at theidea of her working, and he toils to indulge herwith money : she has liberty to get her brainturned by religious exciteraenla, that her attentionmay be diverted from morals, politics, andphilosophy ; and, especially, her morals areguarded by the strictest observance of proprietyin her presence. In short, indulgence is givenher as a substitute for justice."If Miss Martineau had stopped here, she haddone well ; but she follows this up by claimingfor her sex all the privileges of our own, andseems to be highly indignant, that they are notpermitted to take their due share of the governmentof the country, and hold the most importantsituations. To follow up her ideas, weshould have a " teeming" prime minister, andthe Lord Chancellor obliged to leave the woolsackto nurse his Iiaby ; Miss M. forgets thather prayer has been half granted already, for we^WOMEN, 23never yet had a ministry without a certain proportionof old women in it ; and we can, thereforedispense with her services.There is, however, one remark of Miss martineau'swhich I cannot pass over without expressingindignation ; I will quote the passage.It is no secret on the spot, that the habit ofintemperance is not infrequent among women ofstation and education in the most enlightenedparts of the country. I witnessed some instances,and heard of more. It does not seemto me to be regarded with all the dismay whichsuch a symptom ought to excite. To thestranger, a novelty so horrible, a spectacle sofearful, suggests wide and deep subjects of investigation.If women, in a region professingreligion more strenuously than any other, livingin the deepest external peace, surrounded byprosperity, and outwardly honoured more conspicuouslythan in any other country, can everso far cast oiF self-restraint, shame, domesticaffection, and the deep prejudices of education.L24 SOCIETY.as to plunge into the living hell of intemperance,,there must be aonietiiing fearfully wrong intheir position."Misa Martineau is a lady ; and, therefore, itis difficult to use the language which 1 would,if a man had made such an assertion. I shallonly state, that it is one of the greatest libelsthat ever was put into print ; for Miss Martineauimplies that it is a general habit, amongthe American women ; so far from it, the Americanwomen are so abstemious that they do notdrink sufficient for their health. They can takevery little exercise, and did they take a littlemore wine, they would not suffer from dyspepsiaas they now do, as wine would assist their digestion.The origin of this slander I know wellandthe only ground for it is, that there ate twoor three ladies of a certain city, who havingbeen worked upon by some of the EvangelicalRevival Ministers, have had their minds crushedby the continual excitement to which they havebeen subjected. The mind affects the body,I °■ VOL.WOMEN. 25and they Ive required, and have applied to,stimulus, and if you will inquire into the moralstate of any woman among the higher classes,either in America or England, who has falleninto the vice alluded to, nine times out of tenyou will find that it has been brought about byreligious excitement. Fanaticism and gin areremarkable good friends all over the world. Itis surprising to me that, when Miss Martineauclaims for her sex the same privilege as ours,she should have overlooked one simple factwhich ought to convince her that they are theweaker vessels. I refer to what she acknowledgesto be true, which is, that the evangelicalpreachers invariably apply to women for proselytes,instead of men ; not only in .America buteverywhere else \ and that for one male, theymay reckon at least twenty females among theirflocks. According to Miss Martineau's publishedopinions, there can be no greater weaknessthan the above.In the United States, divorces are obtainedSOCIETY.without expence, and without it being necessaryto commit crime, as in England. The partypleads in forma pauperis, to the State Legislation,and a divorce is granted upon any groundswhich may be considered as just and reasonable.Miss Martineau mentions a divorce havingbeen granted to a wife, upon the plea of herhusband being a gambler; and I was myselftold of an instance in which a t, if you hush up suicides,may you not also hush up other offences, to savethe feelings of families ? I have already madeup my mind upon one point, which is that youare content to substitute the appearance for theWOMEN. 39reality in your moral code — the fttct is, youfear one another — you fear society, but, you donot fear God."I should imagine, captain, that when youhave conversed, and mixed up with us a littlemore, you will be inclined to retract, and acknowledgewhat I have said to be correct. Ihave lived all my life in the States, and I haveno hesitation in saying, that we are a verymoral people. Recollect that you have principallyconfined yourself to our cities, duringyour stay with us ; yet even there we mayproudly challenge comparison."My opinion is, that unless you can shewjust cause why you should be more moral thanother nations, you are, whether in cities or inthe country, much the same as we are. Ido not require to examine on this point, as Iconsider it to be a rule-of-lhree calculation.Give me the extent of the population, and Ican estimate the degree of purity. Mankinddemoralize each other by collision i and theL40 society.larger the numbers crowded together, the greaterwill be the demoralization, and this rule willhold good, whether in England or the UnitedStates, the Old World or the New."That argument would hold good if it werenot for our institutions, which are favourable tomorality and virtue."I consider them quite the contrary. Yourinstitutions are beautiful in theory, but in practicedo not work well, I suspect that yoursociety has a very similar defect''Am I then to understand, captain, that youconsider the American ladies as not virtuous ?"I have already said that I have had noproofs to the contrary ; all I wish is to defendmy own country, and I say that I consider theEnglish women at all events quite as moral asthe Americans."I reckon that's no compliment, captain.Now, then, do you mean to say that you thinkthere is as much conjugal infidelity in NewYork, in proportion to the population, as therekis in London ? Now, captain, if you please, wewill stick to that point."I answer you at once. No, I do not believethat there is ; but "That's all I want, captain — never mind thebuts."Bui you must have the buta. Recollect, Idid not say that your society was more moral,although I said that there was in my opinionless infidelity."Will, how can that be?"Because, in the first place, conjugal infidelityis not the only crime which exists insociety ; and, secondly, because there are causeswhich prevent its being common. That thisvice should be common, two things are requisite— time and opportunity ; neither of which isto be found in a society like yours. You haveno men of leisure, every man is occupied thewhole day with his business. Now, supposeone man was to stay away from his business formerely one day, would he not be missed, andi42 SOCIETY.inquiries made after htm ; and if it were provedthat he stayed away to pass his time with hisneighbour's wife, would not the scandal be circulatedall over the city before night ? I recollecta very plain woman accusing a very prettyone of indiscretion ; the reply of the latter,when the former vaunted her own purity, was,Were you ever asked F' Thus it is in Americak there is neither time nor opportunity, andyour women are in consequence seldom or evertempted, I do not mean to say that if theywere tempted they would fall ; all I say is, thatno parallel can in this instance be drawn betweenthe women of the two countries, as theirsituations are so very different. I am ready todoevery justice to your women ; but I will notsuffer you to remain in the error, that you aremore moral than we are,"Why, you have admitted that we are fromcircumstances, if not from principle,"In one point only, and in that you appearto be, and I have given you a reason why youJWomen. 43really should be so ; but we can draw no inferenceof any value from what we know relativeto your better classes of society. If we wouldexamine and calculate the standard of moralityin a country, we must look elsewhere.""Where?"To the lower class of society, and not to thehighest. I presume you are aware that there isa greater proportion of unfortunate females inNew York, taking the extent of the populations,than in London or Paris ? I have it from Americanauthority, and I have every reason to believethat it is true."I am surprised that any American shouldhave made such an admission, captain ; but forthe sake of argument let it be so. But first recollectthat we have a constant influx of peoplefrom the Old Country, from all the other Statesin America, and that we are a sea-port town,with our wharfs crowded with shipping."I admit it all, and that is the reason whyyou have so many. The supply in all countriesSOCIETY.Lis usually commensurate with the demand ; butthe numbers have nothing to do with the argument."Then I cannot see what you are driving at ;for allow me to say that, admitting the class tobe as numerous as you state from Americanauthority, still lliey are very orderly and wellbehaved. You never see them drunk in thestreets ; you never hear swearing or abusivelanguage; and you do in London and your seaports.There is a decorum and sense of proprietyabout them which, you must admit,speaks well, even for those unfortunate persona,and shews some sense of morality and decencyeven in our most abandoned.""You have brought forward the very factswhich I was about to state, and it is from thesefacta that I draw quite contrary conclusions.If your argument is good, it must follow thatthe women of Paris ore much more virtuousthan the women of London, Now, I considerthat these facts prove that the standard of^WOMEN,morality is lower in America and France thanit ia in England. A French woman who hasfallen never drinks, or uses bad language ; shefellows her profession, and seldom sinks, butrises in it. The grisette eventually keeps hercarriage, and retires with sufficient to supporther in her old age, if she does not many. TheAmerican women of this class appear to me tobe precisely the same description of people ;whereas, in England, a woman who falls, fallsnever to rise again — sinking down by degreesfrom bad to worse, until she ends her days inrags and misery. But why so ? because, as yousay, they become reckless and intemperate — theydo feel their degradation, and cannot bear upagainst it — they attempt to drown conscience,and die from the vain attempts. Now, theFrench and the American women of this classapparently do not feel this, and, therefore, theybehave and do better. This is one reason whyI argue that the standard of morality is not sohigh in your country as with us, although, from46 SOCIETY.circumstances, conjugal infidelity may be lessThen, captain, you mean to say that cursing,swearing, and drinking, is a proof ofmorality in your country ?""It is a proof, not of the morality of theparty, but of the high estimation in whichvirtue is held, shewn by the indifference anddisregard to everything else after virtue is oncelost."This is a specimen of many arguments heldwith the Americans upon that question, andwhen examining into it, it should be borne inmind that there is much less excuse for vice inAmerica than in the Old Countries. Povertyis but too often the mother of crime, and inAmerica it may be said that there is no povertyto offer up in extenuation.Mr. Carey appears to have lost sight of thisfact when he so triumphantly points at the differencebetween the working classes of both nations,and quotes the Report of our Poor L,a:vWOMEN. 47Commissioners to prove the wretchedness andmisery of ours. I cannot, however, allow hisassertions to pass without observation, especiallyas English and French travellers have beenequally content to admit without due examinationthe claims of the Americans ; I refer moreparticularly to the large manufactory at Lowell,in Massachusetts, which from its asserted purityhas been one of the boasts of America. Mr.Carey says —*' The following passage from a statement,furnished by the manager of one of the principalestablishments in Lowell, shows a very gratifyingstale of things : — ' There have only occurredthree instances in which any apparently improperconnection or intimacy had taken place, andin all those cases the parties were married on thediscovery, and several months prior to the birthof their children; so that, in a legal point ofview, no illegitimate birth has taken place amongthe females employed in the mis under mydirection. Nor have I known of but one case48 SOCIETY.among all the females employed in Lowell. Ihave said knowii — I should say heard of onecase, 1 am just informed, that that was a casewhere the female had been employed but a fewdays in any mill, and was forthwith rejectedfrom the corporation, and sent to her friends.In point of female chastity, I believe that Lowellis as free from reproach as any place of an equalpopulation in the United States or the world.' "And he winds up his chapter with the followingremark: —The effect upon morals of this state of thingsis of the most gratifying character. The numberof illegitimate children born in the UnitedStates is small ; so small, that we should supposeone in Fifty to be a high estimate. In thegreat factories of the Eastern States there prevailsa high degree of morality, presenting amost extraordinary contrast to the immoralityrepresented to exist in a large portion of those ofEngland."Next follows Miss Martineau, who says —The morals of the female factory popuktioumay be expected to be good when it is consideredof what class it is composed. Many ofthe girls are in the factories because they havetoo much pride for domestic service. Girls whoare too proud for domestic service as it is inAmerica, can hardly be low enough for anygross immorality, or to need watching, or notto be trusted to avoid the contagion of evil example.To a stranger, their pride seems to havetaken a mistaken direction, and they appear todeprive themselves of a respectable home andstation, and many benefits, by their dislike ofservice ; but this is altogether their own affair,they must choose for themselves their way oflife. But the reasons of their choice indicate astate of mind superior to the grossest dangers oftheir position'"And the Rev. Mr. Reid also echoes the praiseof the factory girls given by others, althoughhe admits that their dress was above theirstate and condition, and that he was surprisedto see them appear "in silks, with scarfs, veils,and parasols"Here is a mass of evidence opposed to roe, Iiiitthis American evidence must be received with alldue caution ; and as for the English, I considerit rather favourable to my side of the questionthan otherwise. Miss Martineau says that "thegirls have too much pride for domestic service,"and, therefore, argues that they will not be immoral; now, the two great causes <^ womenfalling off from virtue, are poverty and falsepride. What difference there is between receivingmoney for watching a spinning-jenny, anddoing household work, I do not see; in eithercase it is servitude, although the former may bepreferred, as being less under control, and leavingmore time at your own disposal. I consider thepride, therefore, which Miss Martineau upholds,to be false pride, which will actuate them inother points ; and w hen we find the factoryiWOME,V.girls vying with each other in silks and laces, itbecomes a query whether the passion for dress,so universal in America, may not have its effectthere as well as elsewhere. I must confess thatI went to Lowell doubting all I had heard — itwas so contrary to human nature that five hundredgirls should live among a population offifteen hundred, or more, all pure and virtuous,and all dressed in silks and satin.When I went to Lowell I travelled with anAmerican gentleman, who will, I have no doubt,corroborate my statement, and I must say that,however pure Lowell may have been at the timewhen the encomiums were passed upon it, I haveevery reason to believe, from American authorityas well as my own observation, that a great alterationhas taken place, and that the manufactorieshave retrograded with the whole mass ofAmerican society. In the first place, I neverheard a more accomplished swearer, east of theAllegiance, than one young lady who addressedme and my American friend, and as it was theonly instance of swearing on the part of ifemale that I ever met with in the UniteStates, it was the more remarkable. I shall chinobserve, that two days at Lowell convinced tntMthat " human nature was the same every where,"and thus I dismiss the subjectMr. Carey compels nie to make a remarkswhich I would gladly have avoided, but as he Ibrings forward his comparative statements of thenumber of illegitimate children born in the twocountries as a proof nf the superior morality of iAmerica, I must point out to him what I sub |pet he is not aware of. Public opinion acts aslaw in America ; appearances ate there substitutedfor the reality, and provided appearancesare kept up, whether it be in religion or morality,it is sufficient ; but should an exposure takeplace, there is no mercy for the offender. Asthose who have really the least virtue in themselvesare always the loudest to cry out at any Ilapse which may be discovered in others, so ,does society in America pour out its anathemasin the inverse ratio of its real purity. Now,although the authority I speak from is undoubted,at the same time I wish to say aslittle as possible. That there are fewer illegitimatechildren born in the United States isvery true. Bui why so ? because public opinionthere acts as the bastardy clause in the newpoor law bill has done in this country; andif Mr. Carey will only inquire in his own city,he will find that I should be justified if I saidtwice 83 much, as I have been compelled indefence of my own country to say, upon sounpleasant a subject.CHAPTER X.PUBLIC OPINION. OR THE MAJORITY.NThe majority are always in the right, bosays Miss Martineau, and so have said greaterpeople than even Miss Martineau; to be sureMiss Martineau qualifies lier expression afterwards,when she declares that they alwayswill be right in the end. What she meansby that I do not exactly comprehend ; the endof a majority is its subsiding into a minority,and a minority is generally right. ButI rather think that she would imply that theywill repent and see their folly when the consequencesfall heavily upon them. The greatquestion is, what is a majority? must it hea whole nation, or a portion of a nation,or a portion of the population of a city ; or,PUBLIC OPINION. 55io fact, any plots against any minus, be theyshall or be they large. For instance, two againstone are a majority, and, if so, any two scoundrelsmay murder an honest man and be in the right ;or it may be the majority in any city, as in Baltimore,where they rose and murdered an unfortunateminority;* or it may be a majorityon the Canada frontier, when a set of miscreantsdefied their own government, and invaded the• A striking instance of the excesses which may beoccasioned by the despotism of the majority, occurredat BulUmi)r(! in 1812, At that time the war was verypopular in Baltimore. A journal, which had taken theother side of the question, excited the indignation of theinhabitants by its opposition. The populace assembled,broke the printing-presses, and attacked the houses ofthe newspaper editors. The militia was called out, butno one obeyed the call, and the only means of savingthe poor wretched, who were threatened by the frenzyof the mob, were to throw them into prison as commonmalefactors. But even this precaution was Ineffectual ;the mob collected again during the night, the magi a -tmtes agiiin made a vain attempt lu call out the militia,the prison waa forced, one of the newspaper editors waakilled upon the spot, and the others were left for dead ;when Ie guilty garlic were brought lo trial, they wereaegvUted by the jury.LPUBLIC OPINION,colony of a nation with whom they were atpeace — all which is of course right. But thereare other opinions on this question besides thoseof Miss Martineau, and we shall quote them asI have before observed, that Washingtonleft America a republic ; and that in the shortSpace of fifty years it has sunk into a demo-thebarrier intended to be raised against theencroachments of the people has been sweptaway; the senate (which was intended, by thearrangements for its election, to have served asthe aristocracy of the legislature, as a deliberativecheck to the impetus of the majority,like our House of Lords), having latterly becomevirtually nothing more than a secondcongress, receiving instructions, and submissivetoi them, like a pledged representative. Thaiswhat Washington did not foresee.Washington was himself an aristocrat; heshewed it in every way. He was difficult ofaccess, except to the higher classes. Hetarried state in his outward show, alwayswearing his uniform as General of the Forces,and attended by s. guard of honour. Indeed,one letter of Washington's proves that he wasrather doubtful es to the working of the newgovernment shortly after it had been constituted.He says, —Among men of reflection few will be found,I believe, who are not beginning to think thatour system is better in theory than in practice,and that notwithstanding the boasted virtue ofAmerica, it is more than probable we shallexhibit the last melancholy proof, that mankindare incompetent to their own government withoutthe means of coercion in the sovereign'sThis is a pretty fair admission from such highauthority ; and fifty years have proved thewisdom and foresight of the observation. Graduallyas the aristocracy of the country worewashington's letter to Chief Justice Jwy, 10(hMarch, I787.t58 PUBLIC Opinion,.out (for there was an aristocracy at that time 'in America), and the people became leas andless enlightened, so did they encroach upon theconstitution. President after president graduallylaid down the insignia and outwardappearance of rank, the senate became less andless respectable, and the people more and moreauthoritative.M. Tocqueville says, "When the Americanrevolution broke out, distinguished politicalcharacters arose in great numbers; for publicopinion then served, not to tyrannize over, butto direct the exertions of individuals. Thosecelebrated men took a full part in the generalagitation of mind common at that period, andthey attained a high degree of personal fame,which was reflected back upon the nation, butwhich was by no means borrowed from it."It was not, however, until the presidency ofGeneral Jackson, that the democratic partymay be said to have made any serious inroadsupon the constitution. Their previous advancesOR THE Majesty.were indeed sure, but they were, comparativelyspeaking, slow; but, raised aa he was to theoffice of President by the mob, the demagogueswho led the mob obtained the offices undergovernment, to the total exclusion of the aristocraticparty, whose doom was then sealol.Within these last ten years the advance of thepeople has been like a torrent, sweeping andlevelling all before it, and the will of, themajority has become not only absolute with thegovernment, but it defies the government itself,which is too weak to oppose it.Is it not strange, and even ridiculous, thatunder a government established little more thanfifty years, a government which was to be alesson to the whole world, we should find politicalwriters making use of language such asthis : " We are for reform, sound, progressivereform, not subversion and destruction." Yetsuch is an extract from one of the best writtenAmerican periodicals of the day. This is thelanguage that may be expected to be used in aPubic OPINION,country like England, which still legislatesunder a government of eight hundred years old ;but what a failure must that government be,which in fifty years calls forth even from itsadvocates such an admission 1 1M. Tocqueville says, " Custom, however,has done even more than laws. A proceedingwhich will in the end set all the guarantees ofrepresentative government at nought, is becomingmore and more general in the UnitedStates : it frequently happens that the electorswho choose a delegate, point out a certain lineof conduct to him, and impose upon him acertain number of positive obligations, which heis pledged to fulfil. With the exception of thetumult, this comes to the same thing as if the 'majority of the populace held its deliberationsin the market-place."Speaking of the majority as the popularwill, he says, "no obstacles exist which canimpede, or so much as retard its progress, orwhich can induce it to heed the complaints ofkthose whom it crushes upon its path. Thisstate of things is fatal in itself, and dangerousfor the future."My object in this chapter is to inquire whateffect has been produced upon the morals ofthe American people by this acknowledgeddominion of the majority ?1st. As to the mass of the people themselves.It is clear, if the people not only Instate,but, when in a state of irritation or excitement,they defy even legislation, that they are not tobe compared to restricted sovereigns, but todespots, whose will and caprice are law. Thevices of the court of a despot are, therefore,practised upon the people ; for the people becomeas it were the court, to whom those inauthority, or those who would Ix; in authority,submissively bend the knee. A despot is notlikely ever to hear the truth, for moral couragefails where there is no law to protect it, andwhere honest advice may be rewarded by summarypunishment. The people, therefore, like^62 PUBLIC OPINION,the despot, are never told the truth ; on thecontrary, they receive and expect the most abjectsubmission from their courtiers, to wit,those in ofHce, or expectants.Now, the President of the United States maybeconsidered the Prime Minister of an enlightenedpublic, who govern themselves, andhis communication with them is in his annualmessage.Let us examine what Mr. Van Buren says inhis last message.First, he humbly acknowledges their power.A national bank," be tells them, " would impairthe rightful supremacy of the popular will."And this he follows up with that most delicatespecies of flattery, that of praising themfor the very virtue which they are most deficientin ; telling them that they are " a peopleto whom the truth, however unpromising, canalways be told with safety."At the very lime when they were defying alllaw and all government, he says, " It wasUreserved for the American Union to test theadvantage of a government entirely dependenton the continual exercise of the popular will,and our experience has shewn, that it is asbeneficent in practice, as well as it is just intheoryAt the very time that nearly the whole Unionwere assisting the insurrection in Canada withmen and money, he tells them " that temptationsto interfere in the intestine commotionsof neighbouring countries have been thus farsuccessfully resisted,"This is quite enough ; Mr, Van Buren's motivesare to be re-elected as president. That isvery natural on his part ; but how can you expecta people to improve who never hear thetruth fMr. Cooper observes, "Monarchs have incurredmore hazards from follies of their ownthat have grown up under the adulation ofparasites, than from the machinations of theirenemies ; and in a democracy, the delusion thati 164 PUBLIC OPINION',still would elsewhere be poured into the ears ofthe prince, is poured into those of the people."The same system is pursued by all those whowould arrive at, or remain in place and power:and what must be the consequence P that thestraight-forward, honourable, upright man isrejected by the people, while the parasite, theadulator, the demagogue, who flatters theiropinions, asserts their supremacy, and yields totheir arbitrary demands, is the one selected bythem for place and power. Thus do they demoralizeeach other ; and it is not until a man has,by his abject submission to their will, in contradictionto his own judgment and knowledge, provedthat he is unworthy of the selection which hecourts, that he is permitted to obtain it. Thusit is that the most able and conscientious meninthe States are almost unanimously rejected.M. Tocqueville says, " It is a well-authenticatedfact, that at the present day the mosttalented men in the United States are very rarelyplaced at the head of affairs; and it mustlust he HOB THE MAJORITY.acknowledged that such has been the resultin proportion as democracy has outsteppedall its former limits : the race of Americanstatesmen has evidently dwindled most re-mart ably in the course of the last fiftyyears."Indeed, no high-minded consistent man willnow offer himself, and this ia one cause amongmany why Englishmen and foreigners have notdone real justice to the people of the UnitedStates. The scum is uppermost, and they donot see below it. The prudent, the enlightened,the wise, and the good, have all retired into theshade, preferring to pass a life of quiet retirement,rather than submit to the insolence anddictation of a mob.M. Tocqueville says, "Whilst the naturalpropensities of democracy induce the people toreject the must distinguished citizens as itsrulers, these individuals are no less apt to retirefrom a political career, in which it is almost im-publicOPINION,possible to retain their independence, or to avance without degrading themselves."Again, "At the present day the most affluentclasses of society are so entirely removedfrom the direction of political affairs in theUnited States, that wealth, far from conferringa right to the exercise of power, is rather an obstaclethan a means of attaining to it. The Jwealthy members of the community abandonthe lists, through unwillingness to contend, antfrequently to contend in vain, against the pclasses of their fellow-citizens. They concentratedall their enjoyments in the privacy of their homes, 1where they occupy a rank which cannot be aarmed in public, and they constitute a private Jsociety in the State which lias its own tastes aocLlits own pleasures. They submit to this state cf jthings as an irremediable evil, but they scareful not to shew that they are galled by its 1continuance. It ia even not uncommon to heart |them laud the delights of a republican governorTHE MAJORITY.ment, and the advantages of democratic institutions,when they are in public. Next to hatingtheir enemies, men are most inclined to flatterthem. But beneath this artificial enthusiasm,and these obsequious attentions to the preponderatingpower, it is easy to perceive that thewealthy members of the community entertain ahearty distaste to the democratic institutions oftheir country. The populace is at once the objectof their scorn and of their fears. If themaladministration of the democracy ever bringsabout a revolutionary crisis, and if monarchialconstitutions ever become practicable in theUnited States, the truth of what I advance willbecome obvious."It appears, then, that the more respectableportion of its citizens have retired, leaving thearena open to those who are least worthy : thatthe majority dictate, and scarcely any one venturesto oppose them; if any one does, he isimmediately sacrificed ; the press, obedient toL68 PUBLIC OPINION,its masters, pours out its virulence, and it isincredible how rapidly a man, unless he be ofa superior mind, falls into nothingness in theUnited States, when once he has dared to opposethe popular will. He is morally bemired,bespattered, and trod under foot, until he remainsa lifeless carcase. He falls, never to riseagain, un honoured and un remembered.Captain Hamilton, speaking to one of thefederalist, or aristocratical parly, received thefollowing reply. I have received similar onesin more than fifty instances. *' My opinions,and I believe those of the party to which I belonged,are unchanged ; and the course of eventsin this country has been such as to impress onlya deeper and more thorough conviction of theirwisdom ; but, in the present state of public feeling,we dare not express them. An individualprofessing such opinions would not only findhimself excluded from every office of publictrust within the scope of his reasonable ambi-OR THE MAJORITY.tion, but he would lee regarded by his neighboursand fellow-citizens with an evil eye. Hiswords and actions would become the objects ofjealous and malignant scrutiny, and he wouldhave to sustain the unceasing attacks of a hostof unscrupulous and ferocious assailants."Mr. Cooper says, " The besetting, the degradingvice of America is the moral cowardiceby which men are led to truckle to what iscalled public opinion, though nine times in tenthese opinions are mere engines set in motion bythe most corrupt and least respectable portionof the community, for the most unworthy purposes.The English are a more respectable andconstant [inconstant .'] nation than the Americans,as relates to this peculiarity."To be popular with the majority in America,to be a favourite with the people, you must firstdivest yourself of all freedom of opinion ; youmust throw off all dignity ; you must shakehands and drink with every man you meet ; youPUBLIC OPINION,must be, in fact, Slovenly and dirty in your appearance,or you will be put down as an aristocrat.I recollect once an American candidateasked me if I would walk out with him ? Iagreed ; but he requested leave to change hiscoat, which was a decent one, for one veryshabby; *fors*' say he, "I intend to look inupon some of my constituents, and if they eversaw me in that other coat, I should lose myelection." This cannot but remind the readerof the custom of candidates in former democracies— standing up in the market-place as suppliantsin tattered garments, to solicit thevoices" of the people.That the morals of the nation have retrogradedfrom the total destruction of the aristocracy,both in the government and in society,which has taken place within the last ten years,is most certain.The power has fallen into the hands of thelower orders, the offices under government haveOR THE UAJOEHY.been chiefly filed up by their favourites, eitherbeing poor and needy men from their own class,or base and dishonest men, who have sacrificedtheir principles and consciences for place. Ishall enter more fully into this subject hereafter ;it is quite sufficient at present to say, thatduring Mr. Adams' presidency, a Mr. BenjaminWalker was a defaulter to the amount of18,000 dollars, and was in consequence incarceratedfor two years. Since the democraticparty have come into power, the quantity ofdefaulters, and the sums which have been embezzledof government money, are enormous,and no punishment of any kind has been attempted.They say it is only a breach of trust,and that a breach of trust is not punishable,except by a civil action ; which certainly in theUnited States is of little avail, as the paymentof the money can always be evaded. The consequenceis that you meet with defaulters in, I willnot say the very best society generally, but in thekPUBLIC OPINION,very best society of some portions of the UnitedStates. I have myself sat down to a dinner partjlto which I had been invited, with a defaulter bgovernment on each side of me, I knew one that]was setting up for Congress, and, strange tsay, his delinquency was not considered by tpeople as an objection. An American author"states, " On the 17th June, 1838, the UnitedStates treasurer reported to Congress netffthree defaulters ; th total sums embezzledamounting to one million, twenty thousand aodd dollars."The tyranny of the majority has completelydestroyed the moral courage of the Americanpeople, and without moral courage what chanceis there of any fixed standard of morality ?M. Tocqueville observes, "Democratic ipublics extend the practice of currying favourwith the many, and they introduce it into jgreater number of classes at once : this is one aVoice from America.OR THE MAJORITY.the most serious reproaches that can be addressedta them. In democratic States organized onthe principles of the American republics thisis more especially the case, where the authorityof the majority is so absolute and irresistible,that a man must give up his rights as a citizen,-and almost abjure Ills quality as a human being,if he intends to stray from the track which itlays down.In that intense crowd which throngs theavenues to power in the United States, I foundvery few men who displayed any of that manlycandour, and that masculine independence ofopinion, which frequently distinguished theAmericans in former times, and which constitutesthe leading feature in distinguishedcharacters wheresoever they may be found. Itseems, at first sight, as if all the minds of theAmericans were formed upon one model, soaccurately do they correspond in their mannerof judging. A stranger does, indeed, sometimesVOL. II. EPUBLIC OPINION,meet \vitJi Americans who dissent I'lom theserigorous formularies; wltli men who deptthe defects of the laws ; the mutability and ^eignorance of democracy ; who even go so far asto observe the evil tendencies which impair thenational character, and tu point out such remediesas it might be possible to apply ; Iwt noone is there to hear these things beside yourself,and you, to whom these secret reflections areconfided, are a stranger and a bird of passage.TTiey are very ready to communicate truthswhich are useless to you, but they continue tohold a different language in public"**Mi. Cares in his introduced m ba\3, Freedom otdiscussion h high promote at the poiitr of protection.The see expression of opinion in relation *>matters of public interest u indispensable to security"He denies that we haie it m England, and wouldprove that this exists in America : and how ?1st. By the permission of every man to be of irreligionhe pleases ! ',2nd. By the freedr,ra of the press in the UnitedStates I !OR THE Majority.There are a few exceptions — Claw and Websterare men of such power as to be able, to acertain degree, to hold their independence Dr.Channing has proved himself an honour to hiscountry and to the world. Mr. Cooper hasalso great merit in this point : and no man hascertainly shewn more moral courage, let hiscase be good or not, than Garrison, the leadersthe abolition party.But with these few and remarkable exceptions,moral courage is almost prostrate in the UnitedStates. The most decided specimen I met with tothe contrary was at Cincinnati, when a largeportion of the principal inhabitants ventured toexpress their opinion, contrary to the will of themajcH-ity, in my defence, and boldly proclaimedtheir opinions by inviting me to a public dinner.I told them my opinion of their behaviour, andI gave them my thanks. I repeat my opinionsod my thanks now ; they had much to contendwith, but they resisted boldly; and not onlyPublic OPINION,from that remarkable instance of daring topose public opinion when all others quailed,but from many other circumstances, T have anidea that Cincinnati wi\i one day take an importantlead, as much from the spirit andcourage of her citizens, as from her peculiarlyfortunate position. I had a striking instanceto the contrary at St. Loins, when they paradedme in effigy through the streets. Certainyoung Bostonians, who would have beenglad enough to have seized my hand when inthe Eastern States, before I had happened toaffront the majority, kept aloof, or shuffledaway, so as not to be obliged to recognize me.Such have been the demoralizing effects of thetyranny of public opinion in the short spaceof fifty years, and I will now wind upthis chapter by submitting to the readerextracts from the two French authors, one oTwhom describes America in 1782, and the otherin 1835.OR THE MAJORITY.d'hui ; je m'eloignidisai&-je, mettreavec unlamileaujoiregret infini d'upays ou ]eon est, sans obstacle et sans inconvenient,ce qu'on devant etre partout, sincereet libre." — " On y pense, on y die, on y fait cequ'on veut. Rien ne vous oblige dey <3tre nifaux, ni bas, ni flatter, Personne ne se cliquede la singularity de vos inanieres ni de voagoats." — Memoires ou Souvenirs de M. deSegur, vol. i. p. 409.America in 1835.L'Amerique est done un pays de libere,ou pour ne blesser personne, on ne doit parlerlibrement, ni des gouvernante, ni des mouvementdes entreprises publique, ni des entreprisesprinces; de rien, enfin, de ce qu'on yrencontre si non pent-etre du climat etdu sol;encore trouve-ton des Aiticricains greta a 78 Pubic OPINION, ETC.fendre I'un et Autre, comme sails avaient oon-couru k les former — M. de Tocqueville sur laDemocratic aux EtatB Uni de PAmerique, voL11. p. 118,CHAPTER XI.IPatriotism.This is a word of very doubtful meaning ;and until we have the power to anal ze the secretsprings of action, it is impossible to say who is orwho is not a patriot, TheChartist, the White Boy,may really be patriots in their hearts, althoughthey are attempting revolution, and are lookedupon as the enemies of good order. JosephHume may be a patriot, so may O'Connell, somay ; but never mind ; I consider that ifin most cases, in all countries the word egotismwere substituted it would be more correct, andparticularly so in America.M. Tocqueville says, " The inhabitants ofthe United States talk a great deal of their at-patriotism.tadiiiieiit tu their country; but I confess thatI (111 nut rely upon that calculating patriotismwhich i.^i founded iijwii interest, and which a.change in the interests at stake may obliterate."The fact is, that the American is aware thatwhat affects the general prosperity niuBt affectthe individual, and he therefore is anxious ibrthe general prosperity ; he also considers thathe assists to legislate for the country, and is thereforeequally interested in such legislature beingprosperous ; if, therefore, you attack his country,you attack him personally — you wound hisvanity and self-love.In America it is not our rulers who have done-wrongor right; it is we (or rather I) who havedone wrong or right, and the consequence is,that the American is rather irritable on the subject,as every attack is taken as personal. It isquite ridiculous to observe how some of the verybest of the Americans are tickled when youpraise their country and institutions ; low theywill wince at any qualification in your praise, andPATRIOTISM.actually writhe under any positive disparagement.They will i>Lit questions, even if they anticipatean unfavourable answer; they cannot help it.What is the reason of this ? Simply their bettersense wrestling with the errors of education andlong-cherished fallacies. They feel that their-institutionsdo not work as they would wish ; thatthe theory ia not borne out by the practice, andthey want support against their own convictions.They cannot bear to eradicate deep-rooted prejudices,which have been frontier earliest daysa source of pride and vain-glory; and to acknowledgethat what they have considered as mostperfect, what they have boasted of as a lesson toother nations, what they have suffered so muchto uphold, in surrendering their liberty of speech,of action, and of opinion, has after all proved tobe a miserable failure, and instead of a lesson toother nations — a warning.Yet such are the doubts, the misgivings whichfluctuate in, and irritate the minds of a very largeproportion of the Americans ; and such is thete382 PATRIOTISM.decided conviction of a portion who retire intoobscurity and are silent ; and every year adds tothe number of both these parties. Tliey remindone of a husband who, having married for love,tmd supposed his wife to be perfection, graduallyfinds out that she is full of faults, and renderhim anything but happy ; but his pride will notallow him to acknowledge that he has committedan error in his choice, and he continues beforethe world to descant upon her virtues, and toconceal her errors, while he feels that his homeis miserable.It is because it is more egotistical that thepatriotism of the American is more easily rousedand more easily affronted. He has been educatedto despise all other countries, and to lookupon his own as the first in the world ; he hasbeen taught that all other nations are slaves todespots, and that the American citizen only isfree, and this is never contradicted. For althoughthousands may in their own hearts feel the falsehoodof their assertions, there is not one whoPATRIOTISM.win venture toes press his opinion. The governmentsets the example, the press follows it, andthe people receive the incense of flattery, whichin other countries is offered to the court done;and if it were not for the occasional compunctionsand doubts, which his real good sense willsometimes visit him with, the more enlightenedAmerican would be as happy in his own delusions,as the majority most certainly may be saidto be.M. Tocqueville says, " For the last fiftyyears no pains have been spared to convince theinhabitants of the United States that they constitutethe only religious, enlightened, and freepeople. They perceive that, for the present,their own democratic institutions succeed, whilethose other countries fall; hence they conceivean overweening opinion of their superiority,and they are not very remote from believingthemselves to belong to a distinct race of mankind."There ave, however, other causes which assist84:PATRIOTISM,liii delusion on the part of the majority ofthe Americans; the principal of which is thewant of comparison. The Americans are toofar removed from the Old Continent, and aretoo much occupied even if they were not tohave time to visit it, and make the comparisonbetween the settled countries and their own.America is so vast, that if they travel in it, theirideas of their own importance become magnified.The only comparisons they are able to makearc only as to the quantity of square acres ineach country, which, of course, is vastly in theirfavour.Mr. Sanderson, the American, in his cleverSketches of Paris, observes, " It is certainly ofmuch value in the life of an American gentlemanto visit these old countries, if it were only toform a just estimate of his own, which he iscontinually liable to mistake, and always to overratewithout objects of comparison; 'titmitimse pastime necesse est, qui se nemine compared*He will always think himself wise who seesiPATRIOTISM.nobody wiser ; and to know the customs andinstitutions of foreign countries, which one cannotknow well without residing there, is certainlythe complement of a good education,"After all, is there not a happiness in this delusionon the part of the American majority, andis not the feeling of admiration of their owncountry borrowed from ourselves ? The feelingmay be more strong with the Americans, becauseit is more egotistical; but it certainly is theenglish feeling transplanted, and growing in aranker soil. We may accuse the Americans ofconceit, of wilful blindness, of obstinacy ; butthere is after all a great good in being contentedwith yourself and yours. The English shew itdifferently ; but the English are not so good-temperedas the Americans. They grumble ateverything ; they know the faults of their institutions,but at tile same time they will allow ofno interference. Grumbling is a luxury so great,that an Englishman will permit it only to himself.The Englishman grumbles at his govern-patriotism.ment, hinder which he enjoy a more rationalliberty than the individual of any other nationin the world. The American, ruled by the despotismof the majority, and without liberty ofopinion or speech, praises his institutions to theskies. The englishman grumbles at his climate)which, if we were to judge from thevigour and perfection of the inhabitants, is, notwithstandingits humidity, oneof the best in theworld. Tie American vaunts his above all othersand even thinks it necessary to apologize fat ftbad day, although the climate, from its suddenextremes, withers up beauty, and destroys thenervous system. In everything connected witfa,and relating to, America, the American has thesame feeling. Calculating, wholly matter-of-factand utilitarian in his ideas, without a poetic senseof his own, he is annoyed if a stranger does notexpress that rapture at their rivers, waterfalls,and woodland scenery, which he himself doesnot feel. As far as America is concerned, everythingis for the best in this best of all possibleAcountries. It is laughable, yet praiseworthy,to observe how the whole nation will stoopdown to fan the slightest spark which is elicitedof native genius — like the London cit., who inenraptured with his own stunted cucumbers,which he has raised at ten time the expensewhich would have purchased fine ones in themarket. It were almost a pity that the Americanshould be awakened fi-om his dream, if itwere not that the arrogance and conceit arisingfrom it may eventually plunge him into difficulty.But let us be fair ; America is the country ofenthusiasm and hope, and we must not be toosevere upon what from a virgin soil has sprungup too luxuriantly. It is but the English amorpatriots carried to too great an excess. TheAmericans are great boasters; but are we farbehind them ? One of our most popular songsruns as follows :—They never see us, but tlity wish uL88 PATRIOTISM.What can be more Iraggiiig, or more untrue,than the words of these lines? In the sameway in England the common people hold it as aproverb, that " one Englishman can beat threeFrenchmen," but there are not many Englishmenwho would succeed in the attempt. Nor isit altogether wrong to encourage these feelings ;although arrogance is a fault in an individual, inanational point of view, it often becomes theincentive to great actions, and, if not excessive,insures the success inspired by confidence. Asby giving people credit for a virtue which theyhave not, you very often produce that virtue inthem, I think it not unwise to implant this feelingin the hearts of the lower classes, who ifthey firmly believe that they can beat threeFrenchmen, will at all events attempt to do it.That too great success is dangerous, and thatthe feeling of arrogance produced by it maylead us into the error of despising our enemy, weourselves showed an example of in our first contestwith America during the last war. In thatpoint America and £england have now changedpositions, and from false education, want of comparison,and unexpected success in their strugglewith us, they are now niucii more arrogant thanwe were when most flushed with victory. Theyare blind to their own faints and to the meritsof others, and while they are so it is clear thatthey will offend strangers, and never improvethemselves. I have often laughed at the falseestimate held hy the majority in America asto England. One told me, with a patronizingair, that "in a short time, England would onlybe known as having been the mother of Amesyou go into our interior. Captain,"said a New York gentleman to me, " you willsee plants, such as rhododendrons, magnolias,and hundreds of others, such as they have noconception of in your own country-oneof Jim Crow's verses ti America is a faircopy from us —L90 PATRIOTISM.Englishman he beatTwo French or Portugal ;L Yankee-doodle come down,^ Whip them all three."But an excellent specimen of the effect ofAmerican education was given the other day inthis country, by an American lad of fourteen orfifteen years old. He was at a dinner party, andafter dinner the conversation turned upon themerits of the Duke of Wellington. Afterhearing the just encomiums for some timewith fidgety impatience, the lad rose from hischair, " You talk about your Duke of Wellington,what do you say to Washington ; doyou pretend toconipareWelhngton to Washington?Now, I'll just tell you, if Washingtoncould be standing here now, and the Duke ofWellington was only to look him in the face,why. Sir, Wellington would drop downdead in an instant." This I was told by thegentleman at whose table it occurred.Even when they can use their eyes, they willPATRIOTISM.not. I overheard a conversation on the deck ofa steam-boat between a man who had just arrivedfrom England and another. " Have they muchtrade at Liverpool ,'''' inquired the latter. " Yes,they've some." " And at London ?" " Not muchthere, I reckon. New York, Sir, is the emporiumof the whole world."This national vanity is fed in every possibleway. At one of the museums, I asked the subjectof a. picture representing a naval engagement; the man (supposing I was an American,I presume) replied, " That ship there," paintingto one twite as big as the other, " is theMacedonian £nglisli frigate, and that otherfrigate," pointing to the small one, "is theConstitution American frigate, which capturedher in less than five minutes." Indeed, so greathas this feeling become from indulgence, that theywill not allow anything to stand in its way, andwill sacrifice anybody or anything to support it.It was not until 1 arrived in the United Statesthat I was informed by several people that CapePatriotism.tain Lawrence, who commanded the Chesapeake,' Iwas drank when he went into action. Speakingof the action, one man shook his head, and sold, 'Pity poor Tjawrenre had his failing ; he totherwise a good officer." I was often told thesame thing, and a greater libel was neveruttered ; but thus was a gallant officer's charactersacrificed to sooth the national vanity. Ihardly need observe, that the American navalofficers are as much disgusted with the assertionas I was myself. That Lawrence fought underdisadvantages — that many of his ship's company,hastily collected together from leave, were notsober, and that there was a want of organizationfrom just coming out of harbour, — is true, andquite sufficient to account for his defeat ; but Ihave the evidence of those who walked with him ,down to his boat, that he was perfectly sober,cool, and collected, as he always had provedhimself to be. But there is no gratitude in ademocracy, and to be unfortunate is to beguilty.PATRIOTISM.There is a great deal of patriotism of one sortor the other in the American women. 1 recollectonce, when conversing with a liighly-ciild-dated and beautiful American woman, I inquiredif she knew a lady' who had been some time inEngland, and who was a great favourite of mine.She replied, •' Yes." "Don't you like her''To confess the truth, I do not," replied she ;she is too English for fine." " That is to say,she likes England and the English," " That iswhat I mean." I replied, that "had she lieeiiin England, she would probably have l>econ:etoo English also ; for, with tier cultivated andelegant ideas, she must naturally have beenpleased with the refinement, luxury, and establishedgrades in society, which it had takeneight hundred years to produce." " If that is tobe the case, I hope I may never go to England."Now, this was true patriotism, and there ismuch true patriotism among the higher classesof the American women ; with tl^em thee is noalloy of egotism.uPATRIOTISM,Indeed, all the women in America are verypatriotic ; but I do not give them all thecredit. In the first place, they are controlledby public opinion as much as the men are ;without assumed patriotism they would have na 'chance of getting husbands. As you descend |in the scale, so are they the more noisy ; and, Iimagine, for that very reason the leas sincere.Among what may be termed the middling, Iclasses, I have been very much amused with she ■compound of vanity and ignorance which I have "met with. Among this class they can readand write ; but almost all their knowledge is ,confined to their own country, especially iageography, which I soon discovered. It washard to beat them on American ground, but aasoon as you got tbetn olF that they were defeated,I wish the reader to understand particularly,that I am not speaking now of the well-bred ,Americans, but of that portion which wouljiwith us be considered as on a par with thsmiddle class of shop-keepers ; for I had a very 1PATRIOTISM.extensive acquaintance. My amusement was,to make some comparison between the two countries,which I knew would immediately bringon the conflict I desired j and not without for I sometimes expected, in the ardourof their patriotism, to meet with the fate ofOrpheus.I soon found that the more I granted, themore they demanded; and that the best wayWas T\eveT to grant any thing. I was once in aroom full of the softer sex, chiefly girls, of allages ; when the mamma of a portion of them,who was sitting on the sofa, as we mentionedsteam, said, " Well now. Captain, you willallow that we are a-head of you there."No," replied I, " quite the contrary. Oursteam-boats go all over the world — your's area&aid to leave the rivers."Well now, Captain, I suppose you'll allowAmerica is a bit bigger country than England .'"It's rather broader — but, if I recollect right,it's not quite so long,"PATRIOTISM."Why, Captain !"" Well, only look at the map''Why, isn't the Mississippi a bigger ithan you have in England ?"S'gg^'" ? Pooh ! haven't we got the ]Thames ?"The Thames ? wliy that's no river at all."Isn't it ? Just look at the map, and messure them,"Well, now, Captain, I tell you what, you ]call your Britain, the Mistress of the seas, yetwe whipped you well, and you know that."Oh ! yes — you refer to the Shannon and JChesapeake, don't you ?"No 1 not that time, because Lawrence was Idrunk, they say ; but didn't we chip you well 'at New Orleans .?"No, you didn't."No .'' oh, Captain !"I say you did not. — tf your people hadcome out from behind their cotton bales andsugar casks, we'd have knocked you all into aPATRIOTISM.cocked hat ; but they wouldn't come out, so wewalked away in disgust."Now, Captain, that's romancing — that won'tdo." Here the little ones joined in the cry,We did beat you, and you know it." And,hauling uie into the centre of the roon», theyjoined hands in a circle, and danced round me,Paging,Yankee doodle is a hine,Which Fa uatiiin handy.All the British ran awiiyAt Yankee doodle daiid;',''I shall conclude by stating that this feeling,call it patriotism, or what you please, is sostrongly implanted in the bosom of the Americanby education and association, that whenever, orwhenever, the national honour or character iscalled into question, there is no sacrifice whichthey will not make to keep up appearances. Itis this which induces them to acquit murderers,to hush up suicides, or any other offence whichmay reflect upon their asserted morality. Iwould put no confidence even in an officialVOL. II. yL98 PATRIOTISM.document from the government, for I have 0Iready ascertained how they will invariablytwisted, so ag to give no offence to the majority ;and the base adulation of the government to thepeople is such, that it dare not tell them thetruth, or publish any thing which might woundits self-esteem.I shall conclude with two extracts from awork of Mr. Cooper, the American : —We are almost entirely wanting in nationalpride, though abundantly supplied with an irritablevanity which might rise to pride had wegreater confidence in our facts."*ewe have the sensitiveness of provincials,increased by the consciousness of having ourspurs to earn on all matters of glory and renown,and our jealousy extends even to thereputations of the cats and dogsJ^CHAPTER XII.ENGLAND AiXD THE UNITED STATES-captainHamilton has, in his work, expressedhis opinion that the Americans have nofeeling of ill-will against this country. If CaptainHamilton had stated that the gentlemen andmore respectable portion of the Americans, suchas the New York merchants, &c., had no feelingagainst this country, and were most anxiousto keep on good terms with us, he wouldbare been much more correct. You will findall the respectable portion of the daily pressusing their best endeavours to reconcile anycuriosities, and there is nothing which an Americangentleman is more eloquent upon, whenhe falls in with an Englishman, than in trying;;to convince him that there is no hostile feelIENGLAND AND THEing against this country.* I had not beenweek at New York before I had this assurance"*given me at least twenty limes, and I felt inclinesat first to believe it : but I soon discovered tha^^this feeling was only confined toa small minority 3,and that the feelings towards England of thsmajority, or democratic party, were of deep ii-re—conceivable hatred. I am sorry to assert this;but it is better that it should be known, thatSoon after I arrived at New York, the naval officersvery kindly Bent me a diploma as honorary member oftheir Lyceum, over at Brooklyn. I went over to visitthe Lyceum, and among other portraits, in the most conspicuouspart of the room, was that of William IV.,with the " Sailor Kin;" written underneath it in !aicapitals. As for the present Queen, her health haa beenrepeatedly drunk In my presence; indeed her accessionto our throne appeared to have put a large portion of thengood humour with monarchy. Up to thepresent she has been quite a pet of their's, and they arentinuaily asking questions concerning her. The fact is,that the Americans shew such outward deference to theother sex, that I do not think they would have anyobjection themselves to be governed by il; and ifanarchy vere attempted in the United States,the first reigning sovereign ought to be a very pretty-IUnited STATED. .we may not be misled by any pretended goodwillon the part of the government, or the partialgood-will of a few enlightened individuals-eventhose who have a feeling of regard-ajaxadmiration for oiir country do not venture \emake it known, and it would place them in sovery unpleasant a situation, that they canscarcely he blamed for keeping their opinionsto themselves. With the English they expressit warmly, and I believe them to be sincere; butnot being openly avowed by a few, it is notcommunicated or spread by kindling similarwarmth in the hearts of others. Indeed it isnot surprising, when we consider the national character,that there should be an ill feeling towardsEngland ; it would be much more strange ifthe feeling did not exist. That the Americans.should, after their struggle for independence,have felt irritated against the mother country,is natural ; they had been oppressed — they hadsuccessfully resented the oppression, and emancipatedthemselves. But still the feeling at thatk.■■ENTQLAHD AND THEtime was-tlJfiWent from the one which at pi-sentexists; ' Thea it might be compared to the the heart of a. younger son of an ancient.^t^Ksg, who had been compelled by harsh treatsto disunite from the head of the family,■ ■ and provide for himself — still proud of his origin,yet resentful at the remembrance of injury — attimes vindictive, at others fide of tenderness andrespect. The aristocrat ital and the democraticalimpulses by turns gaining the ascendant it wasthen a manly, fine feeling. The war of 1814, themost fatal event in the short American histocj^;,.would not have been attended with any incrof ill-will, as the Americans were satisfied willtheir successful repulse of our attempts to invadethe country, and their unexpected goodfortune in their naval conflicts. They felt thatthey had consideration and respect in the eye*of other nations, and, what was to them stillmore gratifying, the respect of England herself.In every point they were fortunate, for a peacewas concluded upon honourable terms just as theywere beginning to feel the bitter consequence ofthe war. But the effect of tHa war was to imbuethe people with a strong idea of theirmilitary prowess, and the national glory becametheir favourite theme. Their hero, GeneralJackson, was raised to the presidency by thedemocratical party, and ever since the Americanahave been ready to bully or quarrel with anybodyand about everything.This feeling becomes ati'onger every day.They want to whip the whole world. The wiseand prudent perceive the folly of this, and tryall they can to produce a better feeling ; but theBHijority are now irresistible, and their fiat willdecide upon war or peace. The government ispowerless in opposition to it ; all it can do is togi>'e a legal appearance to any act of violence.This idea of their own prowess will be onecause of danger to their institutions, for warmust ever be fatal to democracy. In this country,during peace, we Ix'canie more and moredemocratic; but whenever we are again forcedk104 ENGLAND AND THEinto war, the reins will be again tightened fromnecessity, and thus war must ever interfere withfree institutions. A convincing proof of theidea the Americans have of their own prowesswas when General Jackson made the claim forcompensation from the French. Through theintermediation of England the claim was adjusted,and peace preserved ; and the Americansare little aware what a debt of gratitudethey owe to this country for its interference.They were totally ignorant of the power and 1resources of France. Tliey had an idea, and Iwas told so fifty times, that France paid the Imoney from fear, and that if she had not, they Iwould have " whipped her into the little end ofnothing."I do not doubt that the Americans wouldhave tried their best ; but I am of opinion, (not-withslanting the Americans would have beenpartially, from their acknowledged bravery, successful)that in two years France, with hermeans, which are well known to, ant! appreei-UNITED STATES,acted bj', the English, would (to use theirown terms again,) have made " an everlastingsmash" of the United States, and the Americanswould have had to conclude an ignominiouspeace. I am aware that this idea will be scoutedin America as absurd ; but still I am well persuadedthat any protracted war would not onlybe their ruin in a pecuniary point of view, butital to their institutions. But to return.There are many reasons why the Americansbave an inveterate dislike to this country. Inthe first place, they are educated to dislike usand our monarchical institutions; their short historypoints out to them that we have been theironly oppressor in the first instance, and their opponentever since. Their annual celebration ofthe independence is an opportunity for vituperationof this country which is never lost sightof. Their national vanity is hurt by feelingwhat they would fain believe, that they are notthe " greatest nation on earth ;" that they areindebted to us, and the credit we give them, forf3England AND THEtheir prosperity and rapid advance ; that they Itmtst still look to us for their literature and the jfine arts, and that, in short, they are still de Ipendent upon England. I have before observed,that this hostile spirit against us is fanned by Idiscontented emigrants, and by those author Iwho, to become popular with the majority, laud |their own country and defame England ; butthe great cause of this increase of hostility Iagainst us is the democratical ]party )havingcome into power, and who consider it necessaryto excite animosity against this country. Wheneverit is requisite to throw a tub to the whale,the press is immediately full of abuse ; everythingis attributed to England, and the machina*tionsof England; slieis,by their accounts, here,there, ami everywhere, plotting mischief andinjury, from the Gulf of Florida to the llockyfountains. If we are to believe the democraticpress, England is the cause of everything offensiveto the majority — if money is scarce, it isEngliuid that ha.* occasioned it — if credit is bad.United STATES.it is England — if eggs are not fresh or beef istough, it is, it must be, England, They remindyou of the parody upon Fitzgerald in Smith'shumorous and witty ' rejected Addresses,' whenbe is supposed to write against Buonaparte :—Who made the quarter loaf and Luddites rise.Who fills the butchers' shops with large blue flies;With a fcml earthquake ravog-ed the Caracas,Aud raised the price of dry goods and tobaccos ?"Why, England. And all this the majoritydo steadfastly believe, because they wish to believeit.How, then, is it possible that the lower classesin the United States, (and the lower and unenlightenedprincipally compose the majority,) canhave other than feelings of ill-will towards thiscountry ? and of what avail is it to us that thehigh-minded and sensible portion think otherwise,when they are in such a trifling minority,and afraid to express their sentiments? Whenwe talk about a nation, we look to the mass, andthat the mass ara hostile, and inveterately hoartile to this country, is a most undeniable fact.ENGLAND AND THEThere ia another cause of hostility which Ihave not adverted to, the remarks upon them bytravellers in their country, such as I am nowmaking ; but as the Americans never hear thetruth from their own countrymen, it is only ,from foreigners* that they can. Of course, afterhaving been accustomed to flattery from theirearliest days, the truth, when it does come, fallsmore heavily, and the injury and insult which theyconsider they have received is never forgotten.Among the American authors who have increasedthe ill-will of his countrymen towardsthis country, Mr. Cooper stands pre-eminent.Mr. Buller Lias observed that the character andopinions of an author may be pretty fairly estimatedby his writings. This is true, but theymay be much better estimated by one species ofwriting than by another. In works invention• A proof tht the feeling again"! Ei ghnd is in-areas n„ b the Bingukr fact that latterly They insistupon calling' (he English ftmigneri u term whichlhe\ fotraerh applied to all other nation s but not laourselvesUNITED STATES. 109or imagination, it is but now and then, by an incidentalremark, that we can obtain a due to theauthor's feelings. Carried away by the interestof the story, and the vivid scene presented tothe imagination, we are apt to form a betteropinion of the author than he deserves, becausewe feel kindly and grateful towards him for theamusement which he has afforded us ; but whena writer puts off the holiday dress of fiction,and appears before us in his every day costume,giving lis his thoughts and feelings upon mattersof fact, then it is that we can appreciate thereal character of the author. Mr. Cooper'scharacter is not to be gained by reading hisPilot,' but it may be fairly estimated by readinghis 'Travels in Switzerland,' and his remarksupon England. If, then, we are to judge of Mr.Cooper by the above works, I have no hesitationin asserting that he appears to be a disappointeddemocrats with a determined hostility to Englandand the English. This hostility on the part ofMr. Cooper cannot proceed from any wantnoENGLAND AND THEattention shewn him in this country, or want of Iacknowledgment of his merits as an author. Itmust be sought for elsewhere. The attacksupon the Eiighsli in a work professed to bewritten upon Switzerland, prove how rancorousthis feeling is on his part ; and not all theAvorks published by English travellers uptniAmerica have added so much to the hostilefeeling against us, as Mr. Cooper has doneby his writings alone. Mr. Cooper wouldappear to wish to detach his countrymen, notonly from us, but from the whole EuropeanContinent. He tells them in his wcvk OBSwitzerland, that they are not liked or esteemedany where, and that to acknowledge yourselfan American is quite sufficient to make thoserecoil who were intending to advance. Mr.Cotq)eris,inmy opinion, very much mistaken inthis point ; the people of the Continent do notas yet know enough of the Americans lo decideupon their national character. He observe-es verytruly, that no one appears to think any thingtit the twelve millions ; why so? because inSwitzerland, Germany, and other nations in theheart of the Continent, they have no interestabout a nation so widely separated from them,and from intercourse with which they receiveneither profit nor loss. Neither do they thinkabout the millions in South America, and notcaring or hearing about them tiicy can haveformed no ideas of their character as a nation.If, then, the Americans are shunned (which I donot believe they are, for they are generallysupposed to bea variety of Englishmen), it mustbe from the conduct of those individuals ofthe American nation who have travelled there,and not because, as Mr. Cooper would imply,they have a democratic form of government.Have not the Swiss something similar, andare they shunned ? Who cares what may betheform of government of a country dividedfrom them by three or four thousand milesof water, and of whom they have only read ?Every nation, aa well as every individual, makesLEngland AND Theits own character; but Mr. Cooper would provethat the dislike shewn to the Americans abroadis owing to the slander of them by the English,and he points out that in the books containingthe names of traveller, he no less than twenty-fivetimes observed offensive remarks writtenbeneath the names of those who acknowledgedthemselves Americans. These books were atdifferent places, places to which all tourists inSwitzerland naturally repair. Did it neveroccur to Mr. Cooper that one young fool of anEnglishman, during his tour, might have beenthe author of all these obnoxious remarks, andis the folly of one insignificant individual to begravely commented upon in a widely disseminatedwork, so as to occasion or increase the nationalill-will .^ Surely there is little wisdom and muchcaptiousness in this feeling.How blinded by his ill-will must Mr. Cooperhe, to enter into a long discussion in the work Irefer to, to prove that England deserves the title,among other national characteristics, of a black-unitedSTATES.guarding natimi ! foundling his assertion uponthe language of our daily press. If the English,judged by the jirefij, area blaikguarding nation,what are the Americans, if they are to be judgedby the same standard ? we must be indebtedto the Americana themselves for an epithet.To wind up, he more than once pronounced theEnglish to be parvenus. There is an oldproverb which says, " A man whose house isbuilt of glass should not be the first to throwstones ;" and that these last two charges shouldbe brought against us by an American, is certainlysomewhat singular and unfortunate.That there should be a hostile feeling whenEnglishmen go over to America to competewith them in business or in any profession, isnatural; it would be the same every where;this feeling, however, in the United States isusually shewn by an attack upon the characterof the party, so as to influence the publicagainst him. There was an American practisingphrenology, when a phrenologist arrived fromKNGLA.KD AND THEEngland. As this opposition wasthe American i in mediately circulated a reportthat the English phrenologist had asserted thathe had examined the sculls of many Americans,and that he had never fallen in with such thickheadedfellows in Lis life. This was quitesufficient — the English operator was obliged toclear out as fast as lie could, and try his fortuneelsewhere.The two following placards were given me;they were pasted all over the city. What halfpencewas I never heard, but they are veryamusing documents. It is the first time, I believe,that public singers were described asaristocrats, and Englishmen of thejtrst stamp.Americans:It remains with you to say whether or notyou will be imposed upon by these base arisocrates, who come from England to America, inorder to gain a livelihood, and despise the landthat gives them bread.Some few years since there came to thisIIUnited STATES.country three 'gentlemen players'' who werereceived with ojien arms by the Americana, andtreated more as brothers than strangers ; whentheir pockets were full, in requital to our bestendeavours to raise them to their merit, theungrateful dogs turned round and abused us.It is useless, at present, to give the names of twoof those gentlemen, as they are not now candidatesfor public favour ; but there is one, Mr.Hodges, who is at present engaged at thePavilion Theatre. This thing has saidpublicly that the Americans were all ' aparcel of ignoramuses,' and that 'the yankeeplayers' were ' perfect fools, not possessing theleast particle of talent,' Sic. We must be briefshould we repeat all we have heard it wouldfill a page of the News,Will the Americans be abused in this waywithout reparation ? We are always willing tobestow that respect which is due to strangers ;but when our kindness is treated with contempt.ENGLAND AND THEami ia return receive base epithets and abuse,let us ' block the game.'Once for all — « ill you permit this thing inpantaloons and whiskers, this brainless, unideaedcub, whom a thousand years will not suffice tolick into a bear, longer to impose upon yourgood-natures ? If so, we shall conclude youhave lost all of that spirit so characteristic oftrue loom Americans.A word to Mr. (?) Hodceb. — When thesemeet your eye, a dignified contempt will mostopportunely swell your breast— such is ever thecase with the coward '. In affected scorn, youwill seek a shelter from the danger you dare notbrave, but we warn you that one day mustovertake you.Seferji. Americans."AMERICANS ATTEND!"Americans : — If there is a spark of that ispirit in your blood with which your fore JUnited STATES.fathers bequeathed you, I hope you nil! shewit when ran come among us from a foreignshore to get a living, and while here to speak interms towards our country and ourselves, derogatoryto the feelings of an American to listento. These men that I speak of are Mr. Hodgesand Mr. Corri, Englishmen of the first stamp,who declare that the Yankees, (as we areall termed, and proud of the name 1 dare say,)are a parcel of ignoramuses — cannibals — don'tknow how to appreciate talent' — they possessvery little I am certain. However, the thingstands thus : they have slandered our country,they have slandered tts ; and if they are permittedto play upon the boards of the EagleTheatre, I shall conclude that we have lostall that spunk so characteristic in a True hornAmerican."There certainly Is no good feeling ti themajority towards England, and this is continuallyshewn in a variety of instances, partibusAND Theearly if there's any excitement from distress orother causes. At the time that the great commercialdistress took place, the abuse of Englandwas beyond all bounds ; and in a public meetingof democrats at Philadelphia, the first resolutionbiassed was " that they did not owe England onefarthing," and this is the general outcry of thelower orders when any thing was WTMig. Ihave often argued with them on this subject,and never could convince them. This countryhas now fifty-fine millions sterling invested inAmerican securities, which is a large sum, andthe majority consider that a war will spunge outthis debt. Their argument which they constantlyurged against me, has more soundness init than would be supposed: — "If you declare warwith us, what is the first thing you do, you seizeall American vessels and all American propertythat you can lay hold of, which have entered intoyour ports on the fiiilh of peace between the twocountries. Now, why have we not an equalright to seize all English property whenever weUNITED STATES. 119can find it in this country ?*' But this, as Ihave observed, is the language of the democratsand locofocos. There are thousands of honourablemen in America, not only as merchants,but in every oder class, who are most anxiousto keep on good terms with us, and havethe kindest feelings towards England. unfortunatethey are but few compared to the majority,and much as they may regret the hostilefteUngs towards us, I am afraid that it is whollyout of their power to prevent their increase,which will be in exact proportion with the increaseof the popular sway.CHAPTER XIII.iSOCIETY.— General CharacterThe character of the Americans is that of arestless, uneasy people — they cannot sit still, ithey cannot listen attentively, unless the theme' 1be politics or dollars — they must do something, .'and, like children, if they cannot do any thing 'else, they ^vill do mischief — their curiosity is ]unbounded, and they are very capricious.Acting upon impulse, they are very generous 'at one moment, and without a spark of charitythe next. They are good-tempered, and posse Jgreat energy, ingenuity, bravery, and jof mind. Such is the estimate I have formedof their general character, independent of thedemoralizing effects of their institutions, whichrenders it so anomalous.GENERAL CHARACTER, ETC.The American author, Mr. Saiiiiderson, verytruly observes of his countrymen, that " theyhave grovvTi vicious without the refinements anddistractions of the fine arts and liberal amusements."The Americans have few amusements;they are too busy. Athletic sports they areindifferent to; they look only to those entertainmentswhich feed their passion for excitement.The theatre is almost their only resort,and even that is not so well attended as it mightbe, considering their means. There are somevery good and well-conducted theatres inAmerica: the best are the Park and Nationalat New York, the Trent at Boston, and theChesnut Street Theatre at Philadelphia. TheAmerican stock actors, as they term thosewho are not considered as star, are better thanour own; but were the theatres to depend uponstock actors they would be deserted — the loveof novelty is the chief inducement of the Americansto frequent ths theatre, and they look forimportations of star actors from this countryVOL. ir,I.iregularly ithey do for cnufacturedflgoods, or the fashions from learns. Inthe large cities they have two theatres;legitimate drama, and the other for melo-drama, '&c, ; as the Bowery Theatre at New York, andthe Walnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia;these latter are seldom visited Iiy the aristocraticalportion of the citizens.The National Theatre at New York ioriginally built as an opera house, and 1company procured from the Savannah ; bet 1the opera, from want of support, was a failure JIt has since been taken by Mr. James Wallace,in opposition to the Park Theatre. The twafirst seasons its success was indifferent; tiePark having the advantage in situation, Awell as of a long-standing reputation. Bvft, ,latterly, from the well-known talent and bu 1period management of Mr. Wallack, and fink jhis unwearied exertions in providing noveltiesfor the American public, it has been v&y •successful ; so much so, that it is said this lastyear to have decidedly obtained the superiority *GENERAL Character, ETC.over its rival. I have seen some splendid representationsill tile National Theatre, with apropriety in scenery and costume which isseldom exceeded even in our great theatres.Indeed, in three seasons, Mr. Wallack hasdone much to improve the national taste ; andfrom his exertions, the theatres in general inAmerica may be said to have been much benefited.But there is one objection to thisrivalry between the Part and National ; whichis, that the stars go out too fast, and they willsoon be all expended. Formerly things wenton very regularly : IMr. Price sent out to Mr.Simpson, duly invoice, a certain portion oftalent for every season ; and Mr. Simpson, whois a very clever manager, first worked it up atNew York, and then dispatched it to Boston,Philadelphia, and the other theatres in theUnion. But, now, if Mr. Simpson has twostars sent to him, James Wallack comes home,and takes out three ; whereupon, Mr. Pricesends out a bigger star ; and so they go on ;G 2L124 SOCIETY.working up the stars so fast, that the supply-willnever equal the demand. There are notmore than two or three actors of eminence in 1England, who have not already made their Jappearance on the American boards; and next Iseason will probably use them up. It is true, Ithat some actors can return there again and!again ; as Power, who is most deservedly sjfavourite with them, and Ellen Tree, who haiequally so. Celeste has realized a large fortune.'Mrs. Wood, and the Keepers, were also v«ygreat favourites; but there are not many actorswho can venture there a second time ; at least,not until a certain interval has elapsed for theAmericans to forget them. When there are nolonger any stars, the theatres will not be so unattended; as, indeed, is the case every where.To prove how fond the Americans are of anythingthat excites them, I will mention arepresentation which I one day went to see —that of the " Infernal Regions." There weretwo or three of these shewn in the different citiest^GENERAL Character, ETC.ID the States. I saw the remnants of another'smyself; but, as the museum-keeper very appropriatelyobserved to me, " It was a finething once, but now it had all gone to h — 11."You entered a dark room; where, railed off'with iron railings, you beheld a long perspectiveof caverns in the interior of the earth, and amolten lake in the distance. In the foregroundwere the most horrible monsters that could beinvented — bears with men's heads, growling —snakes darting in and out hissing — here a manlying murdered, with a knife in his heart ; therea suicide, hanging by the neck — skeletons lyingabout in all directions, and some walking upand down in muslin shrouds. The machinerywas very perfect. At one side was the figure ofa man sitting down, with a horrible face ; boar'stusks protruding from his mouth, his eyesrolling, and horns on his head ; I thought il.was mechanism as well as the rest ; and was notalittle surprised when it addressed me in ahollow voice: " AYe"ve been waiting sonic timefor you, captain." As I found lie had a tongue, Ientered into conversation with him. Therepresen- ,nation wound up with showers of fire, rattling of jbones, thunder, screams, and a regular cascade at Ithe d — d, pouring into the molten lake. Whm |it was first shewn, they had an electric battery icommunicating with the iron railing; and who iever put his hand on it, or went too near, Ireceived a smart electric shock. But the alarm increasedhy this addition was found to be attendedwith serious consequences, and it hadbeen discontinued.The love of excitement must of course producea love of gambling, which may be consideredas one of the American amusements : it is,however, carried on very quietly in the cities.In the South, and on the Mississippi, it is asopen as the noon day ; and the gamblers mayhe said to have there become a professionalpeople. I have already mentioned them, andthe attempts which have been made to get ridof them. Indeed, they are not only gamestersGENERAL CHARACTER, ETC. 127who practice on the unwary, but they combinewith gambling the professions of forgery, andlittering of base money. If they lose, they onlylose forged notes. There is no part of theworld where forgery is carried on to such anextent as it is in the United States; chiefly inthe Western country. The American banks areparticularly careful to guard against this evil,but the ingenuity of these miscreants is surprising,and they will imitate so closely as almost toescape detection at the banks themselves. Banknoteengraving is certainly carried to the higheststate of perfection in the United States, but almostin vain. I have myself read a notice, postedup at Boston, which may appear strange to us.Bank notes made here to any pattern." Butthe Eastern banks are seldom forged upon.Counterfeit money is also very plentiful. AshenI was in the West, I had occasion to pay a fewdollars to a friend : when I saw him a day ortwo afterwards, he said to fine, " Do you knowthat three dollars yon gave nie were counter128 SOCIETY.feats ?" I apologised, and offered to replacethem, "Oh! no," replied he; " it's of no consequence.I gave them in payment to mypeople, who told me that they were counterfeit ;but they said it was of no consequence, as theycould easily pass them." In some of the Stateslotteries have been abolished, in others they arestill permitted. They are upon the Frenchprinciple, and are very popular.There is one very remarkable point in theAmerican character, which is, that they constantlychange their professions. I know notwhether it proceeds simply from their love ofchange, or from their embracing professions at80 early a period, that they have not discoveredthe line in which from natural talents they arebest calculated to succeed. I have heard it said,that it is seldom that an American succeeds inthe profession which he had first taken up atthe commencement of his career. An Americanwill set up as a lawyer; quit, and go to seafor a year or two ; come back, set up inGENERAL CHARACTER, ETC. 129Butler profession ; get tired again, go as clerkor steward in a steam-boat, merely because hewishes to travel ; then apply liiniself to somethingelse, and begin to amass money. It is ofvery Utile consequence what he does, the Americanis really a jack of all trades, and masterof any to with he feels at last inclined tt;apply himself.In Mrs. Butler's clever journal there is oneremark which really surprised me. She says,The absolute absence of imagination is ofcourse the absolute absence of humour. AnAmerican can no more understand a fanciful jestthan a poetical idea ; and in society and conversationthe strictest matter of fact prevails," &c.If there was nothing but " matter of fact'"in society and conversation in America or els.where, I imagine that there would not be manywords used : but I refer to the passage, becauseshe says that the Americans are not imaginative; whereas, I think that there is not a moreimaginative people existing. It is true thatill the Imerallj^lsensibk^Htermed ^^130 SOCIETY.they prefer broad humour, and delight ill thehyperbole, but this is to be expected in a young,nation ; especially as their education is, generallyspeaking, not of a kind to make themto very refined wit, which, I acknowlthrown away upon the majority. What is termedthe under current of humour, as delicate raillery,for instance, is certainly not understood. When.they read Sam Slick, they did not perceivethe author was laughing at them ; andletters of Major Jack Downing are much nwappreciated in this country than they areAmerica. But as for saying that they areimaginative, is a great error, and I have no soulthat Mrs. B. has discovered it by this time.Miss Martineau says, and very truly,Americans appear to me an eminently impnative people." Indeed, it is only necessaryread the newspapers to be convinced itcase. 'Hie hyperbole is their principalbut what is lying but imagination ? and whyyou find that a child of promising talent isGENERAL CHARACTER, ETC.prone lo lying ? because it is the first effortof a strong imagination. Wit requires refinement,which the Americans have not ; but theyhave excessive humour, although it is generallyspeaking coarseAn American, talking of an >igly womanwith a very large mouth, said to me, " Why,sir, when she yawns, you can see right downto her garters ;" and another, speaking of hisbeing very sea-sick, declared, " That he threwevery thing up, down to his knee-pans."If there required any proof of the dishonestfeeling so prevalent in the United States arisingprom the desire of gain, it would be in the fact,that almost every good story which you hear ofan American ia an instance of great ingenuity,and very little principle. So many have beentold already, that I hesitate to illustrate myobservation, from fear of being accused ofuttering stale jokes. Nevertheless I will ventureupon one or two.An American (Down East, of course), whenVLhis father died, foiiiid lira patrimony to consistof several hundred dozen of boxes of ointmentfor the cure of a certain complaint, said (by us)to be more common in the North than in England.He made up his pack, and took a roundof nearly a hundred miles, going from town totown and from village to village, offering his remedyfor sale. But unfortunately for him no onewas afflicted with the complaint, and they wouldnot purchase on tlieciiaiice of any future occasionfor it. He returned back to hia inn, and havingreflected a little, he went out, inquired where hecould find the disease, and having succeeded,inoculated himself with it. Alien he was convincedthat he had it with sufficient virulence, heagain set forth making the same i-ound ; andtaking advantage of the American custom whichis so prevalent, lie shook hands with everybodywhom he had spoken to on his former visit, declaringhe was ' 'tamar glad to see them againeThus he went on till his circuit was completed,when he repaired to the first town again, andGeneral CHARACTER, ETC.found that his ointment, as he expected, wasnow in great i-eqiieat ; and he continued hisroute as before, selling every box that he pos-thereis a story of a Yankee clock-maker'singenuity, that I have not seen in print. Healso " made a circuit, having a hundred clockswhen he started ; they were all very bad, whichhe well knew ; but by ' soft sawder and humanaatur,' as Sam Slick says, he contrived to sellninety-nine of them, and reserve the last for hisintended ' ruse'' He went to the house wherehe had sold the first clock, and said, ' Well,now, hoi does your clock go ? very well, Iguess.' This answer was as he anticipated,'No, very bad.' 'Indeed! Well, now, I'vefound it out at last. You see, I had one clockwhich was I know a bad ont, and I said to myboy, 'you'll put that clock aside, for it won'tdo to sell such an article.' Well, the boy didn'tmind, and left the clock with the others ; and Ifound out afterwards that it had been soldkSOCIETY.somewhere. Mighty mad I was, I can tell you,for I'm not a little particular about my credit ;so I have asked here and there, everywherealmost, how my flocks went, and they all saidthat ' they actually regulated the sun.' But 1was determined to find out who had the badclock, and I am most particular glad that Ihave done it at last. Now, you see i have butone clock left, a very superior article, worth amatter of ten dollars more than the others, andI must give it you in change, and I'll only 'charge you five dollars difference, as you havebeen annoyed with the bad article.' The manwho had the bad clock thought it better to payfive dollars more to have a good one; so theexchange was made, and then the Yankee, proceedingwith the clock, relumed to the nejttI house. ' Welt, now, how does your clock go? 1I very well, I guess.' The same answer — theI same story repeated — and another five ddlars II received in exchange. And thus did he go Iround, exchanging clock for clock, until heGENERAL Character, ETC. 135bad received an extra five dollars for every onewhich he had sold."Logic. — " A Yankee went into the bar of aninn in a country town : ' Pray what's the priceof a pint of shrub ?' ' Half a dollar,' was thereply of the man at the bar. ' Well, then, giveit me,' The shrub was poured out, when thebell rang for dinner. ' Ir that your dinner-lyell ?''Yes.' 'What may you charge for dinner?''Half a dollar.' 'Well, then, I think I hadbetter not take the shrub, hut have some dinnerinstead This was consented to. The Yankeewent in, sat down to his dinner, and when it wasover, was going out of the dcwr without paying.'Massa,' said the negro waiter, 'you not paidfor your dinner.' ' I know that ; I took thedinner instead of the shrub.' 'But, massa,you not pay for the shrub.' 'Well, I didnot have the shrub, did I, you nigger?' saidthe Yankee, walking away. The negroscratched his head ; he knew that somethingwas wrong, as he had got no moiiev ; but hecmiid not nmki.' it out till the Yankee was outofsiglit.''I do not think that democracy is markedupon the features of the lower classes in theUoitetl States ; there is no arrogant bearing inthem, a3 might he supposed from the despotismof the majority ; on the contrary, I should saythat their lower classes are much more civil thanour own. I had a slap of equality on tny firstlanding at New York. I had hired a truck-manto take up my luggage from the wharf; Iwent a-head, and missed him when I clue tothe corner of the street where I had engagedapartments, and was looking round for him inone direction, when I was saluted with a slapon the shoulder, which was certainly givenwith good-will. I turned, and beheld my carman,who had taken the liberty to draw myattention in this forcible manner. He was aman of few words ; he pointed to his truckwhere it stood with the baggage, and thenwent on.GENERAL CHARACTER, ETC.This civil bearing la peculiar, as when llieyare excited by politics, or other causes, they aremost insolent and overbearing. In his usualdemeanour, the citizen born is quiet and obliging.The insolence you meet with is chieflyfrom the emigrant classes. I have before observed,that the Americans are a good-temperedpeople ; and to this good temper I ascribe theircivil bearing. But why are they good-tempered? It appears to me to be one of the fewvirtues springing from democracy. When thegrades of society are distinct, as they are in theolder institutions, when difference of rank is acknowledgedand submitted to without murmur,it is evident that if people are obliged to controlthar tempers in presence of their superiors orequals, they can also yield to them ivith theirinferiors ; and it is this yielding to our temperswhich enables them to master us. But underinstitutions where all are equal, where no oneadmits the superiority of another, even if hereally be so, whei'e the man vi'ith the spade inL138 SOCIETY.his hand will beard the millionaire, and whereyou arc compelled to submit to the caprice andinsolence of a domestic, or lose his services, it isevident that every man must from boyhood havelearnt to control his temper, as no ebullitionwill be submitted to, or followed by its consequences.I consider that it is this habitual control,forced upon the Americans by the natureof their institutions, which occasions them toso good-tempered, when not in a state of exdt^jment. The Americans are in one point,mob, very much like the English ; make then.laugh, and they forget all their animosity immediately.One of the most singular points about thelower classes in America is, that they will callthemselves ladies and gentlemen, and yet refusetheir titles to their superiors. Miss Martinetsmentions one circumstance, of which I very oftaijmet with similar instances. " I once wasa gentleman who was building a large boumhe went to see how the men were gettingmirethe 1^GENERAL CHARACTER, ETC.}39Ibut they had all disappeared but one, ' Whereare the people ?' inquired he. ' The gentlemenbe all gone to liquor,' was the reply."I bought one of the small newspapers just asI was setting off in a steam-boat from NewYork to Albany, The boy had no change,and went to fetch it. He did not come backhimself, but another party made his appearance.Are you the men who bought the newpaper?" "Yes," replied I. "The ymmggentleman who sold it to you has sent me topay you four cents."A gentleman was travelling ^¥ith hie wife,they had stopped at an inn, and during thegentleman's momentary absence the lady wastaken ill. The lady wishing for her husband,a man very good-naturedly went to find him,and when he had succeeded he addressed him,I say, Mister, your woman wants you ; butI felled the young lady of the house to fetchher a glass of water."There was no insolence intended in this ; it isa peculiarity to be anointed for by their loveof title and distinction.It ia singular to observe human nature peep ^ing out in tho Americans, and how tacitly theyacknowledge by their conduct how uncomfortablea feeling there is in perfect equality. The re-Spect they pay to a title is much greater theolthat which is paid to it in England ; and natusrally so; we set a higher value upon that which 1we cannot obtain. I have been often amused Jat the variance on this point between their Iwords and their feelings, which is shewn in their |eagerness for rank of some sort among themselves.Every man who has served in the militiacarries his title until the day of his death, iThere is no encl to generals, and colonels, andjudges; they keep taverns and grog shops, es ispecially in the Western State ; indeed, there are Ivery few who have not brevet rank of some 1kind ; and I being oily a captain, was looked 1upon as a very small personage, as far as rankwent. An Englishman, who was living in thebGENERAL CHARACTER, ETC.State of New York, had sent to have the chimneyof his house raised. The morning afterwardshe saw a labourer rising mortar beforethedoor. "Wel," said the Englishman, "whenis the chimney to i>e finished ?^ " I'm sure Idon't know, you had better ask the colonel.""The colonel? What colonel .?•" "Why, Ireckon that's the colonel upon the top of thehouse, working away at the chimney."After all, this fondness for rank, even in ademocracy, is very natural, and the Americanshave a precedent for it. His Satanic Majestywas the first democrat in heaven, hut as soon ashewas dismissed to his abode below, if Miltonbe correct, he assumed his title.ICHAPTER XIV.feARISTOCRACY.If the Americans should imagine that I hawany pleasure in writing the contents of this chapterthey will be mistaken ; I have considered «the duty of and pandered over it. I would rlibel an individual, much leas a whole iiaticn ;I must speak the truth, and upon due examina^fltion, and calling to my mind all that I have col* Ielected from observation and otherwise, I consider Ithat at this present time the standard of moralityis lower in America than in any other portion ofthe civilized globe. I say at this present tfor it was not so even twenty years ago,possibly may not be so twenty years henceThere is a change constantly going on in everthing below, and I believe, for many reasonsFARISTOCRACY. 143that a change for the better will soon take placein America. There are even now manythousands of virtuous:, honourable, and enlightenedpeople in the United States, but at presentvirtute is passive, while vice is active.The Americans possess courage, presence ofmind, perseverance, and energy, but these maybeconsidered rather as endowments than asvirtues. They are propelling powers which willadvance them as a people, and, were they regulatedand tenura-ed hy religious and moralfeeling, would make them great and good, hutwithout these adjuncts they can only becomegreat and vicious.I have observed in my preface that the virtuesand vices of a nation are to be traced tothe form of government, the climate, and circumstances,and it will he easy to slew that tothe above may be ascribed much of the merit aswdl as the demerits of the people of the IgnitedStates.In the first place, I consider the example setARISTOCRACY.by the governmi."iit as roost injurious : as I shallhereafter prove, it is insatiable in its ambition,regardless of its fai th, and corrupt to the highestdegree. This example I consider as the firstcause of the demoralization of the AmericansThe errors incident to the voluntary system ofreligion are the second : the power of the deris destroyed, and the tyranny of the laity Iproduced the effect of the outward form havingbeen substituted for the real feeling, and hypocrisyhas been hut too often substituted for religion.To the evil of bad example from the governmentis superadded the natural tendency of a.democratic form of government, to excite iambition without having the power to gratify Smorallyorvirtuously; and the debasing influxof the pursuit of gain is everywhere apparent. Hshews itself in the fact that money is in americaevery thing, and every thing else nothingsit is the only sure possession, for character oat any' time be taken from you, and thereforeAAristocracy.Becomes less valuable than in other countries,except so far as mercantile transactions are concerned.Mr. Cooper says — not once, but manytimes — that in America all the local affections,indeed everything, is sacrificed to the spirit ofgain. Dr. Channing constantly laments it, andhe very truly asserts, " A people that deems thepossession of riches its highest source of distinction,admits one of the most degrading ofall influences to preside over its opinions. Atno time should money be ever ranked as morethan a means, and he who lives as if the acquisitionof property were the sole end of hisexistence, betrays the dominion of the mostsordid, base, and grovelling motive that lifeosiers;" and ascribing it to the institutions, hesays, " In one respect our institutions have disappointedus all: they have not wrought outfor us that elevation of character which is themost precious, and, in truth, the only substantialblessing of liberty."I have before observed, that whatever societyARISTOCRACY.Kpermits, men will do and not wider to bewrong, and if the goveniincnt considers a breachof trust Inwards it as not of any importance,and defaulters are permitted to escape, it will ofcourse become no crime in the eyes of the majority,Mr, Cooper observes, " An evident di.honesty of sentiment pervades the public itself,which is beginning to regard acts of private delinquencywith a dangerous indifference ; acts toothat are inseparably connected with the character, ■security, and right administration of the state,"Such is unfortunately the case at present; itmay be said to have commenced with the Jacketson dynasty, and it is but a few years since thisdreadful demoralization has become so apparentand so shamelessly avowed. In another workthe American author above quoted observes, —We see the effects of this baneful influencein the openness and audacity with which menavow improper motives and improper acts, trustingto find support in a popular feeling, forwhile vicious influences are }>Grhaps more ad-aristocracy.147mitted in other countries than in America, innone are they so openly avowed."Surely there is sufficient of American authorityto satisfy any reader that I am not guiltyof exaggeration in my remarks. Nor am Ithe only traveller who has observed upon whatis indeed most evident and palpable. CaptainHamilton says, *' I have heard conductpraised in conversation at a public table, which,in England, would be attended, if not with avoyage to Botany Bay, at least with total lossof character. It is impossible to pass an hourin the bar of the hotel, without being struck withthe tone of callous selfishness which pervadesthe conversation, and the absence of all pretensionto pure and lofty principle''It may indeed be fairly said, that nothing isdisgraceful with the majority in america, whichthe law cannot lay hold of.* You are either inEnglish capital invested. — It is but fair togive the English who have invested their money in Americansecurities, some idea of what their chance of re-k2ARISTOCRACY,or out of the Penitentiary : if once in, you ilost for ever, but keep out and you are as good iivinsLivingsinterestbe. As long as it depends upon the faith of those who1 thecontracted tsoon SB the power is taken out of their hands, and vested \in the majority, they may consider their money as gone.I will explain this — at present the English have vested |their capital in canals, railroads, und other public improvements.The returns of these undertaking are at 'present honourably employed in payinji- interest to Iagenders of the capital, and if the returns arc not sutGcient,more money is borrowed to meet the demands of thecreditor ; but there is a. certain point at which creditfails, and at which no more money can be borrowed; ifthen no more money can be borrowed, and the returnsof their railroads, canals, and other securities fall off,where is the deficiency to be made good ? In thiscountry it would be made food by a lax being imposedupon the population to meet the deficiency, and support .the credit of the nation. Here is the questionthe majority in America consent to he taxed ? I say, iii Iif they do, I shall be surprised, and be most happy tcrecant, hut it is my opinion that they will not, and if mthe English capital will be lost ; and if the reader willcall to mind what I have pointed out as to the probable 'effect of the power of America working to Ie westwardand the direct importation which in a few yettake place, he will see that there is every prospect of arapid decrease ia the value of all their securities, andAristocracy.as yo\ir iieighlxmr. Now one thing is certainthat where honesty is absolutely necessary,honesty is to be found, as for example amongthe New Yorfc merchants, who are, as a body.highly honourable men. When, therefore, the-americanswill have moral courage sufficient to.drive away vice, and not allow virtue to be in.bondage, as she at present is, the morals of"society will be instantly restored — and how andwhen will this be effected ? I have said thatthe people of the United States, at the time ofthe Declaration of Independence, were perhapsthe most moral people existing, and I eowassert that they are the least so ; to what cause canthis change be ascribed ? Certainly not whollyto the spirit of gain, for it exists every where,although perhaps nowhere so strongly developedas it is under a form of government which admitsof no other claim to superiority. I considertent the only iiltimale L-liuncp of their recovering themoney is by lliis country compelling payment of it byIARISTOCRACY.that ii arises from the total extinction, or if notextinction absolute bondage, of the aristocracyof the country, both politically as well as socially.There was an aristocracy at the time ofthe Independence — not an aristocracy of title,but a much superior one ; an aristocracy of great,powerful, and leading men, who were looked uptoand imitated ; there was, politically speaking,an aristocracy in the senate which was elected bythose who were then independent of the popularwill ; but although a portion of it remains, itmay be said to have been almost altogethersmothered, and in society it no longer exists.It is the want of this aristocracy that has aolowered the standard of morals in America, andit is the revival of it that must restore to thepeople of the United States the morality theyhave lost. The loss of the aristocracy has sunkthe Republic into a democracy — the renewal of itwill again restore them to their former condition.Let not the Americans start at this idea. Anaristocracy is not only not incompatible, but abso-ARISTOCRACY.lately necessary for the duration of a democraticform of government. It is the third estate, sonecessary to preserve the balance of power betweenthe executive and the people, and whichhas unfortunately disappeared. An aristocracyis as necessary for the morals as for the government of a nation. Society must have a head tolead it, and without that head there will be no£xed standard of morality, and things mustremain in the chaotic state in which they areat present.Some author has described the English nationas resembling their own leer — froth at the top,dregs at the bottom, and in the middle excellent.There is point in this observation, and it hasbeen received without criticism, and quoted withoutcontradiction : but it is in itself false ; itmay be said that the facts are directly the reverse,there being more morality among thelower class than in the middling, and still morein the higher than in the lower. We have beendesignated as a nation of shopkeepers, a termtAristocracy',certainly more applicable to the Americans,where all are engaged in commerce and thepursuit of gain, and who have no distinctionsor hereditary titles. Trade demoralizes ; there-areso many petty arts and frauds necessaryto be resorted to by every class in trade, toenable them to compete with each other; samany lies told, as a matter of business, to tempta purchaser, that almost insensibly and by degreesthe shopkeeper becomes dishonest. Thesedemoralizing practices must be resorted to,even by those who would fain avoid tlieiii, or theyhave no chance of competing with their rivals in-business. It is not the honest tradesman whomakes a rapid fortune; indeed, it is doubtfulwhether he could carry on his business ; andyet, from desuetude and not being taxed withdishonesty, the shopkeeper scarcely ever feelsthat he is dishonest. Now, this is the worststate of demoralization, where you are blind tO'youi- errors and conscience is never awakened,and in this state may be considered, with fewAAristocracy.exceptions, every class of traders, whether inEngland, America, or elsewhere.Among the lower classes, the morals of themanufacturing districts, and of the frequentersof cities, will naturally be at a low ebb, fiM-men when closely packed demoralize each other ;but if we examine the agricultural classes,which are by far the most numerous, we shallfind that there is much virtue and goodness inthe humble college ; we shall there find pietyand resignation, honesty, industry, and content,more universal than would be imagined, andthe Bible pored over, instead of the day-book orledger.But it is by the higher classes of the Englishnation, by the nobility and gentry of England,that the high tone of virtue and morality is upheld.Foreigners, especially Americans, are toocontinually pointing out, and with evident satisfaction,the scandal arising from the conduct ofsome few individuals in these classes as a proofof the conduct of the whole ; but they mistakekH 3Aristocracy.the exceptions for the rule. If they were to payattention, they would perceive that these accusationsare only confined to same few out of aclass comprehending; many many thousands inour wealthy isle, and that the very circumstanceof their rank being no shield against the attachmade upon them, is a proof that they are exceptions,whose conduct is universally held up tflpublic ridicule or indignation. A crim. con.English high life is exulted over by thecans ; they point to it, and exclaim, " See whatyour aristocracy are !" forgetting that the crimeis committed by one out of thousands, and thatit meets with the disgrace which it deserves, andthat this crime is, tu a certain degree, encouragedby oui laws relative to divorce. Do the Americansimagine that there is no cj-im. con, perpetratedthe United States ? many instances of suspicionsand some of actual discovery, came to my knowledgeeven during my short residence there, butthey were invariably, and perhaps judiciouslyhushed up, for the sake of the families and theAARISTOCRACY.national credit. I do not wish, nor would it bepossible, to draw any parallel between the twonations on this point ; I shall only observe thatin England we have not considered the vice tohave become so prevalent as to think it necessaryto form societies for the prevention of it. as theyhave done in the United States,It has been ack.no wledgect by other nations,and I believe it to be true, that the nobility andgentry of England are the most moral, mostreligious, and most honourable classes that canbe found not only in our country, but in anyother country in the world, and such they certainlyought from circumstances to be.Possessed of competence, they have no incentivesto behave dishonestly. They are well-educated,the finest race of men and womenthat can be produced, and fie men are broughtup to athletic and healthy amusements. Theyhave to support the honour of an ancient family,and to hand down the name untarnished to theirposterity. They have every inducement to nobleIAristocracy.deeds, and are, generally speaking, above thenecessities which induce men to go ivrong. Ifthe Awould assert thatproducesvice, I can only say that luxury infersidleness and inactivity, and on this point thewomen of the aristocracy in this country havethe advantage over the American women, whocannot, from the peculiarity of the climate, takethe exercise so universally resorted to by ourhigher classes. I admit that some go wrong,but is error confined to the nobility alone ; arethere no spendthrifts, no dissolute young men,or ill brought up young women, among otherclasses ? Are there none in America ? Moreover,there are some descriptions of vice whichare meaner than others and more debasing tothe mind, and it is among the bidding andlower classes that these vices are principally tobe found.The higher classes invariably take the lead,and give the tone to society. If the court bemoral, so are the morals of the nation improvedhy example, as in the time of George III. Ifthe court be dissolute, as in the time ofCharles II., the nation will plunge into vice.Now, in America there is no one to take thelead; morals, like religion, are the concern ofnobody, and therefore it is that the standard ofmorality is so low. I have heard it argued thatallowing one party to have a very low standardof morality and to act up to that standard, andanother to have a high standard of morality andnot to act up to it, that the former is the reallymoral man, as he does act up to his principlessuch as They are. This may hold good whenwe examine into the virtues and vices of nations:that the American Indian who acts up tohis own code and belief, both in morality andreligion, may be more worthy than a Christianwho neglects his duty, may be true; but thequestion now is upon the respective moralityof two enlightened nations, both Christian andhaving the Bible as their guide — between thosewho have neither of them any pretence toL158 ARISTOCRACY.lower the standard of morality, as they bothknow better. M, Tocqueville observes, speakingof the difference between aristocratical anddemocrat] cal governments —In aristocratic governments the individualswho are placed at the head of avitus are richmen, who are solely desirous of power. In democraciesstatesmen are poor, and they have theirfortunes to make. The consequence is, that iaaristocratic States the rulers are rarely accessibleto corruption, and have very little craving formoney ; whilst the reverse is the case in democraticnations."This is true, and may be fairly applied to theAmerican democracy : as long as you will notallow the good and enlightened to rule, you willbe governed by those who will flatter and cheatyou, and demoralize society. When you allowyour aristocracy to take the reins, you will bebetter governed, and your morals will improveby example. What is the situation of Americaat present? the aristocracy of the country areARISTOCRACY. 169either in retirement or have migrated, and if thepower of the majority should continue as it nowdoes its despotic rule, you will have still fartheremigration. At present there are many hundredsof Americans who have retired to the Old Continent,that they may receive that return for theirwealth which they cannot in their own country ;and if not flattered, they are at least not insultedand degraded.Mr. Sanderson, in his " Sketches from Paris,"says —The American society at Paris, taken altogether,is of a good composition. It consists ofseveral hundred persons, of families of fortune,and young men of literal instruction. Here arelords of cotton from Carolina, and of sugar-canefrom the Mississippi, millionaires from all theCanada, and pursers from all the navies ; andtheir social qualities, from a sense of mutualdependence or partnership in absence, or somesuch causes, are more active abroad than athome.LARISTOCRACY.NThey form a little republic apart, and whena stranger arrives he finds himself at home ; heiindshimself also under the censorial inspectionof B public opinion, a salutary restraint not alwaysthe luck of those who travel into foreign countries.One thing only is to be blamed : it becomes'every day more the fashion for the eliteof our cities to settle themselves Iierc permanently.We cannot but deplore this exportationof the precious metals, since our country isdrained of what the supply is not too abundant.They who have resided here a few years, havingfortune and leisure, do not choose, as I perceive,to reside any where else."This is the fact ; and as the wealth of Americaincreases every day, so will those who possessit swarm oft' as fast as they can to other countries,if there is not a change in the presentsociety, and a return to something like order andrank. Who would remain in a country wherethere is no freedom of thought or action, andwiisre you cannot even spend your money as youAristocracy.please ? Mr. Butler the other day built a houseat Philadelphia with a porte-coc/ieret and the consequencewas that tliej called him an aristocrat,and would not vote for him. In short, will enlightenedand refined people live to be dictatedto by a savage and ignorant majority, who willneither allow your character nor your domesticprivacy to be safe !The Americans, in their fear of their institutionsgiving way, and their careful guard againstany encroachments upon the liberty of thepeople, have fallen into the en-or of sacrificingthe most virtuous portion of the community, anddriving a large portion of them out of the country.This will eventually be found to be a serious evil ;absenteeism will daily increase, and will be assorely felt as it is in Ireland at the present hour.The Americans used to tc-U mc with exultation,that they never could have an aristocracy in theircountry, from the law of entail having been abolished.Theyoftenasserted, and with some truth,that in that country property never accumulatedk162 Aristocracy.mbeyond two generations, and that the grandsonof a millionaire was invariably a pauper. Thisthey ascribe to the working of their institutions, Iand argue that it will always be impossible for any. Jfamily to be raised above the mass by a descent-i Iof property. Now the very circumstance of thiit Ihaving been invariably the case, induces me tlook for the real cause of it, as there is none to ba Jfound in their institutions why all the grand 1owns of millionaires should be paupers. It ia dowing to their institutions, but to moral causeswhich, although they have existed until now,will not exist for ever. In the principal andwealthiest cities in the Union, it is difficult tospend more than twelve or fifteen thousand dollarsper annum, as with such an expenditureyou are on a par with the highest, and you canbe no more. What is the consequence ? a youngAmerican succeeds to fifty or sixty thousanddollars a year, the surplus is useless to him;there is no one to vie with — no one wbo canreciprocate — he must stand alone. He naturallyARISTOCRACY. 1 63feels careless about what he finds to be of no useto him . Again, all his friends and acquaintancesare actively employed during the whole of theday in their several occupations ; he is a manof leisure, and must either remain alone or associatewith other men of leisure; and who arethe majority of men of leisure in the townsof the United States ? Blackness of genteel exteriorand fashionable appearance, with whomhe associates, into whose snares he falls, and towhom he eventually loses property about whichhe is indifferent. To be an idle man when everybodyelse is busy, is not only a great unhappiness,but a situation of great peril. Had thesons of millionaires, who remained in the Statesand left their children paupers, come over tothe old Continent, as many have done, theywould have stood a better chance of retainingtheir property.All I can say is, that if they cannot have anaristocracy, the worse for them ; I am not ofthe opinion, that they will not have one, al-aristocracy.though they are supported by the strong authorityof M. Tocqueville, who says —T do not think a single people can be quotasince human society began to exist, which halby its own free-will and by its own exertioncreated an aristocracy within its own 1All the aristocracies of the Middle Ages wfounded by military conquest : the conquewas the noble, the vanquished became the siInequality was then imposed by force ; and ait had been introduced into the manners of tcountry, it maintained its own authority, awas sanctioned by the legislation. Communityhave existed which were aristocratic from tearliest origin, owing to circumstances anteriorto that event, and which became more democraticin each succeeding age. Such was Idestiny of the Romans, and of the barbarismafter them. But a people, having taken its riin civilization and democracy, which shouldgradually establish an inequality of conditionuntil it arrived at inviolable privileges and iAristocracy,elusive castes, would be a novelty in the work ;and nothing intimates that America is likely tofurnish so singular an example,"I grant that no single people has by its ownfree-jill created an aristocracy, but circumstanceswill make one in spite of the people;and if there is no aristocracy who have power tocheck, a despotism may be the evil arising fromthe want of it. At present America is thinlypeopled, but let them look forward to the timewhen the population shall become denser; whatwill then be the eti'ect ? why a division betweenthe rich and the poor will naturally take place;and what i>i that but the foundation if not the formationof an aristocracy. An American cannotentail his estate, but he can leave the whole of itto his eldest son if he pleases ; and in a few years,the lands which have been purchased for a trifle,will become the foundation of noble fortunes;*« " At the time of the first settlement of the Englishin Virginia, when land was lo be had for little or nothing',some provident persons having obtained largegrants of it, and being dcsjruu? of maintaining: the splen-kAristocracy.but even now their laid of non-entail does notwork as they would wish.dour of their families, entailed their property upon theirdesccndaalE. The transmission of these estatesgeneration to generation, to men who bore theDBiiie, had the effect of relying up a distinct class of families,who, possession hy law the privilege of perp»-^taking their wealth, formed by these nicana a. sort a£Jpatrician order, distinguished by the grandeurluxury of their establishment, From this order itthat the king uauaUy chose his councillors of state.In the United States, the principal clauses of theEnglish law respecting descent have been nniverai}^rejected. The first rule that we follow, says Mr. Kentouching inheritance, is the following : — If a man diesintestate, his property goes to his heirs in a direct line.If he has hut one heir or heiress, he or she succeeds tothe whole. If there are several heirs of the same degreethey divide the inheritance e<iu:01y amongst them, withoutdistinction of sex.This rule was prescribed for the first time inState of New York by u statute of the 23il of February,17afi. (see Revised Salutes, vol. iii., Jppmdwr, p. 48.JI.It has since then been adopted in the revised statute ofthe same State. At the present day this law holds goodthroughout the whole of the United States, with theexception of the State of Vermont, whitherinherits a double portion : Kent's Commentingvol. iv. p. 370. Mr. Kent, in the same work, vol. ^r^•p. I — 22, gives an historical account of American legssto Vre ■tth- ■ARISTOCRACY. 167M. Tocqueville says —*^ The laws of the United States are extremelynation on the subject of entail ; by this we learn thatprevious to the revolution the colonies followed the Englishlaw of entail. Estates tail were abolished in Virginiain \TJ6, on a motion of Mr. Jefferson. They weresuppressed in New York in 1786; and have since beenabolished in North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee,Georgia, and Missouri. In Vermont, Indiana, Illinois, .South Carolina, and Louisiana, entail was never introduced.Those States which thought proper to preservethe English law of entail, modified it in such a way asto deprive it of its most aristocratic tendencies. * Ourgeneral principles on the subject of government,' saysMr. Kent, * tend to favour the free circulation ofproperty.'It cannot fail to strike the French reader whostudies the law of inheritance, that on these questionsthe French legislation is infinitely more democratic eventhan the American.** The American law makes an equal division of thelather's property, but only in the case of his will notbeing known; *for every man,' says the law, * in theState of New York, revised Statutes vol. iii., Appetising,p. 51), has entire liberty, power, and authority, to disposeof his property by will, to leave it entire, ordivided in favour of any persons he choses as his heirs,provided he do not leave it to a political body or anycorporation.' The French law obliges the testator todivide his property equally, or nearly so, among his heirs.Most of the American republics still admit of entails,168 Aristocracy.favourable to thy division of property ; but acause wliicli is more powerful than the laws preventsproperty from being divided to excess.*This is very perceptible in the States which arebeginning to be thickly peopled ; Massachusettsis the most populous part of the Union, but itcontains only eighty inhabitants to the squaremile, which is much less than in France, wherea hundred and sixty-two are reckoned to thesame extent of country. But in Massachusettsestates are very rarely divided; the eldest sontakes the land, and the others go to seek theirfortune in the desert. The law has abolishedunder certain restrictions ; but the French law prohibitsentail in all eases.If the Hocinl condition of the Americansdemocratic than that nf the Frcncli, the laws of the lat Iter are the inst democratic of the two. This may be ■explained more easily than at lirBt appears to be theftcase. In Prance, democracy is stilt occupied iwork of destruction ; in America, it reigns quietly over Jthe ruins it has made," — Democracy in Amerwa, iiA. De Tocqueville,In New England the shales are exceedingly sikhbut they aie rarely Bubjecfcd to further division.ARISTOCRACY. 169the rights of primogeniture, but circumstanceshave concurred to re-establish] it under a formof which none can tximploin, and by which nojust rights are impaired."And Chancellor Kent, in his "Ti-treatise uponAmerican Law," observes —It cannot be doubted that the division oflanded estates must produce great evils whenit is carried to socii excess as that each paredof land is insufficient to support a family ;but these disadvantages have never been felt inLie United States, and many generations mustelapse before they can be felt. The extent ofour inhabited territory, the abundance of adjacentland, and the continual stream of emigrationflowing from the shores of the Atlantictowards the interior of the country, suffice asyet, and will long suffice, to present the parcelingout of estates."There is, therefore, no want of preparation foran aristocracy in America, and, although at presentthe rich aresomuch in the minority that they^ARISTOCRACY.icannot coalesce, suchivill not be the case, perhaps,in twenty or thirty years ; they have but torally and make a stand when they become morenumerous and powerful, and they have every ichance of success. The fact is that an aristocracy ]is absolutely necessary for America, both polite* Icall and morally, if the Americans wish their in-Jsituations to hold together, for if some stop is not Jput to the rapidly advancing power of the peo- 1pie, anarchy must be the result. I do not mean |aristocracy of title; I mean such an aristocracyof talent and power which wealth will give — anaristocracy which shall lead society and purify it. JHow is this to be obtained in a democracy ?— Isimply by purchase. In a country where tsuffrage is confined, to certain classes, as in Enland, such purchase is not to be obtained, as thepeople who have the right of suffrage are not poor 3enough to be bought ; but in a country like Am&i4rica, where the Suffrage is universality people will Jeventually sell their birth-right; and if by sucblmeans an aristocratical government is electedARISTOCRACY.it will be able to amend the constitution, and passbat laws it pleases. This may appear visionary,but it has been proved already that it can be done,and if it can be done now, how much more easilywill it be accomplished when the population hasquadrupled, and the division commences betweenthe rich and the poor. I say it has been done already,for it was done at the last New York election.The democratic party made sure of success: but a large sum of money was broughtinto play, and the whole of the committees ofthe democratic party were bought over, and theWhigs carried the day.The greatest security fur the duration of thepresent institutions of the United States is theestablishment of an aristocracy. It is the thirdpower which was intended to act, but which hasbeen destroyed and is now wanting. Let thesenate be aristocratical — let the congress be partiallyso, and then what would be the Americangovernment of president, senate, and congress,but mutato nomine, king, lords, and commons ?LARISTOCRACY.I cannot perhaps hind a better opportunity than*here of pointing out what ought to be niadeknownto the English, as it has done more harm to theAmerican aristocracy than may be imagined. Irefer to the carelessness and facility with whichletters of introduction to this country are given,and particularly by the American authorities.I have drawn the character of Bennett, the<Jeditor of the Morning Herald of New Norlandthere is not a respectable Americanwill acknowledge that my sketch of him )correct ; will it not surprise the English pders when I inform them that this man obtainedadmittance to Westminster Hall at theCoronation, and was seated among the proudest Jand purest of our nobility .'! Such was the EBut it will be as well to revert back a little twhat has passed,During the time that England was at iwith nearly the whole of Europe, the Americawere to a great degree isolated and unknownexcept as carriers of merchandize under theARISTOCRACY.neutral flag ; but they were rapidly advancing'in importance ami wealth. At the conclusionof the last American war, during which, bytheir resolute and occasionally successful struggles,they had drawn the eyes of Europe towardsthem, and had advanced many degrees inthe general estimation of their importance aanation, the Americans occasionally made theirappearance as travellers, both on the Continentand in England ; but they found that theywere not so well received as their own ideasof their importance induced them to imaginethey were entitled to be ; especially on the Con-thefirst groat personage who shewed liberalityin this respect, was George the Fourth.Hearing that some American ladies of good,family had complained that, having no titles,no standing in society, they did not meet with.that civility to which, from descent and education,they were entitled, he received them atCourt most graciously, and those very ladiesLARISTOCRACY.are now classed among the peeresses of Great JBritain. Still the difficulty remained, as it valmost impossible for the aristocracy, abroad or at ^home, to ascertain the justness of the claims whichwere made by those of a nation who professedthe equality of all classes, and of whom manyof the pretenders to be well received did not hf Itheir appearance warrant the supposition thai, Itheir claims were Yatid. It being impossible to >|give any other rank but that of office, the AmericanGovernment hit upon a plan which nattended with very evil consequences. They igranted supernumerary attache-&hip& to thoMlAmericans who wished to travel; and as, on ttejOld Continent, the very circumstance of Ian attache to a foreign minister warrantthe respectability of the party, thoseobtained this distinction were well receivedand, unfortunately, sometimes did no credit Itheir appointments. The fact was that thifavours were granted without discriminateall who received them being put ias specimens of American gentlemen, the cbar^Aristocracy.racer of the Americans lost ground by thevery efforts made to establish it. The trueAmerican gentlemen who travelled (and there isno lack of them) were supposed to be English,while the spurious were put town as samples ofthe gentility of the United States.That the principles of equality were onegreat cause of the indiscriminate distnbuticmof those marks of distinction by the highestquarters in the Union, and of the facility of obtainingletters of recommendation from themthere is no doubt ; but the principal and still existingcauses, are the extended and domineeringpower of the press, and the high state of excitementof the political parties. Those in powerare positively afraid to refuse literary men, orthose who have assisted them in their politicalcareer ; they have not the moral courage to do so,however undeserving the parties may ideality he.But, as is generally the case, they really do notknow the parties ; it is sufficient that the favour,considered trifling, is demanded, and it is instantlygranted. Now, as at the accession oftAristocracy.Genera] Jatksitn, and the subsequent raising ofMr. Van Buren to the presidency, the democratteal) or Loco Poco parly came into power, it isto their friends and supporters, the least respectableportion of the American community, towhom these favours have been granted ; whichof course has not assisted the claims of theAmericans to respectability. An instance ofthis sort occurred to me after I had benia few months in America. One of the igentleman-like and well-informed men in NewYork, requested that I would give a letter ofintroduction to a friend of his who was goingto England. Taking it for granted that sucha request would not be made without the partydeserving the recommendation, I immediatelyassented. The party who obtained ray letters(an editor of a paper, as I afterwards discovered),on his arrival in England, considering that hewas not treated with that attention to which, inhis own vain-glorioLiBness, he thought himselfentitled, actually sent a hostile letter to one of theAristocracy. 177gentlemen to whom he had been introduced, andotherwise proved himself by his conduct to be amost improper person. I was informed of this byletters from England ; and immediately went tathe gentleman who had requested the introductionfrom me, and stated the conduct of theparty. " I really am very sorry," said heybut / icnew nothing of him." " Knew nothingof him?" replied I. "No, indeed; but myfriend Mr. C, of Philadelphia, introduced himby letter, and requested me to ask for introductionsfor him." " Then you evil! oblige me bywriting to your friend Mr. C. and ask himwhy he did so, as I find myself very much com-I promised by this affair." He wrote to Mr. C,of Philadelphia, who repbed that he was verysorry, but that really he knew nothing of him.He had been introduced to him by letter, byMr. O., and that he was a staunch supporterof their party. Now, how many grades thisperson had climbed up by letters of introductionit is impossible to say, but this is suffix178 ARtSTOCRAGV.cent to prove that letters of introduction whicht, you may say, demanded, and not refusedfrom the fear of offending a political agent orpenny-aliter, must ever be received with duecaution ; and it is equally certain, that thosefrom the President himself are the most easyto be obtained.I have entered freely into this question, as itis important that it should be known, not onlyto the English, but to the Americans themselves.A letter of introduction from a gentleman rfCarolina, Virginia, or Boston, I should be infinitelymore induced to take notice of than fromthe President of the United States, unless thePresident stated that he was personally acquaintedwith the party who delivered it ; andI make this statement in justice to the Americangentlemen, and not with the slightest wishto check that intercourse which will every dayincrease, and, I trust, to the advantage of bothnations,*• It maps also be here observed, that the Americahave littleopportunityof jadgingfavourahlyof theirARISTOCRACY. 179Indeed, now that such rapid communicationhas taken place between the two countries, sincethe Atlantic has been traversed by steam, it becomesmore imperative that these facts shouldbe known. Every fortnight a hundred andsixty passengers will arrive by the Great Wester,or some other steamer. Most of them arcAmerican citizens, armed with their letters ofrecommendation, and the situation of the Americanminister has become one of peculiar difficulty.By one steam packet alone he has had seventy-fivepeople, or families, with letters of introductionto him, mostly obtained by the means whichI have described ; and there is not one of theseiiah by the usual importations to their country. Theyall call Themselves Engllati gentlemen, and are loo oftensupposed to be, and are received %a such. I hare oftenbeen told that 1 should meet with ao English gentlemanor an English merchant, and the parties mostly provedto ba nothing but travellers, bargemen, or even worse.If the sterling Americana stay at borne, and send the budone to us, and we do the same, neither party wUI belikely to form a very favourable opinion of the othere time to come.^^^yonieti180 Bristolparties wliu milites not expect as much attentionas If the American minister had nothing else todobut to be at bis command. They leave theircards with him ; if the cards are not returnedin two or three plays, they send a letter to knowwhy lie has not called upon them? and ifthe visit is returned, tieiid a letter to knowwhether the minister called m person, or not ?With a stipend from his own government, quiteinadequate to the purpose, he is expected, to thegreat detriment of his private fortune, to receiveand entertain all these people. I have it fromthe best authority, that some of these partieshave called and inquired whether the ministerwas at home; being answered in the negative,they have gone into a room, taken a chair, and declaredtheir determination not to leave the houseimtil they had seen him. Most of them expecthim obtain admittance for them into the Housesof Lords and Commons, and to present them atCourt. In some instances, when the minister hasstated the necessity of a Court dress, they haveremonstrated, thinking it an expence wholly im-aristocracy.necessary. " They were American citizens, andwould be introduced as such ; they had nothingto do with Court dresses, and all that nonsense."And thus, since the steani- vessels have increasedthe communication between the two countries,has the American minister been in a state ofannoyance, to which it is impossible that he,or any other who may be appointed in his place,can possibly submit.Let the Americans understand, that thoseonly go to Court in this country who haveclaims, as the nobility, the oldest commoners,people in ofSce, the army and navy, and otherliberal professions. There are thousands offamilies in England, by descent, fortune, andeducation, very superior to those of America,who never think of going to Court, beingaware that such is not their sphere; and yetevery American who comes over here with fouror five introductions in his pocket must, forsooth,be presented. If the minister refuses,why then thcru is an attack upon him in theL182 Aristocracy.kAmerican prints, and his name and his supposedmisdemeanors are bandied about from ione end of the Union to the other. It is hardly Icredible to what a state of slavery they would 1reduce the American representative. One nsays, " I understand 1 can have a Court |dress at a Jew's." " Yes, you can, I believe.""Well, now, suppose we step doivn together;you may cheapen it a bit for nie, may be."These facts are known to the respectable andgentleman-like Americans, who, after the sampleswhich have come over, and have obtainedadmission into society and gone to Court, willnot shew themselves, but prefer to stay at borne.A]l this is wrong, and a remedy must soonbe found, as the evil increases every day. TheAmericans cannot take the English Court bystorm, or force ua to acknowledge their equalityin this country. There are but certain classesin this country who have any pretension tobe received at Court ; and unless the Americanscan prove that they are by their situa-aristocracy.tion, or descent, of a sufficient rank to qualifythem to be admitted, they must be contentto be excluded, as the major portion of ourcountrymen are. Even an American being amember of Congress does not qualify him, althoughbeing a member of the Senate certainlyshould. The members of the American Congressare not in the mass equal by any means in respectabilityto the members of the EnglishHouse of Commons ; and there have been manymembers of the English House of Commons,since the passing of the Reform Bill, whocould not, and cannot, gain admittance intosociety.If the harmony and good feeling between thetwo countries is to continue uninterrupted, andour intercourse to be extended, as there is everyprobability that it will be, it appears to me-thatthere is more importance to he attached to thisquestion than at the first view of it might besupposed. The Americans are more ambitiousof birth and aristocracy than any other nation,iriiich is very natural, if it were only som theAristocracy.simple fact that we always most desire what isout of our reach. Since the Americans have \come over in such numbers to this country, ourHerald's Office has actually been besieged by |them, in their anxiety to take out the arms and Iachievements of their presumed forefathers;this is also very natural and very proper,although it may be at variance with their institutions.The determination to have an aristocracyin America gains head every day : a conflictmust ensue, when the increase of wealth in thecountry adds sufficiently to the strength of theparty. But some line must be drawn in this icountry, as to the admission of Americans to the IEnglish Court, or, if not drawn, it will end in a >total, and therefore unjust exclusion. As but fewof the Americans can claim any right to aristocracyin their own country from acknowledgeddescent, I should not be surprised if in a fewyears, now that the two countries are becomingso intimately connected, a reception at theEnglish Court ot this country be consideredas an establishment of their claim. If bo, it jAristocracy. 185will be a curious anomaly in the history of a re-public that, fifty years after it was established,the republicans should apply to the mothercountry whose institutions they had abjured,to obtain from her a patent of superiority, soas to raise themselves above that hated equalitywhich, by their own institutions, they profess.CHAPTER XV.GOVERNMENT.It is not my intention to enter into alengthened examination of the American formof government. I have said that, as a government," with all its imperfections, it is the bestsuited to the present condition of America inso far as it is the one under which the countryhas made, and will continue to make, the mostrapid strides ;" but I have not said that it wasa better form of government than others. Itsvery weakness is favourable to the advance of thecountry ; it may be compared to a vessel which,from her masts not being wedged, and her timbersbeing loose, sails faster than one moresecurely fastened. Considered merely as govern-government.ments for the preservation of order and the equalizationof pressure upon the people, I believe.that few governments are bad, as there are alwayssome correcting influences, moral or otherwise,which strengthen those portions which are theweakest. A despot, for instance, although hispower is acknowledged and submitted to, will notexercise tyranny too far, from the fear of assassination.I have inserted in an Appendix the Form ofthe American Constitution, and if my readerswish to examine more closely into it, I must referthem to M. Tocqueville's excellent iiork. Thefirst point which must strike the reader whoexamines into it is, that it is extremely com-plated. It is, and it is not. It is so far complicatedthat a variety of wheels are at work ; butit is not complicated, from the circumstance thatthe same principle prevails throughout, fromthe Township to the Federal Head, and that itis put in motion by one great and universalGOVERNMENT.propfUiiig j)owcr. It may be compared to acotton-thread manufactory, in which thousandsand thousands of reels and spindles are all atwork, the labour of so many smaller reels turnedover to larger, which in their turn yield up their |pniduee, until the whole is collet-ted into one jmass. The principle of the American Govern Iment is good ; the power that puts it in motion iis enormous, and therefore, like the complicated Imachinery I have compared it to, it requiresconstant attention, and proper regulation of the |propelling power, that it may not become out of |order. Time propelling power is the sovereign Iof the people, otherwise the will of the majority.The motion of all propelling powers must be re Jrelated by a fly-wheel, or corrective check, if not, ;the motion will gradually accelerate, until the Imachinery is destroyed by the increase of friction.But there are other causes by which the machinery Imay be deranged ; aa, although the smaller porttons of teaching, defective, may atanytime JGovernment.be taken out and repaired without its being necessaryfor the niacliine to slop ; yet if thelarger wheels are by any chance thrown outof their equilibrium, the machinery may be as it would be by a too rapid motion,occasioned by the excess of propelling power.Further, there are external causes which mayendanger it : any machine may be thrown outof its level by a convulsion, or shock, whichwill cause it to cease working, if even it does notbreak it into fragments.Now, the dangers which threaten the UnitedStates ai-e, the Federal Government being stillweaker than it is at present, or its Incoming, asit may from circumstances, tiw [powerful.The present situation of the American Governmentis that the fly-wheel, or regulator ofthe propelling jmwer (that is to say the aristocracy,or power of the senate,) has been nearlydestroyed, and the consequences are that themotion is at this moment too much accelerated,and threatens in a few years to increase itsLGovernment.rapidity, at the risk of the destruction of the Iwhole machinery.But, although it will be necessary to point jout the weakness of the Federal Government, Iwhen opposed to the States or the majorityinasmuch as the morality of the people is;!seriously affected by this weakness, my «is not to enter into the merits of the governmentof the United States as a working govern Iment, but to inquire how far the Americans arc jcorrect in their boast of its being a model for jother countries.Let us consider what is the best form ofgovernment. Certainly that which most contributesto security of life and property,and renders those happy and moral who isubmitted to it. This I believe will be grally acknowledged, and it is upon thesgrounds that the government of the UnitedStates must be tested. They abjuredmonarchy, and left their country for a distland, to obtain freedom. They railed atGOVERNMENT.vices and imperfections of continental rule,and proposed to themselves a governmentwhich should be perfect, under which everyman should have his due weight in the representation,and prove to the world that a peoplecould govern themselves. Disgusted with theimmorality of the age and the disregard to religion,they anticipated an amendment in the stateof society. This new, and supposed perfect,machinery has been working for upwards ofsixty years, and let us now examine how farthe theory has been supported and home outbythe practical result.I must first rented the reader that I have alreadyshewn the weakness of the federal Governmentupon one most important point, whichis, that there is not sufficient security for personand property. When such is the case, therecannot be that adequate punishment for vice sonecessary to uphold the morals of a people. Iwill now proceed to prove the weakness of theFederal Government whenever it has to combatLI9i2GOVERNMENT.ivitli the several States, or with the will of theinajoritj.It will be perceived, by an examination intotile Constitution of the United States, that theStates have reserved for themselves all the redpower, and that the Federal Union exists butupon their sufferance. Each State still insists .upon its right to withdraw itself from theUnion whenever it pleases, and the consequenceof this right is, that in every conflict with aState, the Federal Government has invariablyto Succumb. M. Tocqueville observes, " If jthe sovereignty of the Union were to engage in Ja struggle with that of the States, at the present -4day, its defeat may be confidently predicted; Iand it is not probable that such a twouldbe seriously undertaken. As often isteady resistance is offered to the FedexGovernment, it will lie found to yield.prince has hitherto shewn that whenever iState has demanded any tiling with perseveranceand resolution, it lias invariably succeeded ; and.GOVERNMENT.that if a separate government has distinctlyrefused to act, it was left to do as it thoughtfit.*But even if the government of the Unionhad any strength inherent in itself, the physicalsituation of the country would render the exerciseof that strength very difficult TheUnited States cover an immense territory ; theyare separated from each other by great distances; and the population is disseminated overthe surface of a country which is still half airildemess. J f the Union were to undertake toenforce the allegiance of the confederate Statesby military means, it would be in a positionvery analagous to that of England at the limeof the War of Independence."• See the conduct of the Northern Sfatea in the warof 1S12. " During that war," says Jefferson in a letterto General Lafayette, " fotar of lh& Eastern Stales wereany attached In the Union, like go men inanimatebodies to living mentThe profound peace of the Union afford no pretextfor a starting; army; and ivilhoat a standing army alot prepared lo profit by a favourablet94GOVERNMENT.^The Funeral Government never displayedmore weakness than in the question of the tariffput upon English goods to support the manufacturersof the Northern States. The SouthernStates, as producers anil exporters, complainedof this as prejudicial to their interests. SouthCarolina, one of the smallest States, led the vain,and the storm rose. This State passed an actby convention, annuUiTig the Federal Act of thetariff', armed her militia, and prepared for war.The consequence was that the Federal Governmentabandoned the principle of the tariff, butat the same time, to save the disgrace of itsdefeat, it passed an act warranting the Presidentto put down resistance by force, or, in othowords, making the Union compulsory. SouthCarolina annulled this law of the FederalGovernment, but as the State gained itsby the Federal Government having abandcthe principle of the tariff, the matter ended.Iopportunity to conquer reaistaiice,andtake the Boyereigapower by surprise.GOVERNMENT.Another instance in which the Federal Governmentshowed its weakness when opposedto a State, was in its conflict with Georgia.The Federal Government had entered into aBcJemn, and what ought to have been an ia-troubletreaty, with the Cherokee Indians,securing to them the remnant of their lands inthe State of Georgia. The seventh Article ofthat treaty says, " The United States solemnlyguarantee to the Cherokee nation all their landsnot hitherto ceded." The State of Georgia,when its population increased, did not like theIndians to remain, and insisted upon their removal.What was the result ? — that the FederalGovernment, in violation of a solemn treaty andthe national honour, submitted to the dictationof Georgia, and the Indians were removed tothe other side of the Mississippi.These instances are sufficient to prove theweakness of the Federal Government when opposedto the States; it is still weaker whenopposed to the will of the majority. I have alk2196 GOVERNMENT,ready quoted many instances of thethis uncontrolled will. I do not refer to Lynchlaw, or the reckless murders in the SouthernSlates, but to the riots in the most civilized cities,such as Boston, New York, and Baltimore, inwhich outrages and murders have been committedwithout the Government ever presumingto punish the perpetrators ; but the strongestevidence-of the helplessness of the Government,when opposed to the majority, has been in thelate Canadian troubles, which, I fear, haveonly for the season subsided. If many havedoubts of the sincerity of the President of theUnited States in his attempts to prevent theinterference of the Americans, there can be nodoubt but that General Scott, Major Worth,and the other American officers sent to thefrontiers, did their utmost to prevent the witnesseswhich were committed, and to allay theexcitement ; and every one is aware how uw*availing were their efforts. The magazines werebroken open, the field-pieces and muskets takenGovernment. 197possession of; large subscriptions of moneypoured in from every quarter; farrier sent of pigs, com, and buffaloes, to supportthe insurgents. No one would, indeed noone could, act against the will of the majority,and these officers found themselves left to theirindividual and useless exertions.The militia at Detroit were ordered out :they could not refuse to obey the summons,as they were individually liable to fine andimprisonment ; but as they said, very truly,You may call us out, but when we come intoaction we will point our muskets in whichdirection we please." Indeed, they did assistthe insists and fire at our people ; and whenthe insurgents were defeated, one of the drumswhich they had with them, and which wascaptured by our troops, was marked with thename of the militia corps which bad been calledout to repel them.When the p^-oplc are thu above the law, it isof very little consequence whether the law isLGOVERNMENT.more or less weak ; at present the Federal Go-tormentis ft mere cypher when opposed by themajority. Have, then, the Americans improvedupon us in this point P It is generally admittedthat a strong and vigorous government, whichcan act when it is necessary to restrain the passionof men under excitement, is most favourableto social order and happiness ; but, on thecontrary, when the dormant power of the executiveshould be brought into action, all thatthe Federal Government can do is to become apassive spectator or a disregarded suppliant.CHAPTER XVI.The next question to be examined into ia,has this government of the United States set anexample of honour, good faith, and moral principle,to those who are subjected to it ? — has it,by so leaving, acted favourably upon themorals of the people, and corrected the vices anderrors of the monarchical institutions which theAmericans hold up to such detestation ?The Americans may be said to have had, tillwithin the last twenty years, little or no relationwith other countries. They have had fewtreaties to make, and very little diplomaticarrangements with the old Continent. But evenif they had had, they must not be judged bythem; a certain degree of national honour isnecessary to every nation, if they would havetthe respect of others, and a <Iread of the consequenceswould always compel them to adhereto any treaty made with great and powerfulcountries. The question is, has the Federal^Government adhered to its treaties andpromisesmade with and to those who have beentoo weak to defend themselves ? Has it notrepeatedly, in the short period of their existenceas a nation, violated the national honourwhenever without being in fear of retaliation orexposure it has been able to do so. Let thisquestion be answered by an examination into |their conduct towards the unhappy Indians,who, to use their own expression, are " nowmelting away like snow before the white men."We arc not to estimate the morality of agovernment by its strict adherence to its compactswith the powerful, but by its strict moral jsense of justice towards the weak and defunctiless ; and it should be borne in mind, that one Iexample of a breach of faith on the part of ademocratic government, is more injurious to ■GOVERNMENT.the morals of the people under that govern in c-ntthan a thousand instances of breach of faithwhich may occur in society ; for a people whohave no aristocracy to set the example, must naturallylook to the conduct of their rulers and totheir decisions, as a standard for their guidance.To enumerate the multiplied breaches of faithtowards the Indians would swell out this workto an extra volume. It was a bitter sarcasm ofthe Seminole chief, who, referring to the termsused in the treaties, told the Indian agents thatthe white man's "for ever" did not last longenough. Even in its payment of the triflingsums for the lands sold by the Indians and resoldat an enormous profit, the American Governmenthas not been willing to adhere to itsagreement ; and two years ago, when the Indianscame for their money, the American Governmenttold them, like an Israelite dealer, thatthey must take half money and half goods.The Indians remonstrated ; the chiefs replied,Our young men have purchased upon credit,V202 GOVERNMENT.as they are wont to do ; they require the dollars,to pay honestly what they owe."Is our great father so poor ?" said one chiefto the Indian agent ; " I will lend him somemoney ;" and he ordered several thousand dollarsto be brought, and offered them to the agent.In the Florida war, to which I shall agiunrefer, the same want of faith has been exercised.Unable to drive the Indians out of their swampsand morasses, they have persuaded them tocome into a council, under a flag of truce.This flag of truce has been violated, and theIndians have been thrown into prison until theycould be sent away to the Far West, that is, if Ithey survived their captivity, which the gallant JSchola could not. Let it not be supposed that Ithe officers employed are the parties to blame in jthese acts ; it is, generally speaking, the Indian Iagents who are employed in these nefarious Itransactions. Among these agents there are |many honourable men, but a corrupt governorment ivill always find people corrupt enough to IGovernment.do anything it may ivisli. Hut any languagethat I can use as to the conduct of the AmericanGovernment towards the Indians wouldbe light, compared to the comments made in mypresence by the officers and other Americangentlemen upon this subject. Indeed, the in-dignatioD expressed is so general, that it provesthere is less morality in the Government thanthere is in the nation.With the exception of the Florida war, whichstill continues, the last contest which the AmericanGovernment had with the Indians waswith the Sacs and Foxes, commanded by thecelebrated chief. Black Hawk. The Sacs andFoxes at that period held a large tract of land(Ml Rock river, in the territory of lowly, on theeast side, of the Mississippi, which the Governmentwished, perforce, to take from them. Thefollowing is Black Hawk's account of the meansby which this land was obtained. The war wasoccasioned by Black Hawk disowning the treatyand attempting to repossess the territory.*' Some moons after this young chief (Lieu.Lt GOVERNMENT.tenant Like) descended the Mississippi, tie ufour }>cop]e killed an American, and was confinedin the prison at St. Louis tor the offence.We held a council at our village to see whatI could be done far him, which determined thatQuash-qua-me, Pa-she-pa-ho, Oii-che-qua-ha,and Ha-she-quar-hi-qua, should go down to StLouis, and see our American father, and do allthey could to have our friend released ; by payingfor the person killed, thus covering theblood and satisfying the relations of the manmurdered ! This being the only means with usof saving a person who had killed another, andwe then thought it was the same way with thewhites.The party started with the good wishes (^the whole nation, hoping they would accomplishthe object of their mission. The relationsof the prisoner blacked their faces and fasted,hoping the Great Spirit would take pity onthem, and return the husband and the father tohis wife and children.Quash-qua-me and party remained a longGOVERNMENT. 205time absent. They at length returned, and encampeda short distance below the village, butdid not come up that daw, nor did any personapproach their camp. Tliey appeared to bedressed in fine coats and had medals. Fromthese circumstances, we were in hopes they badbrought us good news. Early the next morning,the council lodge was crowded ; and party came up, and gave us thefollowing account of their mission : —On their arrival at St. Louis, they met theirAmerican father, and explained to him theirbusiness, and urged the release of their friend.The American chief told them he wanted land,and they agreed to give him some on the westside of the Mississippi, and seme on the Illinoisde, opposite the Jefferson, When the businesswas all arranged, they expected to have theirfriend released to come home with them. Butabout the time they were ready to start, theirfriend, who was led out of prison, ran a shortdistance, and was shot dead. This is all theykGOVERNMENT.could recollect of what was said and done.They had been drunk the greater part of thetime they were in St. Louis.This is all myself or nation knew of thetreaty of 1804. It has been explained to mesince. I find by that treaty, all our countryeast of the Mississippi, and south of the Jell^reon,was ceded to the United States for one thousanddollars a yeai- ! I will leave it to the people ofthe United States to say, whether our nationwas properly represented in this treaty ? orwhether we received a fair compensation lor theextent of country ceded by those four individuals.I could say much more about this treaty,but I will not at this time. It has been theorigin of all our difficulties."Indeed, I have reason to believe that themajor portion of the land obtained from theIndians has been ceded by parties who had nopower to sell it, and the treaties with these partieshave been enforced by the Federal Government.In a Report for the protection of the WesternGOVERNMENT.Frontier, submitted to Congress by tbc Secretaryof War, we have a very fair expose of theconduct and intentions of the American Governmenttowards the Indians. Although the IndiansCDDtiDue to style the President of theUnited States as their Great Father, yet, in thisreport, the Indian feeling which really existstowards the American people is honestlyavowed ; it says in its preamble — ■As yet no community of feeling, except ofdeep and lasting hatred to the white man, andparticularly to the Anglo-Americans, exists-among them, and, unless they coalesce, noserious difficulty need bfe apprehended fromthem. Not bo, however, should they [le inducedto unite for purposes offensive and defensive;their strength would then become apparent,create confidence, and in all probability inducethem to give vent to their long suppressed desireto revenge past wrongs, which is restrained,as they openly and freely confess, by fearalone."208 government.And speaking of the feuds between the tribes,aa in the case of the Sioiix and Chippewa,which, as I Jive observed in my Joiirnai, theAmerican Government pretended to be anxiousto make up ; it appears that this anxiety iiso very great, for the Report says —Should it however prove otherwise, the IUnited States will, whenever they choose, be jable to bring the whole of the Sioux force (the Ihereditary and irreclaimable enemy to everyother Indian) to bear against the hostiles ;vice versa, should our difficulty be with the ISioux nation. And the suggestion is made,whether prudence dates not require, that thosehereditary feelings should not rather he maingained than destroyed by efforts to cultivate acloser reunion between them."This Report also very delicately points out,when speaking of the necessity of a larger forceon the frontier, that " it is merely adverted toin connexion with the heavy obligations whichrest upon the Government, and which haveGOVERNMENT.been probably contracted from time to timewithout any very nice calculation of the meanswhich would be necessary to a faithful dischargeof them,"I doubt whether this Report would have beenpresented by Congress had there been any idea ofits finding its way to the Old Country. By-and-by1 shall refer to it again, I have made thesefew extracts merely to shew that expediency,and not moral feeling, is the principle alonewhich guides the Federal Government of theUnited States.The next instance which I shall bring forwardto prove the want of principle of theFederal Government is its permitting, and itmay be said tacitly acquiescing, in the seizure ofthe province of Texas, and allowing it to beravished from the Mexican Government, withwhom they were on terms of amity, but whowas unfortunately too weak to help herself. Inthis instance the American Government hadno excuse, as it actually had an army on theLGOVERNMENT.frontier, and could have compelled the igents to go back ; but no ; it derived that the 1Texas, if in its hands, or if independent ofMexico, would become a mart tor their ext. Jslave population, that it was the Finest country; 1in the world for producing cotton, and thatchit would be an immense addition of valise jable territory. Dr. Channing's letter to i/b \Clay is so forcible on this question, enters nfully into the merits of the case, and points out scclearly the seriousness of the transaction, that ]I shall now quote a feiv passages from this best Iof American authority. Indeed, I consider that Ithis letter of Dr. Channing is the printed 1cause why the American Government have not Jas yet admitted Tess into the Union,efforts of the Northern States would not haprevented it, but it has actually been shamed Iby Dr. Channing, who says—The United States have not been just tiMexico. Our citizens did not steal singlysilently, in disguise, into that land. Their pur* 1rGOVERNMENT. 211pose of dismembering Mexico, and attachingher distant province to this country, was notwrapt in mystery. It was proclaimed in ourpublic prints. Expeditions were openly fittedout within our borders for the Texan war.Troops were organised, equipped, and marchedfor the scene. of action. Advertisements forvolunteers, to be enrolled and conducted toiTexas at the expense of that territory, were insertedin our newspapers. The Government,indeed, issued its proclamation, forbidding thesehostile preparations ; but this was a dead letter.Military companies, with officers and standards,in defiance of proclamations, and in the face ofday, directed their steps to the revolted province.We had, indeed, an army near' thefrontiers of Mexico. Did it turn back theseinvaders of a land with which we were at peace ?On the contrary, did not its presence give confidenceto the revolters ? After this, what constructionof our conduct shall we force on theworld, if we proceed, especially at this moment.LGovernment,cuuc VI iiatiunsnes. Theyto receive into our Union the territory, which,through our neglect, has fallen a prey to lawlessinvasion ? Are we milling to take our placeamong robber-states ? As a people have we noself-respect ? Have we no reverence for nationalmorality ? Have we no feeling of responsibilityto other nations, ard to Him by whom the fatesof nations are disposed ?"Dr. Channing then proceeds : —Some crimes by their magnitude have atouch of the sublime; and to this dignity theseizure of Texas by our citizens is entitled.Modern times furnish no example of individualrapine on so grand a scale. It is nothing leviathanthe robbery of a realm. The pirate seizea ship. The colonists and their coadjutors cisatisfy themselves with nothing showempire. They have left their AngloSaxooSancestors behind them. Those barbarians iformed to the maxims of their age, to the ru4|code of nations in time of thickest heathen darbijaness. They invaded England under thouGovernment. 213sovereigns, and with the sanction of the gloomyreligion of the North. But it is in a civilizedage, and amidst refinements of manners; it isamidst the lights of science and the teachings ofChristianity; amidst expositions of the law ofnations and enforcements of the law of universallove ; amidst institutions of religion, learning,and humanity, that the robbery of Texas hasfound its instruments. It is from a free, well-ordered,enlightened Christian country, thathordes have gone forth, in open day, to perpetratethis mighty wrong'"I shall conclude my reniarlts upon this pointwith one more extract from the same writer.A nation, provoking war by cupidity, byencroachment, and, above all, by efforts to propagatethe curse of slavery, is alike false toitself, to God, and to the human race."Having now shewn how far the Federal Governmentmay be considered as upholding thepurity of its institutions by the example of itsconduct towards others, let us examine whetherL2UGOVERNMENT.in its domestic management it sets a properexample to the nation. It cries out against thebribery and corruption of England. Is it itselffree from this imputation ?The author of a ' Voice from America' observes,Id such an unauthorized, unconstitutional, andloose state of tidings, millions of the publicmoney may be appropriated to electioneeringand party purposes, and to buy up friends ofthe administration, without being open to proofor liable to account. It is a simple vintner offact, that all the public funds lost in this way,have actually gone to buy up friends to thegovernment, whether the defalcations were mattersof understanding between the powers atWashington and these parties, or not. Themoney is gone, and is going; and it goes tofriends. So much is true, whatever else is falseAnd what has already been used up in thisway, according to official report, is sufficient tobuy the votes of a large fraction of the populationof the United States, — that is to say, suff*GOVERNMENT. 215cent to produce an influence adequate to securethem. On the 17th of January, 1838, theUnited States treasurer reported to Congresssixty-three defalcation (individuals), in all tothe amount of upwards of a million of dollars,without touching the vast amounts lost in thelocal banks, — a mere beginning of the end."As I have before observed-when Mr, Adamswas President, a Mr. B. Walker was throwninto prison for being a defaulter to the extent ofeighteen thousand dollars. Wliy are none ofthese defaulters to the amount of upwards amillion of dollars punished ? If the governmentthinks proper to allow them to remain atliberty, does it not virtually wink at their dishonesty.Neither the defaulters nor their securitiesare touched. It would appear as if ij werean understood arrangement ; the governmenttelling these parties, who have assisted them, " wecannot actually pay you money down for yourservices; but we will put money under yourcontrol, and you may, if you please, helpWGovernment.yourself." What has been the result of misconductujwn society ? — that as the governmentdoes not consider a breach of faith as deservingof punishment, society does not think so either;and thus are the people demoralized, not onlyby the example of government in its foreign relations,but by its leniency towards those individualswho are as regardless of faith as thegovernment iras proved to be itself.Indeed, it may be boldly asserted, that inevery measure taken by the Federal Government,the moral effect of that measure upon the <people has never been thought worthy of a'^moment's consideration.CHAPTER Xvi.We must now examine into one or two otherpoints. The Americans consider that they arethe only people on earth who govern themselves ;they assert that we have not a free and perfectrepresentation. We will not dispute that point ;the question is, not what the case in Englandmay be, but what America may have gained.This is certain, that if they have not a free impartialrepresentation, they do not, as they suppose,govern themselves. Have they, with universalsuffrage, obtained a representation free frombribery and corruption ? If they have, they certainlyhave gained their point ; if they have not,they have sacrificed much, and have obtainediiotliing.By a. calculation which 1 made at the timeI was in the United States of all the variesGovernment.vous elections which took place annually, biennially,and at longer dates, including those for theFederal Government, the separate governmentsof each State, and many other elective offices,there are about two thousand five hundred electionsof different descriptions every year ; and ifI were to add the civic elections, which areequally political, I do not know what amountthey would arrive at. In this country we haveon an average about two hundred elections perannum, so that, in America, for thirteen millions,they have two thousand five hundred elections,and in England for twenty-seven millions, twohundred, on the average, during the year.It must, however, be admitted, that the mastiff(wrtion of these elections in the United States passoff quietly', probably from the comparative'of interest excited by them, and the contirepetition which takes place ; but when theportant elections are in progress the case isdifferent; the excitement then becomesYersal ; the coming election is the theme oiiGovernment.every tongue, the all-engrossing topic, andnothing else is listened or paid attention to.It must be remembered, that the struggle inAmerica is for place, not for principle; torwhichever party obtains power, their principle ofacting is much the same. Occasionally a questionof moment will come forward and nearly convulsethe Union, but this is very rave; thegeneral course of legislation is in a very narrowcompass, and is seldom more than a mere routineof business. With the majority, who leada party, (particularly the one at present inpower), the contest is not, therefore, for principle,but, it may almost be said, for bread;and this is one great cause of the virulence accompanyingtheir election struggles. The electionof the President is of course the most important.M. Tocqueville has well described it,For a long while before the appointed time isat hand, the election becomes the most importantand the ail-engrossing topic of discussion. Theardour of faction is redoubled ; and all the artisGOVERNMENT.filial passions which the imagination can createin tete bosom of a. happy and peaceful land areagitated and brought to light. The President,on the other hand, is absorbed by the cares ofself-defence. He no longer governs for the interestof the State, but for that of his re-election ;he does homage to the majority, and instead ofchecking its passions, as his duty commandshim to do, lie frequently courts its worst Cft^lprices. Ah the election draws near, the activityof intrigue and the agitation of the populaceincrease ; the citizens arc divided into hostilecamps, each of which assumes the name of itsfavourite candidate ; the ivhoie nation glowswith feverish excitement ; the election is thedaily theme of the public papers, the subject ofprivate conversation, the end of every thoughtand every action, the sole interest of the present."Of course the elections in the large cities arethose which next occupy the public attention.I have before stated, that at the last election inNew York the committees of the opposite partyGOVERNMENT,22 1were bought over by the Whigs, and that bythis bribery the election was gained ; but I willnow quote from the Americans themselves, andlet the reader then decide in which country, Englandor America, there is most purity of election.On the 9th, 10th, and lath instant, a localelection for mayor and charter-offices was heldin this city. It resulted in the defeat of theWhig party. The Loco-focus liatl a majority ofabout one thousand and fifty for their mayor.Last April the Whigs had a majority of aboutfive hundred. There are seventeen wards, andseventeen polls were opened. The out, or suburb,wards presented the moat disgraceful scenes ofriot, fraud, corruption, and perjury, that wereever witnessed in this or any other country on asimilar occasion. The whole number of votespolled was forty-one thousand three hundred.It is a notorious fact, that there are not fortythousand legal voters residing in the city. Inthe abstract this election is but of little importance.Its moral influence on other sections of222 GOVERNMENT.1^ the country remains to be seen. Generally, theI effect of such a triumph ia unfavourable to thedefeated party in other places ; and it would beso in the present instance, if the contest had beenan ordinary contest, but the circumstances towhich I have referred of fraud, corruption, andperjury, may, or may not, re-act upon the allegedauthors of these shameless proceedings."Again, " The moderate and thinking men ofboth parties — indeed, we may say every honourableman who has been a spectator of recentevents — feel shocked at the frauds, perjury, andcorruption, which too evidently enabled the administrationparty to poll so powerful a votaWhat are we coming to in this country ? Apeaceable contest at the polls is a peaceable testof party — it is to ascertain the opinions and view*of citizens entitled to vote — it is a fairhonourable party appeal to the ballot-box. Wlare all Americans — living under the samesituation and laws ; each boasting of hisdom and equal rights — our political differentiGOVERNMENT, 223are, after all, the differences between members ofthe same national family. What, therefore, isto become of our freedom and rights, our morals,safety, and religion, if the administration of ourgovernment is permitted to embark in such open,avowed, palpable schemes of fraud and corruptionas those recently exhibited in this city ?More thanjSce thousand strangers, having nointerest and no domicil, are introduced by thepartisans of the administration into the city, andbrought up to the polls to decide who shallmake our municipal laws. ^Vlore than four hundredvotes over and above the ascertained votesof a ward, are polled in such waist. Men movedfrom ward to ward to sleep one nit as an evasivequalification. More than two hundredsailors, from United States' vessels of war, broughtover to the city to vote — sloops and small craft,trading down the uortli and east rivers, eachknown never to have more than three hands,turning out thirty or forty voters from eachvessel, Men turned from the polls for want ofLGOVERNMENT.legal quality cations, brought back by administrationpartisans and made to swear in their vote.Hundreds with the red clay of New Jersey adheringto their think-soled shoes, presentingthemselves to vote as citizens of New York, andall this fraud and perjury set on foot and justifiedto enable Mr. Van Buren to say, ' I haverecovered the city.' But he has been signallydefeated, as he ought to be, notwithstanding allhis mighty efforts. There is this day a clearlyascertained Whig majority in this city of fivethousand.It is, therefore, a mockery to call a contestwith persons from other States, hired for the <»■cation, an election. IVe must have a registryof votes, in order to sweep away this vast system'of perjury and fraud ; and every man whoan interest at stake in his person, his childrenor his property, must demand it of the legibleture, as the only means of coming to a fair decisionon all such matters. This charter election'should open the eyes of the honourable of aHGOVEIiX-MENT,parties to the dangers that menace us, and a redressprovided in time."Again, " The Atlas, Monday Morning, April'16, 1838.— f Triumphant Result of the Electionin Net York). — We have rarely known an electionwhich, during its continuance, has excitedso lively a degree of interest as has been felt in.regard to the contest just terminated in NewYork, From numerous Quarters we have receivedletters requesting us to transmit theearliest intelligence of the result, and an anxietyhas been evinced among the Whigs of the country,which we have hardly seen surpassed. Thetremendous onset of theLoco-focos upon the firstday increased this anxiety, and fears began tobe entertained that the unparalleled and unscrupulousefforts of our opponents — their shamelessresort to every species of fraud, violence, andcorruption — their importation of foreign, perjuredvoters, and the lavish distribution of thepublic money — might possibly overpower thelegitimate voice of the majority of the citizens3 GOVERNMENT.of New York. But gloriously have these fearsIjeen dispelled. Nobly have the Whigs of thegreat metropolis done their duty. Gladly doesold Massachusetts respond to their paeans oftriumph .'We learn from the New York papers thatthere was considerable uneasiness in that city onFriday among the ^Vhigs sith regard to theresult. Never was the struggle of the administrationparty so desperate and convulsive.Hordes of aliens and illegal voters were driveninto the city —In multitudes, like which the populace NorthPoured never from her fj'ozeu loiu9, to pastRhine or the Danube.'The most reasonable calculation admits thatthere must have been at least four thousand illegalvotes polled at the different wards. Squattersand loafers from the Croton Water Works,from Brooklyn and Long Island, and from Troyto Sing Sing, took up their line of march forthe doubtful wards, to dragoon the city intoAGOVERNMENT.submission to Mr, Van Buren, Some of theawards threw from four hundred to six hundredmore votes than there were known to be residentsin them. Double voting was practised togreat extent. The Express says, the wholespirit of the naturalization laws was defied, andan utter mockery was made of the sacred rightof suffrage. What party is likely to be mostguilty of these things, may be judged from thefact, that the Loco-loco party resist eve ry propositionfor a regisirt/ law, or any other taw thatwill give the "people a fair nd honest and constitutionalsystem of voting."When 1 was one day with one of the most influentialof the Whig party at New York, hewas talking about their success in the contest —We beat them, sir, literally with their own weapons."" How BO," replied I. " Why, sir, webout over all their bludgeon men at so manydollars a head, and the very sticks intended tobe used to keep us from the poll were employedupon the heads of the Loco-focus !" So muchfor purity of election.t228 GOVERNMENT.Another point which is worthy of inquiryis, how far is the government of the UnitedStates a. cheap government; that is, not asto the amount of money expended in thatcountry aa compared to the amount of moneypaid in England or France, but cheap asto the work done for the money paid ? And,viewing it in this light, I rather think it will befound a very expensive one. It is true that thesalaries arc low, and the highest officers are theworst paid, but it should be recollected thatevery body is paid.* The expenses of the FederalGovernment, shown up to the world as a proof1 cHDnot here refrain from making an extract fiaM. Tocqueville's clover work, well worthy the attentionof those who rule in this country, as probably they maynot be aware of what they are doing ; — " When a democraticrepublic renders offices which had formerly beenremunerated ipfituitoits, it may safety be believed lbthe Slate is advancing to monarchical institutions ; atwhen a monarchy begins to rrmmieralc such officershad hitherto been unpaid, it is a sure sign that it \a epreaching towards a despotic or a republican form ofThe substitution of paid for unpaid fundsof itself, in my opinion, sufficient tiserious revolution "Government.of cheap government, is but a portion of thereal expenses which are paid by the severalStates. Thus the government will promulgateto the world that they have a surplus revenue ofso many millions, but at the same time it will befound that the States themselves are borrowingmoney and are deeply in debt. The money thatdisappears is enormous; I shiver could understandwhat has become of the boasted surplusrevenue which was lodged in the pet banks, asthey were termed. The paid officers in the severalStates are very numerous ; take, for instance,the State of New York alone. An Americannewspaper lias the following article : —The Standing Army.The following is given in the Macedonianas the rank and file of the executive standingarmy of office-holders in the State of New York.How hardly can the freedom of elections bemaintained against the natural enemies of thatfreedom, when their efforts are seconded by theassaults of such an army of placemen, whose dailyk230 Government.bread, under the rule and reign of the spoilers,is dependent on their partizan exertions !1880 Postmasters.217 Mail Contractors.59 Clerks in the New York Post-office.25 Lighthouse Keepers.500 Custom-House Officers.These," sa's the Mailisonian, " constitutea regiment of the King's own, well drilled in thesystem of terrorism and seduction, and of dragooningvoters !"And it should be remarked, that in the UnitedStates, upon any one party losing an election, thewhole of that party in office, even down to thelamplighters, are turned out, and replaced bypartizans of the successful party ; capability foroffice is never considered, the only object is to r^ward political services. That the work cannotbe well carried on when there are such constantchanges, attended with ignorance of the duties ,is most certain. The long hist of defaultersproves that the party at present in power is .ported by needy and unprincipled men ; indeed,there is a waste of money in almost every departmentwhich would be considered monstrous inthis country The expenses of the Florida warare a proof of this. The best written accountsfrom America are those written by a party whosigns himself "A GeneveseTraveller," and whoseletters very often appear in the Times newspaper.I have invariably observed the correctnessnot only of his statements of facts, but of theopinions drawn from them. Speaking of the Floridawar, he has the following observations : —As to the expenditure, it is yet more astounding.Not less than 20,000,000 dollarshave already been lavished upon favourites, orplundered from the treasury by marauders,whose profligacy and injustice caused the war.Army contractors, government agents, &c. arewallowing in wealth obtained by the worstmeans ; and these are the men that condemn apeace, and will do all in their power to produceand keep up an excitement. But unless theyLGovernment.can reach the treasury of the United States, theirsyiiipatliy for the murdered inhabitants will soonevaporate. I hope, however, and believe thatthe war for the present is at au end. But thepeace will only be temporary, for the rapacityof the avaricious land speculator will not besatisfied until the red man is deprived of everyacre of land."To enter into any estimate of expense wouldbe impossible i all I assert is, that tliei-e is amuch greater waste of public money in theUnited States than in other countries, and thatfor the work done they pay very dearly. I shalltherefore conclude with an extract from M,Tocqueville, who attempts in vain to come toany approximation.Wherever the poor direct public affairs, anddispose of the national resources, it appearscertain, that as they profit by the expenditureof the State, they are apt to augment that expenditure,I conclude, therefore, without having re-GOVERNMENT. 233course to inaccurate computations, and withouthazarding a comparison which might prove incorrect,that the democratic government of theAmericans is not a cheap government as is sometimesasserted ; and I have no hesitation in predicting,that if the people of the United Statesare ever involved in serious difficulties, its taxationwill speedily be increased to the rate of thatwhich prevails in the greater part of the aristocraciesand the monarchies of Europe'sCHAPTER XVIII.The Americans, and with justice, hold upWashington as one of the first of men ; if so, whywill they not pay attention to his opinions ? becausethe^r*^ of men must not interfere with theirprejudices, or, if he does, he immediately intheir eyes becomes the last. Nevertheless, Washingtonproved his ability when he made the followingobservation, in his letter to Chief JusticeJay, dated 10th of March, 1787 ; even at thatearly period he perceived that the institutionsof America, although at the time much lessdemocratical than at present, would not stand.Hear the words of Washington, for they werea prophecy —Among men of reflection, few will be found,I believe, who are not beginning to think thatour system is better in theory than in practice ;GOVERNMENT.and that, notwithstanding the boasted virtue of|, America, it is more than probable that we shallI exhibit the last melancholy proof, that mankindare incompetent to their own government ivith-oui the means of coercion in ike sovereign."Now, if you were to put this extract into the■ hands of an American, his admiration of Washington would immediately fall down below Zero,I and in all probability lie would say, as theydo of poor Captain Lawrence — " Why, sir,Washington was a great man, but great menhave their failings. I gUess he wrote that letterafter dinner."But Washington has been supported in thisopinion by a mwlern American patriot, Dr.Channing, who, asserting that " Our institutionshave disappointed us all," has pointed out thereal effects of democracy upon the morals of thenation ; and there arc many other good andhonest men in America who will occasionallytell the truth, although they seldom venture toput their names to what they write. In a mani-government.festa, published when I was in the States, the followingbitter pills for the democrats were inserted.Speaking of dependence on the virtue and intelligenceof the people, the manifesto says : —A form of government which has no bettercorrective of public disorders than this, is a burlesqueon the reason and intelligence of men ; itis as incompatible with wisdom as it is with publicprosperity and happiness.The people aie, by principle and the Constitution,guarded against the tyranny of kings,but not against their own passions, and ignoranceand delusions."The necessity of relying on some other powerthan the people is therefore enforced :Such facts have induced nations to abandonthe practice of electing their chief magistrate ;preferring to receive that officer by hereditarysuccession. Men have found that the chancesof having a good chief magistrate by birth, areabout equal to the chances of obtaining one bypopular election. And, boast as we will, thatGOVERNMENT.the superior intelligence of our citizens mayrender this government an exception, time willshow that this is a mistake. No nation can beanexception, till the Almighty shall change thewhole character of man.It is a solemn truth, that when executiveofficers are dependent for their offices on annualor frequent elections, there will be no impartialor efficient administration of the laws.It is in vain that men attempt to disguise thetruth; the fact, beyond all debate, is that thedisorders in our political affairs are the genuineand natural consequences of defects in the constitution,and of the false and visionary opinionswhich Mr. Jefferson and his disciples have beenproclaiming for forty years,The mass of the people seem not to considerthat the affairs of a great coniniercial nationrequire for their correct management talents ofthe first order.Of all this, the mass ofoiir population appearto know little or nothing.The mass of the people, seduced and disci-government.»lined City their leaders, are still farther deceived,by being taught that our public disorders areto be ascribed to other causes than the ignoranceand perversity of their party.And yet our citizens are constantly boastingo{ the intelligence of the people ! Intelligence!The history of nations cannot present an exampleof such total want of intelligence as ourcountry now exhibit : and what is moore, swant of integrity is equally surprising'"This is strong language to use in a republic,but let us examine a little.The great desideratum to be attended to in theformation of a government is to guard againstman preying upon his fellow-creature. Callagovernment by any name you will, prescribewhat forms you may, the one great point to beadhered to, is such a code of laws as will put itout of the power of any one individual, ai stayone party, from oppressing another. The despotmay trifle with the lives of his people ; an aristocracymay crush the poorer classes into astate of bondage, and the poorer classes beingiG0VER\-1IEXT.invariably the most numerous, may resort totheir physical force to control those who arewealthy, and despoil them of their possessions.Correctly speaking, the struggle is between theplebeian and the patrician, the poor and the rich,and it is therefore that a third power has, by longexperience been considered as necessary (an apex,or head to the pyramid of society), to prevent andcheck the disorders which may arise from strugglesof ambition among the upper classes.Wherever this apex has been wanting, therehas been a continual attempt to possess it; wheneverit has been elective, troubles have invariablyensued; experience has, therefore, shewnthat, for the benefit of all classes, and the maintenanceof order, the wisest plan was to make ithereditary. It is not to be denied that despotism,when it falls into good hands, has rendered anation flourishing and happy, that an oligarchyhas occasionally, but more rarely, governed withmildness and a regard to justice; but therenever yet was a case of a people having seizedGOVERNMENT.upon the jMiwer, but the result has been one of>lrapacity and violence, until a master-spirit has 'sprung up and controlled them tjy despoticrule. But, although one despot, or one oligarchymay govern well, they are exwptioiBto the general rule ; and, therefore, in framing a. Jgovernment, the rule by which you must Iguided, is on the supposition that each claimwill encroach, and the laws must be so const]ruled as to guard against the vices and jof mankind.To suppose that a people can govern tliem- 1selves, that is to say directly, is absurdHistory has disproved it. They may govemJthemselves indirectly, by selecting from themass the more enlightened and intelligent, bing themselves to adhere to their decisions, iat the same time, putting that due and necessecheck to the power invested in their delegatewhich shall prevent their making an improperuse of it. The great point to arrive at, isteexact measure and weight of their controlling]GOVERNMENT.influences, so as to arrive at the just equipoise ;nor can these proportions he always the same,but must be continually added to or reduced,according to the invariable progressions orrecessions which must ever take place in thisworld, where nothing stands still.The history of nations will shew, that althoughthe just balance has often !sen lost, that if eitherthe aristocracy or the ruling power gained anyadvantage, theevil,if too oppressive, incapableof being corrected ; but any advance gained bythe democratic party, has never been retraced,and that it has been by the preponderance ofpower being thrown into its hands that nationshave fallen. Of all the attempts at republics, thatof the Spartan, perhaps, is the most worthy ofexamination, as Lycurgus went work radically,and his laws were such as to obtain that equalityso much extolled. How far the term republicwas applicable to the Spartan forgot em-mentI will not pretend to say, but whenLycurgus was called upon to re-construct itsVOL. II. MGOVERNMENT.legislation, his first act was to make the necessary jthird power, and lie appointed a senate.But Lycurgus was wise enough to perceivethat he must amend the morals of his countrymen,and that to preserve an equality of conditionhe must take away all incentives to Iambition, or to the acquisition of wealth. He jfirst divided the lands into equal portions, coin Ipellet all classes, from the kings downwards, ito eat at the same table, brought up all the jchildren in the same hardy manner, and obliged |every citizen after a certain age to carry arms, IBut more sacrifices were necessary; Lycurgusivell knew,Qiii(i legs siIS vacEe [troficiutji.Horace, Ode 24, HL 3.To guard against the contagion of corruption, „he prohibited navigation and commerce ; he pmitted no intercourse with foreigners ,■ he hwished the gold and silver coin as current moneys'that every stimulus to any one individual to iexalt himself above his neighbour should he jGOVERNMENT.removed. If ever there was a system calculate*!to produce equality, it was that planned by thewisdom of Lycurgus ; but I doubt if theAmericans would like to follow in his footsteps.What occasioned the breaking up and thedownfal of this republic .'' An increase of powergiven to the democratic party, by the creationout of their ranks of the magistrates, termedEphori, which threw an undue weight and preponderanceinto the hands of the people, liythis breach in the constitution, faction andcorruption were let in and fomented. Plutarch,indeed, denies this, but both Polybius andAristotle are of a different opinion ; the lattersays, that the power of the Ephori was so greataa to amount to a perfect tyranny ; the kingthemselves were necessitated to court theirfavour by such methods as greatly to hurt theconstitution, which from an aristocracy degeneratedinto an absolute democracy. Solon wascalled in to re-model the constitution of theAthenian republic. He had a more difficultLVBekAiH MMkfOTsm iIk knk df theiimmttrj, ikt ieammn^ tlwk^lUkMif|Mii,ndtDlw ■■■iwiiiilbytfeaMa^Ac^oaple. AbkIivss, the Matthiaspkiaaa^^ «h^ be bail ne plants firstJthMtd m the Scale, vd ifiervsids detwedMi ik AfmHy of the people, rear properlyAtxA ** Wise men dAaad,The whole bistot; of theI republic is, tbeiefixe, one of <bribery JBd eocrupdoa among thetyranny, de^nbsm, and iojusDce aathe lower, at minority.Tbe downGU i^ the Roman eiequally be traced to the undue weight obtainedbj the people bv the appointment of thetribunes, and so it will be proved in almostawry instance: the reason why the excess ofpower is more destructive when in the handsof the people is, that other they, by retainingthe power in their own hands, exercise a demoGOVERNMENT. 245realizing despotism, or if they have become sufficientvenal, they sell themselves to be tyraniiizetiover in their turn.I have made these remarks, because I wish tocorroborate my opinion, that "power once gainedby the people is never to be recovered, exceptby bribery and corruption, and that until then,every grant is only the forerunner of an extension; and that although the undue balance ofpower of the higher classes occasionally may he,that in the hands of the people is invariablyattended by the downfal of the institution.At the same time, I do not intend to denythe right of the people to claim an extension oftheir privileges, in proportion as they rise byeducation to the right of ^vcming themselves ;unfortunately these privileges have been given,or taken, previous to their being qualified. Arepublic is certainly, in theory, the most ]uniformof government, but, up to the present day,history has proved that no people have yet beenprepared to receive it.LG OVERS':¥That there is something very imposing in thepresent rapid advance of the United States, Igrant, hut this grandeur ia not ascribed by theAmericans to its true source: it is the magnificentand extended country, not their governmentand institutions, which has been the causeof their prosperity. The Americans think otherwise,and, as I have before observed, they arehappy in their own delusions — they do not malicea distinction between what they have gained bytheir country, and what they have gained bytheir institutions. Every thing is on a vast andin magnificent scale, which at first startles you ; butif you examine closely and reflect, you are convincedthat there is at present more allow thansubstance, and that the Americans are actuallyexisting (and until they liavc sufficient labourerslo sow and reap, and gather up the riches oftheir land, must continue to exist) upon thecredit and capital of England.The American republic was commenced verydifferently from any other, and with what wereGOVEIiNMEST.real advantages, if she had noL hen too ambitiousand too precipitate in seizing upon them.A republic has generally been considered themost primitive form of rule ; it is, on the contrary,the very last pitch of refinement in government,and the cause of its failure up to the presenthas been, that no people have as yet beensufficiently enlightened to govern themselves.Republics, generally speaking, have at their commencementbeen confined to small portions of territoryhaving been formed by the extension oftownships after the inhabitants had become wealthyand ambitious. In America, on the contrary,the republic commenced with unbounded territorya vast field for ambition and enterprize, thathas acted as a safety-valve to carry off theexcess of disappointed ambition, which, likesteam, is continually generating under such aform of government. And, certainly, if ever apeople were in a situation, as far as education,knowledge, precepts and lessons for guidanceand purity of manners could enable them, toII8 GOVEBIIME>iT.aran tbemsdves, those were so who first establishedthe American independence.Fifty years have passed away, and the presentstate of Antics I have already shown. Frompurity of manners, ha moral code has sunk most othernatioDS. She has attemptedto govCTn herself — she is dictated to by the worstof capacities. She has planted the tree of liberty;instead of its flourishing, she has neither freedom<rf speech nor of acti(»i. She has railed against thevices of hierarchical forms of goveminenl, andevery vice against which she has raised up herTone, is still more prevalent under her own.Lie has cried out against corruption — she is stillnK»« corrupt : against bribery — her people are tobe bought and sold : against tyranny — she is infetters. She has proved to the world that, withevery advantage on ber de, the attempt at arepublic has beeii a miserable failure, and thatthe time is not yet come when mankind cangovern themselves. Will it ever come ? In myopinion, never IGOVERNMENT. 249Although the horizon may be clear at present,yet I consider thai the prospect of theUnited States is anything but cheering. It istrue that for a time the States may hold together,that they may each year rapidly increasein prosperity and power, but each year will alsoadd to their demoralization and to their danger.It is impossible to say from what quarter of thecompass the clouds may first rise, or which ofthe several dangers that threaten them they willhave first to meet and to oppose by their energies.At present, the people, or majority, have an unduepower, which will yearly increase, and theirdespotism will be more severe in proportion. Ifthey sell their birthright (which they will not <!(>until the population is much increased, and thehigher classes are sufficiently wealthy to purchase,although their freedom will be lost) theywill have a better chance of happiness and socialorder. But a protracted war would be the mostfatal to their institutions, as it would, in allprobability, end in the dismemberment of theM 3LGOVERNMENT.Ilion, and the wresting of their power from thepeople Iiy the bayonets of a. dictator.The removal of the power and population tothe West, the rapitl increase of the coloured population,are other causes of alarm and dread;but, allowing that all these dangers are steeredclear of, there is one (a more remote one indeed,but more certain), from which it has no escape-thatis, the period when, from the increase ofpopulation, the division shall take place betweenthe poor and the rich, which no lawagainst entail will ever prevent, and which musthe fatal to a democracy.Mr. Sanderson, in his "Sketches of Paris 'Jobserves*' If we can retain our democracy when cback woodlands are filled up ; when New Yoiand Philadelphia have become a London iParis ; when the land shall be covered with itftBmultitudes, struggling for a scanty living, orbitalpassions excited by luxurious habits and appo- 1times. If we can then maintain our universalGOVERNMENT, 251suffrage and our liberty, it will be fair and reasonableenough in us to set ourselves up for theimitation of others. Liberty, as far as we yetknow her, is not fitted to the condition of thesepopulous and luxurious countries. Her householdgods are of clay, and her dwelling wherethe icy gales of Allegheny sing through the crivices of her hut."I have observed, in my introduction to the£erst three volumes of this work, that our virtuesand our vices are maiaiy to be traced to theform of government, climate, and circumstances,and I think I can show that the vices of theAmericans are chiefly to be attributed tu theirpresent form of government.The example of the Executive is most injurious.It is insatiable in its ambition, regardlessof its faith, corrupt in the highest degree ;never legislating for morality, but always forexpediency. This is the first cause of thelow standard of morals ; the second is thewant of an aristocracy, to set an exampletuGOVERNMENT.and give the tone to Society. These ave followedby the errors incident to the voluntarysystem of religion, and a democratical education.To these must be superadded the want of moralcourage, arising from the dread of public opinion,and the natural tendency of a democraticform of government to excite the spirit of gain,as the main-spring of action, and the summumbonum of existence.Dr. Channing observes—Our present civilization is characterized andtainted by a devouring greediness of wealth;and a cause which asserts right against wealth,must stir up bitter opposition, especially in citieswhere this divinity is most adored."The passion for gain is every where sappingpure and generous feeling, and every whereraises up bitter foes against any refonn whichmay threaten to turn aside a stream of wealth.I sometimes feel as if a great social revolutionwere necessary to break up our present mercenarycivilization, in order that Christianity,GOVERNMENT. 253now repelled by the almost universal worldliness,may come into new contact with the soul, andmay reconstruct society after its own pure anddisinterested principles"*All the above evils may be traced to the natureof their institutions; and I hold it as anaxiom, that the chief end of government is thehappiness, social order, and morality of the people;that no government, however perfect intheory, can be good which in practice demoralizesthose who are subjected to it. Neverwas there a nation which commenced withbrighter prospects; the experiment has beenmade and it has failed ; this is not their fault.They still retain all the qualities to constitute agreat nation, and a great nation, or assemblageof nations, they will eventually become. Atpresent, all is hidden in a futurity much toodeep for any human eye to penetrate ; they progressfast in wealth and power, and as theirweight increases, so will their speed be accedeChannir^'B Letter to Barney, 1S37.L i264 GOVEllNMEJIT.rated, until their own rapid motion will occa-therI spliteach iI fragmentsintent Sufficiently large to compose a nationof itself. What may be the eventual resultof this convulsion, what may be the destruction,the loss of life, the chaotic scenes of strifeand contention, before the portions may againbe restored to order under new institutions,is as impossible to foresee as it is to decide ,upon the period at which it may take place ibut one thing is certain, that come it will, andthat every hour of increase of greatness and |prosperity only adds to the more rapid approachof the danger, and to the important lesson whichthe world will receive.I have not written this book for the Americans; they have hardly entered my thoughtsduring the whole time that I have been em 'played upon it, and 1 am perfectly indifferenteither to their censure or their praise. 1 went iover to America well-inclined towards the people,and anxious ascertain the truth among so manyconflicting opinions, I did expect to find alienapeople more virtuous and moral than our own,but I confess on other points I had formed noopinions ; the results of my observations I havenow laid before the English public, for whom onlythey have been written down. Within these lastfew years, that is, since the passing of the ReformBill, we have made rapid strides towards democracy,and the cry of the multitude is still formore power, which our present rulers appear buttoo willing to give them. I consider that thepeople of England have already as much poweras is consistent with their happiness and with trueliberty, and that any increase of privilege wouldbe detrimental to both. Objection writing thesepage is, to point out the effects of a democracyupon the morals, the happiness, and the dueapportionment of liberty to all classes ; to shewthat if, in the balance of rights and privileges,the scale should turn on one side or theother, as it invariably must in this world,how much safer it is, how much more eijui-LGOVERNMENT,table I may add, it is that it should preponderatein favour of the intelligent and enlightenedportion of the nation. I wish that thecontents of these pages may render those whoare led away by generous feelings and abstractideas of right, to pause before they consent togrant to those below them what may appear tobe a boon, but will in reality prove a source ofmisery and danger to all parties — that they mayconfirm the opinions of those who are wavering,and support those who have true ideas as to the |nature of government. If I have succeeded insthe most trifling degree in effecting these ends, |which I consider vitally important to the future Iwelfare of this country — if I have ssister the cause of Conservatism — I am content,and shall consider that my time and labour have |not been thrown away.25:APPENDIX.CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.We, the people of the United States, in orderto form a more perfect union, establish justice,ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for thecommon defence, promote the general welfare,and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselvesand our posterity, do ordain and establish thisConstitution for the United States of America.Article 1. — Section 1.1. All legislative powers herein granted, shallbe vested in a Congress of the United States,which shall consist of a Senate and a House ofRepresentatives.258 Constitution OFSection H.1. The House of Representatives shall becomposed of members chosen every second yearby the people of the several States ; and theelectors in each State shall have the qualificationsrequisite for electors of the most numerous branchof the State legislature.2. No person shall be a representative whoshall not have attained to the age of twenty-fiveyears, and been seven years a citizen of theUnited States, and who shall not, reelected, beaninhabitant of that State in which he shall bechosen.3. Representatives and direct taxes shall beapportioned among the several States which maybeincluded within this Union, according to theirrespective numbers, which shall be determinedby adding to the whole number of free persons,including those bound to service for a term ofyears, and excluding Indians not tax, three-fifthsof alt other persons. The actual enume-THE United STATES.ration shall be made within three years after thefirst meeting of the Congress of the UnitedStates, and within every subsequent term of tenyears, in such manner as they shall by law direct.The number of representatives shall notexceed one for every thirty thousand, but eachState shall have at least one representative ; anduntil such enumeration shall be made, the Slateof New Hampshire shall be entitled to choosethese; Massachusetts eight ; Rhode Island andProvidence Plantations one; Connecticut five ;New York six ; New Jersey four ; Pennsylvaniaeight; Delaware one; Maryland six; Virginiaten; North Carolina five; South Carolinafive ; and Georgia three.4. When vacancies happen in the representationfrom any State, the executive authoritythereof shall issue writs of election to fill up suchvacancies.5. Th House of Representatives shall choosetheir speaker and other officers, and shall havethe sole power of impeachment.Ii260 CONSTITUTION OFSection 3.1. The Senate of the United States shall becomposed of two senators from each State, chosenby the legislature thereof, for six years; andeach senator shall have one vote.2. Immediately after they shall be firstbled, in consequence of the first election, the]Bshall be divided, as equally as may be, into threeclasses. The seats of the senators of the firstclass shall be vacated at the expiration of tiltsecond year ; of the second class, at the expirationof the fourth year ; and of the third class, idthe expiration of the sixth year ; so that onethird may be chosen every second year ; and itvacancies happen, by resignation or otherwise,during the recess of the legislature of any State,the executive thereof may make temporary appointmentuntil the next meeting of the legislature,which shall then fill such vacancies.3. No person shall be a senator who shallhave attained to the age of thirty years, aiTHE United STATES.been nine years a citizen of the United States,and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitantof that State for which he shall be chosen.4, The Vice-president of the United Statesshall be President of the Senate, but shall haveno vote, uuleas they be equally divided.5. The Senate shall choose their other officers,and also a president, pro tempore, in the absenceof the vice-president, or when he shall exercisethe office of President of the United States.C- The Senate shall have the sole power totry all impeachments. When sitting for thatpurpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation.When the President of the United States is tried,the chief justice shall preside; and no personshall be convicted without the concurrence oftwo-thirds of the members present.7- Judgment, in case of impeachment, shallnot extend further than to removal from office,and disqualification to hold and enjoy any officeof honour, trust, or profit, under the UnitedStates ; but the party convicted shall neverthe-LCONSTITUTION OFless be liable and subject to indictment, trial,judgment, and punishment according to law.Section 4.1. The times, places, and manners of holdingelections for senators and representatives, shallbe prescribed in each State by the legislaturethereof, but the Congress may, at any time, bylaw,malic or alter such regulations, except as tothe places of choosing senators.9. The Congress shall assemble at least oncein every year, and such meeting shall be on thefirst Monday in December, unless they shall bylawappoint a different day.Section 5.1. Each House shall be the judge of thetons, returns, and qualifications of its ownmembers ; and a majority of each shall constitutea quorum to do business ; but a smallernumber may adjourn from day to day, and!may be authorized to compel the attendance ofkTHE UNITED STATES, 2bdabsent members, in such manner and under sadipenalties as each House may provide.2. Each House may determine the rules of itsproceedings, punish its members for disorderlybehaviour, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds,expel a member.3. Each House shall keep journal of its proceedings,and from time to time publish thesame, excepting such parts as may in their judgmentrequire secrecy ; and the yeas and nays ofthe members of either House, on any question,shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present,be entered on the journal.i. Neither House, during the session of Congress,shall, without the consent of the other,adjourn for more than three days, nor to anyother place than that in which the two Housesshall be sitting.Section 6.1. The senators and representatives shallreceive a compensation for their services, to bekrONSTlTUlION OFascertained by law, and paid out of the treasuryof the United States. They shall, in all cases,except treason, felony, and breach of the peace,be privileged from arrest during their attendanceat the Session of their respective houses, and ingoing to or returning from the same ; and forany speech or debate in either House, they shallnot be questioned in any other place.2. No senator or representative shall, duringthe time for which he was elected, be appointedto any civil office under the authority of theUnited States which shall have been created, orthe emoluments whereof shall have been increased, ■during such time; and no person holding aiiyaoffice under the United States shall be a nber of either House during his continuance ismoffice.Section 7.1. All bills for raising revenue shall originatein the House of Representatives ; but the Senatemay propos? or concur with amendments, as tother bills.THE UNITED STATES.2. Every bill which shall have passed theHouse of Representatives and the Senate, shall,before it become a law, be presented to the Presidentof the United States ; if he approve, heshall sign it ; but if not, he shall return it, withhis objections, to that House in which it shallhave originated, who shall enter the objection atlarge on their journal, and proceed to re-considerit. If, after such re-consideration, two-thirdsof that House shall agree to pass the bill, itshall be sent, together with the objections, to thecaller House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered,and if approved by two-tliirda ofthat House, it shall become a law. But in allsuch cases, the votes of both Houses shall bedetermined by yeas and nays, and the names ofthe persons voting for and against the bill shallbe entered on the journal of each House respectivelyIf any bill shall not be returned by thePresident within ten days (Sundays excepted)after it shall have been presented to him, thesame shall be a law in like manner as if he hadkConstitution OFsigned it, unless the Congress by their adjournment, prevent its return, in which case it shallnot be a law.8. Every order, resolution, or vote, to whichthe concurrence of the Senate and House of Representativesmay be necessary, (except on aquestion of adjournment,) shall be presented tothe President of the United States ; and beforethe same shall take effect, shall be approved byhim, or being disapproved by him, shall be re- 1passed by two-thirds of the Senate and House of jRepresentatives, according to the rules and |limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.Section 8.The Congress shall have power—1. To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts,and excises; to pay the debts and provide forthe common defence and general welfare of the ]United States ; but all duties, posts, and excises,shall be uniform throughout the United ,States.THE UNITED STATES. 2672. To borrow money on the credit of theUnited States.3. To regulate commerce with foreign nations,and among the several States, and with theIndian tribes.4. To establish a uniform rule of naturalization,and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptciesthroughout the United States.5. To coin money, regulate the value thereof,and of foreign coin, and fix the standard ofweights and measures.6. To provide for the punishment of counterfeitingthe securities and current coin of theUnited States.7. To establish post-offices and post-roads.8. To promote the progress of science anduseful arts, by securing, for limited times, toauthors and inventors, the exclusive right totheir respective writings and discoveries.9. To constitute tribunals inferior to thesupreme court : to define and punish piracies s»2CONSTITUTION OFand felonies committed on the liif;li seas, andoffences against the law of nations.10. To declare war, grant letters of marqueand reprisal, and make rules concerning on anti and water,11. To raise and support armies; but no appropriationof money to that uw shall be lor alonger term than two years.IS. To provide and maintain a navy.13. To make rules for the government andregulation of the land and naval forces.14. To provide for calling forth the militiato execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections,and repel invasions.15. To provide for organizing, arming, anddisciplining the militia, and for governing sadipart of them as may be employed in the serviceof the United Slates, reserving to the Statesrespectively the appointment of the officers, andthe authority of training the militia accordingto the discipline prescribed by Congress.THE UNITED SrATfS.16, To exercise exclusive legislation in allcases whatsoever over such district (not exceedingten miles square) as may, by cession of particularStates, and the acceptance of Congress,become the seat of government of the UnitedStates, and to exercise like authority over allplaces purchased, by the consent of the legislatureof the State in which the same shall be, forthe erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards,and other needful buildings ; and,17. To make all laws which shall be necessaryand proper for carrying into execution theforegoing powers, and all other powers vestedby this constitution in the Government of theUnited States, or in any department or officerthereof.Section 9.1. The migration or importation of such personsas any of the States now existing shall thinkproper to admit, shall not be prohibited by theCongress prior to the year one thousand eighttri^~^^M270 Constitute TIOMOFIhundred and eight ; but a tax or duty may beiimposed on such importation, not exceeding tendollars for each person. 1fa. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 1shall not be suspended, unless when, in cases of 1rebellion or invasion, the public safety may 1require it. I3. No bill of attainder, or ev post facto law, 'shall be passed.i. No capitation or other direct tax shall belaid, unless in proportion to the census or enumerationherein before directed to be taken.5, No tax OT duty shall be laid on articles ^Mexported from any State. No preference shall ^Mbe given to any regulation of commerce or revelnue to the ports of one State over those of anon ^|ther: nor shall vessels bound to or from one ^^State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay dutiesin another.6. No money shall be drawn from the treasury,but in consequence of appropriations madeby law ; and a regular statement and account of^m THE UNITED STATES.the receipts and expenditure of all public moneyshall be published from time to time.7. No title of nobility shall be granted by theUnited States, and no person holding any officeof profit or trust under them, shall, without theconsent of the Congress, accept of any present,emolument, office, or title of any' kind whatever,from any king, prince, or foreign state. "^Section lU.1. No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance,or confederation ; grant letters of marqueand reprisal ; coin money ; emit bills of credit ;make anything but gold and silver coin a tenderin payment of debts ; pass any bill of attainder,ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligortion of contracts ; or grant any title of nobility,2. No State shall, (without the consent of theCongress, lay any imposts or duties on importsor exports, except what may he absolutely nsay for executing its inspection laws ; and theneat produce of all duties and imposts, laid byICONSTITUTION OFany State on imports or exports, shall be for theipso of the treasury of the United States, and ailsocii laws shall be subject to the revision andcontrol of the Congress. No State shall,without the consent of Congress, lay any dutyof tonnage, keep troops or ships of war in timeof peace, enter into any agreement or compactwith another State, or with a foreign power, orengage in war, unless actually invaded, or insuch imminent danger as will not admit ofdelay.Article 2. — Section 1.1. The executive power shall be vested in a •President of the United States of America. He Jshall hold his office during the term of foul 1years, and, together with the Vice-president, Ichosen for the same term, be elected as follows ;S. Each State shall appoint, in such manner ias the legislature thereof may direct, a number iof electors equal to the whole number of senators iand representatives to which the State may beTHE Ignited STATES.entitled in the Congress; but no senator orrepresentative, or person holding any office oftrust or profit under the United States, shall beappointed an elector.3. The electors shall meet in their respectiveStates, and vote by ballot for two persons, ofwhom one at least shall not be an inhabitant ofthe same State with themselves. And they shallmake a list of all the persons voted for, and ofthe number of votes for each ; which list theyshall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to theseat of the Government of the United States,directed to the President of the Senate. ThePresident of the Senate shall, in the presence ofthe Senate and House of Representatives, openall the certificates, and the votes shall thenbe counted. The person having the greatestnumber of votes shall be President, if suchnumber be a majority of the whole number ofelectors appointed ; and if there be more thanone who have such a majority, and have anequal number of votes, then the House ofLH274 CONSTITUTION OFI:loose, bfflH.,^ if noe.eRepresentatives shall immediately choose, 1ballot, one of them for President ; and if iperson have a majority, then, from the fivehighest on the list, the said House shall, in likemanner, choose the President, But, in chooaii^ Jthe President, the votes shall he taken by Statesthe representation from each State having onevote ; a quorum for this purpose shall consist ofa member or members from two-thirds of theStates, and a. majority of all the States shall benecessary to a choice. In every case, after thechoice of the President, the person having thegreatest number of votes of the electors, shsUbe the Vice-president. But if there shouldremain two or more who have equal votes, theSenate shall choose from them, by ballot, theVice-president.4. The Congress may determine the time ofchoosing the electors, and the day on which theyshall give their votes; which day shall be thesame throughout the United States.5. No person, except a natural-bon citizen,THE UNITED STATES.27fior a citizen of the United States at the time ofthe adoption of this Constitution, shall beeligible to the office of President : neither shallany person be eligible to that office who shallnot Jive attained to the age of thirty-five years,and been fourteen years a resident within theUnited States.6. In case of the removal of the Presidentfrom office, or of his death, resignation, or inabilityto discharge the powers and duties of thesaid office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-president,and the Congress may, by law, providefor the case of removal, death, resignation, orinability, both of the President and Vice-president,declaring what officer shall then act asPresident, and such officer shall act accordingly,,until the disability be removed, or a Presidentshall be elected.7. The President shall, at stated times, receivefor his services a compensation, which shallneither be increased nor diminished during theperiod for which he shall hive been elected, andIS76 CONSTITUTION OFhe shall not receive within that period any otheremolument from the United States, or any oithem.8. Before he enter on the execution of hisoffice, he shall take the following oath or affirmation:~9. " I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I jwill faithfully execute the office of President of Ithe United States, and will to the best of my |ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Conseiltuition of the United States." ,Section %.1. The President shall be commander-in-chiefaof the army and navy of the United States, and Iof the militia of the several States, when called |into the actual service of the United States ;may require the opinion, in writing, of the mxo* Icipal officer in each of the executive departmentsupon any subject relating to the duties of tiieimrespective offices ; and he shall have power tgrant reprieves and pardons for offences against ^THE UNITED STATES.peachUnited States, except in ciment.2. He shall have power, by and with theadvice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties,provided two-thirds of the senators presentconcur : and he shall nominate, and, by andwith the advice and consent of the Senate, shallappoint ambassadors, other public ministers andconsuls, judges of the supreme court, and allother officers of the United States, whose appointmentsare not herein otherwise provided for,and which shall be established by law. But theCongress may, by law, vest the appointment ofsuch inferior officers as they think proper, in thePresident alone, in the courts of law, or in theheads of departments.3. The President shall have power to fillup all vacancies that may happen during therecess of the Senate, by granting commissionswhich shall expire at the end of their nextICONSTITUTION OfSection S.1. He shall, from time to time, give to tCongress information of the state of the Unand recommend to their consideration such cBursts he shall judge necessary and expedient;he may on extraordinary occasions convene bothHouses, or either of them, and in case of die 1agreement between them, with respect to the Itime of adjournment, he may adjourn them to Isuch time as he shall think proper ; he shall Ireceive ambassadors and other public ministers ; Ihe shall take care that the laws be faithfully Iexecuted ; and shall commission all the officers ]of the United States.Section 4.1. The President, Vice-president, and allcivil officers of the United States, shall be re- jmoved from office on impeachment for, and con ]fiction of, treason, bribery, or other crimes and Imisdemeanors.THE UNITED STATES. 279Articles. — Section 1.1- The judicial power of the United Statesshall be vested in one supreme court, and insuch inferior courts, as the Congress may fromtime to time ordain and establish. The judges,both of the supreme and inferior courts, shallhold their offices during good behaviour; andshall at stated times receive for their services acompensation, which shall not be diminishedduring their continuance in office.Section 2.1. The judicial power shall extend to allcases in law and equity, arising under this Constitution,the laws of the United States, andtreaties made, or which shall be made, undertheir authority ; to all cases affecting ambassadors,other public ministers and consuls ; to allcases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction ;to controversies to which the United Statesshall be a party ; to controversies between two1^280 CONSTITUTION OFor more States; between a State and citizensof another State; between citizens of differentStates; between citizens of the $anie Stateclaiming lands under grants of different States ;and between a State or the citizens thereof, andforeign States, citizens or subjects.S. In all cases affecting ambassadors, otherpublic ministers and consuls, and those inwhich a State shall be a party, the supremecourt shall have original jurisdiction. In allthe other cases before mentioned, the supremecourt shall have appellate jurisdiction, both asto law and fact, with such exceptions, andunder such regulations, as the Congress shallmake.3. The trial of all crimes, except in cases of Iimpeachment, shall be by jury, and such trial 'shall be held in the Slate where the said crimeshall have been committed ; but when not cmitted within any State, the trial shall be at 1such places as the Congress may by law have Jdirected.THE UNITED STATES.Section 3.1, Treason a^nst the United States shallconsist only in levying war against them, or inadhering to their enemies, giving them aid andcomfort. No person shall be convicted of treatson, unless on the testimony of two witnesses tothe same overt act, or on confession in opencourt.2. The Congress shall have power to declarethe punishment of treason ; but no attainder oftreason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture,except during the life of the personattainted.^^^^m ■ Article i. — Section 1.^^BT Full faith and credit shall be given ineach State to the public acts, records, and judicialproceedings of every other State, And theCongress may, by general laws, prescribe themanner in which such acts, records, and proceedings,shall be proved, and the effect thereofCONSTITUTION OFSection 2.1. The citizens of each Slate shall beentied to all privileges and immunities of citizenin the several States.2. A person charged in any State with êtreson, felony, or other crime, who shall flee frojustice, and be found in another State, shall,demand of the executive authority of the St&flfrom which lie has fled, be delivered up, to faremoved to the State having jurisdiction of ticrime.3. No person held to service or labour in oState under the laws thereof, escaping into another,shall, in consequence of any law or regulationtherein, be discharged from such slabour; but shall be delivered up oa the dof the party to whom such service or labemay be due.Section 3.V States maiI this Union ;be admitted by the Cmbut rnew State sbibe formed or erected within the jurisdiction ofany other State, nor any State be formed bythe junction of two or more States, or part ofStates, without the consent of the legislatures ofthe States concerned, as well as of the Congress.2. The Congress shall have power to disposeof, and make all needful rules and regulationsrespecting, tlje territory or other property belongingto tlje United States ; and nothing inthis Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudiceany claims of the United States, or ofany particular State.1. The United States shall guarantee toevery State in this Union a republican form ofj Goveniraent, and shall protect each of themI against invasion ; and, on application of thelegislature, or of the executive, (when the legislaturecannot be convened) against domesticviolence.L 1E284 CONSTITUTION OFArticle 5.1. The Congress, whenever two-thirds ofboth IHouses shall deem it necessary, shall proposedamendments to this Constitution; or, on misapplicationof the legislatures of two-thirds athe several States, shall call » convention forproposing amendments, which, in either case,shall be valid t» all intents and purposes, as .part of this Constitution, when ratified by the Ilegislatures of three-fourths of the several States, ]or by conventions of three-fourths thereof, asthe one or the other mode of ratification may beproposed by the Congress ; provided, that noamendment which may be made prior to theyear one thousand eight hundred and eight,shall in any manner affect the first and fourthclauses in the ninth section of the first article ;that and no State, without its consent, shall bedeprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.Article 6.1. All debts contracted and engagements en-theUNITED STATES.tered into, before the adoption of this Constitution,shall be as valid against the United Statesunder this Constitution, as under the Confederation.2. This Constitution, and the laws of theUnited States which shall be made in pursuancethereof, and all treaties made, or whichshall be made, under the authority of the UnitedStates, shall be the supreme law of the land ;and the judges in every State shall be boundthereby, any thing in the Constitution or lawsof any State to the contrary notwithstanding.3. The senators and representatives beforementioned, and the members of the several Statelegislature, and all executive and judicial officers,both of the United States and of the severalStates, shall be bound by oath or affirmation tosupport this Constitution : but no religious testshall ever be required as a qualification to anyoffice or public trust under the United States.kCONSTITUTION OFArticle 7.1. The ratification of the conventions of uineTStates shall be sufficient for the establishment |of this Constitution between the States !lying the same.Done in Convention, bj the unanimous consentof the States present, the seventeenth day rf ISeptember, in the year of our Lord onesthousand seven hundred and eighty-seven, 'and of the Independence of the United States Iof America, the twelfth. In witness whereof ]we have hereunto subscribed our names.George Washington,President and Beauty from VirginJohn Langton,Nicholas Gilmaa.Nathaniel GormaD,Rufus King.1 Samuel Johnson,AlexitQiler Ilamilloc.William Livingston,David Besrly,William Peterson,Jouathsa D avon.THE UNITED STATES. 287PmNHBYLVANIA.Daniel Carrol.Benjamin Franklin,Thomas Macklin,Robert Blorrig,George Rhymer,John Burr,James Madison, jon.Thomas Fitxsinions,J wed Ingersoll,JaiBM Wilson,William Blunt,Richard Dobbs Spai^hl,Gouverneur Gloria.Hugh Williamson.Gorge Bead,Gunning Bedford, Jan.John Rutledge,Chas. Wordsworth PicksDickinson,Richard Basset,Jacob Broom.Charles Pinckney,Pierce ButlersHenry, William Few,il of St. Tho. Heifer, Abraham Baldwin.attest,)William Jackson,AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION.Art, 3. Congress shall make no law respectingaa establishment of religion or prohibitingthe free exercise thereof i or abridging the freedomof speech or of the press ; or the right ofLCONSTITUTION OFthe people peaceably to assemble, and to petition Ithe Government for a redress of grieveArt. 2. A well regulated militia being necessaryto the security of a free State, the right ofthe people to keep and bear arms shall not 1infringed.Art. 3. No soldier shall, in time of peace, 1quartered in any house without the consent athe owner ; nor in time of war, but in aprescribed by law.Art. 4. The right of the people to be secuie-lin their persons, houses, papers, and effects, 1against unreasonable searches and seizures, shallnot be violated ; and no warrants shall issue hutupon probable cause, supported by oath (afiinnatiou, and particularly describing belplace to be searched, and the persotiG or thingsto be seized.Art. 5. No person shall be held to answer foracapital or otherwise infamous crime, unless aa presentment or indictment of a grand juiydTHE Untied STATES.except in cases arising in the land or navalforces, or in the militia, when in actual service,in time of war or public danger ; nor shall anyperson be subject for the same offence to betwice put in jeopardy of life or limb ; nor shallbe compelled; in any criminal case, to be a witnessagainst himself; ^or be deprived of life.liberty or property, without due process of law;.nor shall private property be taken for publicuntie, without just compensation.Art. 6. In all criminal prosecutions the accusedshall enjoy the right to a speedy andpublic trial by an impartial jury of the Stateand district wherein the crime shall have beencommitted, which district shall have been pre .piously ascertained by law, and to be informedof the nature and cause of the accusation ; to beconfronted with the witnesses against him ; tohave compulsory process for obtaining witnessesin his favour ; and to have the assistance ofcounsel for his defence.Art. 7. In suits at common law, where theI VOL. II. OLCONSTITUTION OFvalue in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, Ithe right of trial by jury shall be preserved;and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise jre-examined in any court of the United States,than according to the rules of common law.Art. 8. Excessive bail shall not be required,nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusualpunishments inflicted.Art. 9. The enumeration in the Constitutionof certain rights shall not be construed to deny Ior disparage others retained by the people.Art. 10. The powers not delegated to the |United States by the Constitution, nor prohibitedby it to the States, are reserved to theStates respectively, or to the people.Art. 11. The judicial power of the United iStates shall not be construed to extend to any |suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted \against one of the United States by citizens of ]another State, or by citizens or subjects of anyforeign State.Art. 12, 1. The electors shall meet in their \THE UNITED STATES.respective States, and vote by ballot for Presidentand Vice-president, one of whom, at least,shall not be an inhabitant of the same Statewith themselves ; they shall name in their ballotsthe person voted for as President, and indistinctballots the person voted for as Vice-president; and they shall make distinct lists ofall persons voted for as President, and of allpersons voted for as Vice-president, and of thenumber of votes for each, which lists they shallsign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seatof the Government of the United States, directedto the President of the Senate ; the Presidentof the Senate shall, in the presence of theSenate and House of Representatives, open allthe certificates, and the votes shall then becounted ; the person having the greatest numberof votes for President shall be the President,if such of the number be a majority of thewhole number of electors appointed ; and if noperson have such a majority, then from the personshaving the highest numbers, not exceedingiCONSTITUTION OFthree, on the list of those voted for as President,the House of Representatives shall chooseimmediately, by ballot, the President, But, iachoosing the President, the votes shall be takenby States, the representation from each Statehaving one vote ; a quorum for this purposeshall consist of a member or members from two jthirds of the State, and a majority of all the JStates shall be necessary to a choice. And if jthe House of Representatives shall not choose a <President whenever the right of choice shalldevolve upon them, before the fourth day ofMarch next following, the Vice-president shallact as President, as in the case of the death, ofother constitutional disability of the President.2. The person having the greatest number ofvotes as Vice-president, shall be the Vice-president,if such number be a majority of the wholenumber of electors appointed ; and if no persiahave a majority, then from the two highest numberson the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice-president: a quorum for the purpose shall con-theUNITED STATES. 2l>3sit of two-thirds of the whole lUimlxT of w»iiu-tors, and a majority of the whole iunul)er shallbe necessary to a choice.3. But no person constitutionally ineligibleto the office of President, shall be eligible tothat of Vice-president of the United States.END OF VOL. II.