DIARY IN AMERICA,&c. &c.DIARY IN AMERICAWITHREMARKS ON ITS INSTITUTIONS.BYCAPT. MARRY AT, Cab.,Author OF*• PETER SIMPLE," "JACOB FAITHFUL,"•* FRANK Midway," &c.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS,PATERNOSTER ROW.1839.Printed by J. L. Cox and Sok8» 75» Great Queen StreetsLincoInVInn Field*.INTRODUCTION.After many years of travel, during which Ihad seen men under almost every variety ofgovernment, religion, and climate, I lookedround to discover if there were not still newcombinations under which human nature was tobe investigated. I had traversed the old continentuntil satisfied, if not satiated ; and I hadsailed many a weary thousand miles from westto east, and from north to south, until people,manners, and customs were looked upon by mewith indifference.The press was constantly pouring out worksupon the new world, so contradictory to eachother, and pronounced so unjust by the AmorisT. B2 INTRODUCTION.cans, that my curiosity was excited. It appearedstrange to me that travellers whose worksshowed evident marks of talent should viewthe same people through such very differentmediums; and that their gleanings should,generally speaking, be of such meagre materials.Was there so little to be remarked about< America, its government, its institutions, andthe effect which these had upon the people, thatthe pages of so many writers upon that countryshould be filled up with, how the Americansdined or drank wine, and what descriptions ofspoons and forks were used at table ? Eitherthe Americans remained purely and unchangedEnglish, as when they left their father-land ; orthe question required more investigation anddeeper research than travellers in thqj/p hastymovements had been able to bestow upon it.Whether I should be capable of throwing anynew light upon the subject, I knew not, but atall events I made up my mind that I wouldvisit the country and judge for myself.INTRODUCTION. 3-On my first arrival I perceived little differencebetween the city of New York and one of ourprincipal provincial towns ; and, for its people,not half so much as between the people of Devonshireor Cornwall and those of Middlesex. I hadbeen two or three weeks in that city, and I said :There is certainly not much to write about, normuch more than what has already been so continuallyrepeated. ^No wonder that those who precededme have indulged in puerilities to swellout their books But in a short time I alteredmy opinion : even at New York, the Englishappearance of the people gradually wore away ;my perception of character became more keen,my observance consequently more nice and close,and I found that there was a great deal to reflectupon and investigate, and that America andthe American people were indeed an enigma;and I was no longer surprised at the incongruitieswhich were to be detected in those workswhich had attempted to describe the country.I do not assert that I shall myself succeed, whenB 2»#4 INTRODUCTION,SO many have failed, but, at any rate, this I amcertain of, my remarks will be based upon a moresure foundation-an analysis of human nature.There are many causes why those who havewritten upon America have fallen into error:they have represented the Americans as a nation;now they are not yet, nor will they for manyyears be, in the true sense of the word, a nation, —they are a mass of many people cemented togetherto a certain degree, by a general form ofgovernment ; but they are in a constant stateof transition and (what may at first appearestrange) no amalgamation has as yet takenplace : the puritan of the east, the Dutch descentof the middle states, the cavalier of the south,are nearly as marked and distinct now, as at thefirst occupation of the country ; softened downindeed, but still distinct. Not only are thepopulations of the various states distinct, buteven those of the cities ; and it is hardly possibleto make a remark which may be considered asgeneral to a country, where the varieties ofINTRODUCTION. 6-soil and of climate are so extensive. Even onthat point upon which you might most safelyventure to generalise, namely, the effect of ademocratical form of government upon the mass,your observations must he taken with some exceptions,arising from the climate, manners, andcustoms, and the means of livelihood, so differingin this extended country.Indeed the habit in which travellers indulgeof repeating facts which have taken place, ashaving taken place in America, has, perhapsunintentionally on their part, very much misledthe English reader. It would hardly be consideredfair, if the wilder parts of Ireland, andthe disgraceful acts which are committed there,were represented as characteristic of England, orthe British Empire : yet' between London andCcHUiaught there is a less difference than be •tween the most civilized and intellectual portionof America, such as Boston and Pillardelphian, and the wild regions, and wilder in- ihabitants of the west of the Missisippi, and6 INTRODUCTION.Arkansas, where reckless beings compose s\ scattered population, residing too far for the lawto reach ; or where if it could reach, the powerof the government would prove much tooweak to enforce obedience to it. To do justiceto all parties, America should be examined andI ^ pourtrayed piecemeal, every state separately,I for every state is different, running down thescale from refinement to a state of barbarismalmost unprecedented ; but each presentingmatter for investigation and research, andcurious examples of cause and effect.Many of those who have preceded me have\ not been able to devote sufficient time to theirobject, and therefore have failed. If you havepassed through a strange country, totally differingin manners, and customs, and languagefrom your own, you may give your readers someidea of the contrast, and the impressions madeupon you by what you saw, even if you havetravelled in haste or sojourned there but a fewdays ; but when the similarity in manners, cuss7toms, and language is so great, that you mayimagine yourself to be in your own country, itrequires more research, a greater degree ofacumen, and a fuller investigation of cause andeffect than can be given in a few months ofrapid motion. Moreover English travellers haveapparently been more active in examining theinterior of houses, than the public path fromwhich they should have drawn their conclusions ;they have searched with the curiosity of awoman, instead of examining and surveyingwith the eye of a philosopher. Following upthis wrong track has been the occasion of muchindiscretion and injustice on their parts, and ofjustifiably indignant feeling on the part of the'Americans. By many of the writers on America,the little discrepancies, the mere trifles ofcustom have been dwelt upon, with a sarcastic,ill-natured severity to give to their works thatsemblance of pith, in which, in reality, they weremiserably deficient;' and they violated the rightsof hospitality that they might increase theirinterest a^ authors.8 INTRODUCTION.The Americans are often themselves the causeof their being misrepresented ; there is nocountry perhaps, in which the habit of deceivingj for amusement, or what is termed hoaxing, ift socommon. Indeed this arid the hyperbole conistatute the major part of American humour.If they have the slightest suspicion that aforeigner is about to write a book, nothing appearsto give them so much pleasure as to try tomislead him : this has constantly been practisedupon me, and for all I know, they may in someinstances have been successful; if they have,all I can say of the story is that " se non e verye si hen trovatOy^ that it might have happened.*Paragraph from a New York Paper,That old, deaf English maiden lady, Miss Martineau,who travelled through some qi the States, a fewyears since, gives a full account of Mr. Pofntdexters'death ; unfortunately for her veracity, the gentlemanstill lives ; but this is about as near the truth as themajority of her statements. 'The Loafing English menand women who visit America, as penny-a-liners, areperfectly understood here, and Jonathan amuses himselfwhenever he meets them, by imposing upon their ere.dualityINTRODUCTION. 9When I was at Boston, a gentleman of my acquaintancebrought me Miss Martineau work,and was excessively delighted when he pointed "sout to me two pages of fallacies, which he hadtold her with a grave face, and which she hadduly recorded and printed. This practice, addedto another, that of attempting to conceal (forthe Americans are aware of msaiy of their defects),has been with me productive of goodresults : It has led me to much close investigation,and has made me very cautious in assertingwhat has not been proved to my own satisfactionto be worthy of credibility.Another difficulty and cause of misrepresentationis, that travellers are not aware of the jealousyexisting between the inhabitants of thedifferent states and cities. The eastern dt^espronounce the southerners to be choleric, credulitythe most absurd stories which he can invent,which they swallow whole, go home with their eyessticking out of their heads with wonder, and mont allthey have heard for the benefit of John Bull's calves.b310 INTRODUCTION.less, regardless of law, and indifferent as Urreligion; while the southerners designate theeastern states as a nursery of over-reachingpedlars, selling clocks and wooden nutmegs.This running into extremes is produced fromthe clashing of their interests as producers andmanufacturers. Again, Boston turns up hererudite nose at New York ; Philadelphia, in herpride, looks down upon both New York andBoston ; while New York, chinking her dollars,swears the Bostonians are a parcel af puritanicalprigs, and the Philadelphians a would-be aristocracy.A western man from Kentucky, when atTrent House in Boston, begged me particularlynot to pay attention to what they said ofhis state in that quarter. Both a Virginian anTflnesseean, when I was at New York, did thesame.At Boston, I was drinking champagne at asupper. '* Are you drinking champagne ?" saida young Bostonian. ^ That's New York— takeclaret; or, if you will drink champagne, pour itINTRODUCTION. 11into a green glass, and they will think it hock ;champagne's not right'' How are we to distinguishbetween right and wrong in this queerworld ? At New York, they do drink a greatdeal of champagne; it is the small beer ofthe dinner-table. Champagne becomes associatedwith New York, and therefore is not rightI will do the New Yorkers the justice to say,that, as far as drinks are concerned, they areabove prejudice; all's right with them, providedthere is enough of it.The above remarks will testify, that travellersin America have great difficulties to contendwith, and that their channels of information havebeen chiefly those of the drawing-room or dinner 'table. Had I worked through the same, I shouldhave found them very difficult of access ; for theAmericans had determined that they would nolonger extend their hospitality to those whoreturned it with ingratitude — nor can they beblamed. Let us reverse the case. Were not thedoors of many houses in England shut againstVOL. I./S^^->'-i12 INTRODUCTION.an American author, when, from his wantof knowledge of conventional usage he publishedwhat never should have appeared inprint? And should another return to England,after his tetchy, absurd remarks uponthe English, is there much chance of his receivinga kind welcome ? Most assuredly not ;both these authors will be received with caution.The Americans, therefore, are not onlynot to blame, but would prove themselves verydeficient in a proper respect for themselves,if they again admitted into their domestic circlesthose who eventually requited them withabuse.Admitting this, of course I have no feelingsof ill-will towards them for any want of hospitalitytowards me; on the contrary, I was pleasedwith the neglect, as it left me free, and unshackledfrom any real or fancied claims whichthe Americans might have made upon me on thatscore. Indeed, I had not been three weeks inthe country before I decided upon accepting noINTRODUCTION. 13more invitations, even charily as they were made.I found that, although invited, my presence wasa restraint upon the company; every one appearedafraid to speak; and when any thingludicrous occurred, the cry would be — " Oh,now. Captain Marryat, don't put that into youbook." More than once, when I happened to bein large parties, a question such as follows wouldbe put to me by some " free and enlightenedindividual i"" ** Now, Captain M., I ask you beforethis company, and I trust you will give meacategorical answer. Are you, or are you notabout to write a book upon this country ?" Ihardly need observe to the English reader, that,under such circumstances, the restraint becamemutual ; I declined all further invitations, andadhered to this determination, as far as I couldwithout cause of offence, during my whole tourthrough the United States.But if I admit, that after the usage whichthey had received, the Americans are justifiedin not again tendering their hospitality to theMI14 INTRODUCTION.English, I cannot, at the same time, but expressmy opinion as to their conduct towards me personally.They had no right to insult andannoy me in the manner they did, from nearlyone end of the Union to the other, either becausemy predecessors had expressed an unfavourableopinion of them before my arrival,or because they expected that I would do thesame upoft my return to my own country. Iremark upon this conduct, not from any feelingof iU-will or desire of retaliation, but to compelthe Americans to admit that I am under noobligations to them ; that I received fromthem much more of insult and outrage than ofkindness ; and, consequently, that the charge ofingratitude cannot be laid to my door, howeveroffensive to them some of the remarks in thiswork may happen to be.And here I must observe, that the Americanscan no longer anticipate lenity from the Englishtraveller, as latterly they have so deeply committedthemselves. Once, indeed, they couldINTRODUCTION. 15say, ^' We admit and are hospitable to theEnglish, who, as soon as they leave our country,turn round, and abuse and revile us. We haveour faults, it is true; but such conduct ontheir part is not kind or generous." Butthey can say this no longer: they have retaliated,and in their attacks they have beenregardless of justice. The three last works uponthe Americans, written by English authors,were, on the whole, favourable to them; Mr.Power's and Mr. Grunt's most decidedly so ;' . — " . 1and Miss Martineau's, filled as it is with absurd Jties and fallacies, was intended at all events,to be favourable.In opposition to them, we have Mr. Cooper'sremarks upon England, in which my countrymenare certainly not spared; and sincethat publication, we have another of muchgreater importance, written by Mr. Carey, ofiPhiladelphia, not, indeed, in a strain of vituperationor ill feeling, but asserting, and no doubtto his own satisfaction and that of his country16 INTRODUCTION.men, proving, that in every important point,that is to say, under the heads of " Security ofPerson and Property, of Morals, Education,Religion, Industry, Invention, Credit," (andconsequently Honesty,) America is in advanceof England and every other nation in Europe ! 1The tables, then, are turned ; it is no longer theEnglish, but the Americans, who are the assailants; and such being the case, I beg that it mayberemembered, that many of the remarks whichwill subsequently appear in this work have beenforced from me by the attacks made upon mynation by the American authors ; and that if Iam compelled to draw comparisons, it is not withthe slightest wish to annoy or humiliate theAmericans, but in legitimate and justifiable defenceof my own native land.America is a wonderful country, endowed bythe Omnipotent with natural advantages whichno other can boast of; and the mind can hardlycalculate upon the degree of perfection andpower to which, whether the States are even-introduction.^'tully separated or not, it may in ^ course oftwo centuries arrive. At present all is energy andenterprise ; every thing is in a state of transition,but of rand improvement — so rapid, indeed, 'that those who would describe America nowwould have to correct all in the short space |[ ^.*of ten years; for ten years in America is almost \ ^ •equal to a century in the old continents Now,you may pass through a wild forest, where theelk browse sand the panther howls. In ten yeai-s,that very forest, with its denizens, will, mostlikely have disappeared, and in their placeyou will find towns with thousands of inhabitants; with arts, manufactures, and machinery,all in full activity.^ In reviewing America, we must look upon«it as shewing the development of the Englishcharacter under a new aspect, arising froma new state of things. If I were to drawa comparison between the English and theAmericans, I should say that there is almost asmuch difference between the two nations at this18 INTRODUCTION.present time, as there has long been betweenthe English and the Dutch. The latter areconsidered by us as phlegmatic and slow ; andwe may be considered the same, compared withour energetic descendants. Time to an Amesrican is every thing,* and space he attempts toreduce to a mere nothing. By the steam-boats,rail-roads, and the wonderful facilities of water-carriage,a journey of five hundred miles is aslittle considered in America, as would be here ajourney from London to Brighton. " Go head'sis the real motto of the country ; and every mandoes push on, to gain in advance of his neighbour.The American lives twice as long asothers ; for he does twice the work during thetime that he lives. He begins life sooner : atf fifteen he is considered a man, plunges into thestream of enterprize, floats and struggles withThe clocks in America — there rendered so famousby Sam Slick — instead of the moral lessons inculcatedby the dials of this country, such as " Time flies," &c.,teach one more suited to American feeling :Time is money !"INTRODUCTION. 19his fellows. In every trifle an American shewsthe value he puts upon time. He rises early,eats his meals with the rapidity of a wolf, andis the whole day at his business. If he be amerchant, his money, whatever it may amountto, is seldom invested; it is all floating — thisaccumulations remain active; and when hedies, his wealth has to be collected from thefour quarters of the globe.Now, all this energy and activity is of Englishorigin ; and were England expanded intoAmerica, the same results would be produced.To a certain degree, the English were in fformer times what the Americans are now ; andthis it is which has raised our country so high inthe scale of nations; but since we have become soclosely packed — so crowded, that there is hardlyroom for the population, our activity has beenproportionably cramped and subdued. But, in .this vast and favoured country, the very associationsand impressions of childhood foster andripen the intellect, and precociously rouse the20 Introduction.energies. The wide expanse of testify alreadyoccupied — the Tast and magnificent rivers — theboundless regions, yet remaining to be peopled^-tbe rapidity of communication — the dispatchwith which every thing is effected, are evidentalmost to the child. To those who have riversmany thousand miles in lengthy the passageacross the Atlantic (of 3,500 miles) appears buttrifle ; and the American ladies talk of spendingthe winter at Paris with as much indifference asone of our landed proprietors would, of goingup to London for the season.We must always bear in mind the peculiar andwonderful advantages of country when we examineAmerica and its form of government ; for thecountry has had more to do with upholdingthis democracy than people might at first imagine.Among the advantages of democracy,the greatest is, perhaps, that all start fair ;and the boy who holds the traveller's horse, asVan Buren is said to have done, may becomethe president of the United States. But (it isINTRODUCTION. 21the country, and not the government, which ^i» '■has been productive of such rapid strides as \ |have been made by Americans Indeed, it is aquery whether the form of government wouldhave existed down to this day, had it not been •for the advantages derived from the vast extentand boundless resources of the territory in whichit was established. Let the American direct hiscareer to any goal he pleases, his energies areunshackled ; and, in the race, the best man mustwin. There is room for all, and millions more. ILet him choose his profession — his career is notchecked or foiled by the excess of those whohave already embarked in it. ^ In every departmentthere is an opening for talent; and for ^those inclined to work, work is always to beprocured You have no complaint in thiscountry, that every profession is so full that it isimpossible to know what to do with your children.There is a vast field, and all may receivethe reward due for their labour.In a country where the ambition and energies#<22 EXTRODUCnOX.of man hstre been roused to sadi an extent, thegreat point is to find out wortfaj incitements forambition to feed upon. A Throne directed intoa wrong channel, may, hj circumstances provelittle better than, (even if it does not sink downinto,) actual vice. Hence it is that a democraticform of government is productive of such demoralizingeffects. Its rewards are few. HonoursI of every description, which stir up the soul ofI man to noble deeds — worthy incitements, they/ have none. The only compensation they canoffer for services is money ; and the only distinction— the only means of raising himself abovehis fellows left to the American— is wealth : conssequently, the acquisition of wealth has becomethe great spring of actions But it is not soughtafter with the avarice to hoard, but with theostentation to expend. It is the effect of ambitiondirected into a wrong channel. Each manwould surpass his neighbour; and the onlygreat avenue open to all, and into which thousandsmay press without much jostling of eachINTRODUCTION. 23other, is that which leads to the shrine ofMammon. It is' our nature to attempt to raiajjpourselves above our fellow-men ; it is the mainspringof existence — the incitement to all thatis great and virtuous, or great and vicious. InAmerica, but a small portion can raise themselves,or find rewards for superior talent, butwealth is attainable by all; and having noaristocracy, no honours, no distinctions to lookforward to, wealth has become the substitute,and, with very few exceptions, every man isgreat in proportion to his riches. The consequenceis, that to leave a sum of money whenthey die is of little importance to the majorityof the Americans. Their object is to amassit while young, and obtain the considerationwhich it gives them during their life-time.The society in the United States is thatwhich must naturally be expected in a newcountry where there are few men of leisure, andthe majority are working hard to obtain thatwealth which almost alone gives importance\24 ErntoDrcnoy.will find intdkctny jnd j^iiilliwilili peoplem Amerka, but dicT Lie .mttr i wl hoe andtfaoe. The cxrde of sodetj is notoonpkte:wfaoerer joa go, soo wffl find jd miaasUm,sudden wealth harris admitted those ^rfe but afewTcan IxKk were in home aroBBKtaBC^ andin the constant state of Uaiiutiu n which takesface in this country, it will be hdf a oentimr,perhaps, heare a select chide of society can becollected together in any one dtr or place. Theimprovement is rapid, but the Tast extent ofcountry which has to be peopled presents that improvementfrom being manifest. The stream flowsinland, and those who are here to-day are gonetomorrow, and their places in society filled upby others who ten years back had no prospectof ever being admitted. All is transition, thewaves follow one another to the far west, thefroth and scum boiling in the advance.America is, indeed, well worth the study ofthe philosopher. A vast nation forming, societyIINTRODUCTION. 25ever changing, all in motion and activity, nothingcomplete, the old continent pouring inher surplus to supply the loss of the easternstates, all busy as a hive, full of energy andactivity. Every year multitudes swarm off fromthe East, like bees : not the young only, but theold, quitting the close-built cities, society, andrefinement, to settle down in some lone spot inthe vast prairies, where the rich soil offers tothem the captain prospect of their families andchildren head one day possessed of competencyand wealth.^ To write upon America as a nation would beabsurd, for nation, properly speaking, it is not ;but m consider it in its present chaotic state,is wdl worth the labour. It would not only ex-hintto the living a somewhat new picture ofthe human mind, but, as a curious page in thePhilosophy of History, it would hereafter serve asasubject of review for the Americans themselves*It is not my intention to follow the indivi-VOL. I. c*••i*26 INTRODUCTION.realising plans of the majority of those who havepreceded me in this country. I did not sailacross the Atlantic to ascertain whether theAmericans eat their dinners with two-prong iron,or three-prong silver forks, with chopsticks, ortheir fingers; it is quite sufficient for me to knowthat they do eat and drink ; if they did not,it would be a curious anomaly which I shouldnot pass over. My object was, to examine andascertain what were the effects of a democraticform of government and climate upon apeople which, with all its foreign admixturemay still he considered as English.^ It is a fact that our virtues and our vicesdepend more upon circumstances than uponourselves, and there are no circumstances whichoperate so powerfully upon us as governmentand climate. Let it not be supposed that, inthe above assertion, I mean to extenuate vice,or imply that we are not free agents. Naturallyprone to vices in general, circumstances willINTRODUCTION. 27fender us more prone to one description of vicethan to another; but that is no reason why weshould not be answerable for it, since it is ourduty to guard against the besetting sin. Butas an agent in this point, the form of governmentunder which we live is, perhaps, the mostpowerful in its effects, and thus we constantlyhear of vices peculiar to a country, when itought rather to be said, of vices peculiar to agovernment.Never, perhaps, was the foundation of anation laid under such peculiarly favourableauspices as that of America. The capital theycommenced with was industry, activity, andcourage. They had, moreover, the advantageof the working of genius and wisdom, and the recordsof history, as a beacon and a guide ; thetrial of ages, as to the respective merits of thevarious governments to which men have submitted; the power to select the merits from thedemerits in each ; a boundless extent of country,rich in every thing that could be of advantagec2r28 Introduction.to man ; and they were kd by tboae wholeafy giants in those dajs^ a body of men collectedand acting together, fonningan aggr^ at eof wisdom and energy siidi as probably will notfor centuries be seen again. Never was theresuch an opportunity of testing die merits of a republic,of ascertaining if such a form of governmentcould be maintained-^n tact of provingwhether an enlightened people could governthemselves. And it must be acknowledged thatthe work was well brun ; Washington, whenhis career had dosed, left the country a purerepublic. He did all that man could do. MissMartineau asserts that ^^ America has solved thegreat problem, that a republic can exist for fiftyyears ;^ but sadi is not the case. America hasproved that, under peculiar advantages, a pec^akcan govern themselves for fifty years ; but if youput the question to an enlightened American,and ask him, << Were Washington to rise fromhis grave, would he recc^ise the present governmentof America as the one bequeathed to than P"Introduction. 29standthe American will himself answer in thenegative. These fifty years have afforded anotherproof, were it necessary, how short-sightedand fallible are men«-«-how impossible it is tokeep anything in a state of perfection herebelow. Washington left America as an infantnation, a pure and, I may add, a virtuous republic; but the government of the country hasundergone as much change as every thing else,and it has now settled down into any thing butapure democracy. Nor could it be otherwise ;a republic may be formed and may continue inhealthy existence when regulated by a small bodyof men, but as men increase and multiply so dothey deteriorate ; the closer they are packed themore vicious they become, and, consequently,the more vicious become their institutions.Washington and his coadjutors had no powerto control the nature of man.It may be inquired by some, what differencethere is between a republic and a democracy, asth e terms have been, and are often, used indiesINTRODUCTION./ fervently. I know not whether my distinction isright, but I consider that when those possessedof most talent and wisdom are selected to act forthe benefit of a people, with full reliance upontheir acting for the best, and without any shackleor pledge being enforced, we may considerthat form of government as a republic ruled bythe most enlightened and capable ; but that if,on the contrary, those selected by the people tarepresent them are not only bound by pledgesprevious to their election, but ordered by themass how to vote after their election, then thecountry is not ruled by the collected wisdom ofthe people, but by the majority, who are asoften wrong as right, and then the governingprinciple sinks into a democracy, as it now isin America.*>\And in this opinion I find that I am home out byan American writer, who says—" It is true, indeed, thatthe American government, which, as first setup, was properlyrepublican— that is, representation in a course ofsalutary degrees, and with salutary checks upon the popularIntroduction. 31It is singular to remark, notwithstanding hermonarchical form of government, how muchmore republican England is in her institutionsthan America. Ask an American what he considersthe necessary qualifications of a president,and,, after intellectual qualifications, he will tellyou firmness, decision, and undaunted courage ; .and it is really an enigma to him, although hewill not acknowledge it, how the sceptre of acountry like England, subject to the monarchicalsway which he detests, can be held inthe hand of a young female of eighteen yearsof age.But upon one point I have made up mymind, which is that, with all its imperfections,^ democracy is the form of government best suited «polar will, on the powers of legislation, of the executive;and the judiciary,— was assailed at an early period of itshistory, and has been assailed continuously down tothe present time, by a power called democracy, and thatthis power has been constantly acquiring influence andgaining ascendancy in the republic during the term ofits history-<4 Voice from America to England, by anAmerican Gentleman, page 10.32 Introduction.^ to the present condition of America, in so faras it is the one under which the country hasmade and will omtinne to make, the most rapidadvances That it must eventually be changedis true, but the time of its change must be determinedby so many events, hidden in futurity,which may moderate or retard the compulsion,that it would be presumptuous for any one toattempt to name a period when the present form^ /^ of government shall be broken up, and the mule^ y latitude shall separate and re-embody themselvesunder new institutions.In the arrangement of this work, I have consideredit advisable to present, first, to the readerthose portions of my diary which may be interesting,and in which are recorded traits and incidentswhich will bear strongly upon the commentariesI shall subsequently make upon theinstitutions of the United States, and the resultsof those institutions as developed in theAmerican character. Having been preceded by somany writers on America, I must occasionally^INTRODUCTION. 33tread in well-beaten tracts; but, although I shallavoid repetition as ranch as possible, this willnot prevent me from describing what I saw orfelt. Different ideas, and different associations •of ideas, will strike different travellers, as thesame landscape may wear a new appearance, accordingas it is viewed in the morning, by noon,or at night ; the outlines remain the same, butthe lights, and shadows, and tints, are reflectedfrom the varying idiosyncrasy of variousminds.My readers will also find many quotations,either embodied in the work or supplied bynotes. This I have considered necessary, thatmy opinions may be corroborated; but these quotationswill not be extracted so much from theworks of English as from American writers. •The opinions relative to the United States havebeen so conflicting in the many works whichhave been written, that I consider it mostimportant that I should be able to quote«34 INTRODUCTION.American authorities against themselves, andstrengthen my opinions and arguments by theirown admissions.Diary IN America,CHAPTER I.I LIKE to begin at the beginning; it's agood old fashion, not sufficiently adhered to inthese modern times. I recollect a young gentlemanwho said he was thinking of going toAmerica ; on my asking him, « how he tp^edto go ?'' he replied, " I don't exactly know ; butI think I shall take the fast coach' I wishedhim a safe passage, and said, " I was afraid hewould find it very dusty*" As I could not findthe office to book myself by this youngaentle-man's conveyance, I walked down to St. Rather^A36 DIARY IN AMERICA.fine's Docks; went on board a packet; wasshewn into a superb cabin, fitted up with birdseye maple, mahogany, and looking-glasses, andcommunicating with certain small cabins, wherethere was a sleeping berth for each passenger,about as big as that allowed to a pointer in adog-kennel. I thought that there was more finerythat comfort ; but it ended in my promisingthe captain to meet him at Portsmouth. He wasto sail from London on the 1st of April, and Idid not choose to sail on that day — it was ominous; so I embarked at Portsmouth on the 3d.It is not my intention to give a description ofcrossing the Atlantic ; but as the reader may bedisappointed if I do not tell him how I got over,I traffic first inform him that we were thirty-eightin the cabin, and 160 men, women, andchildren, literally stowed in bulk in the steerage.I shall describe what took place from the timeI first went up the side at Spithead, until theship was under weigh, and tltm make a veryshort passage of it.DIARY IN AiVIERICA. 37At 9? 30, A.M. — Embarked onboard the goodship Quebec ; and a good ship she proved to be,repeatedly going nine and a-half knots on a bowling,sails lifting. Captain H. quite delightedto see me — all captains of packets are to seepassengers : I believed him when he said so.At 9j 50. — Sheriffs officer, as usual, came onboard.Observed several of the cabin passengershasten down below, and one who requested thecaptain to stow him away. But it was not apen-and-ink adair ; it was a case of burglary.The officer has found his man in the steerage-thehandcuffs are on his wrists, and they arerowing him ashore. His wife and two childrenare on board ; her lips quiver as she collectsher baggage to follow her husband. One half-hourmore, and he would have escaped fromjustice, and probably have led a better life inafar country, where his crimes were unknown.By the bye, Greenacre, the man who cutthe woman up, was taken out of the shipas she went down the river: he had very38 DIARY IN AMERICA.nearly escaped. What cargoes of crime,folly, and recklessness do we yearly ship offto America ! America ought to be very muchobliged to us.The women of the steerage are persuadingthe wife of the burglar not to go on shore ;their arguments are strong, but not strongenough against the devoted love of a woman'sYour husband is certain to be hung ; what'sthe use of following him? Your passage ispaid, and you will have no difficulty in supportingyour children in America." But she rejectsthe advice — goes down the side, and presses herchildren to her breast, as, overcome with theagony of her feelings, she drops into the boat ;and, now that she is away from the ship, youhear the sobs, which can no longer be controlled.10, A.M. — "All hands up anchor*"I was repeating to myself some of the stanzasof Mrs. Norton's " Here's a Health to theOutward-bound," when I cast my eyes forward• .r 'DIARY IN AMERICA. 39I could not imagine what the seamen were about;they appeared to be pumping ^ instead of heaving,at the windlass. I forced my way through theheterogeneous mixture of human beings, animals,and baggage which crowded the decks, anddiscovered that they were working a patentwindlass, by Robinson — a very ingenious andsuperior invention. The seamen, as usual,lightened their labour with the song and chorus,forbidden by the etiquette of a man-of-war. Theone they sung was peculiarly musical, althoughnot refined; and the chorus of "Oh! SallyBrown," was given with great emphasis by thewhole crew between every line of the song, sungby an athletic young third mate. I took myseat on the knight-heads — turned my face aft-lookedand listened.*^ Heave away there, forward."Aye, aye, sir."* Sally Brown — oh! my dear Sally's"' (Singlevoice)*« ' Oh ! Sally Browne'' (Chorus) ;"' ^ *40 DIARY IN AMERICA.« * SaUy Brown, of Ruble AUy.''' (Singlevoice).< Oh ! SaUy Brown.' '^ (Chorus).^< Avast heaving there ; send all aft to clearthe boat."Aye, aye, sir. Where are we to stow thesecasks, Mr. Fisher ?"^^ Stow them ! Heaven knows ; get them in,at all events*'^^ Captain H. ! Captain H. ! there's my pianostill on deck ; it will be quite spoiled — indeedit will''^^ Don't be alarmed, ma'am ; as soon as we'reunder weigh we'll hoist the cow up, and get thepiano down."What ! under the cow? "No, ma'am ; but the cow's over the hatchway."Now, then, my lads, forward to the windlass."'' * I went to town to get some toddy.' "« < Oh ! Sally Browns1 >DIARY IN AMERICA. 41« « Wasn't fit for any body' "^<«Ohi SaUy Brown; "—Out there, and clear away the jib'Aye, aye, sir''Mr. Fisher, how much cable is thereout?''Plenty yet, sir. — Heave away, my lads""« * Sally is a bright mulatto.' "'' ' Oh ! Sally Brown.' "'^ « Pretty girl, but can't get at her.' ''"<0h! '"—Avast heaving ; send the men aft to whipthe ladies in. — Now, miss, only sit down anddon't be afraid, and you'll be in, in no time. —Whip away, my lads, handsomely ; steady herwith the guy ; lower away.— There, miss, nowyou're safely landed,"^Landed am I .'^ I thought I was shipped*''''Very good, indeed — very good, miss ; you'llmake an excellent sailor, I see."*' i should make a better sailor's wife I expect.Captain H."42 DIARY IX AJfERICA.^^ Excellent ! Allow me to hand you aft ;you'll excuse me. — forward now, my men ;heave away I**^^ ^ Seven years I courted Sally.' "' Oh ! Sally Brown.' "* Seven more of shilly-shally "''' Oil Sally Brown.' ""« ' She won't wed **—Avast heaving. Up there, and loose thetopsails ; stretch along the topsail-sheets. — uponmy soul, half these children will be killed. —Whose child are you ?'^I — don't — knows*"Go and find out, that's a dear. — Let fall ;sheet home ; belay starboard sheet ; clap on thelarboard ; belay all that. — Now, then, Mr,Fisher."Aye, aye, sir. — Heave away, my lads."* She won't wed a Yankee sailor'"«'0h! Sally Brown'"^ For she's in love with the nigger tailor.' \« <0h! Sally Browne"—DIARY IN AMERICA. 43Heave away, my men ; heave, and in sight.Hurrah ! my lads''Sally Brown — oh ! my dear Sally !' "soh! Sally Brown'"' Sally Brown, of Ruble Alley.' "« ' Oh ! Sally Brown "^ Sally has a cross old granny.' "« « Oh ! ' "—Heave and fall — jib-halyards — hoist away."« Oh ! dear— oh ! dear''The clumsy brute has half-killed the girl!Don't cry, my dear."Pick up the child, Tom, and shove it outof the way."Where shall I put her ^Oh, any where just now ; put her on theturkey-coop."« Starboard !"I say, clap on, some of you he chaps orelse get out of the way."Sailor, mind my band-box."Starboard!"44 DIARY IN AMERICA.*' Starboard it is; steady so."Thus, with the trifling matter of maiminghalf-a-dozen children, upsetting two or threewomen, smashing the lids of a few trunks, andcrushing some bandboxes as flat as a muffin,the good ship Quebec was at last fairly underweigh, and standing out for St. Helen's.3. P.M. — Off St. Helen's; ship steady; littlewind ; water smooth ; passengers sure they won'tbe sick.8, 20. — Apologies from the captain for a colddinner on this day.4 o'clock. — Dinner over ; every body pallsout a number of " Pickwick'' every body talksand reads Pickwick ; weather getting up squally;passengers not quite so sure they won't be seasick.Who can tell what the morrow may bringforth ? It brought forth a heavy sea, and thepassengers were quite sure that they were seasick.Only six out of thirty-eight made theirappearance at the breakfast-table; and, for manyDIARY IN AMERICA. 45days afterwards, there were Pickwick in plentystrewed all over the cabin, but passengers werevery scarce.But we had more than sea-sickness to contendwith — the influenza broke out and raged. Doesnot this fHX>ve that it is contagious, and notdependant cm the atmosphere? It was hard,after having sniffled with it for six weeks onshore, that I should have another month of iton board. But who can control destiny ? Theship was like a hospital ; an elderly woman wasthe first victim— then a boy of twelve years ofage. Fortunately, there were no more deaths.But I have said enough of the passage. Onthe 4th of May, in the year of our Lord 1887,I Ibiuid myself walking up Broadway, amongthe free and enlightened citizens of New York.■<.46 DIARY IN AMERICA.CHAPTER II.A VISIT, to make it agreeable to both parties,should be well timed. My appearance at NewYork was very much like bursting into a friend'shouse with a merry face when there is a death inIt-with the sudden change from levity to condolence.** Any other time most happy to seeyou. You find us in a very unfortunate situation."Indeed I'm very— very sorry''Two hundred and sixty houses have alreadyfailed, and no one knows where it is to end.Suspicion, fear, and misfortune have taken possessionof the city. Had I not been aware ofthe cause, I should have imagined that theplague was raging, and I had the description ofDefoe before me.Not a smile on one countenance among theDIARY IN AMERICA, 47crowd who pass and repass ; hurried steps, carewornfaces, rapid exchanges of salutation, orhasty communication of anticipated ruin beforethe sun goes down. Here two or three aregathered on one side, whispering and watchingthat they are not overheard ; there a solitary,with his arms folded and his hat slouched,brooding over departed affluence. Mechanics,thrown out of employment, are pacing up anddown with the air of famished wolves. Theviolent shock has been communicated, like thatof electricity, through the country to a distanceof hundreds of miles. Canals, railroads, and allpublic works, have been discontinued, and theIrish emigrant leans against his shanty, with hisspade idle in his hand, and starves, as histhoughts wander back to his own Emerald Isle.The Americans delight in the hyperbole ; infact they hardly have a metaphor without it.During this crash, when every day fifteen ortwenty merchants names appeared in the newspapersas bankrupts, one party, not in a very\48 DIARY IN AMERICA.good humour, was hastening down Broadwaywhen he was run against by another whose temperwas equally unamiable. This collisionroused the choler of both.^^What the devil do you mean, sir*' criedone ; ^^ I've a great mind to knock you into themiddle ofnecet weekThis occurring on a Saturday, the wrath ofthe other was checked by the recollection ofhow very favourable such a blow would be tohis present circumstances.Will you ! by heavens, then pray do ; it'sjust the thing I want, for how else I am to getover next Monday and the acceptances I musttake up, is more than I can tell''All the banks have stopped pajonent in specie,and there is not a dollar to be had. I walked\~ down Wall Street, and had a convincing proofof the great demand for money, for somebodypicked my pocket.The militia are under arms, as riots are expected.The banks in the country and other<lily is a very re- \ *lean disposition ; if -^DIARY IN AMERICA, 49towns have followed the example of New York,and thus has General Jackson's currency billbeen repealed without the aid of Congress. Affairsare now at their worst, and now that suchis the case, the New Yorkers appear to recovertheir spirits. One of the newspapers humorouslyobserves — " All Broadway is like unto anew-made widow, and dort know whether tolaugh or cry." There certainlymarkable energy in the American dispositionthey fall, they bound up again. Somebody hasobserved that the New York merchants are ofthat elastic nature, that, when fit for nothingdse, they might be converted into ctmch springsand such really appears to be their character.Nobody refuses to take the paper of the NewYork banks, although they virtually havestopped payment-they never refuse anythingin New York; — but nobody will give specie inchange, and great distress is occasioned by thiswant of a circulating medium. Some of theshopkeepers told me that they had been obligedVOL. I. D60 DIARY IN AMERICA,<) turn away a hundred dollars a-day, and manya Southerner, who has come up with a largesupply of southern notes, has found himself apauper, and has been indebted to a friend for afew dollars in specie to get home again.The radicals here, for there are radicals, itappears, in a democracy —"In the lowest depth, a lower deep"—"^ are very loud in their complaints. I was watchingthe swarming multitude in Wall Streetthis morning, when one of these fellows wasdeclaiming against the banks for stopping speciepayments, and ^* robbing a poor man in sucha villanous manner'' when one of the merchants,who appeared to know his customer,said to him — " Well, as you say, it is hard forapoor fellow like you not to be able to getdollars for his notes ; hand them out, and I'llgive you specie for them myself !'' The blackguardhad not a cent in his pocket, and walkedaway looking very foolish. He reminded me ofa little chimney-sweeper at the Tower HamletsDIARY IN AMERICA. 61section, asking — " Wot vos my opinions aboutprimogeniture ?^ — a very important point to himcertainly he having no parents, and havingbeen brought up by the parish.I was in a store when a thorough-bred democratwalked in : he talked loud, and voluntarilygave it as his opinion that all this distress was thevery best thing that could have happened to thecountry, as America would now keep all thespecie and pay her English creditors with bankruptcies.There always appears to me to be agreat want of moral principle in all radicals ;indeed, the levelling principles of radicalismare adverse to the sacred rights of meum ettuum. At Philadelphia the ultra-democratshave held a large public meeting, at which oneof the first resolutions brought forward andagreed to was — "That they did not owe onefarthing to the English people."They may say the times are bad," said ayoung American to me " but I think that theyare excellent. A twenty dollar note used to lastp 262 WARY IX America.me bat a week, but now with as good as FcrtiKnata^Vs pane, wfaicfa was oerer empCj. I eat mjdamer at the hotel, and Aow them mj twentydollar note. The landlord turns aws^fiomh, asif it were the head of Medusa, and begs that Iwin pay another time. I boy every thing At Iwant, and I have only to over my twenty dollarnote m payment, and my credit is unbounded—that is, for any sum under twenty dollars. If theyever do give change again in New Y<»rk it willmake a very unfortunate change in my affidrs.^A government circular, enforcing the act ofCongress, which obliges all those who have topay customhouse duties or postage to do so inspecie, has created great dissatisfaction, andadded much to the distress and difficulty. Atf' the same time that they (the government) refuseto take from their debtors the notes of the banks,upon the ground that they are no longer legaltenders, they compel their creditors to takethose very notes — having had a large quantityin their possession at the time that the banksDIARY IN AMERICA. 63-suspended specie payments — an act of despotismwhich the English Government would not venttore upon.Miss Martineau'^s work is before me. Howdangerous it is to prophecy. Speaking of themerchants of New York, and their recoveringafter the heavy losses they sustained by the calamitousfire of 1835, she says, that althougheighteen millions of property were destroyed,not one merchant failed ; and she continues,It seems now as if the commercial credit ofNew York could stand any shock short of anearthquake like that of Lisbon." That wasthe prophecy of 1836. Where is the commercialcredit of New York now in 1837 ? I i IThe distress for change has produced a curiousremedy. Every man is now his own banker.Go to the theatres and places of publicamusement, and, instead of change, you receivean I.O.U, from the treasury. At the hotelsand oyster-cellars it is the same thing. Call foraglass of brandy and water and the change54 DIARY IX Americais £ft€ec tickets, each ^ good for ooe glass ofbrandy and water." At an ovster-sfac^ eat aplate of oysters, and you have in return seventickets, good far one date of oysters each. Itis the same evwy where. — The barbers giveyou tickets, good for so many dives ; and werethere beggars in die streets, I presume they wouldgive you tickets in change, good for so muchphilanthropy. Dealers, in general, give out the*own bank-notes, or as they are called here, shinplasters, which are good for one dollar, and firtnnthat down to two and a-half cents, all of whichare redeemable, and redeemable only upon ageneral return to cash payments.Hence arises another variety of exchange inWall Street.Tom, do you want any oysters for lunchto-day ?"'' Yes !^'Then here's a ticket, and give me two shavesin return*"I The most prominent causes of this convulseIN AMERICA. 65sion have already been laid before the English Ipublic; but there is one — that of speculating iin land — which has not been sufficiently dwelt/ Iupon, nor has the importance been given to itwhich it deserves ; as, perhaps, next to the losses .occasioned by the great fire, it led, more thanany other species of over-speculation and over 'trading, to the distress which has ensued. Notbut that the event must have taken place in thenatural course of things. Cash payments producesure but small returns ; but no commercecan be carried on by this means on any extendedscale. Credit, as long as it is good, is so muchextra capital, in itself nominal and non-existent,but producing real returns. If any one willlook back upon the commercial history of theselast fifty years, he will perceive that the systemof credit is always* attended with a periodicalblow up; in England, perhaps, once in twentyyears; in America, once in from seven to ten.This arises from their being no safety valvecheck which can be put to it by mutual consenta6 Wary IS AJfEBIClA.d aD partial One Iioiik ftlrnih its credit,and far a tine, its profits; Jimthcw tMam% Aeexample. The finite cf credit induces dunewho cAiCain it to aafaark in other qiemlatinp»yiamffk to tudor business; Cor credit trans be-armiesextim capital which tbej do not noirhoar to emirioj. Such has been the case in thepresent instance: hot this is no reason for diecredit stem not being continued. These occasionalexjdosiaiis act as warnings, and, for thetime peo[^ are more cautious : tbej stop for awhile to repair damages, and lover fromtheir consternation; and when they go a-headagain, it is not quite so fiiut. The loss isseverity felt, because people are not prepared tomeet it ; but if all the profits of the years ofhealthy credit were added up, and the balance-sheetstruck between that and the loss at theexplosion, the advantage gained by the creditsystem would still be found to be great. Theadvancement of America depends wholly uponI ^ it. It is by credit alone that she has madeDIARY IN AMERICA. 67such rapid strides, and it is by credit alone thatshe can continue to flourish, at the same timethat $he enriches those who trade with her. Inthis Utter crisis there was more blame to beattached to the English houses, who forcedtheir credit upon the Americans, than to theAmericans, who, having such unlimited credit,thought that they might advantageously speculatewith die capital of others.One of the most singular affections of the ihuman mind is a proneness to excessive specur /nation; and it may here be noticed that thedisease for (such it may be termed) is peculiarlyEnglish and American. Men, in their racefor gain, appear, like horses that have runaway,to have been blinded by the rapidity oftheir own motion. It almost amounts to anepidemic, and is infectious— the wise and thefoolish being equally liable to the disease.We had ample evidence of this in the which took place in England in theyears 1825 and 1826. A mania of this kindd3K5^ DIARY IX America.had infected the people of America for two orthree rears priors to the cn^ : it vv thaiof speculating in land ; and to show the extentto which it had been carried oo, we may takethe following examples : —The city of New York, which is built upona narrow i^and about ten miss in length, atpresent covers about three miles of that distance,and has a population of three hundred thousandinhabitants. Building lots were marked outfor the other seven miles ; and, by calculation,these lots when built upcHi, would contain anadditional populated of one million and three-quarters.They were first purchased at from onehundred to one hundred and fifty dollars each,but, as the epidemic raged, they rose to upwardsof two thousand dollars. At Brooklyn, on LongIsland, opposite to New York, and about halfa mile distant from it, lots were marked out tothe extent of fourteen miles, which would containan extra population of one million, ancfxhesewere as eagerly speculated, in.DIARY IN AMERICA 59At Staten Island, at the entrance into theSound, an estate was purchased by some speculatorsfor ten thousand dollars, was divided intolots, and planned as a town to be called NewBrighton ; and had the whole of the lots beensold at the price for which many were, previousto the crash, the original speculators would haverealised three million of dollars. But the infatuationwas not confined to the precincts ofNew York : every where it existed. Govern ■ment lands, which could only be paid for inspecie, were eagerly sought after; plans of inew towns were puffed up; drawings made, inwhich every street was laid down and named ;churches, theatres, hospitals, rail-road communications,canals, steam-boats in the offing,all appeared on paper as if actually in existence,when, in fact, the very site was as yet a forest,with not a log-hut within a mile of the pretendedcity. Lots in these visionary cities wereeagerly purchased, increased daily in value, andafforded a fine harvest to those who took advanceDIARY IN AMERICA.take of the credulity of others. One man would^ buy a lot with extensive water privileges and,Upon going to examine it, would find those^ privileges rather too extensive, the whole lotbeing under water. Even after the crisis, therewas a man still going about who made a goodlivelihood by setting up his plan of a city, thelots of which he sold by public auction, on conditionof one dollar being paid down to securethe purchase if approved of. The mania hadnot yet subsided, and many paid down theirdollar upon their purchase of a lot. This wasall he required. He went to the next town, andsold this same lots over and over again.l%''t^heck this madness of speculation, wasone reason why an act of Congress was passed,obliging all purchasers of government lands topay in specie. Nevertheless, government receivednine or ten millions in specie after thebill passed. Now, when it is considered whata large portion of the capital drawn from Englandwas applied to these wild speculations —DURY IN American 61sums which, when they were required, could notbe realized, as, wh&i the crisis occurred, propertythus purchased immediately fell to about one-faithof what was paid for it— it will be clearlysen that, from this unfortunate mania, a greatportico of the present distress must have arisen.The attempt of General Jackson and his sue jcensors, to introduce a specie currency into acountry which exists upon credit, was an actoi &^y, and has ended in complete failures JA few weeks after he had issued from the Minta large coinage of gold, there was hardly aneagle to be seen, and the metal might almost aswell have remained in the mine from whence ithad beni extracted. It was still in the country,One single proof may be given of the ruinous policyof the Jackson administration in temporising with thecredit of the country. To check the export of bullionfrom our country, the Bank of England had but oneremedy, that of rendering money scarce : they contractedtheir issues, and it became so. The consequencewas, that the price of cotton fell forty dollars per bale.The crop of cotton amounted to 1,600,000 bales, which,at forty dollars per bale, was a loss to the southernplanters of 64,000,000 of bales.62 DIARY IN AMERICA.but had all been absorbed by the agriculturists ;and such will ever be the case in a widely extendedagricultural country. The farmers,principally Dutch, live upon a portion of theirproduce and sell the rest. Formerly they werecontent with bank bills or Mexican dollars,which they laid by for a rainy day, and theyremained locked up for years before they wererequired. When the gold was issued, it waseagerly collected by these people, as more convenient,and laid by, by the farmers' wives, inthe foot of an old worsted stocking, where themajor part of it will remain. And thus has thefamous gold-currency bill been upset by thehoard*ing propensities of a parcel of old women. *A curious proof of this system of hoarding, whichimmediately took place upon the bank stopping payment,was told me by a gentleman from Baltimore. He wentinto a store to purchase, as he often had done, a canvasshot-bag, and to his surprise was asked three times theformer price for it. Upon his expostulating, the venderstold him, that the demand for them by the farmers andother people who brought their produce to market, andwho used them to put their specie in, was so great, thatthey could hardly supply them.DIARY IN AMERICA. 63CHAPTER III.Fifty years ago, New York was little morethan a village ; now, it is a fine city with threehundred thousand inhabitants. I have neverseen any city so admirably adapted for commerce.It is built upon a narrow island, betweenLong Island Sound and the Hudson River,Broadway running up it like the vertebrae ofsome huge animal, and the other streets divergingfrom it at right angles, like the ribs ; eachstreet running to the river, and presenting tothe view a forest of masts.There are some fine buildings in this city,but not many. Astor House, although ofsimple architecture, is, perhaps, the grandestmass ; and next to that, is the City Hall,though in architecture very indifferent. In thelarge room of the latter are some interestingDlJkMY IS A1EE2ICJI.pktoTfSk sni hfoSiJB of tsar presidents manors ofthe cil. and nsTsl ani cnHtanr offioeiiL whohare referred the thanks of Congress and thefreedom af the dtr. Sane aie tit fur specimensof art : the most sainted is that of CommodorePer, having his sinking vesse], in thecombat on the Lakes, to hoist his flag on faoaidof another drip. Decator^s portrait is also veryfine. Pity that such a man should have beensacrificed in a foolish dud !At the comer of many of the squares, or Locoof buildings, as they are termed here, is erecteda very high mast, with a cap of liberty uponthe top. The only idea we have of the cap ofliberty is, the bonnet rouge of the French;but the Americans will not copy the French,although they will the English ; so they havea cap of their own, which (begging their pardon),with its gaudy colours and gilding, looks morelike a f oars cap than any thing else.New York is not equal to London, norIkondway to Regent Street, although the Amer■DURY IN AMERICA. 66ricans would compare Diem. Still, New York isvery siqietior to most of our provincial towns,and, to a man who can exist out of London,Broadway will do very well for, a lounge — bangwide, three miles long, and the upper partcomposed of very handsome houses; besideswhich, it may almost challenge Regent Streetfor pretty faces, except on Sundays.* Many Jof the fops, or stores, as they are here called,(for in this land of equality nobody keeps a \shop), have already been fitted up with laiplate^lass fronts, similar to those in London,and but toe the depression which has takendace, many more would have followed theexample.Among the few discrepancies observable betweenthis city and London, sre the under /takers' shops. In England they are all woodenwindows below and scutcheons above; planksand shavings within — in fact, mere workshops.• On Sundays the coloured population take possession \of Broadway. '66 Flirt LS America,Here zh£:j are di&ieat : tfaej hare large g^bis»fronts Hie a mJIKnpiycr cnt-^aas shop with us,and the slop runs back tliirtj or forty feet, itssides dog filled with coISbs plan i ling oo end,mafaogainr and FrenrhpifehBd. Timein you mayselect as Tou ple^e» from the seven feet to reodYethe well-grown aduh, to die tiny reoeptade ofwhat Bums caDs, wee uncfaristened babesI have, hower»-, never heard of any one choosingtheir own coffin ; they genially leave it tatheir natives to perform that office.I may hae remark, that the Americans aresensible enough not to throw away so mundiponey in funerals as we do; still it appearsstrange to an Englishman to see the open hearsecontaining the body, drawn by only one horse,while the carriages which follow are drawn bytwo : to be sure, tha carriages generally containsix individuals, while the hearse is a sulky, andcarries but one.The New York tradesmen do all they canasthe English do, to attract the notice of theDIARY IN AMERICA. 67public by hand-bills, placards, advertisements,&c. ; but in one point they have gone a-head of us.Placards, &c. may be read by those who lookupwards or straight-forward, or to the right orto the left ; but there are some people who walkwith their eyes to the ground, and consequentlysee nothing. The New Yorkers have provided ^for this contingency, by having large marbletablets, like horizontal tomb-stones, let into theflag pavements of the trotter in front of their /shops, on which is engraved in duplicate, turningboth ways, their names and business ; so, whetheryou walk up or down Broadway, if youcast your eyes downwards so as not to see theplacards above, you cannot help reading theinscriptions below.Every traveller who has visited this city hasspoken of the numerous fires which take placein it, and the constant running, scampering, hallooing,and trumpeting of the firemen with theirengines ; but I do not observe that any one hasattempted to investigate the causes which prossDIARY IN AMERICA.duce, generally speaking, three or four fires iathe twenty-four hours. New York has certainlygreat capabilities, and every chance of improvementas a city ; for, about one house in twentyis burnt down every year, and is always rebuiltin a superior manner. But, as to the causes,I have, after minute inquiry, discovered as follows.These fires are occasioned —1st. By the notorious carelessness of blackservants, and the custom of smoking cigars allthe day long.2d. By the knavery of men without capitalwho insure to double and treble the value oftheir stock, and realize an honest penny by settingfire to their stores (This is one reason whyyou can seldom recover from a fireofiice withoutlitigation.)Sd. From the hasty and unsubstantial way inwhich houses are built up, the rafters and beamsoften communicating with the flues of thechimnies.4th. Conflagrations of houses not insured.DIARY IN AMERICA. 69seemed by agents enjoyed by the Jtre-in-strange companies, as a punishment to some,and a warning to others, who have n^kcted totake out policies.«These were gravely stated to me as the causesof so many fires ia New York. I cannot vouchfor the truth of the last, although I feel boundto mention it. I happen to be lodged oppositeto two fire-engine houses, so that I alwaysknow when there is a fire. Indeed, so does everybody; for the church nearest to it tolls its bell,,and this tolling is repeated by all the others ;and as there are more than three hundredchurches in New York, if a fire takes place noone can say that he is not aware of it.The duty of firemen is admirably performedby the young men of the city, who have privilegesfor a statute of seven years ; but they pay toodearly for their privileges, which are an exemptionfrom militia and jury summons. Many of themare taken off by consumptions, fevers, and severecatarrh, engendered by the severe trials70 DIARY IN AMERICA*to which they are exposed : the sudden transitionsfrom extreme heat to extreme cold inwinter, being summoned up from a warm bed,when the thermometer is below zero — then exposedto the scorching flames— and afterwards(as I have frequently seen them myself), withthe water hanging in icicles upon their satu->rated clothes. To recruit themselves after theirfatigue and exhaustion they are compelled todrink, and thus it is no wonder that their constitutionsare undermined. It is nevertheless afavourite service, as the young men have anopportunity of shewing courage and determination,which raises them high in the opinion ofL their brother citizens.I made a purchase at a store ; an intelligentlooking little boy brought it home for me. Ashewalked by my side, he amused me very muchby putting the following questions : —Pray, captain, has Mr. Easy left the King ofEngland's service ?"^5DIARY IN AMERICA. 71** I think he hast*' replied I ; "if you recollect,he married and went on shore*"Have you seen Mr. Japhet lately ?''' wasthe next query.Not very lately'* replied I ; " the last timeI saw him was at the publisher's."The little fellow went away, perfectly satisfiedthat they were both alive and well.72 DIARY IN AMERICA.CHAPTER IV.The dogs are all tied up, and the mosquitohave broke loose — it is high time to leave NewYork.The American steam boats have been oftendescribed. When I first saw one of the largestsweep round the battery, with her two decks,the upper one screened with snow-white awnings— the gay dresses of the ladies — the varietyof colours — it reminded me of a floating garden,and I fancied that Isola Bella, on the Lakeof Como, had got under weigh, and made the firststeam voyage to America.The Hudson is a noble stream, flowing rapidlythrough its bold and deep bed. Already it hasmany associations connected with it — ^a greatmany for the time which has elapsed since Hen-rickHudson first explored it. Where is theDIARY IN AMERICA. 73race of red men who hunted on its banks, orsfished and paddled their canoes in its stream?They have disappeared from the earth, andscarce a vestige remains of them, except in history.No portion o( this world was ever intendedto remain for ages untenanted. Beastsof prey and noxious reptiles are permitted toexist in the wild and uninhabited regions untilthey are swept away by the broad stream ofcivilization, which, as it polirs along, drivesthem from hold to hold, until they finally disappear.So it is with the more savage nations :'they are but tenants at willy and never were jintended to remain longer than till the timewhen Civilization, with the Gospel, Arts, andSciences, in her train, should appear, and claimas her own that portion of the universe which .they occupy.About thirty miles above New York is TarryTown, the alxxle of Washington Irving, whohas here embosomed himself in his own regionof romance ; for Sleepy Hollow lies behind hisVOL. I. E74 DURY IN AMERICA.domicile. Nearly ctppcmte to its is the site of amournful reality — the spot where poor RigorAndre was hung up as a qpy.You pass the State prism, bulk on a spotwhich still retains its Indian name — Sing Sing^-rather an odd name for a prison, wherepeople are condemned to perpetual siknoe. Itis a fine building of white marble,, like a palace—very appropriate for that portion of the sovereignpeople, who may qualify themselves fix aresidence in it.I had a genuine Yankee story from asm ofhe party on deck. I was enquiring if the Hud*on was frozen up or not during the winter ?This led to a conversation as to the severity ofthe winter, when one man, by way of provinghow cold it was, said-^^ Why, I had a cow onmy lot up the river, and last winter she got hiamong the ice, and was carried down threemiles before we could get her out again. Theconsequence has been that she has milkednothing but ice-creams ever since."DIARY IN AMERICA. 75When you have ascended abotit fifty milethe bed of the river becomes continued anddeeper, and it pours its watch's rapidly tbroagbthe high land on each side, having at somedistant time forced its passage thigh a chainof rocky mountains* It was quite dark lotbefore we arrived at West Point, which I hadembarked to visit. A stcfrm hung over us andas we passed through the Inroad masses piled uponeach side of the river, at aae moment illuminatedby the lightning as it burst from theopaque clouds, and the next towering in sullengloom, tl» effect was sublime.Here I. am at West Point.West Point is venous in the short history ofdiis country. It is the key of the Hudson river.The traitor Am<dd had agreed to deliver it uptothe English, and it was on his return fromarranging the terms with Arnold, that Andrewas captured and hung.At present, a Military College is establishedhere, which turns out about forty officers everyE S76 DIARY IN AMERICA.year. Although they receive commissions inany regiment of the American army when theremay be vacancies, they are all educated as ensfingers. The democrats have made several 'tempts to break up this establishment, as savourEl\ ing too much of monarchy but hitherto havebeen unsuccessful. It would be a pity if theydid succeed, for such has been the demandlately for engineers to superintend railroads andcanals, that a large portion of them have resignedtheir commissions, and found employsment in the different States. This consideration\\ alone is quite sufficient to warrant the keeping upof the college, for civil engineers are a Am quanon in a country like America, and they arealways ready to serve should their military servicesbe required. There was an inspection at•f the time that I was there, and it certainly washighly creditable to the students, as well as tothose who superintend the various departments.When I awoke the next morning, I threwDIARY IN AMERICA. 77open the blinds of my windows, which lookedout upon the river, and really was surprisedand delighted. A more beautiful view 1 nevergazed upon. The Rhine was fresh in my memory;but, although the general features ofthe two rivers are not dissimilar, there is noone portion of the Rhine which can be comparedto the Hudson at West Point. It waswhat you may imagine the Rhine to have beenin the days of Caesar, when the lofty mountainsthrough which it sweeps were not bared andnaked as they now are, but clothed with forests,and rich in all the variety and beauty of undisturbednature.There is a sweet little spot not far from thecollege, where a tomb has been erected in honourof Kosciuscko — it is called Kosciuscko's Garden.I often sat there and talked over theevents of the War of Independence. Manyanecdotes were narrated to me, some of themvery original. I will mention one or two whichhave not escaped my memory.78 DIARY IN AMERICA.One of the officers who most distinguishedhimself in the struggle was a General Stare ;and the following is the speech he is reportedto have made to his men previous to an engagement: —Now, my men, you see them ere Belgians ;every man of them bought by the king of Englandat 17s. 6d. a-head, and IVe a notion heMpaid too dear for them. Now, my men, we eitherbeats them this day, or Molly Starless a widow,by Gr— d." He did beat them, and in hisdespatch to head-quarters he wrote — '* Werehad a dreadful hot day of it. General, and IVelost my horse, saddle and bridle and all."In those times, losing a saddle and bridle wasas bad as losing a horse.At the same affair, the captain commandingthe outposts was very lame, and he thoughtproper thus to address hymen : —Now, my lads, you see we're only an outpost,and we are not expected to beat the wholearmy in face of us. The duty of an outpostDURY IN AMERICA. 79when the enemy comes on, is to go in, freeingit, and keeping ourselves not exposed. Now,you have my orders ; and as I am a Ime lame,I'U go in first, and miiHl you do your duty andcome in after me.**'I passed several days at this beautified spot,which is much visited by die Americans* Somefuture day, when America shall have becomewealthy, and New York the abode of affluenceand ease, what taste may not be lavished <m thebanks of this noble river! and what a lovelyretreat will be West Point, if permitted to remainin all its present wildness and grandeur iI re-embarked at midnight in the steam-boatdescending from Albany and which is fittedout as a lugbt boat. Wli^i I descended intothe cabin, it presented a whimsical sight : twolows of necklaces on each side of the immaiaecabin, running xi^t fore and aft ; three oderrows in the c^i^re, each of these five rows havingthree bed-places, ^e over the other. Therewere upwards of five hundred people, lying in80 DIARY IN AMERICA.every variety of posture, and exhibiting everystate and degree of repose — from the loud uneasysnore lying on his back, to the deepsleeper tranquil as death. I walked up and'down, through these long ranges of unconsciousness,thinking how much care was for the timeforgotten. But as the air below was oppressive,and the moon was beautiful in the heavens,I went on deck, and watched the swiftcareer of the vessel, which, with a favouring-tide,was flying past the shores at the rate oftwenty miles an hour — one or two people only,outof so many hundreds on board of her, silentlywatching over the great principle of locomotion.The moon sank down, and' the sun rose and*gilded the verdure of the banks and the spire?sot the city of New York, as I revelled in my^ own thoughts and enjoyed the luxury of being^ alone — a double luxury in America, where thepeople are gregarious, and would think themselvesvery ill-bred if they allowed you one-momentfor meditation or self-examination.DURY IX AMERICA. 81CHAPTER V.Stepped on board of the Narragansett steam-vesselfor Providence. Here is a fair specimenof American travelling : — From New York toProvidence, by the Long Island Sound, istwo hundred miles ; and this is accomplished,under usual circumstances, in thirteen hours:from Providence to Boston, forty miles by railroad,in two hours — which makes, from NewYork to Boston, an average speed of sixteenmiles an hour, stoppages included.I was, I must confess, rather surprised, whenin the railroad cars, to find that we were passingthrough a, churchyards with tomb-stones on bothsides of us. In Rhode Island and Massachusetts,where the pilgrim-fathers first landed — the twoStates that take pride to themselves (and with j justice)for superior morality and a strict exercise ofE 3%82 DIARY IN AMERICA.religious observances — they look down upon theother States of the Union, especially New York,and cry out, ** I thank thee. Lord, that I am notas that publicans Yet here, in Rhode Island,are the sleepers of the railway laid over the sleepersin death ; here do they grind down the bonesof their ancestors for the sake of gain, and execratedearth is desecrated by the ircm wheels,loaded with Mammonrseeking mortals. Andthis in the puritanical state of Rhode Island !Would any engineer have ventured to proposesuch a line in England? I think not Afterall, it is but human nature. I have run overthe world a long while, and have always observedthat people are very religious so long as religiodoes not interfere with their pockets ; but, nthgold in one hand and godliness in the other, thetangible is always preferred to the immateriaL\ In America every thing is sacrificed to time.;\ for time is money. The New Yorkers wouldhave dashed right through the church itself ; butthen, they are publicans, and dcm't pretend tobe good.DIAJIY IK AMBRICiU 83Baton i« a fine city, and, as a comraeroiidsone, alnaoet as ^1 fainted as New Doric. Ithas, however, lost a large portion of Its com**mere, which the ii^er has gradually wrestedfrom it, and it israst eventually lose much mcnre.The pc^pididion of Boston is about esl^^ty thousand,and it has probably tore people of leisurein It (that is, out of business and living on theirown means) than even Philadelphia; taking intothe estimate the diligence between the populations.They are more resumed and scientifichere than at New York, dough not more so thanat Philadelphia; but they aise mwe Englishthan in a«iy other city in Amerka. The Massachusettspeople are very fond of compilingtheir country with that of ISngknd. Thescenery is not unlike ; but it is not Hke Eng^din its high state of cultivation. Stone walls arebad substitutes for green hedges. Still, thereare some lovely spots in the environs of Boston.Mount Auburn, laid out as a Pere la Chaise,is, in natural beauties, far superior to any other84 DIARY IN AMERICA.place of the kind. One would almost wish tobe buried there; and the proprietors, anxious tohave it peopled, offer, by their arrangements astonthe price of places of interment, a handsomepremium to those who will soonest die and be-buried— which is certainly a consideration.Fresh Pond is also a very romantic spot. Itis a lake of about two hundred acres, whosewater is so pure that the ice is transparent asglass. Its proprietor clears many thousanddollars a year by the sale of it It is cut outin blocks of three feet square, and supplies mostparts of America down to New Orleans ; andevery 'winter latterly two or three ships havebeen loaded and sent to Calcutta, by which avery handsome profit has been realised.Since I have been here, I have made everyenquiry relative to the sea-serpent which frequentsthis coast alone. There are many hun-^dress of most respectable people, who, on otherpoints, would be considered as incapable offalsehood, who declare they have seen the ani-diaryIN AMERICA, 8&lulls, and vouch for their existence. It israther singular that in America there is butone copy of Bishop Pontoppidon*s work on Norway,and in it the sea-serpent is described, anda rough wood-cut of its appearance given. Inall the American newspapers a drawing wasgiven of the animal as described by those whosaw it, and it proved to be almost a facsimileof the one described by the bishop in his work.Now that we are on marine matters, I mustnotice the prodigious size of the lobsters offboston Coast : they could stow a dozen commonEnglish lobsters under their coats of mail. Myvery much respected friend Sir Isaac CofHn,when he was here, once laid a wager that hewould produce a lobster weighing thirty pounds.The bet was accepted, and the admiral despatchedpeople to the proper quarter to procureone: but they were not then in season, andcould not be had. The admiral, not liking tolose his money, brought up, instead of the lobster,the affidavits of certain people that they86 DIARY IN AMERICA.ad often seen lobsters of that size and weight.The affidavits of the deponents he submitted tothe other party, and pretended that he had wonthe wager. The case was referred to arbitration,and the admiral was cast with the followingjMthy reply, ** Devotions are not lobstersMassachusetts is certainly Tery English inits scena, and Boston essentially EngKsh as acity. The Bostonians assert that they are moreEnglish than we are, that is, that they havestrictly cashiered to the old English customsand manners, as handed down to them previousto the Revolution. That of sitting a vary longwhip at their wine after dinner, is one whichthey certainly adhere to, and which, / think,would be more honoured in the breach than theobservance ; but their hospitality is-unbounded,and you do, as an Englishman, feel at homewith them. I agree with the Bostonians flo four,that th certainly appear to have made nochange in their manners and customs for these/last hundred years. You meet here with ire-diaryIN AMERICA. 87quest specimens of the Old Engikh Gentleman,descendants of the hest old EagHsh familieswho settled here kmg before the Revolutionsand are iiow liyisig on their incomes, with atown house and a country seat to retire to duringthe sunder season. The society c^ Bostonis very delightful ; it wins upcm you everyday,and that is the greatest compliment thatcan be paid to it.Perhaps of all the Americans the Bost(Hiiansare the most sensitive to any illiberal remarksmade upon the country, far they consider them ^selves, and pride themselves, as being peculiarlyEnglish ; while, on the astray, the majority *of time Americans deny that they are £^glidi.zThere certainly is less intermixture of fcHieign , \blood in this city than in any other in Ammca. % -"'It will appear strange, but so wedded are thto old customs, even to John Bullion, that it isnot more than seven or dight years that Frmchwines have been put on the Boston tables, andbecome in general use in this city.88 DIARY IX AMERICA.It is a pity that this feeling towards Englandis not likely to continue ; indeed, even at thismoment it is gradually wearing away. Self-interestgoverns the world. At the declarationof the last war with England, it was the NorthernStates which were so opposed to it, and theSouthern who were in favour of it ; but now circumstanceshave changed ; the Northern States,since the advance in prosperity and increase ofproduce in the Southern and Western States,< feel aware that it is only as manufacturing statesthat they can hold their rank with the others.Their commerce has decreased since the completionof the Erie and Ohio canals, and duringthe war they discovered the advantage that wouldaccrue to them, as manufacturers, to supply theSouthern and Western markets. The importsof English goods have nearly ruined them. Theynow manufacture nothing but coarse articles, andas you travel through the Eastern countries, youare surprised to witness splendid fabrics commenced,but, for want of encouragement, notDIARY IN AMERICA. 89finished. This has changed the interests of theopponent States. The Southern are very anxiousto remain at peace with England, that their producemay find a market ; while the Northern,on the contrary, would readily consent to awar, that they might shut out the Englishmanufactures, and have the supply entirely intheir own hands. The Eastern States (I particularlyrefer to Massachusetts, Connecticut,and Rhode Island) offer a proof of what canbe effected by economy, prudence, and industry.Except on the borders of the rivers, thelands are generally sterile, and the climate issevere, yet, perhaps, the population is more atits ease than in any other part of the Union ; butthe produce of the States is not sufficient for theincreasing population, or rather what the populationwould have been had it not migratedevery year to the West and South. They set a ♦higher value upon good connections in thesepoor States than they do in others ; and if a ^daughter. is to be married, they will ask what90 DIARY IN AMERICA.£unity the suitor is o^ and if it bears a goodname, they are quite indifferent as to whether hehas a cent or not It is remarkable, that if aman has three or four sens in these States, onewill be a lawyer, another a medio nuai, anothera dairyman, and one will remain ^ home to takethe property; and thus, out of the proceeds of mfarm, perhaps not containing more than fiftyacres, all these young men shall be properlyeducated, and in turn sit forth to the Westand South, where they gain an honourable independence,and very often are sent to Congress aifavors and representatives. Industry and probityare the only entailed estate bequeathedfram[father to son. Yet this State alone mannfMstuvesto the value of 86,^2,616 of dollars in the year.As a general axiom it may fairly be assertedthat the more sterile the soil, the more virtuous,industrious, and frugal are the inhabitants ; amiit may be added, that such a country sends outmore clever and intelligent men than one that isnominally more blessed by Providence. TheDIARY IN AMERICA, 91fact IS, without frugality and industry theEastern States could not exist; they becomevirtues of necessity, and are the basis of others ;whilst, where there is abundance, vice springsup and idleness takes deep root.The population of Massachusetts is by theastreturns 701,381 souls. I rather think theproportion of women to men is very great.An energetic and enterprising people arenaturally anxious for an investigation into causeand effect, a search into which is, after all,nothing but curiosity well directed, and themost curious of all men is the philosopher.Curiosity, therefore, becomes a virtue or a smallvice, according to the use made of it. TheAmericans are excessively curious, especially themob : they cannot bear anything like a secret,that's unconstitutional It may be rememp^bred, that the Catholic Convent near Boston, /which had existed many years, was attacked bythe mob and pulled down. I was enquiring intothe cause of this outrage in a country where all92 DIARY IN AMERICA.forms of religion are tolerated ; and an Americangentleman told me, that although other reasonshad been adduced for it, he fully believed, in hisown mind, that the majority of the mob wereinfluenced more by curiosity than any otherfeeling. The Convent was sealed to them, andthey were determined to know what was in it.Why, sir,*^ continued he, " I will lay a wagerthat if the authorities were to nail together adozen planks, and fix them up on the Common,with a caution to the public that they were notto go near or touch them, in twenty-four bourna mob would be raised to pull them down andascertain what the planks contained' I mentionthis conversation, to shew in what a dexterousmanner this American gentleman attempted topalliate one of the grossest outrages ever committedby his countrymen.DIARY IN AMERICA. 93CHAPTER VI.Crossed over to New Jersey, and took therailroad, to view the falls of the Passaic River,about fifteen miles from New York. This waterpowerhas given birth to Patterson, a townwith ten thousand inhabitants, whei^e a varietyof manufactures s carried on. A more beautifulwild spot can hardly be conceived ; and toan European who has been accustomed to travelfar in search of the picturesque, it appears singularthat at so short a distance frx)m a large city,he should at once find himself in the midst ofsuch a strange combination of nature and art.Independent of their beauty, they are, perhaps,the most singular falls that are known to exist.The whole country is of trappe formation, andthe black rocks rise up strictly vertical. Theriver, which at the Falls is about one hundred94 DIARY Ilf AMERICA.and twenty yards wide, pours over a bed ofrock between hills covered with chestnut, walnut,pine, and sycamore, all mingled together,and descending to the edge of the bank ; theirbright and various foliage forming a lovely contrastto the clear rushing water. The bed ofLack rock over which the river runs, is, at theFall, suddenly split in two, vertically, and acrossthe whole width of the river. The fissure isabout severity feet deep, and not more thantwelve feet wide at any part. Down into thisdiam pour the whole waters of the river,escaping from it, at a right angle, into a deepbasin, surrounded with perpendicular rocks fromeighty to ninety feet high. You may thereforestand on the opposite side of the chasm, lookingup (he river, within a few feet of the Fall, andwatch the roaring waters as they precipitate themselvesbelow. In this position, with thar swift,dear, but not deep waters before you forcing theirpassage through the rocky bed, with the wavingtrees on each side, their branches feathering toDiary IN America. 95the water's edge or dipping and rising in theatremm yoo might imagine yourself far movedfrom jour fellow-men, and you fed that in sucha beauteous spot yon could veil turn andi<Hite,and commune with Nature alone. But turnround with your back to the Fall — look blow,and all is changed : art in full activity — of reels whirling in their sockets — thebright polished cylinders incessantly turning,and never tiring. What formerly was the occupationof thousands of industrious females, whosat with their distaff at the cottage door, is noweffected in a hundredth part of the time, and inevery variety, by those compressed machineswhich require but the attendance of one childto several hundreds* But machinery cannotperform everything, and notwithstanding thisreduetimi oi labour, tli^ romantic Falls ot thePassaic find employment for the industry ofthousandsWe walked up the banks of the river abovethe Fall, and met with about twenty or thirty96 DIARY IN AMERICA.urchins who were bathing at the mouth of thecut, made for the supply of the water-power tothe manufactories below. The river is the propertyof an individual, and is very valuable : hereceives six hundred dollars per annum for onesquare foot of water-power ; ten years hence itwill be rented at a much higher price.We amused ourselves by throwing smallpieces of money into the water, where it wasabout a fathom deep, for the boys to dive after ;they gained them too easily ; we went to anotherpart in the cut where it was much deeper, andthrew in a dollar. The boys stood naked on therocks, like so many cormorants, waiting to dartupon their prey ; when the dollar had had timeto sink to the lx)ttom the word was given—they all dashed down like lightning and disappeared.About a minute elapsed ere there wasany sign of their re-appearance, when they cameup, one by one, breathless and flushed (likeracers who had pulled up), and at last the victorappeared with the dollar between his teeth.diary IN AMERICA. 9*"We left these juvenile Sam Patches ^^ and re- "^turned to the town.There is no part of the world, perhaps, whereyou have more difficulty in obtaining permissionto be alone, and indulge in a reverie, than inAmerica. The Americans are as gregarious asschool-boys, and think it an incivility to leaveyou by yourself. Every thing is done in crowds, ■and among a crowd. They even prefer a double 1bed to a single one, and I have often had theoffer to sleep with me made out of real kindness*. /You must go " east of sun-rise " (or west ofsun-set) if you would have solitude.I never was in a more meditative humour,more anxious to be left to my own dreaming,than when I ascended the railroad car with my• Sam Patch, an American peripatetic, who used toamuse himself and astonish his countrymen by leapingdown the different falls in America. He leaped down aportion of the Niagara without injury; but one fineday, having taken a drop too much, he took a leap toomuch. He went down the Genassee Fall, and sincethat time he has not been seen or heard of.VOL. I. FTTXtl*V% HISSES 3or iSiVCL I pnrniff rmntgrn--rn ™- inqiAt out fcK scvnBP a xtnisiana Ksosd liiiiMiikf ^emeeL itomc:. jmd I<xjfjt Text-foot iJK moziK- nflipB dorazDe. dMr iitts gsaccfsST vaiiBgdiarlKH^the brftze. aad die qnr c uu l hug mr heiifiBdbrain : mv bran was. £ke the cameia-ohsciin,6}k^ with the pltasug Trr.ages^ vhkli I wmixiMtda>» ttiey passed before me so rindlT portrayed,all in life and mocioD, when I was attempted^^ I ua born in the very heart of Cheshire,hit.DIARY IN AMERICA. 99Confound the fellow ! The mer, fais, foliage,all Taaidhed at once ; and I found myselfsitting in a railroad-car (which I bad beenunconscious a£), with a beamy lump of humanityby Hiy side* I wished one of the largest Cheshirecheeses down his throat.^ Indeed !** readied I, not looking at theman.'^ Yes, siren the very heart of Cheshire'* Would you had staid there T thought I,turning away to the window without replying.** Will you oblige me with a pinch of yourraff, sir ? I left my box at New York:'I gave him the box, and, when he had helpedhimself, laid it down on the vacant seat oppositeto him, that he might not have to apply again,and fell back and shut my eyes, as a hint to himthat I did not wish to enter into conversation.A pause ensued, and I had hopes; but theywere delusive.I have been eighteen years in this country.sm"F 2^KOiojstR I; Int I^ I vGBtt up to Prtifimi, ar,(■ov t-iM —11^ luuud Id TDtj tni€v^ ^ rising him I code get id HdidktplDftlier twist rote. jmd £iiiiia lint I Indfldstakei k> I hcrecomelnck. Iare yxae pRtzj iiBs tire? fln-.*Would TOO vere facneidi tbemr dnai^ I ;but I could noC hdplangiiiiigattlkeidBacf amangoiiig to Pattef«■^ jnd letanm^ idiot fleangthe £adl5 ! B j tins time he had avakeoBd hisocmipaxnoD, who, hen America himself, andfinding that there was to be no more sleeps tookhim up, in the American fashion, and put to himsuccessively the following questions, allow whichwere answered without hesitation : — ^ What isyour name? where are you from? where areyou going ? what is your profession ? how manydollars have you made ? have you a wife andchildren ?'' All these being duly responded to,he asked my companion who I mist be, andDIARY IN AMERICA, 101was told that I was an operative artist, and one |of the first cotton spinners in the country. ^jThis communication procured for me considerabledeference from our new acquaintanceduring the remainder of our journey. He observedin the ear of my companion, that hethought I knew a thing or two. In a countrylike America the Utilitarian will always commandrespect.'-^i^prsH vini1M. .ft »!tvfVw "ii-'x-tf .2>- atf"*"It Bc .::*^'.>iurx^-*-.*Tm: .TtiT .^BSCC 1i *■■■ > , *»•-.^fO .X>^->'• V-^^i* ^^^^ .u T*>;,> ,54-TR^ .rWDUDizealy Amnk ?3c«93KSMs«e5. amixld dies.\o^< ^^ .c>«?«tdsfr*A ^vvift ^K^r^ jnd nfls fat,K \>s V\ /:HT^ ^nl >< uaiuv 3iui« adiimMti^N \i*.x' l\x« yut icjetiKr . whsic strings ofDIARY IN AMERICA, 103tons of eloquence ! There are at least fiftythousand cities, towns, villages, and hamlets,spread over the surface of America — in eachthe Declaration of Independence has been read ;in all one, and in some two or three, orationshave been delivered, with as much gunpowder inthem as in the squibs and crackers. But let medescribe what I Actually saw.The commemoration commenced, if the daydid not, on the evening of the Sd, by the municipalpolice going round and pasting up placards,informing the citizens of New York, thatall persons letting off fireworks would be takeninto custody, which notice was immediately followedup by the little boys proving their independenceof the authorities, by letting off squibs, icrackers, and bombs ; and cannons, made out ofshin bones, which flew in the face of every passenger,in the exact ratio that the little boys flew inthe face of the authorities. This continued thewhole night, and thus was ushered in the greatand glorious day, illumined by a bright and104 DIARY IX AMERICA.glaring sun (as if beqx>ken on purpose by themayor and corporation), with the thermometer at90^ in the shade. The first sight which metthe eye after sunrise, was the predicate escape,,from a city visited with the plague of gunpowderof respectable or timorous people in coaches,carriages, waggons, and every variety of vehicle."My kingdom for a horse"" was the generalcry of all those who could not stand fire.In the mean while, the wide atmosphere wasfilled with independence. Such was the quantityof American flags which were hasted onboardof the vessels, hung out of windows, or.carried about by little boys, that you saw morestars at noon-day than ever could be counted onthe brightest night. On each side of the wholelength of Broadway, were ranged booths andstands, similar to those at an English fair, andon which were displayed small plates of oysters.,with a fork stuck in the board opposite to each,plate; clams sweltering in the hot sun; pine-^apples, boiled hams, pies,, puddings, barley-diaryIX AMERICA, 105sugar, and many other indescribable. Batwhat was most remarkable, Broadway beingthree miles long, and the booths lining eachside of it, in every booth there was a roast pig,large or small, as the centre attraction. Sixmiles of roast pig ! and that in New York cityalone ; and roast pig in every other city, town,hamlet, and village, in the Union. What associationcan there be between roast pig and independence? Let it not be supposed that there was anydeficiency in the very necessary articles of potationon this auspicious day : no ! the booths wereloaded with porter, ale, cyder, mead, brandywine,ginger-beer, pop, soda-water, whiskey, mm,punch, gin slings, cock tails, mint julius, besidesmany other compounds, to name which nothingbut the luxuriance of American-Englishcould invent a word. Certainly the preparationsin the refreshment way were most imposing,and gave you some idea of what had to be gonethrough on this auspicious day. Martial musicsounded from a dozen quarters at once ; and asF 3106 DIARY IN AUKKTCA.Tou turned tout had, Yoa tadnd to the sintban of a march horn oae band, the marl tidingbars of Yankee Doodle ran another. At lastthe troops of ndfitiA and ^nnteers^ who hadbeen gathering in the pain and other squares,made their appearance, well dressed and wdlequipped, and, in honour of the day, maidenas independently as they well could. I did notsee them go through many manoeuvres, butthere was one which they afqpeaied to excel in,and that was grounding arms and eating pies.I found that the current went towards CastleGarden, and away I went with it. There thetroops ware all collected on the green, rivaledby the trees, and the effect was v&y beautiful.The artillery and infantry were drawn up in aline pointing to the water. The officers in theirregimental dresses and long white feathers, generalsand aides-de-camp, colonels, ocunmandants,majors, all galloping up and down in front ofthe line,— white horses and long tails appearingthe most fashionable and correct The crowdsJDIilEY IN AMERICA. 107are, quiet and well behaved. I recognised manyof my literary friends turned into generals, andflouncing :their swords iiffitead of their pens.The scene was very animating; the shippingat the whai*& were loaded with stiu'-spangledbanners; steamers paddling in every direction,were covered with flags ; the whole beautifulSound was alive with boats and sailing vessels,all flaunting with pennants and streamers. Itwas, as Ducrow would call at;, *' Arrant M]£Utry and Aquatic Spectacle''Then the tro{^ inarched up into town again,and so did I follow them as I used to do the reviewsin England, when a boy. All creation appearedto be independent ^i this day; some ofthe horsesparticulaify so, for :die would not keepin no line not no how'' Some preferred goingsideways like iCtabs, others went backwards,some would not go at all, others went a greatdeal too fast, and not a few parted companywith their riders, whom they kicked oiF just to108 DIARY IK AMERICA.shew tbdr independence ; but let them go whirlway they would, they could not avoid the squibsand crackers. And the women were in the samepredicament : they might dance right, or danceleft, it was only out of the frying-pan into thefire, for it was pop, pop; bang, bang; fiz,pop, bang, so that you literally trod upon gunpowder.When the troops marched up Broadway,louder even than the music ware to be heardthe screams of delight from the children at thecrowded windows on each side. ^^ Ma i ma !there's pa 1" " Oh ! there's John." " Look at,uncle on his big horse''The troops did not march in very good order,because, independently of their not knowing how,there was a great deal of independence to contendwith. At one time an omnibus and fourwould drive in and cut off the general and hisstaff from his division ; at another, a cart wouldroll in and insist upon following close upon theband of music; so that it was a mixed processIN AMERICA. 109sion — Generals, omnibus and four, music, cartloadsof bricks, troops, omnibus and pair, artillery,hackney-coach, &c. &o. Notwithstandingall this, they at last arrived at the City Hall,when those who were old enough heard theDeclaration of Independence read for the sixty-firsttime ; and then it was — " Begone, bravearmy, and don't kick up a rows*'I was invited to dine with the mayor and corporationat theCity Hall. We sat down in the Hallof Justice, and certainly, great justice was doneto the dinner, which (as the wife says to her hus-handafter a party, where the second coursefollows the first with unusual celerity) ** wentof remarkably well*" The crackers popped outside,and the champagne popped in. The celerityof the Americans at a public dinner isvery commendable ; they speak only now andthen ; and the toasts follow so fast, that youhave just time to empty your glass, before youare requested to fill again. Thus the arrangedtoasts went off* rapidly, and after them, any oneno Diary IN AMERICA.might withdraw. I waited till the thirteenth toast,the last on the paper, to wit, the ladies of America; and, having previously, in a qieech fromthe recorder, bolted Bunker's Hill and NewOrleans, I thought I might as well bolt ,as I wished to see the fireworks, which wereto be very splendid.Unless you are an amateur, there is no occasionto go to the various places of public Amusementwhere the fireworks are let off, for they aresent up every where in such quantities that youhardly know which way to turn your eyes. Itis, however, advisable to go into some place ofsafety, for the little boys and the big boys haveall got their supply of rockets, which they fire offin the streets — some running horizontally upthe pavement, and sticking into the back of apassenger; and others mounting slantingdicularlyand Paul-Prying into the bed-room windows onthe third floor or attics, just to see how thingsare going on there. Look in any point of thecompass, and you will see a shower of rocketsDIARY IN AMERICA. Illin the sky : turn from New York to Jersey City,from Jetaey City to Brookljoi, and shower isanswered by shower on either side of the water.Hoboken repeats the signal : and thus it is carriedon to the east, the west, the north, and thesouth, from Rhode Island to the Missouri, fromthe Canada frontier to the Gulf of Mexico.At the various gardens the combinations werevery beautiful, and exceeded anything that I hadwitnessed in London or Paris. What with sea-serpents,giant rockets scaling heaven, Bengallights, Chinese fires, Italian suns, fairy bowers,crowns of Jupiter, exeranthemums, Tartar temples,Vesta's diadems, magic circles, morningglories, stars of Colombia, and temples of liberty,all America was in a blaze ; and, in addition tothis mode of manifesting its joy, all Americawas tipsy.There is something grand in the idea of anational intoxication. In this world, vices on agrand scale dilate into virtues ; he, who murdersone man, is strung up with ignominy ; but■>112 DIARY IX America,he who martin twcntr dHmnml ins a statue tohis iDeiDorT,aDd is handeddovBtopcMterityasahero. As t ^j gi a in giiidiTidoalisalauigfaaHeMid,sometimes, a disgusting spectacle; butthewfacdeof a Tast content rcelii^y offering a hdocaustof its brains for mercies vouchsafe is an appropriale tribute of gratitude for the rights of equalityand the heeding sphii of their institutions.j'.tDIARY IN AMERICA. 1 13CHAPTER IX.Once more flying up the noble Hudson.After you have passed West Point, the highlands,through which the river has forced itspassage, gradually diminish, and as the shorebecomes level, so does the country become morefertile.We passed the manor of Albany, as it iscalled, being a Dutch grant of land, now in thepossession of one person, a Mr. Van Rensselaerand equal to many a German principality, beingtwenty miles by forty-eight miles square. Mr.Van Ransalaer still retains the old title of Patroon.It is generally supposed in Englandthat, in America, all property must be dividedbetween the children at the decease of the parent.This is not the case. The entailing of estates wasabolished by an act of Congress in 1788, but114 DIART IN AMERICA.a man may will away his property entirely tohis eldest son if he pleases. This is, however,seldom done ; public opinion is too strong againstit, and the Americans tear panic opinion beyondthe grave. Indeed, were a man so to act, theother claimants would probably appeal to havethe will set aside upon the grounds of lunacy,and the sympathy of an American jury woulddecree in their favour.As you ascend to Albany City, the banks ofthe river are very fertile and beautiful, and theriver is spotted with many very picturesque littleislands. The country seats, which fringe thewhole line of shore, are all built in the sameand very bad, style. Every house or tenement,be it a palace or a cottage, has its porticos andpillars — a string of petty Parthenon which theyou by their uniformity and pretence.I had intended to stop at Hudson, that Imight proceed from thence to New Lebanon tovisit the Shaking Quakers ; but, as I discoveredthat there was a community of them not fiveDIARY IN AIM ERICA. 115miles from Troy, I, to avoid a fatiguing journey,left Albany, and continued on to thatcity.Albany is one of the oldest Dutch settlements,and among its inhabitants are to be found manyof the descendants of the Dutch aristocracy.Indeed, it may even now be considered as aDutch city. It is the capital of the state ofNew York, with a population of nearly 30,000.Its commerce is very extensive, as it is here thatthe Erie canal communications with the FarWest, as well as the Eastern States, debauchinto the Hudson.We have here a singular proof, not only of the irapidity with which cities rise in America, butalso how superior energy will overcome every rdisadvantage. Little more than twenty yearsago, Albany stood by itself, a large and populouscity without a rival, but its population waschiefly Dutch. The Yankees from the EasternStates came down and settled themselves at Troy,not Ave miles distant, in opposition to them. ItIH ZKJtaLZ ISf JEJCIXOCJL.'tFiiinKf2 "^xtt terr 5k asia &iir*!3[L hut k ^■■■^^ mtyk:» ^vrvKaoaiL and s pspiflflEDOB «f 90L^^sums (divides ^;5bs' imimiiffffg ^t^bIi Afflnor. fioHivuBKib siijisi 'G)f ilbc-caBiteBiii ttnde Ins Ihkb niidied*Tbe iabaisiitaasa lat ASbmmr ane toned Alhft-cQsnH. iri»Kr oT Try TuiJMi ! In obt fiEatmetiaew csrics are tot CTrihr. bab boA q und cdvidi Innahw and pRttr giikI went out to fee the Shakers at NidEqruna.So molli has abcadr been said about theirtenet that I dial not repeat diem, fartherthan to observe that all their goods are in common,and that, although the sexes mix together,they profess the tows of celibacy and chastity.Their lands are in excellent order, and they aresaid to be very rich.*I should be very sorry to Uke away the character ofany community, bat, as I was a little sceptical as to thepossibility of the vow of chastity being observed undercircumstances above alluded to, I made some inqairica, ^and htivinp^ met with one who had seceded from the fraternity.Duty IN AMERICA. 117We were admitted into a long room on theground-floor, where the Shakers were seated onforms, the men opposite to the women, and apartfrom each other. The men were in their waistcoatsand shirt-sleeves, twiddling their thumbs,and looking awfully puritanical. The womenwere attired in dresses of very light striped cotton,which hung about them like full dressing-gowns,and concealed all shape and proportions.A plain mob cap on their heads, and a thickmuslin handkerchief in many folds over theirshoulders, completed their attire. They eachheld in their hands a pocket-handkerchief aslarge as a towel, and of almost the same substance.But the appearance of the women wasmelancholy and unnatural ; I say unnaturalbecause it required to be accounted for. Theyhad all the advantages of exercise and labour inthe open air, good food, and good clothing;eternity, I discovered that my opinion of human naturewas correct, and the conduct of the Shakers not altongether so, I must not enter into details, as they wouldbe unfit for publication.118 DIART ly AMERICA.they were not overwarked,for dies aEewstTeqinredto work more than they please ; and yet therewas something so pallid, so unearthly in theircomplexions, that it gave you the idea that theyhad been taken up from their coffins a few hoursafter their decease : not a hue of health, not avestige of colour in any cheek or lip;— one cadaverousyellow tinge prevailed. And yet therewere to be seen many faces very beautiful, as arrasregarded outline, but they were the featuresof the beautiful in death. The men, on Aecontrary, were ruddy, strong, and vigorous.Why, then, this difference between the sexes,where they each performed the same duties,where none were taxed beyond their strength,and all were well fed and clothed ?After a silence of ten minutes, one of the menof the community, evidently a coarse illiterateperson, rose and addressed a few words to thespectators, requesting them not to laugh at whatthey saw, but to behave themselves properly, &c.and then he sat down.One of the leaders then burst out into a hymn.Diary IN AMERICA. 119to a jigguog BOit of tune, and all the othersjc»ned chorus. After the hymn was sung theyall rose, put away the forms on which they leadbeen seated, and stood in lines, eight in a row,msn and women separate, facing each other,and about ten feet apart — the ranks of men beingflanked by the boys, and those of the women bythe girls. They commenced their dancing byadvancing in rows, just about as far as profanepeople do in Vote when they dance quadrilles,and then retreated the same distance, all keepingregular time, and turning back to back afterevery third advance. The movement was ratherquick, and they danced to their own singing'ofthe following beautiful composition : —L&Wy law, de handel law,Law, law, de law,Law, law, de handel law,Lawdel, handel, law-keepingtime also with the hands as well as feet,the former raised up to the chest, and hangingdown like the fore-paws of a dancing bear.After a quarter of an hour they sat down again,120 Burt ISsad die woiaem matt oae cfffrjAeSrhaadkerAaA to wipe off the persfam-tkn. Soldier hTnm was sag, and dien thesame perscxi address the qxctatots^ requestingthem not to laugh, and mqimiiig if anj ofthem felt a wish to be sacred — adding ^ Not oneof joa, I don't think.* He looked romid at allof Us with the DMHt ineffable oootempty and then-rat down; and they sang another hymOy theburden of which** Our Stale are saved, quid we areFrom rice and all in-i-^ni-ty.''which was a very comfortable ddusioD, at allevents.They then rose again, put away the forms asbefore, and danced in another fashion. Insteadof IJete, it was Grande ronde. About ten menand women stood in two lines in the centre ofthe room, as a vckbI band of music, while allthe others, two and two, women first and menfollowing, promenaded round, with a short(quick step, to the tune chaunted in the centre.^lARY IN AMERICA. 121was they went Toad and round, shaking their^ws up and down before them, the scene wasvery absurd, and 1 could have laughed had 1iK^ felt disgusted at such a degradation ofrational and immortal beings. This dance lastedn long while, until the music turned to croaking,sand the perspiration was abundant ; they stoppedat last, and then announced that their exercisewas finished. I waited a little while afterthe main body had dispersed, to speak with oneof the elders. *' I will be with you directly*'replied he, walking hastily away; but he nevercame back.I never beard the principle upon which theydance. David danced before the ark; but it isto be presumed that David danced as well as hesung. At least he thought so for when hiswife Michael laughed at him, he made her conducta ground of divorce.Every community which works in common,"and is provided for in the mass, must become rich,especially when it has no children to maintainVOL. I. GIt H hkt vtuirmg apmoiift Boar m esduqgelor rktuniB and ci-irving odr, and dbk is jU IOKI i#efccsre dat cm be Mod in favour at theseytof/k. Su&ct it to fit, I hai-e a vcnr badofMiMD cis deem : and went I dHpawd to dilateOb the Infect, I should fed. no inrHnarinn totfcat tbtm with the Ifoity dieaii to them byother travelers.From this mockery, I went to tee what hada real tendency to make you fed idigiouft-^the Falltf of the Mohawk, about three milesfromTroy« Picturesque and beautiful as all fellingwater is, to describe it is extremely difficult,unless, indeed by a forced simile ; the flow of"language is too tame for the flow of water; but ifthe reader can imagine a ledge of Lack rocks,about sixty or seventy feet high, and that overthis ledge was poured simultaneously the milkof some millions of cows, he will th^fi havesome idea of the beauty of the creaming Falls ofthe Mohawk, imbedded as they are in their wildand luxuriant scenery.DIARY IN AMERICA. 123€}k>se to the E«US).I perched a few ssaalXwarden sheidkigsi^ apjpeari¥^« under die majestictrees which overshadowed them, more like dog*kennel than the hi^atii»ui of m^ : they werewanted by Irish em^raiits^ who had takenwork at the new locks forming coi the Eriecanal I wait vp to them. In a tenement aboutfourteen feet by toi, lived an Irishman, his wife,.aad emily, and seven boys as he called themesyoung mea from twenty to thirty years of agewho boarded with him. There was but one bedon which slept the man his wife, and family.Above the bed were some planks, extending halfwaythe length of the stealing, and there sleptthe seven boys, without any mattress, or evenstraw, to lie upon. I entered into conversationwith them : they complained bitterly of thetimes, saying that their pay was not 2s. 6d. ofour money per day, and that they could not liveupon it. This was true, but the distress hadbeen communicated to all parts, and they werefortunate in finding work at all, as most of theG 2\124 DIARY IN AMERICA,public works had been discontinued. I mentionedto them that the price of labour in Ohio,Illinois, and the West, was said to be two dollarsa-day, and asked them, why they did not gothere ? They replied, that such were the pricequoted, to induce people to go, but that theynever could find it when they arrived ; that theclearing of new lands was attended with agueand fever ; and that if once down with thesediseases there was no one to help them to riseagain. I looked for the pig, and there he was,sure enough, under the bed.DIARY IN AMERICA, 125CHAPTER X.Troy, like a modern academy, is classical,as well as commercial, having Mount Olympuson one side, and Mount Ida in its rear. Thepanorama from the summit of the latter issplendid. A few years back a portion of MountIda made a slip, and the avalanche destroyedseveral cottages and five or six individuals. Theavalanche took place on a dark night and in aheavy snow storm. Two brick kilns were lightedat the time, and, as the mountain swept themaway, the blaze of the disturbed fires called outthe fire engines, otherwise more lives would havebeen lost. Houses, stables, and sheds, were allhurled away together. Horses, children, andwomen, rolled together in confusion. One childhad a very strange escape. It had been forced139 nux n ahedca.out of its bed and was found on the top of ahuge mats of daw, weighing forty or fifty tons ;he wa crying, and aping who had put himthere. Had all the inhabitants of the cottagesbeen within, at least forts nnist have perished ;but notwithstanding the severity of the weather,the day being Sunday, they had all gone toevening meeting, and thus, being good christians,they were for once rewarded for it onthis side of the grave.As I surveyed the busy scene blow me, thegentleman who accompanied me to the summitof the mountain, informed me that forty-threeyears ago his father was the first settler, andthat then there was but his one hut in the placewhere now stood the splendid town.But signs of the times were manifest here also.Commerce had stopped for the present, and alung line of canal boston was laid up for want ofemployment.I remained two hours perched upon the topof the mountain. I should not have staid soDIARY IN AMERICA. 127ling, perhaps, had they not brbfughtine a bassetof clerks, do that Z ooold gratify more sensesthan one I felt becomingly classical whilstsitting on the precise birtb*p}aoe of Jupiter,attended by VossKOAy Vfith Troy at my feet,and Mount Olympus in the distance ; but I wasobliged to descend to lumber and gm-slings,and I set off for Albany, where I had an engagement having been invited to attend at the examinationof the young ladies at the seminary.Here again is a rivalry between Albany and jTroy, each of them glorying in possessing the |largest seminary for the education of young ^ladies who are sent from e%rery State of theUmoD, to be finished off at one or the other ofthem* Here, and indeed in many other establish*mcntSy the youn lass upon quitting it havediplomas given to tli^m, if they pass their examtnationfr satisfactorily. They are educated /upon a system which would satisfy even Miss /Martineau, and prepared to exercise the rights^f which she complains that women have been soHh UlAKT IS AlCEUCi.ooju«it}T deprmcL Conceive tree Indeed'vjMkra Pottiafi, vifto regnljDlj take liar d&-gn*^ arid c uM f ge from the porto of the semK>wary full of algebra, eqiufit j, and the thoxyrjf tier con^tutkm ! The quantity and Varietycrsuntii^l into them is beyond all calculationTbfr examination takes place pearls, to {mnreti the parents that the preceptor bare donetheir duty, and is hi itself very innocent, asit only causes the young ladies to bludi alittle.This afternoon they were examined in algebra,and their performance was very creditableUnder a certain age girls are certainly much .quicker than boys, and I presume would retainsthey learnt if it were not for their subsequentduties in making puddings, and nursinghahics. Yet there are affairs which must be-performedby one sex or the other, and of whatUHC cun algebra and other abstruse matters betn woman in her present state of domestic-thraldom.DIARY IN AMERICA. 129The theory of the American constitution wasthe next subject on which they were examined ;by their replies this appeared to be to themmore abstruse than algebra: but the fact iswomen are born tories, and admit no other thanpetticoat government as legitimate.The next day we again repaired to the hall,and French was the language in which they wereto be examined, and the examination affordedus much amusement.The young ladies sat down in rows on oneside of the room. In the centre, towards theend, was an easel, on which was placed a largeblack board on which they worked with chalkthe questions in algebra, &c. — a towel hangingto it, that they might wipe out and correct.The French preceptor, an old Emigre Count,sat down with the examiners before the board,the visitors (chiefly composed of anxious papasand mammas) being seated on benches behindthem. As it happened, I had taken my seatg3130 DIART IS America.dose to the exmnismg board, and at some littledistance from the other persons who were devotedor invited to attend. I don know how I camethere. I belkre I had come in too late; butthere I was, within three feet cS every younglady who came up to the board.^ Now, messieurs, hare the kindness to ask anyquestion you please** said the cd Count. ^ Mademoiselle,you will hare the goodness to stepforward*" A question was proposed in English,which the young lady had to write down inFrench. The very first went wnmg: I perceivedit, and without looking at her, pronounced theright word, so that she could hear it. Shecaught it, rubbed out the wrong word with thetowel, and rectified it. This was carried onthrough the whole sentence, and then she retreatedfrom the board that her work might beexamined. ** Very well, very wdl, indeed,Miss c'est parfaitement bien ; " and the younglady sat down blushing. Thus were they allI>IARY IN AMERICA. 131called up, and one after another prompted byme ; and the rfrf Count wa delighted at thesuccess of his puptts.Now, what amused me m this was the Kettlebit of human nature ; the tact displayed by thesex, which appears to be innate, and whichnever deserts them. Had 1 prompted a boy,he would most likely have turned his headround towards me, and thus have revealed whatI was about ; but not one of the whole classwas guilty of such indiscretion They heardme, rubbed out, corrected, waited for the wordwhen they did not know it, but never by anylook or sign made it appear that there was anyunderstanding between us. Their eyes wereconstantly fixed on the board, and they appearednot to know that I was in the room. It wasreally beautiful. When the examination wasover, I received a look from them all, half comic,half serious, which amply repaid me for myassistance.As young ladies are assembled here from-c•■I1^2 DIART or Americatftrj State of the Umaa^h mta^l fair crkueriak',f4 Amtikza beauty, and it mnft be acknoir^XtAfifA that the American women are dtepreMet^ip the whole world*DIARY IN AMERICA. 133CHAPTER XI.Saratoga Springs. — Watering places alloverthe world are much alike : they must bewell filled with company, and full of bustle,and then they answer the purpose for whichthey are intended — a general muster, under thebanner of folly, to drive care and common senseout of the field. Like assembly-rooms, unlesslighted up and full of pec^le, they look desolateand forlorn : so it was with Saratoga :a beautiful spot, beautiful hotels, and beautifulwater; but all these beauties werethrown away, and the water ran away unheeded,because the place was empty. People'spockets were empty, and Saratoga was talet. The consequence was that I remained aweek there, and should have remained muchlonger had I not been warned, by repeated34 I^LUiT TX America,arrivals. that die History vere incraang, aodthat I should be do longer anne.The weariness of solitude, as described byAlexander Sdkirk and the And-zimmerman,can surdj not be equal to the misery of never beingalone ; of feeling that jour tboogfats andideas, rapidly accumulating, are in a state ofchaos and confusion, and that you have not amoment to put them into anj lucid order ; offinding yourself, against your will, continuallyin society, bandied finn one person to the other,to make the same bows, extend the same hand tobe grasped, and reply to the same eternal questions;until, like a man borne down by sleepafter long vigils, and at each moment rousedto reply, you either are not aware of what yondo say, or are dead beat into an unmeaningsmile. Since I have been in this country, Ihave suffered this to such a degree as at last tobecome quite nervous on the subject; and Imight reply in the words of the spirit summonedby Lochiel —DIARY IN AMERICA. 136Now my weary lips I close ;Eeisnre^ oJi ! leave me to repose."It would be a strange account, bad it beenpossible to keep oae, of the number of introductionswhich I have had since I came into thiscountry. Mr. A introduces Mr. B and C, Mr*B and C introduce Mr. I>, E, Fy and G.Messrs. D, E, F, and 6^ introduce Messrs. H,I, J, K, L, M, N, O, and so it goes on, adinfinitum during the whole of the day; andthis to me who never could remember either a6tce or a name.At introduction it is invariably the custom toshake hands ; and thus you go on shaking handshere, there, and everywhere, and with everybody; for it is impossible to know who is who,in this land of equality.But one ike dp the faffind will not do; iftwenty times during the some day you meet aperson to whom you hare been introduced, thehand is every where extended with— ^ Well,captain, how do you find yourself by this time ?"^136 DIARY IN AMERICA.and, in their good-will, when they seize yourhand, they follow the apothecaries advice—When taken, to be well shaken'* As for theconstant query — " How do you like our country?" — that is natural enough. I should askthe same of an American in England, but toreply to it is not the less tedious. It is all wellmeant, all kindness, but it really require fortitudeand patience to endure it. Every onethrows in his voluntary tribute of complimentsand good-wil, but the accumulated mass is toogreat for any one individual to bear. How I longfor the ocean prairies, or the wild forests. Subsequently,I begged hard to be shut up for sixmonths in the Penitentiary at Philadelphia,but Sammy Wood said it was against the regulations.He comforted me with a tete-astutedinner, which was so agreeable, that at the timeI quite forgot I wished to be alone.When I left Saratoga, I found no one, as Ithought, in the car, who knew me; and Idetermined, if possible, they should, in theDIARY IN AMERICA. 137Indian phrase lose my trail. I arrived atSchenectady, and was put down there. Iamused myself until the train started for Uticawhich was to be in a few hours, in walking-aboutthe engine-house, and examining thelocomotives; and having satisfied myself, setout for a solitary walk in the country. Therewas no name on my luggage, and I had notgiven my name when I took my ticket for therailroad. *sat last'' said I to myself, " / amincog I had walked out of the engine-house,looked round the compass, and resolved in whichdirection I would bend my steps, when a youngman came up to me, and very politely takingoff his hat, said, " I believe I have the pleasureof speaking to Captain M." Had he known myindignation when he mentioned my name, poorfellow ! but there was no help for it, and I repliedin the affirmative. After apologizing, heintroduced himself, and then requested theliberty of introducing his friend. " Well, ifever'* thought I ; and, ** no never'' followed138 Bart IX America.afterwards as a matter of cones and as amatter of ooune hU friend wasmtm d nc e du Itreminded me of old time vhcn^ midshipmenat bolls, we tied to introduce each other tofairies we had none of us seen before in ourlives. Welly there I was, between two overpoweringcivilities, but they meant it kindly,and I could not be angry. These were studentsof Schenectady Cdil^pe i would I like tosee it ? a beautiful location, not half a mile off.I requested to know if there was any thing tobe seen there, as I did not like to take a hotwalk for nothing, instead of the shady one I hadproposed for myself. ** Yes, there was ProfessorNottt ''—I had of course heard of ProfessorNottttt. — Professor Nottttt, who governed by mcnralinfluence and paternal sway, and who hadIwritten so largely on stcmea and anthracitecoal. I had never before heard of mon idefluence, stones, or anthracite coal. Then therewere more professors, and a cabinet of minerals•—the lost was an inducement, and I went.DIARY IN AMERICA. 139I sair Professor Nottt, but iK)t the cabinet ofminerals, for Professor Savage bad the key.With Professor Nottt I had rather a hot argumentabout anthracite coal, and then escapedbefore he was cool again. The students walkedback with me to the hot, and, with manyapologies for leaving me, informed me thatdinner was ready. I would not tax their politenessany longer, and they departed.Schenectady College, like most of the buildingsin America, was commenced on a grand scale,but haw never been finished ; the two wing arefinished, and the centre is lithographed, whichlooks vary imposing in the plate There is a peculiarityin this college : it is called the BotanyBay, from its receiving young men who havebeen exposed from other colleges, and who arekept in order by moral influence and paternalsway, the only meai» certainly by which wildyoung men are to be reclaimed. Smoudyspeaking Professor Nottt is a very clever mam,and I suspect this cottage will turn out more140 DIARY IX AMERICA.clever men than any other in the Union. Itdiffers from the other colleges in another point.It upholds no peculiar sect of religion, whichalmost all the rest do. For instance, Y^e,William's Town, and Amherst Colleges, areunder presbyterian influence; Washingtonepiscopal; Cambridge, in Massachusetts, unitarian.There is one disadvantage generally at-^tending railroads. Travellers proceed morerapidly, but they lose all the beauty of thecountry. Railroads of course run through themost level portions of the States ; and the levels,except they happen to be on the banks of ariver, are invariably uninteresting. The roadfrom Schenectady to Utica is one of the exceptionsto this rule: there is not perhaps a morebeautiful variety of scenery to be found anywhere.You run the whole way through thelovely valley of the Mohawk, on the banks ofthe Mohawk river. It was really delightful,but the motion was so rapid that you lamentedDIARY IN AMERICA. 141passing by so fast. The Utica railroad is one ofthe best in America ; the eighty miles are peineformed in four hours and a-half, stoppages fortaking in water, passengers, and refreshments,included. The locomotive was of great power,and as it snorted along with a train of carriagesof half a mile long in tow, it threw out suchshowers of fire, that we were constantly in dangerof conflagration. The weather was toowarm to admit of the windows being closed,and the ladies, assisted by the gentlemen, wereconstantly employed in putting out the sparkswhich settled on their clothes — the first time Iever heard ladies complain of having too manysparks about them. As the evening closed inwe actually were whirled along through a streamof fiery threads — a beautiful, although humbleimitation of the tail of a comet.I had not been recognised in the rail car, andI again flattered myself that I was unknown.I proceeded, on my arrival at Utica, to the hotel,and asking at the bar for a bed, the book wasy142 DIUIV Vf XXERIC.faded to mtf mod I wm reqxmsud to waken J Basie. Wfaererer you stop in America,they gesetallr produce a book and Awa^gMljour iMHne^ not od aoeonnt of an j police Regulationsbut tnenij because they will doI allowsecrets in America, and because they cfaooie toknow who you may be. Of course, you mayfrustrate this eafnooage by putting down anyname you please; and I had the pen in my hand,ami wad just thinking whether I should be air.Snooks or Mr. Smith, when I received a slap onthe shoulder, accompanied with. — << Well, captain,how are you by this time ?" In despair I letthe pen drop out of my baud, and instead of myname I left on the book a large blot. It was anold acquaintance from Albany, and before Ihad been ten minutes in the hotel, I was recognizedby at least ten more. The Americans aresuch locomotives themselves, that it is uselessto attempt the incognito in any part except thewest side of the Missisippi, or the Rocky Mountains.Once known at New York, and you areDIARY IN AMERICA. 148Jokown every where, for in every place you willmeet with sone one whcnaa you have met wingbroadway.A tremendous thunder-storm, with torrents ofrain, prevented my leaving Utica for TrentonFalls until late in the aftemooiL The roads,ploughed up by the rain, were any thing butdemocratic; there was no level in them; and wewere jolted ami shaken like peas hi a rattle,until we 'were silent from absolute suffering.I rose the next morning at four oVlock. Therewas a heavy fog in the air, and you could notdistinguish more than one hundred yards beforeyou. I followed the path pointed out to methe night befcM^, through a forest of majestictrees, and desolating a long flight of stepsfound myself below the Falls. The scene impressedyou with awe — the waters roared throughdeep chasms, between two walls of rock, onehundred and fifty feet high, perpendicular oneach side, and the width between the two varyingfrom forty to fifty feet. The high rocks144 DIARY IN AMERICA.were of black carbonate of lime in perfectlyhorizontal strata, so equally divided that theyappeared like solid masonry. For fifty or sixtyfeet above the rushing waters they were smoothand bare; above that line vegetation commencedwith small bushes, until you arrived at theirsummits, which were crowned with splendidforest trees, some of them inclining over thechasm, as if they would peep into the abyss belowand witness the wild tumult of the waters.From the narrowness of the pass, the heightof the rocks, and the superadded towering ofthe trees above, but a small portion of theheavens was to be seen, and this was not blue,but of a misty murky grey. The first sensationwas that of dizziness and confusion, from theunusual absence of the sky above, and the dashingfrantic speed of the angry boiling waters.The rocks on each side have been blasted so asto form a path by which you may walk up tothe first fall ; but this path was at times verynarrow and you have to cling to the chain whichDURY m AMERICA. 145is let into the rock. The heavy storm of theday before hed swelled the torrent so that itrose nearly a foot above this path ; and before Ihad proceeded far, I found that th flood sweptbetween my legs with a force which would havetaken some people off their feet. The rapidsblow the Falls are much grander than the Fallsthemselves ; there was one down in a chasm betweentwo riven rocks which it was painful tolook long upcni^ and watch with what a deepplunge— what irresistible force— the waters dasheddown and then returned to their own surface,as if struggling and out of breath. As I stoodova: them in their wild career, listening to theirroaring as if in anger, and watching the madnessof their speed, I felt a sensation of awe —an inward acknowledgment of the tremendouspower of Nature ; and, after a time, I departedwith idling of gladness to escape from thoughtwhich became painful when so near to danger.I gained the lower falls, which now coveredthe whole width of the rock, which they seldomVOL. I. * H146 Bart I^ AMEmCA^f to except daring the fishes. The vere esdrasfrom their rmety. On die side whereI iitood, poured down a rapid eidiram of waterabout one-half of the width of the fill ; on theother, it was running over a clear thin stream,a<» gentle and amiaMe as water could be. Thatpart of the fall reminded me of ladies hair inflowingringlets, and the one nearest me of theI^>r(l Chancellor Eldon, in all the pomposity andfrowning dignity of his full-bottomed wig. Andthen I thought of the lion and the lamb, notlying down, but falling down together; andthen I thought that I was wet through, whichwaH a fact ; so I climbed up a ladder, and cameto a wooden bridge above the fall, which conveyedme to the other side. The bridge passesover a staircase of little falls, sometimes diagonally,sometimes at right angles with the sites, andis very picturesque. On the other side you dumbup a holder of one hundred feet, and arrive atu litllo building with a portico, where travelersaiv ivfroshetl. Here you have a view of all theDIARY IN AMERICA. 147nipper falls, but these seem tame after witnessingth savage impetuosity of the rapids below.You ascend another ladder of one hundred feet,-and you arrive at a path pointed out to you bythe broad chips of the woodman's axe. Followthe chips and you will arrive four or five hundredfeet above both the bridge and the level of theupper fall. This scene is splendid. The blackperpendicular rocks on the other side; the successionof falls; the rapids roaring below; theforest trees rising to the clouds and spreadingwith their majestic boughs the vapour ascendingfrom the falling waters ; together with theoccasional glimpses of the skies here and thereall this induces you to wander with your eyesfrom one point of view to another, never tirkigwith its beauty, wildness, and vastness i and, ifyou do not exclaim with the Mussulman, Godis great ! you feel it through every sense andat every pulsation of the heart.The mountain was still above me, and I continuedtiny ascent; but the chips now disap-H 2148 DIARY IN America.feared, and, like Tom Thamby I lost mj was.I attempted to retreat, but in hymn ; I was nolonger amongst forest trees, but in a made cxfyoung mountain ash, from which I ooold notextricate myself : so I stood still to thinkwhat I should do. I recollected that the usualcourse of proceeding on such occasions waseither to sit down and cry, or attempt to get outof your scrape. Tom Thumb did both; but Ihad no time to indulge in the former luxury, so Ipushed and pushed, till I pushed myself out ofmy scrape, and found myself in a mote respectable part of the woods. I then stepped to takebreath. I heard a rustling behind me andmade sure it was a panther : — it was a beautifullittle palm squirrel, who came close to me, as ifto say " Who are you ?'' I took off my hat andtold him my name, when, very contemptuously,as I thought, he turned short round, cockedhis tail over his back, and skipped away. ^< Free,but not enlightened thought I; ^^hasn^t asoul above nuts'' I also beat a retreat, and onDIARY IN AMERICA. 149my arrival at the hotel, found that, although Ihad no guides to pay, Nature had made a veryconsiderable levy upon my wardrobe : my bootswere bursting, my trowsers torn to fragments,and my hat was spoilt ; and, moreover, I satshivering in the garments which remained. So I,in my turn, levied upon a cow that was milking,and having improved her juice very much bythe addition of some rum, I sat down under theportico, and smoked the cigar of meditation.The walls of the portico were, as usual,scribbled over by those who would obtain cheapcelebrity. I always read these productions;they are pages of human life. The majorityof the scribblers leave a name and nothing more :beyond that, some few of their productions arewitty, some sententious, mostly gross. Mythoughts, as I read over the rubbish, were happilyexpressed by the following distich which Icame to : —Les Centres et les Murailles,Sont le papier des Canailles.150 ^lAJKT DT tifffjiira.A £ttk sardis oo. I find the Er gin totlm remark bj sooie plrilfwnpiiic S} «i hied :Eftcril^ lo po €s il 'libro ^ Ko eefa Anirr.DIARY IN AMERICA. / \ 151CHAPTER XII.Returning to Utica, I fell in with a horsebridled and saddled , that was taking his wayhome without his master, every now and thencropping the grass at the road-side, and thenwalking on in a most independent manner. Hismaster had given him a certificate of leave, bychalking in large letters on the saddle-flaps oneach side, " Let him go This was a very primitiveproceeding; but I am not quite surethat it could be ventured upon in Yorkshire,or in Virginia either, where they know a goodhorse, and are particularly careful of it. It isa fact, that wherever they breed horses they invariablylearn to steal them.Set off for Oswego in a canal boat; it wascalled a packet-boat because it did not carrymerchandize, but was a very small affair, about^ Diary IX AMERICA.fiky feet long hy eight wide. The captainof h'jT vajiy however, in his own opinion, nohiiiiul affair; he puffed and sidled until heIfxjked larger than bis boat. This personage,a«( soon as we were under weigh, sat down in thenarrow cabin, before a small table; sit for ibiswriting-desk, which was about the size of astreet organ, and, like himself no small affiEor ;ordered a bell to be rung in our ears to summonthe passengers; and, then, taking down the namesof four or five people, received the enormous sumof ten dollars passage-money. He then lockedhis desk with a key large enough for a street-door,ordered his steward to remove it, and wenton deck to walk just three feet and return again*After all, there is nothing like being a captain.Although many of the boats are laid upthere is still considerable traffic on this canaLWc passed Rome, a village of two thousandinhabitants, at which number it has for manyyears been nearly stationary. This brandy ofthe canal is, of course, cut through the levelsDIARY IN AMERICA. 163and we passed through swains and wild forests ;here and there some few acres were cleared, and alog-house was erected, looking very solitary andforlorn, surrounded by the stumps of the treeswhich had been felled, and which now laycorded up on the banks of the canal, ready tobe disposed of. Wild and dreary as the countryis, the mass of forest is gradually receding,and occasionally some solitary tree is leftlanding, throwing out its wide arms, and appearingas if in lamentation at its separationfrom its companions, with whom for centuries ithad been in close fellowship.Extremes meet : as I looked down from theroof of the boat upon the giants of the forest,which had for so many centuries reared theirbeads undisturbed, but now lay prostrate beforecivilisation, the same feelings were conjured upin my mind as when I have, in my wanderings,surveyed such fragments of dismembered empiresas the ruins of Carthage or of Rome. There thereign of Art was over, and Nature had resumedh3.4-164 DIARY IN AMERICA.her sway — here Nature was deposed, and about,to resign her throne to the usurper Art. Bythe bye, the mosquitoes of this district havereaped some benefit from the cutting of thecanal here. Before these impervious forest retreatswere thus pierced, they could not havetasted human blood ; for ages it must have beenunknown to them, even by tradition ; and if theytaxed all other boats on the canal as they didours, a canal share with them must be considerablyabove par, and highly profitable.At five o'clock we arrived at Syracuse, I dadetest these old names vamped up. Why do-notthe Americans take the Indian names?They need not be so very scrupulous about it ;.they have robbed the Indians of everything elseAfter you. pass Syracuse, the country wears amore populous and inviting appearance. Salinais a village built upon a salt spring, which hathe greatest flow of water yet known, and thissalt spring is the cause of the improved appearanceof the country ; the banks of the canal, forDIARY IN AMERICA. 156three miles, are lined with buildings for theboiling down of the salt water, which is suppliedby a double row of wooden pipes. Boats areconstantly employed up and down the canal,transporting wood for the supply of the furnaces.It is calculated that two hundred thousand cordof wood are required every year for the presentproduce; and as they estimate upon anaverage about sixty cord of wood per acre inthese parts, those salt works are the means ofyearly clearing away upwards of three thousandacres of land. Two million of bushels of saltare boiled down every year: it is packed inbarrels, and transported by the canals and lakesto Canada, Michigan, Chicago, and the farWest. When we reflect upon the number ofpeople employed in the manufactories, and incutting wood, and making barrels, and engagedon the lakes and canals in transporting the produceso many thousand miles, we must admirethe spring to industry which has been created156 DIARY IN AMERICA.by this little, but boanteotu, qraing presentedby nature.The first sixty miss of this canal (I get onvery slow H-ith my description, but canal travelling18 very slow), which is through a flatswampy forest, is without a lock ; but after yonpass Syracuse, you have to descend by locks tothe Oswego river, and the same at every rapidof the river ; in all, there is a fall of one huitdred and sixty feet. Simple as locks are, Icould not help reverting to the wild rapids atTrenton Falls, and reflecting upon how the ingenuityof man had so easily been able to overcomeand control Nature! The locks did notj detain us long — they never lose time in America.I When the boat had entered the lock, and thegate was closed upon her, the water was let offwith a rapidity which considerably affected herlevel, and her bows pointed downwards. I timedone lock with a fall of fifteen feet. From the timethe gate was closed behind us until the lowerDIARY IN AMERICA. 157one was opened for our egress, was exactly acmeminute and a quarter ; and the boat sank downin the lock so rapidly as to give you the ideathat she was scuttled and sinking.The country round the Oswego is fertile andbeautiful, and the river, with its islands falls,and rapids, very picturesque. At one p.m. we arrivedat the town of Oswego, on Lake Ontario;I was pleased with the journey, although, whatwith ducking to bridges, bites from mosquitoes,and the constant blowing of their unearthlyhorn with only one note, and which one musthave been borrowed form the gamut of the infemale regions, 1 had had enough of it.For the first time since my arrival in thecountry, no one — that is to say, on board thecanal-boat — knew who I was. As we trackedabove the Oswego river, I fell into conversationwith a very agreeable person, who had joined usat Syracuse. We conversed the whole day, andI obtained much valuable information from himabout the country: when we parted, he expressed168 DIARY IN AMERICA.a wish that we should meet again. He gave mehis name and address, and when I gave my cardinreturn, he looked at it, and then said, ^< Iam most happy to make your acquaintance, sir ;but I will confess that had I known with whomI had been conversing, I should not havespoken so freely upon certain points connectedwith the government and institutions of thiscountry." This was American all over ; theywould conceal the truth, and then blame usbecause we do not find it out. I met him afterwards,but he never would enter into anydetailed conversation with me.DIARY IN AMERICA. 169CHAPTER XIII.Ni AGABA Falls. — Perhaps the wisest, if notthe best description of the Falls of Niagara, isin the simple ejaculation of Mrs. Butler ; for itis almost useless to attempt to describe whenyou feel that language fails; but if the fallscannot be described, the ideas which are conjuredup in the mind, when we contemplate thiswonderful combination of grandeur and beauty,are often worth recording. The lines of Mrs.Sigourney, the American poetess, please me most.Flow on for ever, in thy glorious robeOf terror and of beauty; God hath setHis rainbow on thy forehead, and the cloudMantles around thy feet. And he doth giveThy voice of thunder power to speak of himEternally — bidding the lip of manKeep silence, and upon thy rocky altar pourIncense of awe-struck praise.Wcjeci 'ijt Ja¥jaia fine lacked opoo the fide,}^ i^Jjinfi ting to be the dwdfin^ of thefjrr>xt Spirit* The flanks ctxild not miami*tf>at the Great Spirit dwelt also in die leafwhich he bruised in his hand ; but here it q>pealal to his seo«9 in thunder and awful niajetty, and be was compiled to acknowledge it.The effects which the contemplation of theseglorious waters produce, are of cone yeredifferent, according to one's temperament anddisposition. As I stood on the brink above Aefalls, continuing for a considerable time to watchthe great mass of water tumbling, dancing, capering,and rushing wildly along, asia inahonjU) take the leap and ddigfated at it, I could nothelp wishing that I too had been made of stidihtufr OS would have enabled me to have joinedit ; with it to have rushed innocuously downthe precipice; to have rolled uninjured intothe dei'p unfathomable gulf below, or to havef^iunboled in the atmosphere of spray, whichrosi* again in a dense cloud from its recesses.DIARY IN AMERICA. 161For about half an hour more I continued towatch the rolling waters, and then I felt a slightdizziness and a creeping sensation come overme — that sensation arising from strong excitement,and the same, probably, that occasionsthe bird to fall injp the jaws of the snake.This is a feeling which, if too long indulgedin, becomes irresistible, and occasions a cravingdesire to leap into the flood of rushing waters. .It increased upon me every minute ; and retreatingfrx>m the brink, I turned my eyes to thesurrounding forage, until the effect of the excitementhad passed away. I looked upon thewaters a second time, and then my thoughtswere directed into a very different channel. Iwished myself a magician, that I might transportthe falls to Italy, and pour their wholevolume of waters into the crates of MountVesuvius; witness the terrible conflict between^e contending elements, and create the largestitfeam-boiler that ever entered into the imaginationof manh"'162 DIARY IN AMERICA.I have no doubt that the opinion that thesefills have receded a distance of seven miles iscorrect; but what time must have passedbefore even this tremendous power could havesawed away sadi a mass of solid rock ! Within-thememory of man it has .receded but a fewfeet— changed but little. How many thousandyears must these waters have been flowing andfalling, unvarying in their career, and throwingup their sheets of spray to heaven.It is impossible for either the eye or the mindto compass the whole mass of falling water; youcannot measure, cannot estimate its enormous-volume; and this is the reason, perhaps, why travellersoften express themselves disappointed byit. But fix your eye upon one portion— one fallingand heaving wave out of the millions, as theyturn over the edge of the rocks ; watch, I say,this fragment for a few minutes, its regular timebeating motion never varying or changing;:pursuing the laws of nature with a regularitynever ceasing and never tiring ; minute afterDiary IN AMERICA. 16?minute ; hour after hour ; day after day ; yearafter year, until time recedes into creation:then cast your eyes over the whole multitudinousmass which is, and has been, performing thesame and coeval duty, and you feel its vastness !Still the majesty of the whole is far too greatfor the mind to compass — too stupendous for itslimited powers of reception.Sunday. — I had intended to have passed thewhole day at the Falls ; but an old gentlemanwhose acquaintance I had made in the steamboaton Lake Ontario, asked me to go tochurch ; and as I felt he would be annoyed if Idid not, I accompanied him to a Presbyterian;meeting not far from the Falls, which soundedlike distant thunder. The sermon was upon!temperance— a favourite topic in America ; andthe minister rather quaintly observed, thatalcohol was not sealed by the hand of God." •It was astonishing to me that he did not alludeto the Falls, point out that the seal of Godwas there, and shew how feeble was the voice of164 DIARY IN AMERICA.man when compared to the thunder of theAlmighty so close at hand But the act was,he had been accustomed to preach every Sundaywith the Falls roaring in his ear, and (when thewind was in a ceram quarter,) with the spraydamping the leaves of his serm(xi : he therefore,did not feel as we did, and, no doubt, thoughthis sermon better than that from the God ofthe elements.Yes, it is through the elements that theAlmighty has ever deigned to commune withman, or to execute his supreme will, whetherit has been by the wild waters to destroyan impious race by the fire hurled uponthe doomed cities ^by seas divided thatthe chosen might pass through them-bythe thunders on Sinai'^s Mount when hislaws were given to man— by the pOlar offire or the gui^ng rock, or by the rushingof mighty winds. And it is still throughthe elements that the Almighty speaks to manyto warn, to terrify, to chasten; to raisePure m AMERICA. 165him up to wonder, to praise, and adore. Theforked and blinding lightning which, with therapidity of thought, dissolves the union betweenthe body and the soul; the pealing thunder,announcing that the bolt has sped ; the fiercetornado, sweeping away everything in its career,Mke a besom of wrath ; the howling storm ; themountain waves ; the earth quaking, and yawningwide, in a second overthrowing the work andpride of centuries, and burying thousands in aliving tomb ; the fierce vomiting of the crater,pouring out its flames of liquid fire, and changingfertility to the arid rock : it is through thesethat the Deity still speaks to man ; yet what caninspire more awe of him, more reverence, andmare love, than the contemplation of thy fallingwaters, great Niagara !^Ml :.rta7 3r H.UTTK XIV.T«o jBttitlaaen bdrte fest thor cods. anil willht y»fffj Trp set va na wkw went ; one Kto atffatftv&a, tiM; ocher at Edda. I recollect goingf^^ the brrj to Brooklyn to rim the Commitdriri; at the Nar j Said ; I walked to where theimfniit^Mhfi f^uarted froai, to see if one was goingmy way. There were but two on the stand:4me wan hmitd to Caspian, the other to Jericho.iluttaJo i<t one of tie wonders of America. It\% tally to Ixr credited that such a beautifuldty (Miulil have risen up in the wilderness in sonhiirt a |X'ri<Kl. In the year 1814 it was burntdown, hcin^ then only a village ; only one housewjiH Ici't Hinting, und now it is a city withtwenty-five thoimund inhabitants. The Amorislire very judicious in planning their newInwiis; the stnvts arc laid out so wide that thereDURY IN AMERICA, 167will never be any occasion to pull down to widenand improve, as we do in England. The city ofBuffalo is remarkably well built ; all the housesin the principal streets are lofty and substantial,and are either of brick or granite. The mainstreet is wider, and the stores handsomer, thanthe majority of those in New York. It has fiveor six very fine churches, a handsome theatre,town-hall, and market, and three or four hotels,one of which is superior to most others inAmerica ; and to these we must add a fine stonepier, with a lighthouse, and a harbour full ofshipping and magnificent steam-boats. It isalmost incomprehensible, that all this shouldhave been accomplished since the year 1814.And what has occasioned this springing up ofa city in so short a time as to remind you ofAladdin's magic palace? — the Erie Canal, whichhere joins the Hudson River with the Lake,passing through the centre of the most populousand fertile States.At present, however, the business of Buffalo,168 DIARY IX A31£IUCA«as well as of every other city, is nearly at astand-still ; the machinery of America is underrepair, and until that repair is completed, thecountry will remain paralyzed. America mayjust now be compared to one of her own steamsboats, which, under too high pressure, hasburst her boiler. Some of her passengers have(in a commercial point of view) been killed outright,others severely injured, and her pro gre sshas for a time been stepped : but she will soonbe enabled to go a-head again as fast as ever,and will then probably pay a little more attentionto her safety-valve.I went out to the Indian reservation, grantedto the remnant of the Seneca tribe of Indiansonce a portion of the Mohawks, and all that nowremains in the United States of the famed sixnations. The chief of them (Red Jacket), ladydead, might be considered as the last of theMexicans. I had some conversation with ibisdaughter, who was very busily employed in theornamenting of a pair of mocassins, and thenDIARY IN AMERICA. 169visited the tomb, or rather the spot, where herfather was buried, without name or record. Thisomission has since been repaired, and a tabletis now raised over his grave. It is creditable tothe profession that the " poor players' as Shakspearehath it, should be the foremost to paytribute to worth. Cooke, the tragedian, waslying without a stone to mark his resting-place,when Kean came to America, found out thespot, and raised a handsome cenotaph to his memory; and it is to Mr. Placide, one of the verybest of American actors, that Red Jacket is indebtedfor the tablet which has been raised torescue his narrow home from oblivion.Red Jacket was a great chief and a greatman, but, like most of the Indians, he couldnot resist the temptations of alcohol, and wasduring the latter part of his life very intemperate.When Red Jacket was sober, he was theproudest chief that ever walked, and neverwould communicate even with the highest of theAmerican authorities but through his interval.I. Irftf0»^0i0t^ xJn^m, bf brick nl«lk^^ van th#^ <awfe ^f tl»M/. fUfiJ^Tti^ f*lw ii0«r fin;m ^j4 f4 hU #y«n boikiiiig. It was he alio(milt fell tame hock, cfrarcbes, and other pallienditiaA; in ikct,evety structure worthy of obaovriOti/iri ti th irhde lawn was protected, oon-irm'>U>il f/#r, and crxccuted bjr Mr. Rathbtubf fU tiUtfrry in angular. Of quiet, iinaamminginiintu*r», Uiiakt*r in hifi dress, moderate in allliU tiH|N5nNi^N, (except in charity, wherein, assistedDIARY IN America. 171hy an amiable wife, die "vis n^ery liberal) heconcealed under this apparentsimplicitjrand goodnessa mind capable of the vastest conceptions,united filii the greatest (power of execution. Jikundertook contracts, and embarked in buildingspeculations, to an amount almost incredible.Rathbun undertook every thing, and everythingundertaken by Rathbun was well done.Not only at Buffalo, but at Niagara indother places, he was engaged in raining vastbuildings, when the great crash occurred, andRathbun, with others, was unable to meet hisliabilities. Then, for the first time, it was discoveredthat for more than five years he hadbeen conniving at a system of forgery, to theamount of two millions of dollars: the forgetsconsisted in putting to his bills the names ofresponsible parties as indorsers, that they mightbe tore current. It does not appear that heever intended to defraud, for he took up all hisnotes as fast as they became due; and it wasthis extreme regularity oiv his part which prey9t172 DIAILV IX AlIERICJLvented the diaooTcnr of his fkaad tat so unusuallylong a period. It b snnniaed, that hadDot the genenl fidluie taken places he wouldhave eventually withdrawn all these fixed billsfrom the market, and hare paid all his creditorsreserving for himself a handsome fortune. It isa singular event in the anna of forgery, thatthis should have been canned on unde soo vc fed fishiso unprecedented a time. Mr. Sathbun is to betried as an accessary, as it was his brother whoforged the names. As soon as it was discoveredthe latter made his escape, and he is said to havedied miserably in a hovel on the confines oftexas.Embarked on board of the Sandusky, forDetroit. As we were steering dear of the pier,a small brig of about two hundred tons burthenwas pointed out to me as having been the ^fit^ship of Commodore Barclay, in the action uponLake Erie. The appearance of Buffalo fromthe Lake is very imposing. Stopped at Dunkirkto put some emigrants on shore. As they wereDIARY IN AMERICA. 137landing, I watched them carefully countingover their little property, from the iron teakettleto the heavy chest. It was their whosefortune, and invaluable to them ; the nest-egg \by which, with industry, their children were ta ;rise to affluence. They remained on the wharfas we shoved off, and no wonder that they seemedembarrassed and at a loss. There was the babyin the cradle, the young children holding fastto their mother's skirt, while the elder hadseated themselves on a log, and watched thedeparture of the steam-vessel; — the bedding,Cooking utensils, &c., all lying in confusion, andall to be housed before night. Weary did theylook, and weary indeed they were, and mostjoyful would they be when they at last shouldgain their resting-place. It appears from the 'reports sent in, that upwards of 100,000 emigrantspass to the west every year by the routeof the Lakes, of which it is estimated that about '80,000 are from Europe, the remainder migrating jfrom the eastern States of the Union.174 DIARY IN AMERICA.I may keep a log now. — 5 a.m« Light breezesaud clear weather, land trending fix)m South, toS.S.W. Five sail in the offing.At 6, ran into Grand River. Within theselast two years, three towns have i^rung up here,containing between them about three thousandinhabitants.How little are they aware, in Europe, of thevastness and extent of commerce carried on inthese inland seas, whose coasts are now lined withflourishing towns and cities, and whose watersare ploughed by magnificent steam-boats andhundreds of vessels ladai with merchandize. Even.the Americans themselves are not fully aware ofthe rising importance of these Lakes as connectedwith the West. Since the completion of theOhio Canal, which enters the Lake Erie atCleveland, that town has risen almost as rapidlyas Buffalo. It is beautifully situated. It is aboutsix years back that it may be said to have commencedits start, and it now contains more thanten thousand inhabitants. The buildings areDIARY IN AMERICA. 17Supon the same scale as those of Buffalo, and itis conjectured with good reason, that it willbecome even a larger city than the other, as theiee breaks up here and the navigation is openin the spring, six weeks sooner than it is atBuffalo ; abreast of which town the ice is drivendown and collected, previous to its forcing itspassage over the falls.Erie, which was the American naval depotduring the war, has a fine bay, but it is nowfalling into insignificance : it has a populationof about one thousand,Sandusky is a fast-rising town, beautifullysituated upon the verge of a small prairie ; it isbetween Sacredly and Huron that the prairielands commence. The bay of Sandusky is verypicturesque, being studded with small verdanthands. On one of these are buried in the samegrave all those who fell in the hard-foughtbattle of the Lakes, between Perry and Barclay,both of whom have since followed their comepinions.i:7tTuiebis-UK lez:: ixnFX rfiiBiiifjwii <■ tkeK OK nicias. «p as to aid5x » xifiBS Far boilfiiHr loba bu.<d ooe for an editor to watt op to aswritings ought to be very sharps and, at theBsme time, extremely well4empered.The American government hare paidevnyattentkm to their inland wales. The harbours-lighthouses,piers, &c. have aU been built althe expense of government, and every {Kocautkarhas been taken to make the navigation of the-lakesas safe as possible.In speaking of the new towns rising so fast inAmerica, I wish the reader to understand that.DIARY IN AMERICA. 177if he compares them with the country towns ofthe same population in England, he will not dothem justice. In the smaller towns of Englandyou can procure but little, and you have to sendto London for any thing good : in the largertowns, such as Norwich, &c., you may procuremost things ; but, still, luxuries must usually beobtained from the metropolis. But in suchplaces as Buffalo and Cleveland, every thing isto be had that you can procure at New Yorkor Boston. In those two towns on Lake Erieare stores better furnished, and handsomer, thanany shops at Norwich, in England ; and youwill find, in either of them, articles for which,at Norwich, you would be obliged to send toLondon. It is the same thing at almost everytown in America with which communication iseasy. Would you furnish a house in one ofthem, you will find every article of furniture —carpets, stoves, grates, marble chimney-pieces,pier-glasses, pianos, lamps, candelabra, glass,T 8178 DlAJiY LK AM£JUCA.china, kc, in t vice die quantity, and in greatervariety. than act any pixniDdal town in England.Thisarifies from the srslem of credit extendedthrough even vein and artery of the country,and bv which EngKA goods are forced, as ifwith a force-pump, into every available depot inthe Union; and thus, in a town so newrlynified,that the stumps <^ the Brest-trees aie not onlystill surrounding the houses, but remain standingin the cellars, you will find every luxurythat can be required. It may be asked whatbecomes of all these goods. It must be lootelected that hundreds of new houses spring upevery year in the towns, and that the surroundingcountry is populous and wealthy. In the farmhouses— mean looking and often built of logs—*is to be found not cmly comfort, but Tery oftenluxury.DIARY IN AMERICA. 179CHAPTER XV.The French never have succeeded as colonists,and their want of success can only beascribed to an amiable want of energy. Whenlocated at any spot, if a Frenchman has enough,he seeks no more ; and, instead of working asthe Englishman or the American does, he willpass his time away, and spend his little surplusin social amusements. The town of Detroit wasfounded as early as the city of Philadelphia, but,favourably as it is situated, it never until latelyrose to any thing more than, properly speaking,a large village. There is not a paved street in it,or even a foot-path for a pedestrian. In winter,in rainy weather you are up to your knees in'imud ; in summ, invisible from dust : indeed, ^until lately, there was not ^ practicable road forthirty miles round Detroit. The muddy andi»afsauuc die: dwr of a haaat^ theat titter bottflDH of k; Aerathe mMrwff of dv pstrvice to call ; the cit k backedther are taailfrf drr and rirai Ab old s-laliilaiit of Dictate coasplaiBBd to bk tnal |Windi'woptn^w getdug Bopmnd, dnl waamwd Aemretired to vim in that v;^ any kngcr. BstcHiiiig to the life of the other tims cai tiielakerthe great inaeaae of oonmieic^ and MifhigMthang been admitted as a Stale into the Unionswith Detroit as its capital, a large Eastern populationhas now poured into it, and Detroit willsoon present an i^ipearanoe very different frontit present, and become one of the most flourishingcities of America. Within these last six yearsit has increased its population from two to tenthousand* The climate here is the very best in-DIARY IN AMERICA. 181America, although the State itself is unhealthyThe land near the town is fertile. A railroadfrom Detroit already extends thirty miles throughthe State; and now that the work has commenced,it will be carried on with the usualenergy of the Americans.Left Detroit in the Michigan steam-vesselfor Mackenaw; passed through the Lake St.Clair, and entered Lake Huron ; stopped at a^ <solitary wharf to take in wood, and met there 'with a specimen of American politeness or (ifyou please) independence in the gentleman whocut down and sold it. Without any assignable 'motive, he called out to me, " You are a damnedfool of an Englishman \^ for which, I supposesI ought to have been very much obliged to ihim.Miss Martineau has not been too lavish in herpraises of Mackinaw. It has the appearance ofa fairy isle floating on the water, which is sopure and transparent that you may see down toalmost any depth ; and the air above is as pure182 DIARY IN AMERICA.as the water, so that you fed invigorated as youbreathe it. The first reminiscence brought tomy mind after I had landed, was the descriptionby Walter Scott of the island and residence ofMagnus Toil and his daughters Minna andBrenda, in the novel of the ** Pirate."The low buildings, long stores, and outhousesfill of nets, barrels, masts, sails, andcordage; the abundance oi fish lying about;the rafters of the houses laden with dried andsmoked meat ; and the full and jolly proportionsof most of the inhabitants, who would haverivalled Scott's worthy in height and obesity,immediately struck my eye; and I might liveimagined myself transported to the Shetland isle,had it not been for the lodges of the Indians onthe beach, and the Indians themselves eitherrunning about, or lying stripped in the porchesbefore the whisky stores.I inquired of one of the islanders, why allthe white residents were generally such largeportly men, which they are at a very early age ;Puny IN AMEIilGA. 183he replied, ^^We have good air, good water,and what we eat agrees with us.^' This wasvery conclusive.I enquired of another, if people lived to a ^good old age in the island ; bis reply was (suite ,American—" J guess they do ; if people want » 'to die, they can't die hers — they're obliged tpigo elsewhere''Wandering among the Indian lodges (wigwamsis a term not used now^a-days), I hearda sort of flute played in one of them, and Ientered. The young Indian who was blowingon it, handed it to me. It was an imperfectinstrument, something between a flute and aclarion, but the sound which it gave out wassoft and musical. An islander informed methat it was the only sort of musical instrumentwhich the Northern tribes possessed, and that itwas played upon by the young joaeji only whitleywere in love. I suspected at first that b^wa bantering me, but I afterwards found tba|;what he said was true, The young IndianIM DtAs.? Di AimarA,mas/c have heat ^erj < i e qp t y ^■'-■j tar heeonrlaoed to pray aD der jBd all i^rt, danB|rdie rime that I waa toe<« If mihi be tie fiw4 •€ kwe, pbj Mu*^Started in a birch moe fir Smh Sc Marie,a small town built umber die npids of thatnam, which pour oat a portion ct the waterof Lake Superior. Two American gentkmeii,one a member of Coi^;reaB, and die oder belongingto the American For Company, wereof the party. Oar crew boasted of fire Canadianhalf-breed — a mixture between the Indianand the white, which spoils body. It was alovely morning ; not a breath of air stirred thewide expanse of the Huron, as far as the eyecould scan ; and the canoe, as it floated alongsideof the landing-place, appeared as if it werepoised in the air, so light did it float, and soclear and transparent are these northern waters.We started, and in two hours arrived at GooseIsland, unpoetical in its name, but in itself fullof Iwnuty. As you stand on the beach, you canDIARY IN AMERICA. 186look down through the water on to the shelvingbottom, bright with its variety of pebbles, andtrace it almost as far off as if it had not beencovered with water at all. The island was small,but gay as the gayest of parterres, coveredwith the sweet wild rose in full bloom (certainlythe most fragrant rose in the world), bluecampanellos, yellow exeranthemums, and whiteox-eyed daisies. Underneath there was a perfectcarpet of strawberries, ripe, and invitingyou to eat them, which we did, while our Canadianbrutes swallowed long strings of raw saltpork. And yet, in two months hence, this lovelylittle spot will be but one mass of snow—a mound rising above to serve as a guide to thechilled traveller who would find his way overthe frozen expanse of the wide Huron Lake.As soon as our Canadians had filled themselvesto repletion with raw pork, we continuedour route that we might cross the lake and gainthe detour, or point which forms the entranceof the river St. Marie, before it was dark. We]M :>Lta? :2r t jHMcaput lo lor ieot miT. aad iaEfOHaBked &r hitMgfiT, A* MOIL js we poc omv ieK «■.Aumben. diet wi cmki noir «» jk ifa biaek neil fid you caned hocharnxi^ jour nondi fiCoi withten states we had a Imgt Szti,ioifp or b rancid, bat of a does shbDThe wind eddkd, aad diether roe in irnwnrij wfairkd afoot thetoes right and left, and in ewtnr simla' of thecsompaM, until they were fail j beaten off to arespectable distance. We sopped upon lake-trotand fried ham ; and rolling ourxlTei up in ourMackinaw blankets, we were soon £ut ailopp.There was no occasion to call us the nextmorning. The Canadians were still snoringand had let the fires go down. The mosquitoestaking ml vantage of this neglect, had Breedther way into the tent, and sounded theDIARY m AMERICA. 187in our ears with their petty trumpets ; followingup the summons with the pricking of pins,as the fairies of Queen Mab are rq3cn?ted to havedone to lazy housemaids. We kicked up oajtrhalf-breeds, who gave us our breakfast, stowedaway the usual quantity of raw pork, and oncemore did we float on the water m a piece ofbirch bark. The heat of the sun was oppressiveand we were broiled ; but we dipped our handsin the clear cool stream as we skimmed alonglistening to the whistling of the solitary loci asit paddled away from us, or watching the serratedback of the sturgeon, as he rcdled lazilyover and showed above tl^ water. Now andthen we stopped, and the sil^oe of the desertwas broken by the report of our fowling^piecee^and a pigeon or two was added to our larder.At noon a breeze sprung up, and we boasted oursail, and the Canadians who had paddled droppedasleep as we glided quietly along under theguidance of the ^^ timonier.'*After you have passed through the river St.188 DVkSLT JS AirBKKA,Clair f sand ^atriri tfae Iluiui Ude the let^HntydL tir fiwip^ry vswoBBHStfthen indttdy e^KcnDf oa Ae Cna&m aide, •ipoCBwie rich dim d» nil m gengnJ ii ale w abj the huge growth of the timber; but Arnortfaem pvt of the Lake Haroo dmci is eovainly fittk fit Cor caitifslioo. The wfrofot firncyw b^;nu to be plentiful ; Cor, titothe upper end of the hdu^ theyalthough rerj aboodait Ml Upper Canada. Thecountry wearft thence j^ipeanaiee all the war opto the Salt St. Marie, Aewmg maple and blackpoplar intending with fir : the oak but rarelyappearing. Tbewbole lake firomMackinawto dieDetour ii studded with isbmds. A large one atthe entrance of the river is called St. Joseph's.The Hudson Bay Company had a station therewhich is now abandoned, and the idand hasbeen purchased, or granted, to an English officer,who has partly settled it. It is said to be dielest land in this region, but still hardly fit forcultivation. It was late before our arrival atVIABY IN AMERICA. 189the Sault, and we were obliged to have recourseto our paddles, for the wind had died away. Asthe sun went down, we observed a very curiouseffect from the refraction of tints, the water changingto a bright violet every time that it was disturbedby the paddles. I have witnessed somethinglike this just after sunset on the Lake ofGeneva.We landed at dusk, much fatigued; but theAurora Borealis flashed in the heavens, spreadingout like a vast plume of ostrich feathers acrossthe sky, every minute changing its beautifuland fanciful forms. Tired as we were, wewatched it for hours before we could make upour minds to go to bed.m-f -•190 lUAOY d AJTKSICA.Saith St. Mas^ik^^-Oot Unheard is m Terrstrange being. It appem bat he has been »-Toyed by some trader, who has pufaGdied awork in wbidihehasfaandfimlt wiAdieaccoDi-mutations at Saatt St. Marie, end spoken waydisrespectfully ci oar host's beds and .I have never read the work, but I am sowell aware how frequently travelers fiD up theirpages with fleas, and ^* such small gear,*^ that Ipresume the one in question was flora of matterto furnish out his book ; vet it was neitherjust nor liberal on his part to expect at SaultSt. Marie, where, perhaps, not five travellersarrive in the course of a year, the same accommodationsas at New York. The bedsteadscertainly were a little rickety, but every thingwas very clean and comfortable. The house wasDiary IN AMERICA. 191not an inn, nor, indeed, did it pretend to be onebut the fare was good and well cooked, and soilwere waited upon by the hosts two pretty modestdaughters — not only pretty, but well-informed jgirls ; and, considering that this village is th ^Ultima Thule of this portion of America, Ithink that a traveller might have been verywell content with things as they were. In twoinstances, I found in the log-houses of this village 'complete editions of Lord Byron's works.Sault St. Marie contains perhaps, fifty housesmostly built of logs, and has a palisade put uptorepel any attack of the Indians.There are two companies of soldiers quarteredhere. The rapids from which the village takesits name are just above it ; they are not strongoi* dangerous, and the canoes descend themtwenty times a day. At the foot of the rapidsthe men are constantly employed in taking thewhite fish in scoop nets, as they attempt to forcetheir way up into Lake Superior. The majorityof the inhabitants here are half-breeds.^192 DIARY Ur AMERICA.It is remarkable that the females genenllj improve,and the males d^enemte, from the admixtureof blood. Indian wives are here prese redto white, and perhaps with reason — they makethe best wives for poor men ; they labour hard,never complain, and a day of severe toil isamply recmnp^ised by a smile frcnn their lordand master in the evening. They are alwaysfaithful and devoted, and very sparing of theirtalk, all which qualities are considered as recommendationsin this part of the world.^ It is remarkable, that although the Americanstreat the negro with contumely, theyhave a respect for the red Indian : a well-educatedhalf-bred Indian is not debarred fromentering into society ; indeed, they are generally■• received with great attention. The daughter ofa celebrated Indian chief brings heraldry intothe family, for the Indians are as proud oftheir descent (and with good reason) as we, inEurope, are of ours. The Randolph family inVirginia still boast of their descent from Poca-DIARY IN AMERICA. 193hontas, the heroine of one of the most remark ^able romances in real life which was ever heard of. ^The whole of this region appears to be incapableof cultivation, and must remain in its presentstate, perhaps, for centuries to come. Thechief produce is from the lakes ; trout and whitefishare caught in large quantities, salted down,and sent to the west and south. At Mackinawalone they cure about two thousand barrels,which sell for ten dollars the barrel ; at theSault, about the same quantity; and on LakeSuperior, at the station of the American FurCompany, they have commenced the fishing, tolessen the expenses of the establishment, andthey now salt down about four thousand barrels ;but this traffic is still in its infancy, and willbecome more profitable as the west becomes morepopulous. Be it here observed that, althoughthe Canadians have the same rights and thesame capabilities of fishing, I do not believe thatone barrel is cured on the Canadian side. Asthe American fish is prohibited in England, itVOL. I. ItIM Diary IS AHaUCA.BBgfat leilij heoMiie m article ci exportationham the Cmiadn to a commendable mount.There is another aouroe cf profit, which is thecollecting of the male sagpr; and this stapleif I may use the len is rapidly inoeasiiig. Atan average, the full gvoiini m^ple^tiee will kiddabout five pounds at sugar each tapping and,if carefully treated, will last Carty yean Allthe State at IficUgan is supplied bam thisquarter with thb sugar, which is good in quality,and refines welL At Marina they receiveabout three hundred thousand pounds everyyear. It may be collected in any quantity idiomtheir vast wildernesses of forests, and althoughthe notion may appear strange it is not impossiblethat one day the Northern sugiur maysupersede that of the Tropics. The ishmd ofSt. Joseph, which I have mentioned, is coveredwith large maple trees, and they malice a greatquantity upon that spot alone.I was amused by a reply giv^i me by anAmerican in ofBce here. I asked how much DiisDURY IN AMERICA. 195office was worth, and his answer was six hun i )dred dollars, besides stealing. This was, at allevents, frank and honest ; in England the wordwould have been softened down to perquisites.I afterwards found that it was a common expressionin the States to say a place was worth somuch besides cleavage.In all this country, from Mackinaw to theSault, hayes very scarce ; and, during the shortsummer season, the people go twenty or thirtymiles in their canoes to any known patch of prairieor grass land to collect it. Nevertheless, theyare very often obliged, during the winter, to feed v^'their cattle upon fish, and, strange to say, theyacquire a taste for it. You will see the horsesand cows disputing for the offal ; and our landlordtold me that he has often witnessed a particularhorse wait very quietly while they werelanding the fish from the canoes, watch U»opportunity, dart in, steal one, and run awaywith it in his notitiamutiny among our lazzaroni of half-breeds,K.2T2r2f2. ^2:e7 «t. sal v% are obGiecd torocr> the caaetL ac«i ib fire ■Bmrnr^ vere ob theTac izkLrari «a of Lake S up gior , Tbe «smsof di:^ jfcke are. ^ pDOsble. iwiic- transporttnaii tlv>:e ct the Hutdd, or ndter the TaiieljsrA brl;rht coiocm of the pebbles and agatesvtiicfa lie at the bottom make then appear so.The appearance of the coast, and the growth oftimber, ^a^ inucfa the same as od Lake Huron,until you arrive at Gros Cape, a brit promontory,about three hundred feet high. We ascendedthis cape, to have a full view of the expandof water : this was a severe task, as it wasnearly perpendicular, and we were forced to dingfrom tree to tree to make the ascent. In additionto this difficulty, we were unremittingly pursuedby the mosquitoes, which blinded us so asto im[x:de our progress, being moreover assistedin their malevolent attacks by a sort of sand-fly,that made triangular incisions behind our ears.DIARY IN AMERICA. 197exactly like a small leech bite, from which the-bloodtrickled down two or three inches as sooas the little wretch let go his hold. This varietyof stinging made us almost mad, and we descendedquite exhausted, the blood tricklingdown our faces and necks. We threw off ourclothes, and plunged into the lake ; the waterwas too cold ; the agates at the bottom cut ourfeet severely, and thus were we phlebotomizedfrom head to foot.There is a singular geological feature at thiscape ; you do not perceive it until you haveforced your way through a belt of firs, whichgrow at the bottom and screen it from sight.It is a ravine in which the rocks are pouringdown from the top to the bottom, all so equal insize, and so arranged, as to wear the appearanceof a cascade of stones ; and when, half blindedby the mosquitoes, you look upon them, theyappear as if they are actually in motion, andfalling down in one continued stream.We embarked again, and after an hour'sviB- Tie limn nf wol Isdzm sniff or i ijiiLiiL. . IsJMf!:. UlUt l«fl&. all 9DinBIE2]lfaaMfit^ Vit^j ferre itjoaaff on Ldkc- Sopmor,tfj^r f»»9»KdT^ fades of the Uke, wmd dierkaoft bdfTe a firaaE schooner vUcli narrates it.Then: u one question vhacfa the tisinclkrIwrip atkins bioMelf as he sires the restf/f vater, into which so many fiTeis pourtheir contributions which is — sin viiat mannerH all this accumulation of water carried off?Except hy a verjr small evaporation in the barriertime, and the outlet at Sault St. Marie,DIARY IN AMERICA. 189where the water whkh escapes is not much morethan equal to two or three of the rivers whichfeed the lake, there is no apparent means bywhich the water is carried off. The only conselusion that can be arrived at is, that baithe lake rises above a certain height, as the soilaround is sandy and porous, the surplus watersfind their way through it ; and such I believe tobe the case.We saw no bears. They do not come downto the shores, (or travel, as they term it here,)until the huckleberries are ripe. We were toldthat a month later there would be plenty ofthem. It is an ascertained fact, that the bearfrom this region migrate to the west everyautumn, but it is not known when they return.They come down to the eastern shores of theLakes Superior and Huron, swim the lakes andrivers from island to island, never deviatingfix)m their course, till they pass through byWisconsin to the Missisippi. Nothing st(^them ; the sight of a canoe will not prevent200 DIARY rsf A>reRrcA,their taking the water; join the Indian mthe River St. S^Iarie hare hen known to killfifteen in one dsr. It is sangularthat the bearson the other fide at the MiaHsip|X are said tomigrate to the east, exactly in the contrarydirection. Perhaps the Mississippi is theirfashionable watering-place.A gathering storm induced us to return, in-jitead of continuing our pr ogre ss on the hikeA birch canoe in a gale of wind on Lake Superior,would not be a very insurable risk. Onour return, we found our half-breeds very penistent, for had we not taken them back, theywould have stood a good chance of winteringthere. But we had had advice as to the treatmentof these lazy gluttonous scoundrels, whoswallowed long pieces of raw pork the whole ofthe day, and towards evening were, from repletion,hanging their heads over the sides of thecanoe and quite ill. They had been regaled withpork and whisky going up ; we gave them saltishand a broomstick by way of variety on theirDIARY IN AMERICA. 201return, and they behaved very well under the .latter fare. ^We started again down with the stream, andthe first night took up our quarters on a prairiespot, where they had been making hay, whichwas lying in cocks about us. To have a soft bedwe carried quantities into our tent, forgettingthat we disturbed the mosquitoes who had goneto bed in the hay. We smoked the tent todrive them out again ; but in smoking the tentwe set fire to the hay, and it ended in a conflagration.We were burnt out, and had to re-pitchour tent.I was sauntering by the side of the river wh^iI heard a rustling in the grass, and perceived agarter snake, an elegant and harmless little creature,about a foot and a half long. It had asmall toad in its mouth, which it had seized bythe head : but it was much too large for the snaketo swallow, without leisure and preparation. Iwas amused at the precaution, I may say inventionof the toad, to prevent its being swallowed :X 3****** .''* * '202 PIABY IK AMERICA.it had inflated itself, till it was as Toad asabladder, and upon this, issue was yioed —the snake would not let go, the toad wouldnot be swallowed. I lifted up the Snake by dietail and threw them three or fir yards into theriver. The snake rose to the surfiux^ as iiia|esticas tl)e great sea serpent in miniature, carryinghis head well out of the water, with the toad sillin his mouth, reminding me of Caesar with hisCommentaries. He landed does to my fist ; Ithrew him in again, and this time he kt go thetoad, which remained floating and inanimate oathe water; but after a time he discharged hissuperfluous gas, and made for the shore; whilethe snake, to avoid me, swam away down withthe current.The next morning it blew hard, and as weopened upon Lake Huron, we had to encountera heavy sea ; fortunately, the wind was fur fairthe island of Mackinaw, or we might have beendelayed for some days. As soon as we were inthe lake we made sail, having fifty-six miles to©lARY IN AMERICA, 203run before it was dark. The gale increased,but the caiioe flew over tip water, swimming itlike a sea bird. It ws^ beautiful, but not quiteso pleasant, to watch it, as, upon the least carelessnesson the part of the helmsman, it wouldimmediately have filled. As it was, we shippedsome heavy seas, but the blankets at the bottombeing saturated, gave us the extra ballast whichwe required. Before we were clear of theislands, we were joined by a whole fleet ofIndian canoes, with their dirty blankets spread '^to the storm, running, as we were, for Mackinaw,being on their return from WantonIslands, where they had congregated to receivepresents from the Governor of Upper Canada.Their canoes were, most of them, smaller thanours, which had been built for speed, but theywere much higher in the gunnel. It was interestingto behold so many hundreds of beingstrusting themselves to such fragile conveyances,in a heavy gale and running sea ; but the harderit blew, the faster we went ; and at last, muchJ ■J204 DIARY IX AMOUCJIto my satisfaction, we found ordres in smoothwater agaiii, alongside of the landing wharf atMackinaw. I had had some with to see a fresh*water gale of wind, but in a fairdi canoe I neverwish to try the experiment again.DIARY IN AMERICA. 20&CHAPTER XVII.Mackinaw. — I mentioned that, in my trip toLake Superior, I was accompanied by a gentlemanattached to the American Fur Companywho have a station at this island. I was amusingmyself in their establishment, superintendingthe unpacking and cleaning of about forty orfifty bales of skins, and during the time collectedthe following information. It is an averagecomputation of the furs obtained every yeaivand the value of each to the American FurCompany. The Hudson Bay Company aresupposed to average about the same quantity, orrather more; and they have a larger proportionof valuable furs, such as beaver and sable,but they have few deer and no buffalo. Whenwe consider how sterile and unfit for cultivationare these wild northern regions, it certainlyslily ISr l^ntBJCAaccean 'rybzssr that rhea ^^rmJA raonmL as theyar* :D«»ftr. i'.nr Tirieriiss . . 150.* JewB'lii-o 3d,f)«"N}Ejc 3J0Bear-fir Iij)0«}Mtw Rac 5*}*'^ .000Or^tn .5.'>Wi^WMartin or Sttikk Ii,<>MMinx I0,0<»SllTtr and Black Fox. . 15Cro^ToT l'}0BedFox 3^00*}GrevFox l,OtWPrairie Fox 5,000Bears 4,*)00Lynx 500Wildcat 2,000Racoon 70,000WolvM 12,000Wolverton SOPanthers 50Badgers 250-15 etmtff per lb.5 dollars person.-^UbBfcrlb.12 cents per dun.^ dollars per skmdo.^Ido-OTHiore.i4 down persia.do.1*do.ido.i ^*do.1 2*do.2idodo.idodo.do.besides skunks, ground-hogs, hares, and manyothers, These are priced at the lowest : in proportionas the skins are finer, so do theyDIARY IN AMERICA. 207higher profit. The two companies may be saidto receive, between them, skins yearly to theamount of from two to three millions of dollars.Fable apropos to the subjectA hare and a fox met one day on the vastprairie, and after a long conversation, theyprepared to start upon their several routes.The hare, pleased with the fox, lamented thatthey would in all probability separate for ever.No, no," replied the fox, " we shall meetagain, never fear." " Where ?" inquired hiscompanion. " In the latter's shop to be sure,"rejoined the fox, tripping lightly away.Detroit. — There are some pleasant people inthis town, and the society is quite equal to thatof the eastern cities. From the constant changeand transition which take place in this country, Igo where you will you are sure to fall in with \a certain portion of intelligent, educated people. )This is not the case in the remoter portions208 DIARY IX AMERICA.of the Old Content, where every thing issettled, and generation succeeds general i on, asin some obscure country town. But in America,where all is new, and the country has to bepeopled from the other parts, there is a proportionof intelligence and education transplantedwith the inferior passes, either from the EasternStates or from the Old Wcvld, in whatever quarteryou may happen to find yourself.Left my friends at Detroit with r^ret, andreturned to Buffalo. There is a marked differencebetween the behaviour of the lower people of theeastern cities and those whom you fall in withinthis town : they are much less civil in theirbehaviour here; indeed, they appear to thinkrudeness a proof of independence. I went tothe theatre, and the behaviour of the majcnritjof the company just reminded me of the Portsmouthand Plymouth theatres. I had forgottenthat Buffalo was a fresh-water sea-port town.Returning to Niagara, I took possession ofthe roof of the rail-coach, that I might enjoyDIARY IN AMERICA. 20&the prospect. I had not travelled three milesbefore I perceived a strong smell of burning ; atlast the pocket of my coat, which was of cotton,burst out into flames, a spark having found itsway into it : fortunately (not being insured)there was no property on the premises.When the celebrated Colonel David Crocketfirst saw a locomotive, with the train smokingalong the rail-road, he exclaimed, as it flew pasthim, " Hell in harness, by the 'darnel !"''I may, in juxtaposition with this, mentionan Indian idea. Nothing surprised the Indiansso much at first, as the percussion caps forguns : they thought them the ne plus ultra ofinvention : when, therefore, an Indian was firstshewn a locomotive, he reflected a little while,and then said, " I see —-percussion"There is a beautiful island, dividing the Fallsof Niagara, called Goat Island : they havethrown a bridge across the rapids, so that youcan now go over. A mill has already beenerected there, which is a great pity ; it is alU) iLkar zr *:iKgnTj^A^-ne lead ir lieilPTita Til .rm'rrjui^iuu* pfuruHL if kHluunc^fL and rjuft ac the send ofinfeft an ocnr: ff j^sa puc vtie-vas outside cilia fines dvrbrie »ft-7 b^ics free: if ^w«ir>nn the falls. Aft I lUti i iiL I ohKrrcd isnj^Jj unaJce m mj pati, join I Added k. AnAmerican, wfao came op, exdainwd, ^ It^iat% a c^qq^er-head, stealer! I nevthat their were in this island'' I CdodiI out thatI harl killed a make quite as TcnoiDoiif^ if notmore so, than a rattlesnakeih)ft never tires with these falls ; indeed Utakiii a week at least to find out all theirDIARY IN AMERICA. 211ties ail beauties. There are scene sweet spotson Goat Island, where you can meditate and bealone.I witnessed, during my short stay here, that ^indifference to the destruction of life, so very Jremarkable in this country. The rail-carescrushed the head of a child of about seven yearsold, as it was going into the engine-house ; theother children ran to the father, a blacksmith,who was at work at his forge close by, cryii^out " Father, Billy kilkd."*^ The man put downhis hammer, walked leisurely to where the boylay, in a pool of his own blood, took up thebody, and returned with it under his arm to Imhouse. In a short time, the hammer rang uponthe anvil as before.The game of nine-pins is a favourite gaminAmerica, and very superior to' what it is inEngland. In America, the ground is alwayscovered properly over, and the balls are rolledupon a wooden floor, as correctly levelled as abilliard table. The ladies join in the game.212 duly £3r ^ifKRrrA-wtucti nere pgcnmps ai agreeable jot not toofatfi^.jin^ an gygrmp. I was ^crj find cf &«•quelling thar aOejah. not aalj fat thebut becai2.se, among the various wmjs ofmating character, I had made op m j amid thatthere was xKXie mare likely to he connect, Aaathe radiate fanned hw the manner m whichpeople roD the balla, especially the ladies.There were soaie very delightful spedracns cfAmerican females when I was this time atNiagara. We sauntered about the fide andwood in the day time, or dse played at moins; in the evening we looked at the moonyspouted verses, and drank mint juleps. Butall that was too pleasant to last long : I fitthat I had not come to America to play at ninepins; so I tore myself away, and within the nexttwenty-four hours found myself at Toronto, hiUpper Canada.Toronto, which is the present capital and seatof government of Upper Canada, is, from itswant of spires and steeples, by no means anDIARY IN AMERICA. 213imposing town, as you view it on entering theharbour. The harbour itself is landlocked, andwhen deepened will be very good. A greatdeal of money has been expended by the Englishgovernment upon the Canadian provinces,but not very wisely. The Rideau and Willedcanals are splendid works ; they have nothingto compare with them in the United States ; butthey are too much in advance of the country,and will be of but little use for a long period, ifthe provinces do not go a-head faster than theydo now. One half the money spent in makinggood roads through the provinces would havedone more good, and would have much increasedthe value of property. The proposed rail-roadfrom Hamilton to Detroit would be of greaterimportance ; and if more money is to be expendedon Upper Canada, it cannot be betterdisposed of than in this undertaking.The minute you put your foot on shore, Iyou feel that you are no longer in the UnitedStates ; you are at once struck with the differentDiA&T DT ^^wmnr/i.popalodonv awsoema^ and m^m^*- Ob themdeoixhe Lake vaa bore nndi nunproperty bnc nodi Ie real a u lkl it ymy. The looses and tons aC Tto be compared with use of thetoiwna opposite. Bat the Fng,TiiihniMi has bideaccording to ibisinf^ to hii expectations. The istriaat Toronto are inerT had ; at BdEdo Aejsplendid: for theEi^iiAiiian tfardslitde; dieAmerican is ever on the more. The privatehouses of Toronto are built according to dieEnglish taste and desire of ezdiuiTcnes^ awajrfrom the road, and are embowered in trees ; theAmerican, let his house be ever so huge, or ibisplot of ground however extensive, builds withina few feet of the road, that he may see and knowwhat is going on. You do not perceive thebustle, the energy, and activity at Toronto, thatyou do at Buffalo, nor the profusion of articlein the stores ; but it should be remembered thatDIARY IN AMERICA. 216the Americans pressure their articles upon credit, ^whilst at Toronto they proceed more cautiously. ^The Englishman builds his house and furnisheshis store according to his means and fair expectationsof being able to meet his acceptances.If an American has money sufficient to build a 'two-story house, he will raise it up to four storieson speculation. We must not, on one side, bedazzledwith the effects of the credit system inAmerica, nor yet be too hasty in condemning it.It certainly is the occasion of much over-speculation; but if the parties who speculate areruined, provided the money has been laid out,as it usually is in America, upon real propertysuch as wharfs, houses, &c. — a new countrybecomes a gainer, as the improvements are madeand remain, although they fall into other hands.And it should be further pointed out, that theAmericans are justified in their speculationsfrom the fact, that property improved rises sofast in value, that they are soon able to meetall claims and realize a handsome profit. They216 Dairy ajpeeulace na die fixture; but the lotiuee withthem id not ducat at it ti with bsw ten vos inAmerica bexnis^ as I have bdfare ofaiovcd, equalCo a century in Europe : they axe cfaerefixe warrantedin 50 speculating. Tbe property in Bofiloin DOW worth one hundred times what it wwbwhen the lirvt speculators commenced ; for asthe country and cities become peopled, and diecommunication becomes eaaj, 90 does the wwiueof every thing increase.Wliy, then, does not Toronto vie withBuffalo? Because the Canada cannot certainthe credit which is given to the United States,and of which Buffalo has her portion. Americahas returns to make to England in her cottoncrops : (canada ha nothing ; for her timberwould be nothing, if it were not protected. Shecannot, therefore, obtain credit as America does.What, then, do the Canada require, in order tobecome prosperous ? (capital !I must not, however, omit to inform mjreaders that at Toronto I received a letter fromDIARY IN AMERICA. 217a " Brother Author," who was polite enough tosend me several specimens of his poetry ; statingthe remarkable fact, that he had never writtena verse until he was past forty-five years of age ;and that, as to the unfair accusation of hishaving plagiarized from Byron, it was not true,for he never had read Byron in his life. Havingput the reader in possession of these facts, Ishall now select one of his printed poems for hisgratification : —From the Regard the Author has for theLadies of Toronto,He presents them with the followingODE.To the Ladies of the City of Toronto.1.How famed is our cityFor the beauty and talentsOf our ladies, that's prettyAnd chaste in their sentiments,2.The ladies of TorontoAre fine, noble, and charming.And are a great mementoTo all, most fascinating.VOL. I. L218 DL\RY IN AMERICA.3.Our ladies are the best kind.Of all others the most fine ;In their manners and their mindsMost refined and genuine.4.Ure are proud of our ladies.For they are superiorTo all other beautiesAnd others are inferior.5.How favoured is our landTo be honoured with the fair,That is 80 majestic g^nd !And to please them is our care.6.Who would not choose them beforeAll others that's to be found,And think of others no more?Their like is not in the world round.Tes,Toronto,2l8t Jan. 1837.DIARY IN AMERICA. 219CHAPTER XVIII.Through Lake Ontario to Montreal, by railroadto Lake Champlain, and then by steamboatto Burlington.^ Burlington is a pretty county town on theborder of the Lake Champlain ; there is a largeestablishment for the education of boys kepthere by the Bishop of Vermont, a clever manitis said to be well conducted, and one of thebest in the Union. The bishop's salary, asbishop, is only five hundred dollars; as a preacherof the established church he receives seven hundred;whilst as a schoolmaster his revenue comes very handsome. The bishop is just nowin bad odour with the majority for havingpublished some very sensible objections to theRevivals and Temperance Societies. ''^Plattsburg. — This was the scene of an America220 DIARY or AMERICA.can triumph I was talking with a States officer,who was present during the whcde affair, and wasmuch amused with his description of it. Thereappeared to be some fatality attending almostall our attacks upon America during the lastwar ; and it Would be remarked, that wheneverthe Americans entered upon our territory, theirmet with similar defeat. Much allowance mmCof course be made for ignorance of the country, ,and of the strength and disposition of the enemy'sforce ; but certainly there was no accuse for theindecision shewn by the British general, withsuch a force as he had under his command.Now that the real facts are known, one hardlyknows whether to laugh or feel indignant. Theperson from whom I had the information ib ofundoubted respectability. At the time that ourgeneral advanced with an army of 7,000 Peninsulartroops, there were but 1,000 militia atPlattsburg, those ordered out from the interiorof the State not having arrived. It is true thatthere were 2,000 of the Vermont militia at\ iiDIARY IN AMERICA. 221Burlington opposite to Plattsburg, but whenthey were sent for, they refused to go there ;they were alarmed at the preponderating force ^of the British, and they stood upon their Staterights — ^.e.5 militia raised in a State are notbound to leave it, being raised for the defenceof that State alone. The small force atPlattsburg hardly knew whether to retreat ornot ; they expected large reinforcements underGeneral M^Coomb, but did not know whenthey would come. At last it was proposed andagreed to that they should spread themselves andkeep up an incessant firing, but out of distance,iso as to make the British believe they had a muchlarger force than they really possessed ; and onthis judicious plan they acted, and succeeded.In the mean time, the British general wasanxious for the assistance of the squadronon the lakes, under Commodore Downie, andpressed him to the attack of the Americansquadron then off Plattsburg. Some sharp remarksfrom the General proved fatal to our222 SLLRT I^ Amici.ariixis. r:L«hei iocoosikfacelT milo a time cn»ea^^cer.r. Now. Commodore Downie's l ea w lAhad all Iccg guns. McIXsooiigli's T caMb hadotis C2r?ncade»^ Hair, there. Ddwnie notthrown ^vaj chi advantage. bj engaging atcli>>o qi:«irter». there i> fide reason to supposethat the victory would hare been oufSy as hechild have chosen his distance, and the fire ofthe An.ercan vessels would hare been comparativelyharmless : but he ran down chase to^fcDonoiigh's fleet, and engaged them bniad-tide to broadside, and then the carronadesof the American, being of liea^y calibre, threwthe advantage on their side. Downie was killedbv the wind of a shot a few minutes after thecommencement of the action. Still it was thehardest contested action of the war ; Bring beingwell worthy to take Downie's place.It was impossible to have done more on eitherHide ; and the gentleman who gave me this informationadded, that McDonough told him that soDIARY IN AMERICA. 223nicely balanced were the chances, that he tookout his watch just before the British colourswere hauled down, and observed, " If they holdout ten minutes more, it will be more than, Iam afraid, we can do.'^ As soon as the victorywas decided on the part of the Americans, theBritish general commenced his retreat, and wasfollowed by this handful of militia. In a dayor two afterwards. General Mc Coomb came up,and a large force was poured in from allquarters.There was something very similar and quiteas ridiculous in the affair at Hackett's harbour.Our forces advancing would have cut off somehundreds of the American militia, who werereally retreating, but by a road which led insuch a direction as for a time to make theEnglish commandant suppose that they were intendingto take him in flank. This made himimagine that they must be advancing in largenumbers, when, the fact was, they were runningaway from his superior force. He made a re-22A: DLkaT :s v»iKHrr.\,mat . lofln wt'fT I aiuiug avoid* die \niwrii'ju>nuTieci mick sid iiilaiiett.iiiiiu iiiii ■Hiiiig am crag.r va* oil It 3aitiii]iire. duff iuHt die EzigfiakatirsicecL The Aiiicsscaai oniina war cjuite cea^JXk nn away. .hoc iisvriur die idea, of csppamgriieaueiv!(» u Trained ioLdiia^. Ic rbIIt'7**irj ahffiird: hue in oiiinv ':nscsaee» djojOBgwar. 'which. save one tn mj knowledge it was■n^tcxij ciitu — **- If yoa dun t nm I wiE; bat if70I1 wilL [ TFoa't r*Tie name xivai bv tee French to VamaaJLdesdffkatzesi the nature of die county wUcb iscfjKipyned of small montana, covered with Tortureto their summit ; but the land k bj aomeant ^(orxi.At the bottoms, oo the banks of ibe rircn^th alluvial soil is rich, and, geaenUlj y^™githe land in this State admits of cultivation abouthalf' way up the mountains ; after wbicb, it is fitfor nothing but sheep-walks, or to grow smalltimYx.T upon. I have travelled much in theaterStates, and have been surprised to find how veryDIARY IN AMERICA. 226small a portion of all of them is under cultivation,considering how long they have been settled ;nor will there be more of the land taken up, Ipresume, for a long period ; that is to say, notuntil the West is so over-peopled that a refluxis compelled to fall back into the Eastern States,and the crowded masses, like the Gulf-stream,hind vent to the northward and eastward.Set off* by coach, long before day-light.There is something very gratifying when onceyou are up in finding yourself up before thesun ; you can repeat to yourself, " How doth thelittle busy bee," with such satisfaction. Some fewstars still twinkled in the sky, winking like theeyelids of tired sentinels, but soon they were relieved,one after another, by the light of morning.It was still dark when we started, and off* wewent, up hill and down hill — short steep pitchesas they term them here — at a furious rate. Therewas no levi ground ; it was all undulating, andvery trying to the springs. But an Americandriver stops at nothing ; he will flog away withl3sa ^cti-i Zi««n: mr<«^ n imui . sad x :» muieALifW: uinitr^ jmt» if AnmesL '*r.ttxi^ > *rjuiL ii iiiir nuuxisL in.T^.ier!: > iLiii:n HmisesiiiBic snrjt r.^r^iTr. wca sober v^ had Ai g e d^Jjt^ r;*:* sr ^ Gf4e9ds^. as kehier irhi. bi-rirpL •* Go aLooe^ tub'*Whj nthtmgvedf cnqoirBd I.'^ WelL I reAan she has no toDgoCy l>MnSfAtten it cfT herself, I was going to aajr — butk wa'^n'c exactly that, neither'How was it, thei r^ «^* Well now, the fact is, that she is awfulij^l y (ill-tempered) ; she bites like a badger,and kicks up as high as the church-steeple.Siie^ft an almighty ritter to handle. I was tryingif hitch her under-jaw like, with the halter.DIARY IN AMERICA. 227but she corrected so, that I could only hitchVher tongue : she ran back, the end of the halterwas fast to the ring, and so she left her tonguein the hitch — that's a fact T"I wonder it did not kill her; didn't shebleed very much ? How does she contrive to eather corn ?""Well, now, she bled pretty considerable —but not to speak off. I did keep her one day inthe stable, because I thought she might feelqueer ; since that she has worked in the team ♦every day ; and she'll eat her peck of corn withany horse in the stable. But her tongue is out,that's certain — so she'' II tell no move lies /"Not the least doubting my friend's veracityI, nevertheless, took an opportunity, when wechanged, of ascertaining the fact ; and hertongue was half oi it out, that is the factWhen we stopped, we had to shift the luggage,to another coach. The driver who was a slightman, was, for some time, looking rather puzzledat the trunks which lay on the road, and which:f5t aiA^'j z'k T nanTTA,vir iSiii "eli luc m-tut. Tnacsi : 3e 3SHt ai Iir ivr .ATze^r. jfcT X mwn jam. aiHtdie9tLbedfc-ruiif-r ir^rrniirh iir me : one E seem jaa obi.woi-ri^ ':ie*n. w just lier tiusn jp an. die faiBir !ninpuefi :. and aft I had. id lift daanka^ i^ghiH tn heart* tiiev i!*«iuiroi aH mr stRwclbLT rank je. i:apcanL ;, don't tZDoblie iuntarf fm^ Airx>. the rare: be aH rrghf, and I onThe Anr.tticansi never n^Fose ta/r-ier rn loch difficulties a» tiiK. InnToiBigrr>iintnr they must aaaat facti oCfacTy if Aej:«Uh tr> \)e a9ft»ted tfaexmelTes — aod Were always*«'ill hf: a mutual dependance. It a man is in a/Li^ in America, every one stops to assist him,and (rxitect^ the elaine for hind£IMIowft Fall, a beautiful, romantic spot oni\w Connecticut River, which separates theStftt/rH (ff New Hampshire and Vermont. TheDIARY IN AMERICA. 229masses of rocks through which the river forcesits way at the Falls, are very grand and imposing; and the surrounding hills, rich with theautumnal tints, rivet the eye. On these massesof rocks are many faces, cut out by the tribe ofPequod Indians, who formerly used to fish intheir waters. Being informed that there was tobe a militia muster, I resolved to attend it.The militia service is not in good odourwith the Americans just now. Formerly, whenthey did try to do as well as they could, thescene was absurd enough ; but now they do allthey can to make it ridiculous. In this musterthere were three or four companies, wellequipped ; but the major part of the men werewhat they call here flood-woods that is, of allsizes and heights — ^a term suggested by thepieces of wood borne down by the freshness ofthe river, and which are of all sorts, sizes, andlengths. But not only were the men of all sortsand sizes, but the uniforms also, some of whichwere the most extraordinary I ever beheld, and not2:30 DZJLRT i3r jlhe&ica.unlike the calico dresses von bj the tumbleand Talkers at an Engtwh fiiir. As for the exercbe. they either did not, or would not, kooirany thing ab«}ut it; indeed, as they are nowmustered but once a year, it carol be expectedthat they should ; but as they faced every wmy*and made mistakes on purpose, it is evident,from their consistent pertinacity in beg wrong,that they did know something. When they marriedofT single file, quick time, they were onehalf of then dancing in and out of the ranks tothe Lyell tune which was played — the onlyinstance I saw of their keeping time. Butthe most amusing part of the ceremony wasthe speech made by the brigade major, whosepatience had certainly been tried, and whowished to impress his countrymen with the importanceof the militia. He ordered them toform a hollow square. They formed a circle,proving that if they could not square the circle,at all events they could circle the square, whichis coming very near to it. The major foundDIARY IN AMERICA. 231himself, on his white horse, in an arena about aslarge as that in which Mr. Ducrow performs atAshley's. He then commenced a sort of perambulatingequestrian speech, riding roundand round the circle, with his cocked hat in hishand. As the arena was large, and he constantlyturned his head as he spoke to thosenearest to him in the circle, it was only when hecame to within a few yards of you, that youcould distinguish what he was saying ; and ofcourse the auditors at the other point were inthe same predicament. However, he dividedhis speech out in portions very equally, andthose which came to my share were as follows :Yes, gentlemen — the president, senate, andhouse of representatives, and all others youmilitia, the bones and muscle of the land, andby whom Eagle of America shall ruffle herwings, will ever dart those days so glorious,when our gallant forefathers terrible effectof the use of ardent spirits, and shewing Temperancesocieties, the full benefits of which, I232 Diary jy AMF.BICi.am Sir-spangled Simmer, ever TictDnom^blazing Hke — — ^ ~Tbe last v-onl I head was glory; but fakaudience being very impatient for their cheerycried out loudI\' for it — prefrni^ it to themouthfuls of eloquence which fell to their sharesbut did not stay their stomach. Altogether itwas a scene of much finn and good-humour.Stopped at the preCtr village of Charleston,celebrated for the dance it made during theFrench war. There is here, running by theriver sade, a turnpike road, which gave gieMtoti'enoe to the American citizens of this State :they declared that to pay toll was monardUoal^as they always assert every thing to be whichtaxes their pockets. So, one fine night, they assembledwith a hawser and a team or two of hones,made the hawser fast to the house at the gate,dragged it down to the river, and sent it floatingdawn the stream, i»-ith the gate and boardof tolls in company with it.Progressing in the stage, I Iliad a very amusing\DIARY IN AMERICA. 233specimen of the ruling passion of the country —the spirit of barter, which is communicated tothe females, as well as to the boys. I will stopfor a moment, however, to say, that I heard ofan American, who had two sons, and he declaredthat they were so clever at barter, that ^he locked them both up together in a room, .feywithout a cent in their pockets, and that beforethey had swopped for an hour, they had . )each gained two dollars a piece. But now formy fellow-passengers — both young, both good-looking,and both ladies, and evidently weretotal strangers to each other. One had a prettypink silk bonnet, very fine for travelling ; theother, an indifferent plush one. The younglady in the plush, eyed the pink bonnet forsome time : at last Plush observed in a drawlinghalf-indifferent wav : -iThat's rather a pretty bonnet of your's,miss."Why yes, I calculate if s rather smarts'replied Pink.:S4 'j^.t.i'i: :::"^ ril iflw. r tnii T .430W 'tut I onishr 1 Ilar.? rom :t iii-fares ibv^l T nQekanJ^^ r-^-t 1 inrfiiii it «jiiin't nm, hoc aa — sitesanW pttTTTi^ Lin the ^clcar?.'^^ That' ^ an xvfiildiaB^ tric yoaliacieca^i'^ ( other rhmk inc but Che's as bwt be**Tome, niiftu what will jfxi Cake r*** Why I don't kniysr, — vliat will soo gnre?^^ I reckon Tall konrv be when too answer^ Wdl then, I shouldn't like kss than fifedollar'*^ Vive dollars and my Ixmnet ! I reckon twowrmld Ik* m;arcr the mark — but it's of no wont*DIARY IN AMERICA. 236None in the least, miss, only I know thevalue of my bonnet. — Well say no more aboutit."Just so, miss""A pause and silence for half a minute, whenMiss Plush, looks out of the window, and says,as if talking to herself, "I shouldn't mind givingfour dollars, but no more." She then fell baclcin her seat, when Miss Pink, put her head outof the window, and said: — " I shouldn't refusefour dollars after all, if it was offered' and thendie fell back to her former position.Did you think of taking four dollars, miss ?*Well ! I don't care, I've plenty of bonnetsat home."Well," replied Plush, taking out her purse,and offering her the money.*' What bank is this, miss ?""^' Oh, all's right there. Safety Fund, I calculate''The two ladies exchange bonnets, and Pinkpockets the balance. JZifi 0JAKV JK AMEBJOLI ^sjMv here suit «s v^ fxtenelaoa time oofitxm*A' whitings wbldi is aocoanmixillieEafltnii>^tuU-«. it ib alialiit, arian from the Naturalr«'bili^!»iA<'i>« of the American when he is BaC ensor|>l(>y«^i, «if cutting a piece of stick, or anjr dungdi»('i wiUi hi knife, Some are so wedded to itomni long cutftoni, that if they have not a pieceof thick to rut, they will whittle the hades of therhiiirti, or lui thing within their reach. A yankeetiliewn into H r(K)in to await the arrival of another,\mti ht^eti known to whittle away nearly thewUiAv of till* nmntle-{)iece. Lawyers in courtwhit del liwiiy lit the table before them; andjiitlgt^H will int through their own bench. Inbiuui* rtiurtH, they put sticks before notedwhittUn'H to Have the furniture. The ,til tho yankiVft are termed generally,whittUMxhon thou are making a hargam, as ittill \\\\ \\w |m\lSl'i^ give's them time for reflection,i\\\\\ uun\H»voi\ pivots «my examination of the\'ouniou«iK\* — for in bargaining, like in the gameDIARY m AMERICA. 237of brag, the countenance ib carefully watched,as an index to the wishes. I was once witnessto a bargain made between two respectableyankees, who wished to agree about a farm, andin which whittling waa resorted to.They sat down on a log of wood, about threeor four feet apart from each other, with theirfaces tuned opposite ways — that is, one had hialegs on one side of the log with his face to theEast, and the other his legs on the other side withhis face to the West. One had a piece of softwood, and was sawing it with his penknife ; theother had an unbarred hickory stick which hewas peeling for a walking-stick. The reader willperceive a strong analogy between this bargainand that in the stage between the two ladies.Well, good morning— and about this farm ?''I don't know; what will you take??What will you give P''Silence, and whittle away.Well, I should think two thousand dollars,a heap of money for this farm."J5A iijkar :s7 -^ \ italian x toI ^-^^* - » » T 1 r^ 3;«it vnf^p h lie sun ai noes dK^ Metier !UiC aiTrgni s»> be^ I rwtvoTt^ I *}iail snakes jb^^fKK0-x of tht:* piece of ^\ril^/!:^ ^>r a fe mnoKnti. Kites laid at%iifV. aM ser f:aaroe out of a wood']hhfrtihlnt nihil two thousand five hundred(\h]hirH, and time /ipven-'"^^ It fVi'ildtTt he more than six months then,if it /^:><'M at that pnce."^(Paijw'.)DIARY IN AMERICA. 239Well, that might suit me*"What do you say, then ?"Suppose it must be so."'* It's a bargain then arising ups come let'sliquor on it. '240 DIARY IN AH£aiCA«CHAPTER XIX.The fanners cm the banks of the C<Miiiecticutinter are the richest in the Eastern States. Themajestic growth of the timber certified that thesoil is generally good, although the crops wereoff the ground. They grow here a Luge quantityof what is called the brocHn corn : the stalk andleaves are similar to the maize (Mr Indian com, but,instead of the ear, it throws out, at top and onthe sides, spiky plumes on which seed is carried.These plumes are cut off, and furnish the broomsand whisks of the country ; it is said to be avery profitable crop. At Battledore* we sloppedat an inn kept by one of the State representatives,and, as may be supposed, had yeiybad fare in consequence, the man being abovehis business. We changed horses at BloodyBrook, so termed in consequence of a massacreDIARY IN AMERICA. 241of the settlers by the Indians. But there aretwenty Bloody Brooks in America, all recordsof similar catastrophes.Whether the Blue laws of Connecticut are supposedto be still in force I know not, but I couldnot discover that they had ever been repealed.At present there is no theatre in Connecticut,nor does anybody venture to propose one. Theproprietors of one of the equestrian studs madetheir appearance at the confines of the State,and intimated that they wished to perform, butwere given to understand that their horses wouldbe confiscated if they entered the State. The ,consequence is that Connecticut is the dullest,most disagreeable State in the Union ; and, if Iam to believe the Americans themselves, so far ifrom the morals of the community being kept |uncontaminated by this rigor, the very reverse |is the case — especially as respects the collegestudents, who are in the secret practice of more ,vice than is to be found in any other establishmentof the kind in the Union. But even if I hadTOL. I. II1^ 2r j^z ::i t\rffa3TA•im v:i&-tie a^e. Fr.iini'v:ie;> lie: Mine..J .la d:i& ixrrae?.^ ^nm me records voici flaw IlU(9^ jttT^Tsd dt-v"^ or rvQb io ai toIkser for peroaaL bos die» ri5.> 1/ nr chile cr dtildm above sx-tine Teareif old, and <^ jfriBricnt andentaidiBi^shall CTirse or sate their national fiidicr or notber^ hee or they hail bee faut te deaik ; iinleMit can be snfficieDthr testified that the paintshave been very unchristiaiilj nq^igeot in theeducation rif such children, or so provoke them hjextreme and cruel correction that they have beenfirirced thereunto to preserve themsdTea finomdeath, maiming. — £xo., xxi., 17. Levity. xx.Kx*9 xxi.) 15,DIARY IN AMEBIC A, 243«(14.) If any man have a stubborn and rebelliousSonne of sufficient yeares and understanding,viz., sixteen yeares of age, which willnot obey the voice of his father or the voice ofhis mother, and that when they have chastenedhim will not hearken unto them, then may hisfather and mother, being his natural parents,lay hold on him, and bring him to the magistratesassembled in courte, and testifie untothem that their sonne is stubborn and rebelliousand will not obey there voice and chastisement,but lives in sundry notorious crimes — such asonne shall heeput to death. — Deut.,xxi, 20, 21.plying.) That every person of the age ofdiscretion, which is accounted fourteen yeares,who shall wittingly and willingly make, or publish,any lye which may be pernicious to tb*publique weal, or tending to the damage m*injury of any particular person, to deceive andabuse the people with false news or reported, aadthe same duly proved in any courte* or beforeany one magistrate, who hath hereby powerm2244 Duly IS AirRRTCa.granted rx hears and desoimiie alla^imt thifl la^we:. aicfa genoa 4uU hee fy a ulfor the fine o&oce. tea diiDnigs, or if A»party bee unable to pay the same, then to betact in the stocks %o lone as the said eoorte ormagistrate shall appointe. in same ripen pboe^not exceeding three koar»; tar the second offencein that kiode, whereof anj shall bee IcgaByconvicted, the summe of twenty duttngi^ or bewhipped uppofn the naked body, not exasedfaigtwenty stripes; and for the timid oftener thatway, forty shilling*, or if the party be unableto pay, then to be whipped with more itripea^not exceeding thirty ; and if yet any shaDoffend in like kind, and be legally foundedthereof, such person, male or female, shall beefined ten shillings at a time mOTe than formerlyor if the party so offending bee unable to pay,then to be whipped with five or six stripes morethen formerly, not exceeding forty at any time.** minister's Maintenance,) — whereas themost considerable persons in the land came intoDIARY IN AMERICA. 245these partes of America, that they might enjoyChriste in his ordinances without disturbance ;and whereas, amongst many other pretiousmeanes, the ordinances have beene, and are,dispensed amongst us, with much purity andpower, they tooke it into their serious consideration,that a due maintenance, according toGod, might bee provided and settled, both forthe present and future, for the encouragement ofthe ministers' work therein ; and doe order, thatthose who are taught in the word, in the severalplantations, bee called together, that every manvoluntarily sett downe what he is willing toallow to that end and use ; and if any manrefuse to pay a meet proportion, that then heebee rated by authority in some just and equalway; and if after this, any man withhold ordelay due payment, the civil power to be exercisedas in other just debts.(Profane Swearing.) — That if any personwithin this jurisdiction shall swear rashly andvainly, either by the holy name of God, or any:^\:ixjt^i zr X IZ3ICA.•:^r^ ^atn. oui ^fuiil ^nrul- iii-vtcixcifSj:!•■-: ui'-. ;.i^ tfiail n;ristr "\i The rixxmifTiK..•?a*r;r'-. nir ^'"^rj T-icn. ^e^^s^ i.■".fil'.riiTS uu: X-kail '^e ji iHe ":oiper ct a■irr^r.r'lin'j "^o "Lie usual :river oc juacct : ami if^•.ch DfincBfi hes :3nc hie. or «iiall izctarlv n^aseVj pay line a£.rEsiaiii iSnxe, hee ihdEl bee roofsiro the ^tGcki^ there to oemtisaey not-x/'^jfviini; their bourn. anie ooC leas than one-' (TVw^Ao.) — That DO person iinckr the ageof t ^entv-i^ifie years. nor any other that hath noCairea^lv accustomed him^ife to the use tberaf,'liali take any toljacko, untill ice hath iHOUgfat'1 certificate: under the hands of some who areapproved for knowledge and skill in phiaick,that it ift uMrfuU for him, and also that he hathreceived a lyceum; from the courte, for the same.'^ // %H ordered — That no man within thisDIARY IN AMERICA. 247colony, shall take any tobacco obliquely, inthe street, highways or any bare, yards, orupon training dayes, in any open places, underthe penalty of sixpence for each offence againstthis order," &c. &c.Among the records we have some curiousspecimens : —« At a Court, held May 1, 1660,Jacob M. Murline and Sarah Tuttle beingcalled, appeared, concerning whom the governordeclared, that the business for which they werewarned to this Court, he had heard in privateat his house, which he related thus : — On theday that John Potter was married, Sarah Tuttlewent to Mistress Murline's house for somethread ; Mistress Murline bid her go to herdaughters in the other roome, where she selleinto speech of John Potter and his wife, thatthey were both lame ; upon which Sarah Tuttlesaid, how very awkward it would be. WhereuponJacob came in, and tooke up, or tookeaway her gloves. Sarah desired him to giveVOL. I.24^ DUET IK ^yTinr.A,fj? toe rlcn-es. lo viikdi lie answered, hewouic do K» if she would pre inn m kine;uyxi vL'idi tbej sat down together, bk annebeing abciui her iradsLe. and her anne upaiklib shoulder. or about his dbcIl, and kekissed hier. sDd «&€ kifiaed him, or ther kissedciTie aiKX^ier. ociotiiiuing in Uns posture afootYiilf 911 your, a& 3^Ianaii and Sum testified,which italian, now in Court, affirmed tobe so.^^ 31 i«>trefi6 Murline, now in Court, sad thatshe heard Sarah Bas, bow Terr awkward itwould be; but it was matter of sorrow andblame unto her.^^ Jacob was asked what he had to say to thesethings ; to which he answered, that he was inthe other roome, and when he heard Sarah speakthose words, he went in, when shee having letfall her gloves, he tooke them up, and she askedhim for them ; he told her he would, if shewould kiss him. Further said, hee took herbythe hand, and they both sat down upon aDIARY Ix AMERICA. 249chest, but whether his arme were about herwaste, and her arme upon his shoulder, or abouthis neck, he knows not, for he never thought ofit since, till Mr. Raymond told him of it atMandates, for which he was blamed, and toldhe had not lade it to heart as he ought. ButSarah Tuttle replied, that shee did not kyssehim. Mr. Tuttle replied, that Marian hathdenied it, and he doth not looke upon her as acompetent witness. Thomas Tuttle said, that heasked Marian if his sister kissed Jacob, andshe said not. Moses Mansfield testified, thathe told Jacob Murline that he heard Sarahkissed him, but he denied it. But Jacobgranted not what Moses testified.Mr. Tuttle pleaded that Jacob had endeavouredto steal away his daughter's affections.But Sarah being asked, if Jacob had inveigledher, she said no. Thomas Tuttle said, that hecame to their house two or three times before hewent to Holland, and they two were together,and to what end he came he knows not, unlessM 3:J/i DlJkaV ZS A3£HBICI.X T-^Ti ro jr^eoQ^jt her : and door'*^rar. fio a> su?eo cnnpsiiT with hzm : and to-'- p- 4jkxne pursue fosse Jonathan Tate. ButJacob denied disc he came to dbdr faouse withiTiy Mich incendznenr. nor did it appear so tothe C'-^ur'.*the ^>Temor told Sarah that her miscarriage> the greatest, that a virgin ahoold be so boldin the pence of others to carry it aa she hadrjrme, and to speake suche corrupt words; mostof the things charged against her being acknowledgedby herself, though that about kvas-Tn? is denied, jet the thing is proved.'-Sarah professed that she was sorry that*he had carried it so manfully and fixdishly,which she saw to be hateful : she hoped Gkxlwould help her to carry it better fcx* time tocome.^^ The governor also told Jacob that his carriagelialli been very evil and sinful, so to carryit towards her, and to make such a light matterof it as not to think of it, (as he exprest) dothDIARY IN AMERICA. 251greatly aggravate ; and for Marian, who was amarried woman, to suffer her brother and aman's daughter to sit alios half an hour in sucha way as they have related, was a very greatevil. She was told that she should have showedher indignation against it, and have told hermother, that Sarah might have been shut out ofdoors. Mrs. Murline was told that she, hearingsuch words, should not have suffered it.Mrs. TutlSe and Mrs. Merlin being asked ifthey had any more to say, they said, no.'^ Whereupon the Court declared, that we haveheard ia the publique ministry, ths it is a flungto be lamented, that yoimg people should havetheir meetings, to the corrupting of themselvesand one another. As for Sarah Tuttle, her .miscarriagesare very great, that she should utterso corrupt a speech as she did, concerning thepersons to be married; and that, she auldcarry it in such a wanton, uncivil, immodest,and lascivious manner ais hath been proved. Andfor Jacob, his carriage hath been very corrupt-^r-'VL:^'Z li - ^f^^rvTM.-:i«r 'ufe-jt tfuiiL iso ^xtxcr tr.ttijttL. *.«tccan. ATTigr t zsbe.«£4C rr,^.cr^9 v-r:i>: fran k% mnttr. vliicfa he^ Jor^ri F^KiKT, aecatcd fair bang drmike withi^VM\yi witling, va acqintud, it appearing to beof iufmuity, and oceaakned bj the extmnity of^^Mr Mouldy accused of being drink, butnot clearly proved, was respited."I (en; cranes a very disorderly reprobate, calledWill Harding.*MMt of It Month, 1648.^Molit) Luwrcncc and Valentine, servants toDIARY IN AMERICA. 253Mr. Malboii, for impelling their master'sgoods, and keeping disorderly night meetingswith Will Harding, a lewd and disorderly person,plotting with him to carry their master'sdaughters to the farmer in the night, concealingdivers dalliances ; all which they confessed, andwere whipped.Ruth Ache, a covenant-servant to Mr. Mal-bon,for suborned, lying, stealing from hermistress, and yielding to dalliance with WillHarding, was whipped,"Martha Malton, for consenting to goe in thenight to the farmer, with Will Harding, to avenison feast ; for stealing things from herparents, and dalliance with the said Harding,was whipped,Goodman Hunt and his wife, for keeping thecouncils of the said Will Harding, bakeinghima pastry and plum cakes and keeping companywith him on the Lord's-day ; and she sufferingHarding to kiss her, they being only admittedto sojourn in this plantation upon their good254 DIARY IN AMERICA.behaviour, was ordered to be sent out of thistowne within one month after the date hereofWill Harding, however, appears to have metwith his deserts.« Dec. Srd, 1651."Will Harding, being convicted of a great didof base carriage with divers yonge girls, togetherwith enticing and corrupting divers men-servantsin this plantation, haunting with them at nightmeetings and junketings, &c, was sentencedto be severely whipped, and fined 51. to Mr.M albion, and 51. to Will Andrews, whose fEuny-lyes and daughters he hath so much wronged ;and presently to depart the plantation.**^Thus winds up the disgraceful end of ourColonial Don Juan of 1643.The articles of the Blue laws, which I haveextracted, are from a portion which appears tohave been drawn up more in detail ; but, generally,they are much more pithy and concise, asthe following examples will show :—DIARY IN AMERICA. 266No.13. No food and lodgings dial be allowed \ia Quaker, Adamite, or other heretic.'No. 14. If any person turns Quaker, he shallbe banished, and not suffered to return, on painof death*'I was walking in Philadelphia, when I perceivedthe name of Buffon, Hatter. Wishingto ascertain whether it was an English name ornot, I went in, and entered into conversationwith Mr. Buffon, who was dressed as what istermed a wet Quaker. He told me that his wasan English name, and that his ancestor had beenbanished from Salem for a heinous crime — whichwas, as the sentence worded it, for being adam-ned Quaker. The reason why Quakerswere banished by the Puritans, was because they ^ \would not go out to shoot the Indians! To t \icontinue : —No. 17. No one shall run of a Sabbath-day,or walk in his garden or elsewhere, except reverentlyto and from church.No. 18. No one shall travel, cook victuals,u25A ULkaY IN %.viffWTnA.make iberia. sheep hanBeSb cat far or^ v.). \% No hiuhmd aha kzaftlmwift^no mother hail Ideas her child upon the(lav,^ No. 31. No one hail resin Coioima F a ay qi ,keep Christmas or saint-day, makeranee, or play on any mstmraent ofkept the fining, die tippet, and die jeirs-lunrpL'I do not know any thing thai di^iista me aomuch as ean/. Even now we continually hear,in the American pabiic orations, about the alarmmriuen of the pilgrim fathers. Sierm^ indeed !The fact i5t, that theK^ pilgrim fathers weieJGuHfr-ticft and liigot«, without charity or mercy wantingin the very en^enee of Christianity. Witnesstheir conduct tf> the Indians when they thirstedfor their territory. After the death (murder,wo ny well call it) of Alexander, the brotherof the celebrated Philip, the latter prepared forwar, " And now*' says a reverend historian ofDIARY IN AMERICA. 267the times, " war was begun by a fierce nation ofIndians upon an honesty harmless Christiangeneration of English, who might very trulyhave said to the aggressors, as it was said ofold unto the Ammonites, * I have not sinnedagainst thee ; but thou doest me wrong to waragainst me.' " Fanaticism alone — deep, incurablefanaticism — could have induced such aremark. Well may it be said, " We deceiveourselves, and the truth is not in us''And when the war was brought to a close bythe death of the noble-minded, high-spiritedPhilip ; when the Christians had slaked theirrevenge in his blood, exposed his head intriumph on a pike, and captured his helplessinnocent child of nine years old ; would itbe credited, that there was council held to putthis child to death, and that the clergy weresummoned to give their opinion? And theclergy quoted Scripture that the child mustdie ! Dr. Increase Rather compared it withthe child of Hadid, and recommended, with his-258 DIARY TS WfVUXCA.brother postea, that it be magnae d. Bat fanepious men were vended; mtiy withocher, it was sent to the Bermudas and olda eve. «$/^rR miueai! Call thoudiabolical vices. Crowd of Ifaacven! what ahabwe learn to call things bj their fight naflMS?The next time GoTemor Everett is calkd opfor an oration at Bloody Brook, kt faun nottalk quite so much of the virtues of the pilgrimfathers.This reminds me of a du/^ towards this gentleman,which I have great pleasure in performing.Every one who is acquainted with himmust acknowledge his amiable manners, and Uahigh classical attainments and power of €la>quench. His orations and speeches are printed,and arc among the best specimens of Americantalent. Miss Martineau, in her work uponAmerica, states that she went up to hear theorator at Bloody Brook ; and, in two pages ofvery coarse, unmeasured language, states ** thatall her sympathies were baffled, and that sheDIARY IN AMERICA. 269was deeply disgusted ;" that the orator " offeredthem shreds of tawdry sentiment, without theintermixture of oT»e sound thought or sinopleand natural feeling, simply and naturally ex-Jpressed." I have the Address of GroTemorEverett before me. To insert the whole of itwould be inconvenient ; but I do most unequivocallydeny this, as I must, I am afraid, toomany of Miss Martineau assertions. To prove,in this one instance alone, the very contrary towhat she states, I will merely quote the perorationof Governor Everett's Address : —Yon simple monument shall rise a renewedmemorial of their names on this sacred spot,where the young, the brave, the patriotic, pouredout their life-blood in defence of that heritagewhich has descended to us. We this day solemnlybring our tribute of gratitude. Agesshall pass away ; the majestic tree which overshadowsus shall wither and sink before theblast, and we who are now gathered beneath itshall mingle with the honoured dust we eulo-260 DURY IN AMERICA.give ; but the ^ Flowers of Essex"* shall bloomin undying remembrance ; and, with every century,these rites of commemoration shall berepeated, as the lapse of time shall continuallydeveloped, in rich abundance, the fruits of whatwas done and suffered by our forefathers''I can, however, give the reader a key to Miss-martineau'spraise or condemnation of everyperson mentioned in her two works : you havebut to ask the question, <^ Is he, or is he notan abolitionist ?''Governor Everett is notDIARY IN AMERICA. 261CHAPTER XX,MoiJTREAL, next to Quebec, is the oldestlooking and most aristocratic city in all NorthAmerica. Lofty houses, with narrow streets,prove antiquity. After Quebec and Montreal,New Orleans is said to take the next rank, allthree of them having been built by the French.It is pleasant to look upon any structure in thisnew hemisphere which bears the mark of timeupon it. The ruins of Fort Putnam are one ofthe curiosities of America.Montreal is all alive — mustering here, drillingthere, galloping every where ; and, moreover,Montreal is knee-deep in snow, andthe thermometer below Zero. Every hourbrings fresh intelligence of the movements ofthe rebels, or patriots — the last term is doubtsDiary IX iUffFBlTAfuL ret it maj be correct When they firstopened the theatre at Botany Bar, BarringtonSpoke the prologue, which ended with these twolines: —** True P€ttri0tt w«. sar he H imdmttood,We jest our cocnuy, for our coiuit3T''s good."In this View of the case, Kme of them, it ishoped* will turn out patriots before they die, ifthe' haTe not been made so already.Every hour comes in some poor wreCdi, iriioi,for refusing to join the insurgent has beenmade a beggar; his cattle, sleeps and pigsdriven away ; his fodder, his beams, lira hone,all that he possessed, now reduced to asheibThe cold-blooded, heartless murder of LieutenantWeir has. however, sufficiently ndaedthe choler of the troops, without any furtherenormities on the part of the insurgents beingrequisite to tluit end : when an English soldierswears to slew no mercy, he generally keeps hisword. Of all wars, a civil war is the most cruel,the most unrelenting, and the most exterminating;DiARY IN AMERICA. 2ffi}and deep indeed must be the responsibility ofthose, who by their words or their actions,have contrived to set countryman against countryman,neighbour against neighbour, and veryoften brother against brother, and father againstchild.On the morning of the the ice on thebranch of the Ottawa river, which we had to cross,/being considered sufficiently strong to bear theweight of the artillery, the whole foi'ce marchedout, under the command of Sir John Colorein person, to reduce the insurgents, who hi^ifortified themselves at St. Eustache and StBenoit, two towns of some magnitude in thedistrict of Bois Brule The snow, as I beforeobserved, lay very deep ; but by the timewe started, the road had been well beatendown by the multitudes which had preceded us.The effect of the whole line of troops, in theirfur caps and great coats, with the trains ofartillery, ammunition, and baggage-waggons,as they wound along the snow-white road.UI-iT,': ITra 1*much manTJt, ili tlK SmXir giaiiiMS- gf■FTa tii «Tiit ez:ic :t»* imseai nut a: At^^iXTTi^ tllH Ifs tbt grmminiT-Mr.-iinJLrt-lit iss- liltal :iir mrmw-t \*\ tut 03viijirT Fit Ti;w^*L ir Tn»- jmc &rf •K'-Tijr-hier jr^^: bin finetilt EiT vjum. iDeni- ranfifid brcnsr^r^-^c rricL irjf? zncss^miaamaMaaat upontree i^j: : iLe orjrci v->i5db had nenlj sHan^Mt f>cf.-^ v eT>e :bes rt^TKrred, and, in a fcv nhiala,th<^v rto^vered suScientlT to be led to dieLet it not be supposed that I am about towrite a regular ditch. I went out with thetroops, but was of about as much use as theDURY IN AMEfllCA. 266fifth wheel of a coach ; with the exception, thatas I rode one of Sir John Colorless horses, Iwas, perhaps, so far supplying the place of agroom who was better employed.The town of St. Eustache is very prettilysituated on the high banks of the river, themost remarkable object being the Catholicchurch, a very large massive building, raisedabout two hundred yards from the river side,upon a commanding situation. This churchthe insurgents had turned into a fortress, andperhaps, for a fortress " d'occasion^'^ there neverwas one so well calculated for a vigorous defence,it being flanked by two long stone-builthouses, and protected in the rear by severallines of high and strong palisades, runningdown into the river. The troops halted aboutthree hundred yards from the town, to reconnoitre;the artillery were drawn up and openedtheir fire, but chiefly with a view that the enemy,by returning the fire, might demonstrate theirforce and position. These being ascertained,VOL. I. N2A u:a1'.: i^ ASusaOL,'.'^"'llj:* lllli. TUT*" of line'ru'jK viii cnjBfeec OIL the hat 'm\\A. \u^uui«fsr dnigcKiii&. and tfelUUiUilUg of tCH: pUBHKdirii^ i: ife, that anj thing ^m^^" ^ mffluu". jaugzu ID oppoatkn to tke strings c£hvmpiaby^ axndetr, aod few.awavti were cut dopriKJSKTkAb soon fts that portkn of die troops jMA\)mA entered the town, and married op Ae ndnstreet towards the church, arrived widen Utf-luubket shot, they were received with m onartvolley, which was fired from die large windows ofthe church, and which wounded a £sw of dKineii.The soldiers were then ordered to make doorapproaches under cover of the looses ; and theDIARY IN AMERICA. 267artillery being brought up, commenced firingupon the church : but the walls of the buildingwere much too solid for the shot to make anyimpression, and had the insurgents stood firmthey certainly might have given a great deal oftrouble, and probably have occasioned a severeloss of men ; but they became alarmed, arid firedone of the houses which abuttedupon and flankedthe church, — this they did with the view of escapingunder cover of the smoke. In a few minutesthe church itself was obscured by the volumesof smoke thrown out ; and at the same time thatthe insurgents were escaping, the troops marchedup and surrounded the church. The poorwretches attempted to get away, either singlyor by twos and threes ; but the moment theyappeared a volley was discharged, and they feltEvery attempt was made by the officers to makeprisoners, but with indifferent success ; indeedsuch was the exasperation of the troops at themurder of Lieut. Weir, that it was a service ofdanger to attempt to save the life of one of theseN 2yA 21X3LY DT h^arexLTrxynr,r ieiiuiefi TreflKUEeSb. Toe fee finBi the^^>n cnmmiinzcated oi the rfmrch."sae jiouieTr "^Itfi ten. fkher% cfae ■ "■■■■—■* of tfcein.sursenCii who was xn die cfanrBk, fiahJour : rher^ ^aa one cnaaaendaas ▼oDcyy and aDwas '■^'/dT.Br thine time maj other parts of die townvere oa fire, and there waa enoj p e u Epic t oir^nii ^^^f^e of it beg faornt down, kaiiiig bor|ijarteri for the soldier to protect thei daringthe night. The attgnticai ci ererjfaodj waatherefore turned to present the progress of theflamen. Some bouses were pulled down, so aat/} cut off the communication with the houses inthe centre of the town, and in these houses thetnxifM were billeted off! The insurgents ladiestheir families, and most of their valuableand furniture, before our arrival; but in onehoufte were the commissariat stores, consisting ofthe carcases of all the cattle, sheep, pigmy Sec,which they had taken from the loyal farmers;there WHS a very large supply, and the soldiersDIARY IN AMERICA. 269were soon cooking in all directions. The roll wascalled, men mustered, and order established*The night was bitterly crfd : the sky wasclear, and the moon near to her full: houseswere still burning in every direction, but theywere as mere satellites to the lofty church,which was now one blaze of fire, and throwingout volumes of smoke, which passed over theface of the bright moon, and gave to her alurid reddish tinge, as if she too had assisted inthese deeds of blood. The distant fires scatteredover the whole landscape, which was onesnow-wreath ; the whirling of the smoke fromthe houses which were burning close to us, andwhich, from the melting of the snow, were surroundedby pools of water, reflecting the fierceyellow flames, mingled with the pale beams of thebright moon — this, altogether, presented a beautiful,novel, yet melancholy panorama. I thoughtit might represent, in miniature, the burning ofMoscow.About midnight, when all was quiet, I walked270 Diet sr ^mmrcA,jp ro die cbuxch. in comply with, one of 5kTonn Coihorntr'^ lide-^ie^iaiiips : the mos bdfallen, and die flames had aihwrfprf for want^^ further aliment. Ars ^e passed hj a bonae-vhich horn just taken dre we head a cry and,on going' up. djand a poor wounded Canadian,utterly incapable of moving, wfaom the fiaaaeahad past readied ; in a few minutes Ik woodhave been burned alive : we dragged him bootyand gave him in charge of the sddiera, whocarried him to the hospitalBut what was this compared to the scenewhich presented itself in the diurdi ! But mfew weeks back, crowds were there, kneelingin adoration and prayer; I could fimcy theCatholic priests in their splendid stoles, thealtar, its candlesticks and ornaments, the solemnmiiMc, the incense, and all that, by appealing tothe flenncff, is so favourable to the cause of religionwith the ignorant and uneducated ; andwhat (lid T now behold? — nothing but the barenid bhu'kcncd walls, the glowing beams andBlkRY IN AMERICA. 271rafters and'tbe i¥iiidow-frttisie» which the flamesstill licked and Sichs^thvouf^. The Sober hadbeen burnt ta cinders, and upon and betweenthe sleepers on which the floor had been laid,were scattered the remains of human creatures injuredin various degrees, or destroyed by the fir ;some with merely the clothes burnt off, leavingthe naked body ; some burnt to a deep browntinge ; others to far consumed that the viscerawere exposed ; while here and there the blackenedribs and vertebra were all that the fierceflames had spared.Not only inside of the church, but withoutits walls, was the same revolting spectacle. Inthe remains of the small building used as areceptacle for the coffins previous to interment,were several bodies, heaped one upon another,and still burning, the tresses which had oncesupported the collins serving as fuel ; and furtheroff were bodies still unscathed by fire, butfrozen hard by the severity of the weather.I could not help thinking, as I stood contemnULiaY ES JkJSZRlCA^plating his mrianrhnly bob of deatmctBan^.bloodshed. juui sacrilege. that if Mr. Hume orXr. B«iehuck had beni bv mv sde. tier mieiikhave repented thor inflammatory and fibenlopinions, as here they beheld die firigfatfiil'effects of them.DIARY IN AMERICA. 273CHAPTER XXI.Crossing the river St. Lawrence at this seasonof the year is not very pleasant, as you mustforce your passage through the large masses of ice,and are occasionally fixed among them ; so thayou are swept down the current along with them.Such was our case for about a quarter of anhour, and, in consequence, we landed about threemiles lower down than we had intended. Thenext day the navigation of the river, such as itwas, was stopped, and in eight and forty hoursheavy waggons and carts were passing over wherewe had floated across.My course lay through what were termed theexcited districts ; I had promised to pass throughthem, and supply the folks at Montreal with anyinformation I could collect. The weather wasbitterly cold, and all communication was carriedN 3274 DIARY IX AMERICA.on by sleighs, a very pleasant mode of travellingwhen the roads are smooth, but rather fatiguingwhen they are uneven, as the sleigh then jumpsfrom hill to hill, like an oyster-shell thrown bya boy to skim the surface of the water. To defendmyself from the cold, I had put on, overmy coat, and under my cloak, a wadded blacksilk dressing-gown ; I thought nothing of it atthe time, but I afterwards discovered that I wassupposed to be one of the rebel priests escapingfrom justice.Although still in the English dominions, I hadnot been over on the opposite side more than aquarter of an hour before I perceived that it wouldbe just as well to hold my tongue ; and my adherenceto this resolution, together with my supposedcanonicals, were the cause of not a wordbeing addressed to me by my fellow-travellers.They presumed that I spoke French only, whichthey did not, and I listened in silence to allthat passed."sit is strange how easily the American peopleChary IN AMERICA. 276S-are excited, and when exceed, they will hesitate alnothing. The coach (for it was the stage-eocteh \although represented an open sleight stoppedat every town large or sixiall, every body eagerto tell sid to receive the news. I always gotout to wari» mysrif at the stove in the bar, andbeard all the remarks made upon what I doreally believe were the most absurd and extravagantRes ever dlrciilated — ^Eca which the verypeople who uttered them knew to be such, butwhich produced the momentary effect intended.They were even put into the newspapers, andcirculated every where; and when tl^ truly wasdiscovered they still remained uncontradicted,except by a general remark thftt such was theTaffy version c^ the matter, and of course wasfalse. The majority of those who traveled withme were Amans who had crossed the St. Lawpence in the same boot, and who must, therefore,have known well the whdie circumstances, attendingthe expedition saint St. !Eustache ; but, tomy surprise, at every place where we stopped they376 DIARY IN AMERICA.declared that there had been a battle between theinsurgents and the Kings trcx^fis, in which theinsurgents had been victorious; that Sir JohnColore had been compelled to retreat to Montreal; that they had themselves seen the troopscome back (which was true), and that Montrealwas barricaded (which was also true) to preventthe insurgents from marching in. I never said;one word ; I listened to the exultations — to the-declarationsof some that they should go andjoin the patriots, &c. One man amused meby saying — "I've a great mind to go, butwhat I want is a good general to take the command; I want a Julius Caesar, or a Bonaparte,or a Washington, — then 111 go''I stopped for some hours at St. Allan's.I was recommended to go to an inn, thelandlord of which was said not to be of thedemocratic party, for the other two innswere the resort of the Sympathises, andin these, consequently, scenes of great excitementtook place. The landlord put into myDIARY IN AMERICA. 277hand a newspaper, published that day, containinga series of resolutions, founded upon suchfalsehoods that I thought it might be advantageousto respite them. I asked the landlordwhether I could see the editor of the paper ; hereplied that the party lived next door ; and Irequested that he would send for him, tellinghim that I could give him information relativeto the affair of St. Eustache.I had been shewn into a large sitting-room onthe ground-floor, which I presumed was a privateroom, when the editor of the newspaper,attracted by the message I had sent him, camein. I then pointed to the resolutions passed atthe meeting, and asked him whether he wouldallow me to answer them in his paper. Hisreply was, " Certainly ; that his paper wasopen to all."^' Well, then, call in an hour, and I will bythat time prove to you that they can only beexcused or accounted for by the parties who278 DURY IN AMERICA.framed them being totally ignorant of the wholeaffair."He went away but did not retom at the timerequested. It was not until lite in the eveningthat he came; and, avoiding the question ofthe resolutions, begged that I would give himthe information relative to St. Eustache. As I'presumed that, like most other editors in theUnited States, he dared not put in anythingwhich would displease his subscribers, I saidno more on that subject, but commenced ditaking to him, while he wrote the particularsattending the St. Eustache affair. I was staadiDg^by the stove, giving the editor this informationwhen the door of the room opened, and in walkedseven or eight people, who, without qieaking^took chairs ; in a minute, another party of aboutthe same number was ushered into the room bythe landlord, who, I thought, gave me a significantlook. I felt surprised at what I thoughtan intrusion, as I had considered my room taDIARY IN America. 279be private ; however, I appeared to take no noticeof it, and continued dictating to the editor.The door opened again and again, and morechairs were brought in for the accommodate ofthe parties who entered, until at last the roomwas so full that I had but just room to walkround the stove. Not a person said a word; theylistened to what I was dictating to the editor,and I observed that they all looked rather fierce;but whether this was a public meeting, or whatwas to be the end of it, I had no idea. At last,when I had finished, the editor took up hispapers and left the room, in which I supposethere might have been from one hundred to ahundred and fifty persons assembled. As soonas the door closed, one of them struck his stuckstick on the floor (they most of them had sticks),and gave a loud " Hem !^'** I believe, sir, that you are €aptam M-— /,Yes," replied I, " that la my names''We are informed, sir, by the gentleman whohas just gone out, that you have asserted that2S0 DLUtT DT AimkTg'Ar^nr raoiudoiia of j^^i^T^j cou<ri2Kd or accmxncedfrrfiDmoartDfidHere he ncraek his Mick agni upas dieami peuaed."^Ohf dunes I toiBj^M, "^ die editor Limbinfrjfnthtd agaxiut me !*^ Now, 9xr,^ coDdnaed die spckesnmD, **' wearecone to be enlisted; we with yoa toprove to us that we aie totally i ffUMani ; yoawill riMige us bj an exudation of jour assertions'He was again silent. (Hunks I to myselfTrn in far it now, and if I get away withouta broken head, or something worse, I amfortunate; however, here goes.) Whereupon,without troubling the reader with what I didHay, I will only observe, that I thought the bestplan was to gain time by going back as four asI could. I therefore commenced my oiatkm atthe fx^riod when the Canada were surrenderedto the English ; remarking upon the systemwhich had been acted upon by our governmentDIARY IN AMERICA. 281from that time up to the present ; proving, aswell as I could, that the Canadians had nothingto complain of, and that if England had treatedher other "American colonies as well, therenever would have been a declaration of independence,&c. &c. Having spoken for about anhour, and observing a little impatience on thepart of some of my company, I stopped. Uponwhich, one rose and said, that there were severalpoints not fully explained, referring to themone after another, whereupon " the honourablemember rose to explain," — and was again silent.Another then spoke, requesting information asto points not referred to by me. I replied, andfortunately had an opportunity of paying theAmericans a just compliment; in gratitude forwhich their features relaxed considerably. Perceivingthis, I ventured to introduce a story ortwo, which made them laugh. After this, the"day was my own ; for I consider the Americans,when not excited (which they too often are), as avery good-tempered people : at all events, they282 DIARY IN AMERICA.won't break your head for making them laugh ;at least, such I found was the case. We nowentered freely into conversation ; some wentaway, others remained, and the affair endedby many of them shaking hands with me, andour taking a drink at the bar.I must say, that the first appearances of thismeeting were not at all pleasant; but I wasrightly sense for my own want of caution, inso publicly stating, that the free and enlightenedcitizens of St. Albans were very ignorant, andfor opposing public opinion at a time when thegreatest excitement prevailed. I have meitoned this circumstance, as it throws a greatdeal of light upon the character of the Yankeeor American of the Eastern States. They wouldnot suffer opposition to the majority to passunnoticed (who, in England, would have criedwhat a stranger may have expressed as his opinion); but, at the same time, they gave me apatient hearing, to know whether I could shewcause for what I said. Had I refused this, IDIARY IN AMERICA. 283might have been very roughly handled ; but asI defended my observations, although they werenot complimentary to them they gave me fair ^play. They were evidently much excited whenthey came into the room, but they gradiu^ycooled down until convinced of the truth of myassertions; and then all animosity was ova*.The landlord said to me afterwards, " I reckonyou got out of that uncommon well, captain."I perfectly agreed with him, and made a resolutionto hold my tongue until I arrived atNew York.The next day, as I was proceeding on myjourney, I fell in with General Brown, celebratedfor running away so fast at the commencementof the fight at St. Charles. He had avery fine pair of mustachios. We both warmedour toes at the same stove in solemn silence.Sunday, at Burlington. — The young ladiesare dressing up the church with festoons andgarlands of evergreens for the celebration ofChristmas, and have pressed me into the service.284 DIABT IX AlfKRTCA,Last S unda I was meditating over the HaAiiM^walls of the cfaordi at St. Eustache, and thetoasted cones 1 sing within its pandects ; nowI am in another chmdi, wearing land andcypress, in company with some of the prettiestcreatures in creation. As the oopj-book says,rarUiy is charming!DIARY IN AMERICA. 285CHAPTER XXII.Philadelphia is certainly, in appearance,the most wealthy and imposing city in theUnion. It is well built, and ornamented withmagnificent public edifices of white marble;indeed there is a great show of this materialthroughout the whole of the town, all theflights of steps to the doors, door-lintels, andwindow-sills, being very generally composedof this material. The exterior of the houses,as well as the side pavement, are kept remarkablyclean ; and there is no intermixture ofcommerce, as there is at New York, the bustleof business being confined to the Quays, andone or two streets adjoining the river side.The first idea which strikes you when you .arrive at Philadelphia, is that it is Sunday:every thing is so quiet, and there are so fewpecc-1^ sdrriz-z: bet bj the time that youhier znTidid Ali a dc/zeo streets, too oxideVj a cc»:cl.iaGc thai :t mush be Satar&T, astit day 15. geneiaJlj yalnng, a wadsing-^lay.Philadelphia i§ ^ admirable supplied withwatXtT from the ScfauTkiU valer-wflrksy thatererv house has it laid cm finn the attic tothe basement; and all day long they washwindows, door, marie step, and sacraments infront of the houses. Indeed, ther have so mundiwater, that they can afford to be Teiy libendto passers-by. One minute you bare a shower-bathfrom a negress, who is throwing waterat the windows on the first floor; and thenext you have to hop over a stream acroea thepavoneDt, occasioned by some Mack fellow,who, rather than go fbr a broom to sweep awmjany small portion of dust collected befixe hismaster's door, brings out the leather hoae^aUachfid to the hydrants, as they term diemhere 2.nd fishes away with it till the streamhas forced the dust into the gutter.DIARY IN AMERICA. 287Of course, fire has no chance in thk city.Indeed, the two elements appear to have arrangedthat matter between them; fire hissthe ascendant in New York, while water ^ ^reigns in Philadelphia, If a fire does break ^out here, the housekeepers have not the fearof being burnt to death before them ; for thewater is poured on in such torrents, that thefurniture is washed out of the windows, andall that they have to look out for, is to escapefrom being drowned.The public institutions, such as librariesmuseums, and the private cabinets of Philadelphiaare certainly very superior to thoseof any other city or town in America, Bostonnot excepted. Every thing that is undertaken "in diis city is well done ; no expense is spared,although they are not so rapid in their movementsas at New York : indeed the affluenceand ease pervading the place, with the generalcultivation which invariably attend them, are evidentto a stranger.:k .•fvrrrrr^?^:a<!£ipn:jL ua-ainfft ir "■■■if dmf r.iz r.o:*t arr-tmrracc srj in dK Ck'' ne-p?ie^. -o-tie uz^axraer if ^veaAtfE, I-iv.mc iitr ^ ;i>.nxzc±i . 3iit x fle 'Whiff «cr•:ir:::'inr n 3y-l:=- rW too:::i.-r list •.r.nrirnr 'tj d'^iie- ^r-njin--lar Ji .ifi !irT iaY.'^ 'Her y: iiiiny ^iiiijies xnd sci in »»»•,V-.!., <t.^p iran fr-.m-aci cciia"; aidxc u '•'ly^r-^r. ti^^c:.!: *:.: is:sni^ use jEHMiiiib of did■ rdrjCTiirx.:'. 0:u= £iniilT will Eve at N«»- 1,^r.'i aacvjer ^^ N j. 2 in the same straeC, bodyr^vi hicr.ilzT establishments, both keepr;^Lrriage«, loch he veil elicited. Midffi^y talk of their grandfathersth<;r% ; and yet No. 1 will tell you that Na Si4 nofxxly, and you must not visit there; andwhen you enquire why? there is no otherDIARY IN AMERICA. 289answer, but that they are not of the right sort.As long as a portion are rich and a portion arepoor, there is a line of demarcation easy to bedrawn, even in a democracy ; but in Philadelphia,where there are so many in sdHuentcircumstances, that line has been effaced, andthey now seek an imaginary one, like theequinoctial, which none can be permitted to passwithout going through the ceremonies of perfeet ablution. This social contest, as may besupposed, is carried on among those who haveno real pretensions ; but there are many oldand well-connected families in Philadelphia,whose claims are universally, although perhapsunwillingly, acknowledged.I doubt if the claims of Boon to be themost scientific city in the Union, can be nowestablished. I met a greater number of scientificmen in Philadelphia than I did in Boston ; aircertainly the public and private cdlectiotts in theformer city are much supadbr. The coilecti(n!i ofshells and minerals belonging to Mr. Lee, whoVOL. I. oDIARY IK AMERICA.is well known as an author and a naturalist,is certainly the most interesting I saw inthe States, and I passed two days in ezamuHing it : it must hare cost him much troubleand research.The Girard College, when finished, will bebe a most splendid building. It is, however,as they have now planned it, incorrect, avoidingto the rules of architecture, in the numberof columns on the sides in proportion to thosein front. This is a great pity ; perhi^ theplan will be re-considered, as there is plenty oftime to correct it, as well as money to defraythe extra expense.The water-works at Schuylkill are well wortha visit, not only for their beauty, but their simplicity.The whole of the river Schuylkill isdammed up, and forms a huge water-power,which forces up the supply of water £ar theuse of the city. As I presume that river has agod as well as others, I can imagine his indigonation, not only at his waters being divertedDIARY IN AMERICA. 291from his channel, but at being himself obligedto do all the work for the benefit of his tyrannicalmasters.I have said that the museums of Philadelphiaare far superior to most in the States ; but Imay just as well here observe, that, as in manyother things, a great improvement is necessarybefore they are such as they ought to be. Thereis not only in these museums, but in all that Ihave ever entered in the United States, a wantof taste and discrimination, of that correctfeeling which characterises the real lovers ofscience, and knowledge of what is worthy ofbeing collected. They are such collections aswould be made by school-boys and school-girls,not those of erudite professors and scientific men.Side by side with the most interesting and va » \liable specimens, such as the fossil mammoth,&c., you have the greatest puerilities and absurditiesin the world — such as a cherry-stoneformed into a basket, a fragment of the boilerof the Moselle steamer, and Heaven knows whato 2heftiriesf. Thai too inrandUT hm^e a large of riaiibs^ called portraits ofyjna(2fes, one-half of whom a strangero^— hot that u nadoiial Tazntr; and bsdv, I^> rv recollect to hare seen a maaemB dial badnot a con.ifideraUeportfOD of hs place occupied brnw9t execrable wax-work, in wb^ the il e qau gbeaut J (a sad misnomer) gencndlj figures tctjconspicuously. In some, tbejbaie models ofcelebrated criminals in the act of c uiumittlB g amurder, with the very hatchet or the veryknife: or such trophies as the bonnet wornby Mrs. when she was killed by herhusband ; or the shirt, with the Good of bis witton it, worn by Jack Sprat, or whoever be mightbe, when he committed the Woody deed. Topmostfavourite subject, after the sleeping beautyin the wax-work, is General Jackson, with thebattle of New Orleans in the distance. Nownil these things are very well in their places :exhibit wax-work as much as you please— itamuses and interests children ; but the presentKMARY IN AMERICA. 298collections in the museums remind you of Americansociety— a chaotic mass, in which youoccasionally meet what is valuable and iitfe- J ^-resting, but of which the larger proportion ispretence.It was not until I had been some time inPhiladelphia that I became convinced how verysuperior the free coloured people were in intelligenceand educatictti, to what, from my knowledgeof them in our West-india Islands, Ihad ever imagined than capable erf. Not thatI mean to imply that they will ever attain to thesame powers of intellect as the white man, for Ireally believe that the race are not formed for itby the Almighty. I do not mean to say that'there never will be great men among the Africanrace, but that such instances will always be veryrare, compared to the numbers produced amongthe white. But this is certain, that in Philanderphil the free coloured people are a very respectableclass, and, in my opinion, quite as intelli- 1gent as the more humble of the free whites, j■J294 DIARY IX AMERICA.I have been quite surprised to see them takeout their pencils, write down and calculatewith quickness and precision, and in everyother point shew great intelligence and keenness.In this city they are both numerous andwealthy. The most extravagant funeral I sawin Philadelphia was that of a black ; the coacheswere very numerous, as well as the pedestrians,who were all well dressed, and behaving withthe utmost decorum. They were preceded by ablack clergyman, dressed in his full black silkcanonicals. He did look very odd, I mustconfess./^ Singular is the degree of contempt and disKlike in which the free blacks are held in allthe free States of America. They are deprivedof their rights as citizens ; and the white pauper,who holds out his hand for charity (and there isno want of beggars in Philadelphia), will turnaway from a negro, or coloured man, with disdain.It is the same thing in the Eastern States, not*DIARY IN AMERICA. 396withstanding their religious professions. In fact, ^in the United States, a negro, from his colour, 1and I believe his colour alone, is a degradedbeing. Is not this extraordinary, in a land which iprofesses universal liberty, equality, and the Irights of man ? In England this is not the Jcase. In private society no one objects to sit incompany with a man of colour, provided he hasthe necessary education and respectability. Nor,indeed, is it the case in the Slave States, where Ihave frequently seen a lady in a public conveyancewith her negress sitting by her, and no objectionhas been raised by the other parties in thecoach ; but in the Free States a man of colouris not admitted into a stage coach ; and in allother public places, such as theatres, churches,&c., there is always a portion divided off for thenegro population, that they may not be mixed ^up with the whites. When I first landed at NewYork, I had a specimen of this feeling. Fastenedby a rope yam to the rudder chains of a vesselnext in the tier, at the wharf to which the packetDIARY IX AMERICA.had hauled in, I perceived the body of a blackman,turning over and over with the ripple ofthe waves. I was looking at it, when a lad cameup : probably his curiosity was excited by myeyes being fixed in that direction. He looked,and perceiving the object, turned away with disdain,saying, " Oh, it's only a ni^er.*"ind all the Free States in America respondto the observation, " It's only a niggers"* Atthe time that I was at Philadelphia a curious*'*' On the whole, I cannot help considering it a mistaketo suppose that slavery has been abolished in theNorthern States of the Union. It is true, indeed, thatin these States the power of compulsory labour nolonger exists; and that one human being within theirlimits can no longer claim property in the thews andsinews of another. But is this all that is implied in theboon of freedom ? If the word mean anything, it mustmean the enjoyment of equal rights, and the unfetteredexercise in each individual of such powers and facultiesas God has given. In this true meaning of the word, itmay be safely asserted that this poor degraded class arestill slaves — they are subject to the most grinding andhumiliating of all slaveries, that of universal and unconquerableprejudice. The whip, indeed, has been removedfrom the back of the negro ; but the chains arestill upon his limbs, and he bears the brand of degradationDIARY IN AMERICA. 297cause was decided. A coloured man of the nameof James Fortin, who was, I believe, a sailmakerby profession, but at all events a person notonly of the highest respectability, but said to beworth 160,000 dollars, appealed because he wasnot permitted to vote at elections, and claimedhis right as a free citizen. The cause was tried,and the verdict, a very lengthy one, was givenby the judge against him. I have not that verdiet in my possession ; but I have the opinion ofthe Supreme Court on one which was grvcabefore, and I here insert it as a curiosity. It isa remarkable feature in the tyranny and injusticeof this case, that although James Fortinwas not considered white enough (he is, I believe,a mulatto) to vote as a citizen, l^ has falways been quite white enough to be deuced as ,tion on his forehead. What is it but the mere abuse oflanguage to call him /reCy who is tyrannically deprivedof all the motives to exertion which animate other men ?The law, in truth, has left him in that most pitiable of 1all conditions — a masterless slaves — Hamilton's Men ^and Manners in America.o3298 DIARY IX AMERICA.«one, and has to pay his proportion, (which, fromthe extent of his business, is no trifle) of all therates and assessments considered requite for thesupport of the poor, and improving and beautifyingthat city, of which he is deceived not tobe a citizen.Although the decision of the Supreme Courtenters into a lengthened detail, yet as it is veryacute and argumentative, and touches upcm severalother points equally anomalous to the boastedfreedom of the American institutions, I wish thereader would peruse it carefully, as it will amplyrepay him for his trouble ; and it is that he mayread it, that I have not inserted it in an Appendix.The question arose upon a writ of error tothe judgment of the Common Pleas of Luzernecounty, in an action by Wm. Fog, a n^io,against Hiram Hobbs, inspector, and Levi Baldwinand others, judges of the election, for refusinghis vote. In the Court below the plaintiffrecovered. The Supreme Court being of opinionDIARY IN AMERICA. 299that a negro has not a right to vote under thepresent constitution, reversed the judgment.Respectfully, Feed. Watts.Wm. Fog v. Hiram Hobbs and others.The opinion of the Court was delivered byGibson, C. J,This record raises, a second time, the onlyquestion on a phrase in the Constitution whichhas occurred since its adoption; and, howeverpartizans may have disputed the clearness andprecision of phraseology, we have often beencalled upon to enforce its limitations of legislativepower; but the business of interpretationwas incidental, and the difficulty was not in thediction, but in the uncertainty of the act towhich it was to be applied. I have said a questionon the meaning of a phrase hus arisen asecond time. It would be more accurate to saythe same question has arisen the second time.About the year 1795, as I have it from James-♦*300 DIARY IN AMERICA.Gibson, Esquire, of the Philadelphia bar, thevery point before us was ruled by the HighCourt of Errors and Appeals against the rightof negro suffrage. Mr. Gibson declined an invitationto be concerned in the argument, andtherefore has no memorandum c^ the cause todirect us to the record. I have had the officesearched for it ; but the papers had fidlen intosuch disorder as to preclude a hope of its discovery.Most of them were imperfect, and manywere lost or misplaced. But Mr. Gibaoiii^s remembranceof the decision is perfect, and entitledto full confidence. That the case was not reported,is probably owing to the fact that thejudges gave no reasons ; and the omission is themore to be regretted, as a report of it wouldhave put the question at rest, and preventedmuch unpleasant excitement Still, the judgmentis not the less authoritative as a precedentStanding as the court of last resort, that tribunalbore the same relation to this court t^t theSupreme Court does to the Common Pleas; andDIARY IN AMERICA. 301as its authority could not be questioned then,it cannot be questioned now. The point, therefore,is not open to discussion on originalgrounds.But the omission of the judges renders itproper to show that their decision was foundedin the true principles of the constitution. Inthe first section of the third article it is declared,that ' in elections by the citizens, every freemanof the age of twenty-one years, having residedin the State two years before the election, andhaving within that time paid a state or countytacc^ shall enjoy the rights of an elector. Now,the argument of those who assert the claim ofthe coloured population is, that a nero is aman; and when not held to involuntary service,that he is free, consequently that he is a freeman;and if a freeman in the common acceptationof the term, then a freeman in everyacceptation of it. This pithy wit syllogisticsentence comprises the whole argument, which,however elaborated, perpetually gets back to the302 DIARY IN AMERICA.point from which it started. The fallacy of itis its assumption that the term 'freedom signifiesnothing but exemption from involuntaryservice ; and that it has not a legal significationmore specific. The freedom of a municipalcorporation, or body politic, implies fellowshipand participation of corporate rights; but aninhabitant of an incorporated place, who is neitherservant nor slave, though bound by itslaws, may be no freeman in respect to its government.It has indeed been affirmed by textwriters, that habitants, paying soot and lot,give an incidental right to corporate freedom;but the courts have refused to acknowledge it,even when the charter seemed to imply it ; andwhen not derived from prescription or grant, ithas been deemed a qualification merely, and notatitle. (Wilcoof^ chap. iii. p. 466.) Let it notbe said that the legal meaning of the wordfreeman is peculiar to British corporations, andthat we have it not in the charters and constitutionsof Pennsylvania. The laws agreed uponDIARY IN AMERICA. 303in England in May 168^, use the word in thisspecific sense, and even furnish a definition ofit : * Every inhabitant of the said provincethat is, or shall be, a purchaser of one hundredacres of land or upwards, his heirs or assigns,and every person who shall have paid his passage,and shall have taken up one hundredacres of land, at a penny an acre, and havecultivated ten acres thereof; and every personthat hath been a servant or bondsman, and isfree by his service, that shall have taken up hisfifty acres of land, and shall have cultivatedtwenty thereof; and every inhabitant, artificer,or other resident in the said province, that paysscot and lot to the government, shall be deemedand accounted a freeman of the said province; and every such person shall be capableof electing, or being elected representatives ofthe people in provincial council, or generalassembly of the said province** Now, why thisminute and elaborate detail? Had it beenintended that all but servants and slaves should304 DIARY IN AMERICA.be freemen to every intent, it had been easierand more natural to say so. But it was notintended. It was foreseen that there would beinhabitants, neither planters nor taxable, who,though free as the winds, might be unsafedepositories of popular power ; and the designwas, to admit no man to the freedom of theprovince who had not a stake in it. That theclause which relates to freedom by service wasnot intended for manumitted slaves is evident,from the fact that there were none; and itregarded not slavery, but limited servitudeexpired by efflux of time. At that time, certainly,the case of a manumitted slave, or of hisfree-bon progeny, was not contemplated as oneto be provided for in the founder's scheme ofpolicy : I have quoted the passage, however, toshow that the word freeman was applied in apeculiar sense to the political compact of ourancestors, resting like a corporation, on a charterfrom the crown ; and exactly as it was appliedto bodies politic at home. In entire consonance.DIARY IN AMERICA. 306it was declared in the Act of Union, given atChester in the same year, that strangers andforeigners holding land * according to the lawof a freeman,' and promising obedience to theproprietary, as well as allegiance to the crown,shall be held and reputed freemen of theprovince and counties aforesaid f and it wasfurther declared, that when a foreigner ^ shallmake his request to the governor of the provincefor the aforesaid freedom the sameperson shall be admitted on the conditionsherein expressed, paying twenty shillings sterling,and no more :' — modes of expression peculiarlyappropriate to corporate fellowship. Theword in the same sense pervades the charter ofprivileges, the act of settlement, and the act ofnaturalization, in the preamble to the last ofwhich it was said, that some of the inhabitantswere ' foreigners and not freemen, accordingto the acceptation of the laws of England ;' itheld its place also in the legislative style ofenactment down to the adoption of the present306 DIARY IN AMERICA.constitution ; after which, the words ' by andwith the advice and consent of the freemen,*were left out, and the present style substituted.Thus, till the instant when the phrase on whichthe question turns was penned, the term freemanhad a peculiar and specific sense, beingused like the term citizen, which supplanted it,to denote one who had a voice in public affairs.The citizens ware denominated freemen even inthe constitution of 1776 ; and under the presentconstitution, the word, though dn^ped in thestyle, was used in legislative acts, convertiblewith electors, so late as the year 1798, when itgrew into disuse. In an act passed the 4th ofApril in that year for the establishment ofcertain election districts, it was, for the firsttime, used indiscriminately with that word ;since when it has been entirely disused. Now,it will" not be pretended, that the legislaturemeant to have it inferred that every one not afreeman within the purview, should be deemeda slave ; and how can a convergent intent beDIARY IN AMERICA. 307collected from the same word in the constitution,that every one not a slave is to be accountedan elector ? Except for the word citizen, whichstands in the context also as a term of qualification,an affirmance of these propositionswould extend the right of suffrage to aliens;and to admit of any exception to the argument,its force being derived from the supposed universalityof the term, would destroy it. Onceconcede that there may be a freeman in onesense of it, who is not so in another, and thewhole ground is surrendered. In what sense,then, must the convention of 1790 be supposedto have used the term ? questionless in thatwhich it had acquired by use in public acts andlegal proceedings, for the reason that a dubiousstatute is to be expounded by usage. * Themeaning of things spoken and written, must beas hath been constantly received.' (Waugh. 169.)On this principle, it is difficult to discoverhow the word freeman, as used in previouspublic acts, could have been meant to compressDIARY IN AMUUCXlend a coloured race: t» well nrigbt it besupposed, that the declaration of universal andunalienable freedom in both our constitutionwas meant to comprehend it. Nothing was evermorecomprehensive predicted, and a practicalenforcement of it would have liberated everyslave in the State ; yet mitigated slavery longcontinued to exist among us, in derogation of it.Rules of interpretation demand a strictly verbalconstruction of nothing but a penal statute ; anda constitution is to be construed still moreliberally than even a remedial one, because aconvention legislating for masses, can do littlemore than mark an outline of fundamental principles,leaving the interior gyrations and detailsto be filled up by ordinary legislation. • Conventionsintended to regulate the conduct ofnations said Chief Justice Tilgfaman, in theFarmers' Bank v. Smith, 8 Serge. & Raw. 69,are not to be construed like articles of agreementat the common law. It is of little importanceto the public, whether a tract of land belongs toWARY IN AMERICA. 3©9A. or B. In deciding these titles, strict rules ofconstruction may be adhered to ; and it is bestthat they should be adhered to, though sometimesat the expense of justice. But wheremultitudes aise to be affected by the constructionof an amendment, great regard is to be paid tothe spirit and intentions What better key tothese, than the tone of antecedent legislationdiscoverable in the application of the disputedterms.^'But in addition to interpretation from usage,this antecedent legidaticm furnishes other pnxifiBthat no coloured race was party to our sodacompact. As was justly remarked by ftf§-sident Fox, in the matter of the late contestedelection, our ancestors settled the province asacommunity of white men, and the blackswere introduced into it as a race (^ slaves,whence an unconquerable prejudice of easito,which has canoe down to our day, inscmiidithat a suspicion of taint still has the unjusteffect of sinking the subject of it bdbv thez'310 DIARY IN AMERICA.common level. Consistently with this prejudice,is it to be credited that parity of rankwould be allowed to such a race? Let thequestion be answered by the statute of 17S6,which denominated it an idle and a slothfulpeople; which directed the magistrates to bindout free negroes for laziness or vagrancy ; whichforbade them to harbour Indian or mulattoslaves, on pain of punishment by fine, or todeal with negro slaves, on pain of stripes;which annexed to the interdict of marriagewith a white, the penalty of reduction toslavery; which punished them for tipplingwith stripes, and even a white person with servitudefor intermarriage with a negro. If freemen,in a political sense, were subjects of these crueland degrading oppressions, what must havebeen the lot of their brethren in bondage PIt is also true, that degrading conditions weresometimes assigned to white men, but neveras members of a caste. Insolvent debtors,to indicate the worst of them, are onnpelledDIARY IN AMERICA. 311to make satisfaction by servitude; but thatwas borrowed from a kindred, and still lessrational, principle of the common law. Thisact of 17^, however, remained in force,till it was repealed by the Emancipating Actof 1789 ; and it is irrational to believe, that theprogress of liberal sentiments was so rapid inthe next ten years, as to produce a determinationin the convention of 1790 to raise this depressedrace to the level of the white one. Ifsuch were its purpose, it is strange that theword chosen to effect it should have been thevery one chosen by the convention of 1776 todesignate a white elector. * Every freeman,'it is said, (chap. 2, sect. 6,) * of the full age oftwenty-one years, having resided in this Statefor the space of one whole year before the dayof election, and paid taxes during that time,shall enjoy the rights of an elector** Now, ifthe word freeman were not potent enough toadmit a free negro to suffrage under the firstconstitution, it is difficult to discern a degree312 DURY IN AMERICA.of magic in the intervening plan of emancipationsufficient to give it potency, in the apprehensionof the convention, under the second.The only thing in the history of the conventionwhich casts a doubt upcm the intent, isthe fact, that the word white was prefixed tothe word freeman in the report of the committee,and subsequently struck omit — probably becauseit was thought superfluous, or still moreprobably, because it was feared that respectablemen of dark complexion would often be insultedat the polls, by objections to theircolchis. I have heard it said, that Mr. Grallatinsustained his motion to strike out on the latterground. Whatever the motive, the disseveredis insufficient to wrap the interpretationof a word of such settled and determinatemeaning as the one which remained. A legislativebody speaks to the judiciary, only throughits final act, and expresses its will in the wordsof it ; and though their meaning may be in-fluence<l by the sense .ig which they haveDIARY IN AMERICA. unusuallybeen applied to extrinsic matters, irecannot receive an explanation of than fromwhat has been moved or said in debate. Theplace of a judge is his forum — not the legislativehall. Were he even Disposed to pry Itothe motives of the members, it would be impossiblefor him to ascertain them; and, inattempting to discover the ground on whichthe conclusion was obtained, it is not probablethat a member of the majority could indicateany that was common to all ; previous prepositionsare merged in the act of consummation,and the interpreter of it must look to thatalone.^^ I have thought it fair to treat the questionas it stands affected by our own municipalregulations, without illustration fire those ofother States, where the condition of the racehas been still less favoured. Yet it is ptcfpeatto say, that the second section of the fourtharticle of the Federal Constitution presents anobstacle to the political freedom of. the n^;io»VOL. I. P314 DIARY IN AMERICA.which seems to be insuperable. It is to beremembered that citizenship, as well as freedom,is a constitutional qualification ; and bowit could be conferred, so as to overbear the laws,imposing countless disabilities cm him in otherStates, is a problem of difficult solution* Inthis aspect, the question becomes one, not ofintention, but of power; so doubtful, as toforbid the exercise of it. Every man mustlament the necessity of the disabilities; butslavery is to be dealt with by those whoseexistence depends on the skill with which itis treated. Considerations of mere humanity,however, belong to a class with which, asjudges, we have nothing to do; and, interpretingthe « constitution in the spirit of ourown institutions, we are bound to pronouncethat men of colour are destitute of title to theelective franchise: their blood, however, maybecome so diluted in successive descent, as tolose its distinctive character; and then bothpolicy and justice require that previous disa-DIARY IN AMERICA. 316abilities should cease. By the amended constitutionof North Carolina, no free negro,mulatto, or free person of mixed blood, descendedfrom negro ancestors to the fourthgeneration inclusive, though one ancestor 'ofeach generation may have been a white person ,shall vote for the legislature. I regret to say,no similar regulation, for practical purposes,has been attempted here; in consequence, ofwhich, every case of disputed colour must bedetermined by no particular rule, but by thediscretion of the judges; and thus a greatconstitutional right, even under the proposed-amendmentsof the constitution, will be leftthe sport of caprice. In conclusion, we areof opinion the court erred in directing thatthe plaintiff could have his action againstthe defendant for the rejection of his vote. 1^Judgment reversed'* **It will be observed by those who have hadpatience to read through so long a legal docu-316 DIARY IN AMERICA.ment, that reference is made to the unjust prejudiceagainst any taint of the African blood.There is an existing proof of the truth of thisremark, in the case of one of the most distinguishedmembers of the House of Representatives.This gentleman has some children whoare not of pure blood ; but, to his honour, hehas done his duty by them, he has educated them,and received them into his house as his acknowledgeddaughters. What is the consequence?Why, it is considered that by so doing he hasoutraged society ; and whenever they want to raisea cry against him, this is the charge, and veryinjurious it is to his popularity, — *^ that he hasdone his duty as a father and a Christian."Captain Marryat, we are a very moralpeople rThe laws of the State relative to the intermarriageof the whites with the coloured populationare also referred to. A case of this kind tookplace at New York when I was there ; and as soonas the ceremony was over, the husband, I believeDIARY IN AMERICA. 317ft Was, bu. *er .he hurf»nd „ 4e wife, ,^seized by the mob and put under the pump forhalf an hour. At Boston, similar modes ofexpressing public opinion have been adopted,notwithstanding that that city is the strong /^hold of the abolitionists.It also refers to the white slavery, which wasnot abolished until the year 1789. Previous tothat period, a man who arrived out, from the oldcontinent, and could not pay his passage, wasput up to auction for the amount of bis debt,and was compelled to serve until he had workedit out with the purchaser. But not only for thedebt of passage-money, but for other debts, awhite man was put up to auction, and sold tothe best bidder. They tell a curious story, forthe truth of which I cannot vouch, of a lawyer,a very clever but dissipated and extravagantman, who, having contracted large debts andescaped to New Jersey was taken and put uptoauction ; a keen Yankee purchased him, andtook him regularly round ta all the circuits ta•I *^318 DIARY IX AMERICA.plead causes, and made a very considerable sumout of him before his time expired.I have observed that Mr. Fortin, the colouredman, was considered quite white enough to paytaxes. It is usually considered in this country,that by going to America you avoid taxation,but such is not the case. The municipal taxesare not very light. I could not obtain any verysatisfactory estimates from the other cities, butI gained thus much from Philadelphia.The assessments are on property.City Tax, 70 cents upon the 100 dollars valuation.County Tax, 65 cents upon ditto.Poor's Rate, 40 cents.Taxes on Horses, 1 dollar each.Taxes on Dogs, half a dollar each.Poll Tax, from a quarter dollar to 4 dollarseach person.It is singular that such a tax as the poll tax,that which created the insurrection of Wat Tylerin England, should have forced its way into aDIARY IN AMERICA, 319democracy. In the collection of their taxes, they iare quite as summary as they are in England.This is the notice :You are hereby informed, that your property isincluded in a list of delinquents now preparing, and willbe advertised and sold for the assessments due thereon.(This being the last call.)Your immediate attention will save the costs of advertising,sale, &c.Collector.Collector's Office, No. J, State of ."It is a strange fact, and one which must haveattracted the reader's notice, that there shouldbe a poor's rate in America, where there is workfor every body; and still stranger that thereshould be one in the city of Philadelphia, inwhich, perhaps, there are more beneficent andcharitable institutions than in any city in theworld of the same population : notwithstandingthis there are many mendicants in the street. Allthis arises from the advantage taken of an unwisephilanthropy in the first place, manypeople preferring to live upon alms in preferenceto labour ; and next from the state of destituteDIARY IX Americation to which many of the emigrants are reducedafter their arrival and befixe they can obtainemployment. Indeed, not only Phibiddphia, butBaltimore and New YcN'k, are equally chargedfor the supped of these pec^le — the two first bylegal enactment, the latter by Voluntary subscription.And it is much to the credit of theinhabitants of all these cities that the charge ispaid cheerfully, and that an appeal is nevermade in vain.But let the Americans beware: the poor rateat present is trifling — 40 cents in the 100 dollars,or about Ifd. in the pound; but they must recollect,that they were not more in Englandabout half a century back, and see to what theyhave risen now ! It is the principle which is bad.There are now in Philadelphia more than 1,600paupers, who live entirely upon the public ; butwho, if relief had not been continued to them,would, in all probability, by this time, havefound their way to where their labour is required.The Philadelphians are proverbially