DIARY IN AMERICA,&c. &c.ADIARY IN AMERICAREMARKS ON ITS INSTITUTIONS.DartBYCAPT. MARRY AT, Cab.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. III.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS,PATERNOSTER ROW.1839.v. 5Printed by J. L. Cox and SONS, 75, Great Queen Street,Lincoln s-Inn Fields.Chapter;,CANADA.OF what advantage are the Canadass to England?This question has been put to me, atleast one hundred times since my return fromAmerica. It is argued that the Canadass produceand export nothing except timber, andthat the protecting duty given to Canada timberis not only very severely felt by the mother-country,but very injurious to her foreign relations.These observations are undeniable ; and Iadmit that, as a mere colony compelled to add tothe wealth of England, (sending to her all herproduce, and receiving from her all her supplies),Canada has been worth less than nothing.But, admitting this for the present, we will nowVOL. III. B2 CANADA.examine whether there are no other groundsfor the retention of the Canadass under our control.Cok>nis;are:of value to the mother countryjjn ,tWQ ways The first is already mentioned,arid in that way, the present advantage ofthe Canadass as colonies is abandoned. Theother great importance of colonies is, thatthey may be considered as outports, as stepping-stones, as it were, over the whole world ;and for the present I shall examine into thevalue of these possessions merely in this pointof view. We have many islands or coloniesunder our subjection which are in themselvesnot only valueless, but, moreover, extremelyexpensive to us; and if every colonyor island is to be valued merely according tothe produce and advantage derived from it bythe mother-country, we must abandon Helio-poland, Ascension, St. Helena, Malta, and,even Gibraltar itself. All these, and someothers, are, in point of commerce, valueless ;CANADA. 3yet they add much to the security of the countryand to our dominion of the seas. This willbe admitted, and we must therefore now examinehow far the Canadass may be considered asvaluable under this second point of view.I have already shewn that the ambition forterritory is one of the diseases, if I may usethe term, of the American people. On thatpoint they are insatiable, and that they covetthe Canadass is undeniable. Let us inquire intothe reasons why the Americans are so anxiousto possess the Canadass.There are many. In the first place, they donot like to have a people subjected to a monarchialform of government as their neighbours;they do not like that security of personand property, and a just administration of thelaw, should be found in a thinly-peopled province,while they cannot obtain those advantagesunder their own institutions. It is a reproachto them. They continually taunt the Canadiansthat they are the only portion of the NewB 24 CANADA.World who have not thrown off the yoke theonly portion who are not yet free ; and this taunthas not been without its effect upon the unthinkingportion of the community. What isthe cause of this unusual sympathy ? The questionis already answered.Another important reason which the Americanshave for the possession of the Canadass is,that they are the means of easy retaliation onthe part of England in case of aggression. Theyrender them weak and assailable in case of war.Had they possession of the Canadas,and our otherprovinces, the United States would be almost invulnerable.As it is, they become defenceless to thenorth, and are moreover exposed to the attack ofall the tribes of Indians concentrated on the westernfrontier. Indeed, they never will considertheir territory as complete " in a ring fence,"as long as we have possession of the mouths ofthe St. Lawrence. They wish to be able to boastof an inland navigation from nearly the Equatorto the Pole from the entrance of the Mississippito the exit of the St. Lawrence. OurCANADA. 5possession of the Canadass is a check to theirpride and ambition, which are both as boundlessas the territory which they covet.But there are other reasons equally important.It is their anxiety to become a manufacturingas well as a producing nation. Their object is,that the north should manufacture what thesouth produces ; and that, instead of commercialrelations with England, as at present, thatAmerican cotton-manufactures should be bornein American bottoms over all the world. Thisthey consider is the great ultimatum to be arrivedat, and they look forward to it as the source ofimmense wealth and increased security to theUnion, and of their wresting from Englandthe sceptre and dominion of the seas.It may be said that the United States, if theywant to become a manufacturing nation, havenow the power ; but such is not the case. Untilthey can completely shut out English manufactures,they have not. The price of labour is6 CANADA.too dear. Should they increase the tariff, orduty, upon English goods, the Canadass andour other provinces will render their effortsuseless, as we have a line of coast of upwards of2,000 miles, by which we can introduce Englishgoods to any amount by smuggling, and whichit is impossible for the Americans to guardagainst ; and as the West fills up, this importationof English goods would every year increase.As long, therefore, as we hold the Canadas, the Americans must be content to be avery inferior manufacturing nation to ourselves ;and it may be added that now or never is thetime for the Americans to possess themselvesof the Canadass. They perceive this ; for whenonce the Western States gain the preponderancein wealth and power, which they will in a fewyears, the cause of the Eastern, or manufacturingStates will be lost. The Western States willnot quarrel with England on account of theEastern, but will import our goods direct inCANADA. 7exchange for their produce. They themselvescannot manufacture and they will go tomarket where they can purchase cheapest.But do the views of the Americans extendno further ? Would they be satisfied if theyobtained the Canadass ? Most assuredly not.They are too vast in their ideas too ambitiousin their views. If Canada fell, Nova Scotia wouldfall, and they would obtain what they most covetthe harbour of Halifax. New Brunswickwould fall, and they would have then driven usout of our Continental possessions. Would theystop then ? No ; they never would stop untilthey had driven the English to the other sideof the Atlantic. Newfoundland and its fisherieswould be their next prey ; for it, as well as ourother possessions, would then be defenceless.They would not leave us the West-indies,although useless to them. Such is their objectand their earnest desire an increase of territoryand power for themselves, and the humiliationof England. The very eagerness with which8 CANADA.the Americans bring up this question on purposethat they may disavow their wishes, is oneof the strongest proofs of their anxiety toblind us on the subject ; but they will neverlose sight of it ; and if they thought they hadany chance of success, there is no expense whichthey would not cheerfully incur, no war intowhich they would not enter. Let not the Englishbe deceived by their asseverations. WhatI have now asserted is the fact. The same spiritwhich has actuated them in dispossessing the Indiansof territories which they cannot themselvespopulate, which prompted the u high-handedtheft" of the Texas from Mexico, will inducethem to adopt any pretext, as soon as they thinkthey have a chance, to seize upon the Canadassand our other transatlantic possessions.If what I have stated be correct, and I amconvinced of its truth myself, it will be evidentthat the Canadass, independent of every otherconsideration, become a most important outpostwhich we, must defend and hold possession of.CANADA. 9Let it be remembered that every loss to us, is anincrease to the power of America an increaseto her security and to her maritime strength ;that whatever her assertions may be, she isdeadly hostile to us, from the very circumstancethat she considers that we prevent her aggrandizementand prosperity. America can onlyrise to the zenith, which she would attain,by the fall of England, and every disaster tothis country is to her a source of exultation.That there are many Americans of a contraryopinion I grant ; that the city of New Yorkwould prefer the present amicable relations iscertain ; but I have here expressed the feelingsof the majority, and it must be rememberedthat in America it is the majority whodecide all questions.To prove that I am not too severe uponthe Americans in the above remarks, let merefer to their own printed documents.The reader must be informed that the Canadianrebels, with their American auxiliaries,B310 CANADA.made incursions into our territory near theboundary line, burnt the houses, took away thecattle, and left destitute those parties who wereconsidered as loyal and well affected, or, in fact,those who refused to arm and join the rebels.When pursued by the militia, or other forces,the rebel parties hastened over the boundary-line,where they were secure under the Americanprotection. This system of protection naturallyirritated the loyal Canadians, who threatenedto cross the boundary and attack theAmericans in return. It was, however, only athreat, never being put in execution ; butupon the strength of this threat, applicationwas made to the Governor in the State of Vermont,requesting that the arms in the Americanarsenals might be supplied to the citizens fortheir protection. The Governor very properlyrefused, and issued a proclamation warning thecitizens of Vermont not to interfere. Thisoffended the majority, who forthwith called ameeting at St. Albans, the results of whichCANADA. i 1were ordered to be printed and circulated. Ihave a copy of these reports and resolutions,from which I shall now give some extracts.Let it be observed that these are not the resolutionsof a few lawless and undisciplined people,bordering on the lakes, as the sympathizersare stated to have been. The title of Honorabledenotes that the parties are either Members ofthe State or Federal Governments ; and, indeed,the parties whose names appear on the committee,are all of the first respectability in the State.Meeting of the Freemen at St. Albans.Agreeable to a notice circulated throughoutthe county, about forty-eight hours previous tothe meeting, two thousand of the freemen fromthe different towns in the county assembled totake into consideration a recent proclamation ofthe Governor, and an extraordinary letter accompanyingthe same, and also to express theirsentiments on Canadian affairs, especially suchas have recently transpired in the neighbourhoodof latitude forty-five degrees.12 CANADA.Jeptba Bradley, Esq., of St. Albans, wascalled to the chair, and, agreeable to a resolve ofthe meeting, appointed the Hon. S. S. Brown,Hon. Timothy Foster, and G. W. Kendall,Esq., a committee to nominate officers.The following gentlemen were nominatedand appointed :Hon. Austin Fuller, of Enosburgh, President.Vice Presidents.Col. S. B. Hazeltine, . Wakefield.Plan. Horace Eaton, . Enosburgh.Doctor I. S. Webster, . Berkshire.William Green, Esq., . Sheldon.Martin Wires, Esq., . Cambridge.Hon. Timothy Foster, . Wanton.Secretaries.J. J. Beardsley, . . . Sheldon.Zoroaster Fisk, . . . Wanton.The following gentlemen were appointed acommittee to prepare a report and resolutionsfor the meeting :CANADA. 13Henry Adams, Esq., . St. Albans.N. L. Whittemore, Esq., Wanton.R. A. Shattuck, Esq., . Sheldon.Bradley Barlow, Esq., . Fairfield.1. B. Bow dish, Esq., . Wanton.The letter of certain citizens of Burlington,and the proclamation of his Excellency, SilasH. Tennyson, were then read by the Secretary,J. J. Beardsley, Esq. After the reading ofthe letter and the proclamation the meeting wasaddressed by several gentlemen, in an eloquentand impressive manner, and their remarks severallycalled forth great applause."The committee, on resolutions by HenryAdams, Esq., chairman, then presented thefollowing report and resolutions, which wereunanimously adopted"After having in the report stated that threatshave been made, they then attack the legalityof the Governor s proclamation and conduct, asfollows :The committee have no evidence to show14 CANADA.that the execution of the threats above-mentoned, or that any invasion of the rights ofAmerican citizens, would knowingly be permittedby the existing government in Canada, or approvedof by a majority of the citizens in theCanadian townships ; but when they bear inmind, that civil law is suspended in Canada,and in its place are substituted the summaryproceedings of military courts and the capriciouswills of petty military officers ; when they considerthe excited and embittered feelings whichprevail along the frontier, and which some havestudied to inflame, and also the character of aportion of the population which borders uponour territory, they deem it not improbable thatacts of violence might be attempted, and eventhat a gang of marauders might be gatheredtogether, and led to make some petty invasioninto our territory, disturbing the public peace,and committing acts of outrage. If this bedeemed improbable, still a state of suspense anddoubt is not to be endured. Every family onCANADA. 15the frontier should live in a state of undisturbedrepose. The ability not only to resist aggression,but to redress injuries with summary justice,furnishes a certain, if not the only guarantee ofperfect quiet.With these views, at recent meetings of thepeople, a committee was appointed to wait uponthe Governor and request the use of a part ofthe arms in the State arsenal. This requesthas been denied ; and the reason assigned byhis Excellency is, that he has doubts whetherby law he can loan out the arms of the State tobe used by the people of the State for their owndefence. Without commenting on the technicalitieswhich so much embarrass his Excellency,or inquiring into the wisdom of that constructionof the law which infers, that because the Statearms are to be kept Lit for use, therefore theyare not to be used, the committee would begleave respectfully to suggest to the people that,inasmuch as they are to receive no aid from the16 CANADA.State, it is their duty at once to arm themselves,and to rely upon themselves.While the governor has thus declined furnishingany aid for the security of the frontier,he has issued a proclamation enjoining upon thecitizens of this State the observance of a strictneutrality between the hostile parties in Canada.The propriety of our Governor s issuing a proclamationon an occasion like the present, merelyadvisory, may well be questioned. It neithercreates any new obligations, nor adds force tothose already resting on our citizens. When itis considered that our relations with foreignpowers are solely confided to the general government,and that if the people of this State shouldboldly break the obligations of neutrality, thegovernor of the State has no power to restrainor to punish, it must be admitted , that a proclamationof neutrality issuing from our Stateexecutive seems to be over-stepping the proprietiesof the office, and should be exercised,CANADA. 17if at all, only in case of a general and glaringviolation of the laws of nations ; and even thenit may reasonably be questioned whether theordinary process of law would not be sufficient,and whether gratuitous advice to the people onthe one hand, and gratuitous interference withthe exclusive functions of the general governmenton the other, would become pertinent bybeing stamped with the official Seal of State.We are not aware of any express authority inour constitution or laws for the exercise of thisnovel mode of addressing the people ; and it canonly be justified on the ground, that the chiefmagistrate has something of fact or doctrine ofimportance to communicate, of which the peopleare supposed to be ignorant. In neither pointof view is there any thing striking in this otherwiseextraordinary document.No facts are set forth before unknown tothe public, except that a representation has beenmade to his Excellency that c hostile forces hadbeen organized within this State, of which18 CANADA,organization our citizens are profoundly ignorant.To the doctrine of this proclamation, thatthe declaration of martial law, by Lord Gosport,changes the relations between the United Statesand Canada, we cannot assent. Our relationswith Great Britain and her colonies rest upontreaties, and the general law of nations, which,it s believed, her Majesty s Governor in Chiefof Lower Canada can neither enlarge norrestrict.To assume that our citizens are ignorant oftheir rights and obligations as members of aneutral independent power, is to take for grantedthat they have forgotten the repeated infractionsof those rights which have so often agitated ourcountry since the adoption of Federal Constitution,which led to the late war with GreatBritain, and which have given rise to claims ofindemnity that are still due from various powersof Europe. Every page of the history of ourcountry pourtrays violations of her neutral rightsCANADA. 19Hby the despotic and haughty powers of Europe,among whom England has ever been foremost.Your committee do not deem it necessary toenlarge upon this subject."After the report came the resolutions, a portionof which I subjoin :Resolved That the safety of the people isthe supreme law, and we recommend to ourcitizens to arm themselves for the maintenanceof this law.u Resolved That the proclamation of martiallaw in Canada, and placing arms in the handsof people unaccustomed to their use, hostile toour institutions, and heated by intestine dissensions,have a direct tendency to disturb thepeace of our citizens, and demands the immediateinterference of the general government.Resolved That our government ought totake immediate measures to obtain redress forthe injuries and insults perpetrated on ourcitizens by the people of Canada.Resolved That as friends of human liberty20 CANADA.and human rights, we cannot restrain the expressionof our sympathy, when we behold anoppressed and heroic people unfurl the bannerof freedom.Resolved That we hope that time will sooncome when the bayonet shall fail to sustain thelast relic of royalty which now lingers on thewestern continent.Resolved That we concur in the opinionswhich have been fully and freely expressed inthe British parliament by eminent Englishstatesmen ; that in the ordinary course ofthings, Canada must soon be separated from themother country.Resolved That it is the duty of everyindependent American to aid in every possiblemanner, consistent with our laws, the exertionsof the patriots in Lower Canada, against thetyranny, oppression) and misrule of a despoticgovernment"CHAPTER II.THE next question to be considered is, whether,independent of their being important to usas an out-post to defend our transatlantic possessions,.the Canadass are likely to be useful tous,as a colony, in a commercial point of view.This requires much consideration.It must be admitted that, up to the present,we may consider the Canadass to have been aheavy burden to this country. From what I amnow going to state, there are many, who agreeingwith me in most other points, will be likelyto dissent. That I cannot help ; I may be inerror, but, at all events, I shall not be in errorfrom a too hasty decision.That it is wise and proper for a mother-countryto assist and support her colonies in their infancy22 CANADA.is undoubted. In so doing, the mother-countrytaxes herself for the advantages to be hereafterderived from the colony ; but it may occur thatthe tax imposed upon the people of the mother-countrymay be too onerous, at the same timethat no advantages at all commensurate arederived from the colony. When such is thecase, the tax is not fair ; and the colony forwhose benefit that tax has been imposed, islooked upon with ill-will. This is the precisesituation of the Canadass, and this is the causewhy there is so strong an outcry against ourretaining possession of these provinces.The bonus of forty-five shillings on a loadof timber, which is given to the Canadass byour present duties, is much too great ; andhas pressed much too heavily on the people of themother-country. It has, in fact, created a monopoly; and when it is considered how importantand necessary an article timber is in this country,how this enormous bonus on Canadian timberaffects the shipping, house-building, and agricola23tural interests it is no wonder that people wishto get rid of the Canadass and the tax at one andthe same time. It is also injurious to us in ourcommercial relations with the northern countries,who refuse our manufactures because we havelaid so heavy a duty upon their produce. Thistax for the benefit of the canadian produce wasput on during the war, without any intentionthat it should remain permanent : and Ithink I shall be able satisfactorily to establish,that, not only is it unjust towards our ownpeople, but that, instead of benefiting, it will be,now that the Canadass are fast increasing inpopulation, an injury to the Canadass themselves.Up to the present period, timber has been theonly article of export from Canada : we certainlyhave had the advantage of a large carrying trade,and the employment of many thousand tons ofshipping ; but, with this exception, the timbertrade has been ins curious, not only to the mother-country,but to the colony itself, as it has preventedher real prosperity, which must ever24 CANADA.depend upon the culture of the land and theincrease of population. The first point to whichthe attention of a colony should be directed, isits own support, the competence and supply ofall the necessaries of life to its inhabitants ; itis not until after this object has been obtained,that it must direct its attention to the gain whichmay accrue from any surplus produce. In whatway has the timber trade benefited the Canadass ?Has it thrown any wealth into the provinces? mostcertainly not; the timber has been cut down, eitherby those Canadians who would have been muchbetter employed in tilling the land, for everyacre cleared is real wealth ; or by Americanswho have come over to cut down the timber andhave returned to their own country to spend themoney. That the profits of the timber trade havebeen great is certain ; but have these profits remainedin the Canadass ? have the sums realizedbeen expended there ? no ; they have beenrealized in, or brought over to England, sharedamong a few persons of influence who have, to aCANADA. 25certain degree, obtained a monopoly by thebonus granted, but the Canadass have benefitedlittle or none, and the mother-country has receivedserious injury. That the parties connectedwith the Canada timber trade will deny this,and endeavour to ridicule my arguments, I amaware ; and that they are an influential party Iwell know ; but I trust, before I have concluded,to prove to every disinterested person, that I amcorrect in my view of the case, and that theprosperity of the Canadass is a very differentquestion from the prosperity of the Canadiantimber merchants, or even the proprietors on theOttawa.When the protecting duty was first imposed,there was no idea of its being a permanent duty :it was intended as an encouragement for shipsto go to Canada for timber, when it could notbe got in the Baltic. It was, in fact, a warmeasure, which should have been removed uponthe return to peace. The reason why it was not,is, the plea brought forward, that the takingVOL. in. c26 CANADA.off the protecting duty would be a serious loss tothe emigrant settler, who would have no meansof disposing of his timber after he had felled it,and that the emigrant looked to his timber as hisfirst profits ; moreover, that it gave employmentto the emigrants in the long winters. Thatthose who have never been in the country wereled away by this assertion I can easily imagine,but I must say that a more barefaced falsehoodwere never uttered. There are varieties of emigrants,and those with capital speculate in timberas well as other articles ; but let us examine intothe proceedings of the emigrant settler, that is,the man who purchases an allotment and commencesas a farmer for this is the party to whomthe supposed philanthropy was to extend. Hebuilds his cottage and clears two or three acres,that is, he fells the trees ; as soon as he has donethis, if the weather permit, he burns them wherethey lie, the branches and smaller limbs beingcollected round the trunks as fuel to consumethem. This he is compelled to do, for the landCANADA. 2?having been so long smothered by the want ofair and sunshine, arising from the denseness ofthe forest, has a degree of acidity in it, whichthe alkali of the wood ashes are required to correct,previous to his obtaining a crop. I do notbelieve that a settler ever sold a tree when hewas clearing, although, if water-carriage was convenient,he may afterwards, when he was in competentcircumstances, have done so. Havingraised his crop from the first year s clearing, whatis his employment during the winter, cuttingdown timber on the Ottawa for the English market? no ; cutting down timber on his own propertyas fast as he can, so as to have it ready forburning in the early spring, and having a crop offthis, his second clearing. And so he continues,with full employment on his own farm, until hehas cleared sufficient for the growing of his cornand the pasture for his cattle. When he has becomeindependent and comfortable, and has afew thousand dollars to spare, then he will erect a28 CANADA.saw-mill, and work up his own trees into lumberfor sale, but by that time he must be consideredas a rich man for a settler. The timber trade,therefore, is hurtful to the Canadass, in so muchas it prevents them from clearing land and becomingindependent people, who by other meanswould become so. The timber which is cutdown for exportation, is chiefly from the forestson or near the Ottawa rivers, and the emigrantsettler has neither interest or concern in it.It may be argued that, as settlers do, as soonas they are in better circumstances, erect sawmills,and work up their trees into lumber, thatit would be unfair to deprive them of that advantage.I will grant that ; but the fact is,that you will not do so ; for of the quantityof timber and lumber exported from the Canacas, it is only one-half which is sent to the Britishmarket, the other half is divided between(-he West-indies, the United States, and theirwn consumption ; and the demand of thetlnitedCANADA. 29States will so rapidly increase, that, in a fewyears, the Canadians will care little for sendingtheir timber to England, even if the present dutywere kept on. I consider that this bounty uponcutting timber is very injurious to the Americanprovinces, as it distracts their attention from thereal source of wealth, which must consist inclearing the country ; for, to show how greata difference this makes to them, it must be observed,that a farm which was only worth twodollars an acre when the settler first came to it,will, as soon as others have cleared around him >rise to twenty or thirty dollars per acre. Everyman, therefore, who settles and clears land, notonly benefits himself, but increases the value ofthe property of all those around him ; while thefeller of timber on the Ottawa only puts a fewdollars into his own pocket, and does no goodto the province, as the timber-dealers in Englandreap all the harvest.It would appear very strange that the ship30 CANADA.owners should have joined the Canadian timber-merchantsin persuading the government to continuethese duties, were it not from the fact, thatthe ship-owners appear, invariably, to opposeany measure advantageous to their own interests.That the carrying trade to the Canadass is ofimportance is certain ; but of how much moreimportance to the ship-owner is the reduction ofexpense in building his ship, which must ensueif the timber duties were reduced. The shipownercomplains that he cannot sail his ship atas low a rate as foreigners ; that he must beprotected, or that he cannot compete with themin any way ; and yet he opposes the very measurewhich would materially assist him in sodoing. But the fact is, that, as I shall eventuallyshow, the carrying trade with Canada wouldnot be lost, though the cargo would not be thesame ; and there is every reason to suppose thatthe employment of the shipping would verysoon amount to the same tonnage as at present.CANADA. 31The next consideration is, to what should theduty be reduced, so as not to affect our revenue ?This is a question easily answered.In the Report on Timber Duties, AppendixNo. 10, we have, in round numbers, for the year1833 :Timber exported fromCanada and Americanprovinces, calculated Loads. Duty paid.in loads 719,000 . 300,000-Timber from the northof Europe, in ditto . . . 444,000 . . . 985,0001,163,000 . 1,285,000Now it is certain that, wherever the timbermay come from, the same quantity will be required; we have, therefore, to fix a duty upontimber coming from all parts of the world, bywhich the revenue will not suffer. A duty of25s. per load will give, upon the whole importation,a revenue of ^1,4 53,000, not only an in-32 CANADA.crease of revenue upon the timber at present imported; but there is every reason to supposethat it would occasion a much greater consumptionof timber, and of course a great increase ofrevenue. I do not consider that it would beadvisable to make this reduction immediately.There is a large tonnage employed in the Canadatrade, which might as well wear out in it ; and itwould be but fair to allow those who have embarkedtheir capital in the trade, to have timeto withdraw it. As the Canadass are not yetprepared to send other produce to the market,we can, with great propriety, confer this boonupon the present timber trade. The reductionof the duty should be gradual, and extendedover ten years, at which period the final reductionto 25s. per load should take place; by whichtime, if Canada be cherished, she will have otherproduce for the market.The more I consider the question, the moreI am convinced that this alteration would be abenefit to all parties. We then should be ableCANADA. 33to build ships at a moderate price ; we shouldhave a fall in house-rent ; and, indeed, it wouldbe of advantage to every class in this country ;and, however interested people may argue,,the removal of this protecting duty would bethegreatest boon and kindness which we couldconfer on our transatlantic possessions.Let us now inquire what are likely to be thefuture prospects and produce of the Canadass asthe population increases, and the resources of thecountry will be developed.Lower Canada is a sterile country ; not thatthe land is in itself bad, but from the severityand length of the winters. The climate of LowerCanada is precisely the same as that of Russia,and so might be its produce. The winters aretedious, but not unhealthy, as they are dry*The summers, like all the summers in the northernregions, although short, are excessivelyhot. It is owing to this excessive heat of thesummer that the maize, or Indian corn, whichwill not ripen in this country, can be grown inc334 CANADA.Lower Canada, and it is the principal corn whichis rased. The French Canadians who inhabitLower Canada are but indifferent and carelessfarmers, yet still they contrive to live in apparentcomfort : but the question is not whetherthe inhabitants of Lower Canada can supportthemselves, but whether they are likely to beable to produce anything which might becomean article of export to England. I should sayyes : they may produce tar and hemp, two veryimportant articles, and for which we are almostwholly dependent upon Russia. Tar they canmost assuredly produce ; and, with the sameclimate as Russia, why not hemp ? Hemp willgrow in any climate, and almost in any soil,except very stiff clay, and I consider the soil ofLower Canada admirably adapted to it. Up tothe present time the French Canadians havemerely vegetated, but as the country fills up,and they gradually amalgamate with the othersettlers, there is no doubt that they will rapidlyimprove.CANADA. 35Upper Canada has been, and is still, but littleknown. At the close of the war, there was notapopulation of 40,000 upon the whole province :even now there is but 400,000 upon a territorycapable of receiving and supporting manymillions. It is, without exception, the mostfavoured spot in North America, having all thefertility of the Southern and Western States,without being subject to the many and fatal diseaseswhich are a drawback upon the latter.Although so far north, its climate is peculiarlymild, from its being so wholly surrounded withwater, which has the effect of softening downboth the cold of the winter and the heat of thesummer. It abounds with the most splendidtimber ; is well watered ; the land is of therichest quality ; the produce is very great, andthe crops are almost certain. I particularlynotice this as I consider Upper Canada to bethefinest corn country in the world.At present the resources of the Canadass areunknown ; the country has not been explored ; it36 CANADA.is without capital, and I may add without credit,but its prospects are very favourable. The timbertrade to England will in a few years, evenallowing the present bonus to be continued,be of little advantage to Upper Canada ; theywill find a much better market as the WesternStates fill up, as then there will be a great demandfor lumber, which will be obtained cheaperfrom Canada than from any portion of theUnited States. Even now lumber is sent overfrom Upper Canada to those portions of reunitedStates bordering on the lakes. I have pointedout the want of timber in the Western States,that is, of timber fit for building ; they havesome in the State of Wisconsin, which will soonbe absorbed, and then the Canada timber andlumber will be in demand, and I have no doubtthat there will be a very extensive exportationof it.The next article of produce to which the Canadiansshould direct their attention is the fisherieson the lake, which may be carried on toCANADA. 37any extent and with great profit. The troutand white fish, both very superior to the Newfoundlandcod, are to be taken with the greatestease, and in vast quantities. I have mentionedthat the Americans have already commencedthis fishery, and the demand is rapidly increasing.As the West fills up, the supply wouldhardly keep pace with the demand ; besidesthat it would also be an article of exportationto this country.There are millions and millions of acres tothe north and about Lake Superior, fit for littleelse than the increase of the animals whose furswe obtain, and which will probably never bebrought into cultivation ; yet these lands arerich in one point, which is, that the maple treegrows there, and any quantity of sugar may becollected from it, as soon as the population isthick enough to spare hands for its collection.A maple-tree, carefully tapped, will yield forforty years, and give six or seven pounds ofsugar, fully equal to the best East-india prossCANADA.duce, and refining well. A few tons are collectedat present, but it may become a largearticle of export.The United States appear to be rich in mostmetals, but particularly in lead and iron ;* theThe following description of the iron mines atMarmora are worthy the attention of the reader. It isfrom the engineer who was sent to survey them.To Isaac Fraser, Esq.The water power at Marmora, and its sufficiency forall hydraulic purposes, may be better imagined than explainedto you by me, from the fact, that the falls occurupon the Crow River, at the foot of untold lakes fallinginto Crow Lake, the deepest inland lake in the province,and just below the junction of the Beaver River, whichlatter has its source in the Ottawa or Grand River, orthe waters flowing parallel therewith, and by the outletat the Marmora Falls : these head waters, on the confluencewith the waters of the Otonabee, and Rice Lakein Crow Bay, six miles below the works, form the greatRiver Trent, second in importance and magnitude onlyto the St. Lawrence. It is sufficient for me to add, thatI deem the water power at the works abundantly equalto all the purposes of machinery and manufacture, whichcan for centuries be established there.Immediately adjoining the works there is an orebed, from the partial development of which, and from theopinions I have received of its superior quality, it wouldappear to be of the purest kind of iron ore, except na-canada.39metal which they are most deficient in is copper.It is said that the copper mines in New Jerseytime iron, in the same veins with which is an admixtureof red paint and yellow ochre, and in separate veins andbeds at this locality, those paints occur in some quantities,several barrels of which, especially the red paint,Mr. Hayes disposed of at 25s. per barrel, at the works,and it seems probable they would become profitable articlesof commerce. Here also there is a bed of purely whitemarble, not seemingly stratified, but in large blocks ;and a quarry of superior stone for lithographic purposes,the quality of which has been tested and reported favourablyupon. This ore bed would be from its situationwithin any wall constructed for the custody of theconvicts, but from the great jumble of mineral substances,which the careless opening of those veins hasoccasioned, it is not possible to hazard an opinion as tothe probable extent of minerals here, but from, if I mayjudge by appearances and from geological analogy, thefew acres surrounding, it is probable they are sufficientlyextensive to be an object of consideration several hundredtons of ore have already been taken out for thefurnaces. There is at this place a well-built bridge anda wharf at which the ore brought from the lake ore bedsis landed, and from thence carted or wheeled up to theore bank.At a distance of four miles by water, that is at theCrow Lake, in the township of Belmont, Newcastle District,the principal ore bed occurs. I may confine myobservations respecting this ore bed to the qualities and40 CANADA.are good ; those in the West have not yet provedto be worth working. Canada, as I have beforevarieties of the ores to be found there, and of the extentof the deposit give you an idea, by fancying my feelingswhen I first saw the mountain. My surprise was great,and my first conclusion was, that it would be more thansufficient to supply the world with iron for ever. Theore here is in great variety of magnetic ore, easilyquarried; and, in fact, it can be quarried, loaded, andtransported to the work?, roasted on the ore bank, brokenup into particles, and put upon the furnace, at an expensenot exceeding 2s. 6d. per ton ; as I observed it is stronglymagnetic, and although mixed considerably with sulphur,it is easily freed from that deleterious mineral byexposure to the atmosphere, and to the action of air andfrost, and by this species of evaporation, a new and valuablecommodity could be procured in great quantities,namely, the copperas of commerce.With a boat of 50 tons burthen and there is depthof water enough for a 74 gun ship from the wharf at theworks to this mountain of ore navigated by four men,150 tons of ore could be brought down in two days soreadily is it quarried, and so handily put on board. Intermediateto this bed and the works, several other depositedof iron are discovered one of a superior quality,surpassing in magnetic power any other ore yet discovered,possessing what mineralogists call polarity ;and near to this, meadow and bog ore, not a mile distantfrom the works, is to be found in great quantities.The works are to the north-north-east and eastward,CANADA. 41said, is as yet unexplored, but I have every reasonto believe that it will be found rich in minerals,especially copper. I argue, first, from its analogywith Russia, which abounds in that metal ;and secondly, because there is at this time, onthe shores of Lake Superior, a mass of nativecopper weighing many tons, a specimen of whichI have had in my hand. We must not forgetto reckon, among the other products andexpected resources of Canada, the furs obtainedby the Hudson Bay Company. Ofcourse, if the Canadass are wrested from us, weshall have to depend upon the Americans forour supply of this necessary article. The valuein Canada of the furs exported to this country,by the company, amounts, as I have observed insurrounded by beds of ore, of which five have beentried and brought into use but as they are inland, andconsequently more expensively procured, they merit butthis passing observation, that in quantity and qualitythey are valuable.For the present I am, Sir,Your obedient servant,Engineer. 142 CANADA.my Diary, to about a million and a half ofdollars.I now come to what I consider will be themost important export from the Canadass. Ihave stated it to be my opinion that UpperCanada will be the first corn country in theworld, and in a very few years we may expectthat she will export largely into this country ;already having had a surplus which lias beensold to the Americans. It must be recollectedthat America, who used to supply the West-Indies and other parts of the world with her flour,has, for these last few years, in her mania forspeculating, neglected her crops, and it is onlyduring these last two years that she has redirectedher attention to the tillage of her land.She will now no longer require assistance fromUpper Canada, and the yearly increasing corn-produceof that province must find a marketelsewhere. After supplying the wants of NovaScotia and New Brunswick, this surplus willfind its way into this country. As the popular43tion of Upper Canada increases, so will of courseher growth of wheat be greater, and in a veryfew years, we have reason to expect that therewill be not only a constant, but even a more thanrequisite, exportation of corn to this country.Now what will be the effect ? Corn from Canadais admitted at a fixed duty of 5s. per quarter,therefore as soon as the supply from thenceis sufficient, the corn laws will be virtually repealed,that is to say, they will be exchangedfor a permanent duty of 5s. per quarter.I think that the remarks I have made will inclinethe reader to agree with me, that the reductionof the duties on timber will be a realboon to all parties : to the Canadians, becauseat the same time that the supplies of lumber tothe West-indies and elsewhere will give a certainprofit, they will no longer have the true interestsof the colony sacrificed for the benefit ofparties at home ; to the mother country, becauseit will relieve the expenses of the builder, lessen44 CANADA.house-rent and agricultural expenses, and atthe same time increase the revenue ; to theship-owner, as it will enable him to build muchcheaper, and to compete more successfully withforeign vessels, with the prospect also of thecarrying trade soon reviving, and the freight ofthe corn proving an indemnification to him forthe loss of that on the timber. That a few interestedindividuals would complain is undoubted,but it is high time that a monopoly soinjurious in every point, should be removed; andthe profits of a few speculators are not to be foramoment considered, when opposed both to theinterests of the colony and of the nation.I may as well here remark that it would onlybe an act of justice to the provinces, and no lessso to ourselves, to take off the prohibitions atpresent in force against the importation of goodsfrom France and other countries. The boonitself would be small, but still it would be astimulus to enterprize, and the time has gone byCANADA. 45for England to impose such restrictions on hercolonies. I say that we should lose nothing,because all these articles are imported by theAmericans ; and if the Canadians wish to procurethem, they can obtain them immediately atBuffalo, and other American towns bordering onthe lakes. At present, therefore, all the profitsarising from these importations go into thepockets of the Americans, who are the onlyparties benefited by our restrictive laws. Weshould therefore remove them.I shall now support the arguments in thischapter, touching the relative value of the cornand the timber trade to the Canadass, by someextracts from the evidence given in the Reportof the Committee on the Timber Duties.Q. " Have you ever formed an opinion ofwhat rate per quarter wheat could be exported tothis country, so as to yield a profit to theeporter ? A. I cannot call it to mind accurately,but I think the estimate I once madewas between 40s. and 50s.46 CANADA.Q. "Would it not follow that, unless theprice of wheat in this country were to rise to40s. or 5 Os. per quarter, the population thatyour former answer would transfer from thetimber trade to the agricultural would not beable advantageously to employ themselves ?A. No ; I do not think it follows necessarily. Ifall our population were devoted to agriculture,our settlements would be more dense, and theirroads more perfect ; in fact, all the social officesmore perfectly fulfilled ; which would enablethem to bring their wheat to market at a moremoderate price, and thus they might obtain alarger profit even With a lower price. Weshould bear in mind, in relation to their agriculturalproduce, that the farmer of course firstfeeds his own family, and that price only affectshim so far as it relates to his surplus produce,and that price rather affects his luxuries thanhis means of subsistence. I am not aware thatthe present prices would prevent a farmer ob-canada.47training that return which would enable him topurchase at least all his necessaries.Q. " What do you suppose is the averageexpense of the conveyance of wheat from theremote parts of Canada to Montreal ? A. I believethe cost of bringing wheat from Niagarato Montreal was about I5d. colonial currency,but I am not certain ; it is not now lower. Ionce made a table showing the cost of takingproduce of all kinds from three points on LakeOntario and on Lake Erie, and sending uparticles to the same places.Q. "What is the freight from Quebec toEngland ? A. The ordinary rate has beenfrom 8s. to Ss. 6d. a quarter for wheat.Q. " Do you know the price of wheat in thiscountry ? A. I believe the last average was 40s.Q. " If at 40s. you would probably allow10s. a quarter, by your present statement, as afair deduction for the expenses of bringing itinto this market ? A. I should think so.48 CANADA.Q. " Do you think the price of 30s. wouldpay the agricultural producer in Canada forthe production of wheat ; would afford a returnfor the investment of capital in the productionof wheat in Canada ? A. I should be loth tospeak to a point on which I have not sufficientknowledge.Q. " Is it not indispensable to form an opinionupon that point to justify the opinion youhave already given ? A. I think riot. I havethat feeling, that the consequence of their nothaving the timber trade would be, that theywould produce other articles, and that their conditionwould not be deteriorated. I am led to thatconclusion by seeing the present condition of theState of New York, which once depended on thetimber trade ; I look also to Vermont ; and whenevery man tells me that he laments and haslamented that he ever meddled with the timbertrade, I think that I am justified in my opinion,for no one will pretend to state that the land ofVermont, or even of New York, equals that ofCANADA. 49Canada. While speaking of the soil of Canada,I would observe that Jacobs has estimated theaverage return for wheat on the Continent atfour to one, of Great Britain seven to one, andGourlay has estimated the return of UpperCanada at twenty to one. Many state thatUpper Canada is unrivalled in comparison withany other piece of land of equal extent.Q. "Are you aware of the extent of exportationof agricultural produce from Canada ?A. I am ; I can state it from memory. Thelargest quantity of wheat exported in any yearwas in 1831, and I think amounted to 1,300,000bushels.Q. " Can you make the same statement withreference to corn and provisions as to other articles? A. Canada exports a great deal of corn.Q. " Which Canada ? A. Both Upper andLower Canada.Q. " Does Lower Canada grow corn enoughfor her own consumption ? A. I should thinkLower Canada did, and more.VOL. III. D50 CANADA.Q. " Does Upper Canada ? A. Upper Canadaa great deal more.Q. " Have you the amount of the exports ?A. I have the exports of 1833 ; the two Canadassexported about 650,000 bushels of wheat.Q. "How much flour ? J. About 91,000barrels.Q. " Have you any account of the imports offlour from the United States into Lower Canada?A. I have not with me ; but I can give it verynearly.Q. " Do those exports of which you havespoken just now comprehend the United Statesflour ? A. No, they are exclusive of Colonialproduction.Q. u Is not Lower Canada, as well as UpperCanada, in the habit of supplying herself, to acertain degree, with American flour and wheat,and exporting her own produce, on account of thestate of the corn laws last year ? A. Yes, it isdone to a certain extent. I have some indicationas to the quantity which comes from the UnitedCANADA. 51States into Upper and Lower Canada beingsmall. In the returns of the traffic last yearthrough the Welland Canal, about 265,000bushels of wheat passed through, of which18,000 British and 22,000 American only wentto Montreal. All the rest went to Oswego, forthe New York market : but the destination infuture will probably depend upon whether theinternal communication is improved in thosecolonies, and on the state of the market in NewYork and in the Canadass.Q. " If there is sufficient capital, is there anyreason to suppose it would not be beneficial toengage in both ? A. I do not think it is a questionconcerning the abundance of capital, but thegood to be derived from the preservation of theCanada timber trade by enormous protectingduties. I am confident that the timber tradeis inimical to the best interests of the Canadass ;it would be possible to make the timber trademore beneficial than any other pursuit in thecountry, and the way to render it so would beto give immense protecting duties to the timber52 CANADA.trade of Canada, allowing all other articles ofproduce to be open to general competition ; but,by such a course, England would not be benefitingCanada.Q. "Can you state the average prices of wheatat Quebec the last four or five years? A. Ithink 5s. or 6s. Canadian currency ; the latter rateis equal to 5s. sterling, which is 40s. a quarter ;but I do not suppose an average of severalyears would be over 4s. 2d., that would be33s. 4d. There are peculiar circumstances thatattended the last three or four years.Q. " Has it been higher the last three or fouryears than the three or four years previously ?A. Considerably higher than the ten years previously.Q. " Do you think 30s. a quarter would havebeen the average of the ten years preceding ?A. I should think so, but I cannot now speakpositively.Q. " Are the committee to understand it to beyour opinion, that if the timber establishmentswere broken up and no more timber exportedCANADA. 53from Canada, there would be no loss to thatcountry? A. There might be an immediate loss,and a very great subsequent gain. I thinkthere would be an immediate loss attending onthe mills, possibly ^150,000 to < 200,000.Q. " Has it not been the fact that there hasbeen a constant and gradual increase of tonnageinto Quebec for the last fifteen years ? A. Yes.Q. " Presuming that those establishments wereto be broken up, and no more timber exported,doyou think that gradual increase would still continue? A. No ; the first consequence, I think,very possibly would be a very material decrease.Q. " Subsequently the same tonnage would berequired for the carriage of corn as at present?A. Some years hence, for corn and other articles.CHAPTER III.To one who has a general knowledge of thevarious English colonies, to which emigrationis constantly taking place, it appears verystrange that people should emigrate to suchcountries as New South Wales, Van Dieman sLand, and New Zealand, when Upper Canadais comparatively so near to them, and affordingevery advantage which a settler could wish.Of course the persuasion of interested parties,and their own ignorance, prevent them fromascertaining the truth. Indeed, the reports uponUpper Canada are occasionally as highly colouredas those relative to the other colonies, andnothing but an examination of the country, I maysay a certain period of residence in it, can enableyou to ascertain the real merits of the case.CANADA. 55I have neither land nor interest in Upper Canada,and, therefore, my evidence on the question maybeconsidered as impartial ; and I do not hesitateto assert that Upper Canada promises moreadvantages to the settler than any other Englishcolony, or any portion whatever of the UnitedStates.I shall now make a few remarks upon emigrationto that province, and point out what the settlerwill have to expect. I have read many worksupon the subject ; they are very inaccurate, andhold out to the emigrant brilliant prospects,which are seldom or never realized. The bestwork, independently of its merits as a novel,is < Laurie Todd, by Mr. Gait. And, first,I address myself to the poor man who goesout with only twenty or thirty pounds in hispocket.If he credit the works written to inducepeople to emigrate, all that he has to do is tobuild his log-hut, clear his land, and in threeyears be an independent man.56 CANADA.It is true that he can purchase fifty acres ofland for one hundred dollars, or twenty-fivepounds ; that he has only to pay one-tenthpart of the sum down, which is two pounds tenshillings sterling. It is true that he will collecta Bee, as it is termed, or a gathering ofneighbours to run up the frame of his house ;but, nevertheless, possessing his fifty acres ofland and his log-house, he will in all probabilitybe starved out the very first year, especiallyif he has a family.To a poor man, a family is eventually ofimmense value. As soon as he has fairlysettled, the more children he has the fasterhe will become rich; but on his first arrival,they will, if not able to work for themselves, beaheavy burthen. If, however, they can do anything,so as to pay for their board and lodging,he will not be at any expense for them, as thereis employment for every body, even for children.The only article I should recommend him totake out from England is a good supply ofCANADA. 57coarse clothing for his family; if he wouldtake out a venture, let it be second-hand clothes,and he will double his money if he sells them byauction, for clothes are the most expensive articlein Canada. I once saw some cast-off clothessold by an acquaintance of mine in Upper Canada; a Jew in England would not have givenfive pounds for the lot, yet, sold at auction,they cleared twenty-five pounds, all expensespaid. He cannot, therefore, take out too muchclothing, but the coarser and more common it isthe better. Let him supply himself from the oldclothes shops, or the cheap stores. New clotheswill soon become old when he works hard.Having made this provision, let him buy nothingelse ; but change his money into sovereigns andkeep it in his pocket.As soon as he arrives at Quebec, he must loseno time in taking the steam-boat up the St. Lawrence,and landing near to where he has decidedupon locating. If he has made no decision, at allD 358 CANADA.events let him leave the city immediately, and getinto the country, for there he will get work andspend less money. Instead of thinking of makinga purchase of land, let him give up all thoughtsof it for a year or two; but hire himself out,and his wife and children also, if he can. If he isa good man, he will receive four pounds a month,or forty-eight pounds a year, with his board andlodging. The major part of this he will beable to lay by. If his wife must stay athome to take care of the children, still let herwork ; work is always to be found, and she maynot only support herself and children, butassist his fund. By the time that he has beeneighteen months or two years in the country,he will have his eyes open, know the valueof every thing, and will not be imposed uponas he would have been had he taken a farmimmediately upon his arrival. He will havelaid by a sum sufficient for him to begin with,and he will have become acquainted with theCANADA. 59mode of farming in the country, which is verydifferent from what he has been used to in theold. He may then go on and prosper.The next description of emigrant settler towhich I shall address myself is he who comesout with a small capital, say from two hundredto five hundred pounds ; a sum sufficient to enablehim to commence farming at once, but notsufficient to allow him to purchase or stock a farmwhich has a portion of the land already cleared.The government lands fetch at auction about tenshillings an acre, and they are paid for by instalments,one-tenth down, and one-tenth every year,with interest, until the whole be paid ; of course,he may pay it all at once, if he pleases, and savethe interest. He must not purchase more thanfour hundred acres. He can always procuremore if he is successful. His first instalmentto government for the purchase of four hundredacres will be eighty dollars.His next object is to have a certain portion60 CANADA:of his land cleared for him. The price varies,according to the size and quantity of the portion; but you may say, at the highest, it willcost about sixteen dollars an acre. Let himclear ten acres, and then build his house andbarns. I will make two estimates, between which,he may decide according to his means.Estimate 1.Dollars.Instalment to Government 80Shingle-house 400Furniture 100Barns and Sheds 400Ten acres clearing ] 60Oxen 80Cow 20Pigs and Poultry 20Plough, Harrow, &c 20Seed 50Horse and Waggon 100About 300 1,430To this (if you have no family able towork) for a man and his wife 300Expenses of living the first year 200400 1,930CANADA. 61Estimate 2.Dollars.Instalment to Government 80Log-house and Furniture , 100Barn COClearing 160Oxen 80Cow 20Pigs and Poultry 20Plough, Harrow, &c 20Seed 50Horse and Wag-gon 1 00But choosing between these two estimates,according to his means, that is, by reserving,if possible, one hundred pounds for contingencies,he has every chance of doing well. Hemust bear in mind, that although every year hismeans will increase, he must not cripple himselfby an outlay of all his money at first starting.After the first year, he will be able to supporthimself and family from the farm. I have putevery thing at the outside expense, that he maynot be deceived ; but he must not expend all hiscapital at once ; his horse or oxen may die62 CANADA.his crops may partially fail he may havesevere illness all these contingencies must beprovided against.But the settler who goes out under the mostfavourable circumstances, is the one who hasone thousand pounds or more, and who can,therefore, purchase a farm of from two hundredto four hundred acres, with a portion cleared, anda house and offices ready built. These are alwaysto be had, for there are people in the Canadass,as in America, who have pleasure in selling theircleared land, and going again into the bush.These farms are often to be purchased at the rateof from five to ten dollars per acre for the whole,cleared and uncleared. In this case, all the difficultieshave been smoothed away for him, and allthat he has to do is, to be industrious and sober.When I was at London, on the river Thames,(in Upper Canada I mean), I might have purchaseda farm, lying on the banks of thatriver, of four hundred acres, seventy of themcleared, and the rest covered with the finest oakCANADA. 63timber, with a fine water-power, and a saw-millin full work, a good house, barn, and outbuildingsand kitchen garden, for six hundredpounds. In ten years this property will be worthmore than six thousand pounds ; and in twentymore, if the country improves as fast as it doesnow, at least fifteen thousand pounds.In looking out for a property in Canada, alwaystry to obtain a water-power, or the meansof erecting one, by damming up any swift stream;its value will, in a few years, be very great ;and never consider a few dollars an acre more,if you have transport by water, or are closeto a good market. You must look forward towhat the country will be, not to what it is atpresent.Half-pay officers settle in Upper Canada withgreat advantages, arising from the circumstance,that their annual pay is always a resource tofall back upon. A very small capital is sufficientin this case ; and, if prudent, they gradually riseto independence, if not to wealth, There are,64 CANADA.however, one or two cautions to be given to thesegentlemen. Never go into the bush if you canhelp it : accustomed to society, you will find thetotal loss of it too serious. If you have a wifeand large family, they may partially compensatefor the loss, but even then it is betterto locate yourself near a small town. If you areasingle man and sit down in the bush, you arelost. Hundreds have done so, and the resulthas been, that they have resorted to interpenances and have died ruined men.But the settlers most required in Upper Canada,and those who would reap the most goldenharvest, are men of capital ; when I say capital,I mean those who possess a sum of four or fivethousand pounds a sum very inadequate tosupport a person in England, who has been bornand bred as a gentleman ; but in Canada, withsuch a sum, he can not only farm, but speculateto great advantage. At present the Americansgo over there every year, and realize large sumsof money. Indeed, capital is so much required inCANADA. 65Upper Canada, and may be employed to suchadvantage, that I wonder people, with what maybeconsidered as small capitals here, do not goover. The only caution to give them is, not tobe in a hurry; in the course of a year or twothey will understand what they are about, andthen they will soon become wealthy.When I arrived at Toronto, I was called uponby an old friend who had often shot with me inNorfolk. His father had once set him up in business,but the house failed. He resolved to go outto Canada, and his father gave him a thousandpounds as a start, and allowed him two hundredpounds a year afterwards. He had been in thecountry seven years when we met again. I acceptedhis invitation to dine and sleep at hishouse, which was about seven miles from thetown. He sent handsome saddle horses over forthree of us. I found him located on a beautifulfarm of about four hundred acres, the major portionof it cleared ; his house was a very elegantlybuilt cottage ornee ; every thing had the66 CANADA.appearance of a handsome English country residence; he had married a beautiful woman ofone of the first families. We sat down to anexcellent dinner, and, in every respect, the wholeset-out was equal to what you generally meetwith in good society in England. He was reallyliving in luxury. We returned the next day,in a handsome carriage and as fine a pair ofhorses as one could wish to see.I could hardly credit that all this could havebeen accumulated in seven years yet such wasthe case, and it was not a singular one; forthe whole road from his farm to Toronto waslined with similar farms and handsome houses,belonging gentlemen who had emigrated, forming,among themselves, a very extensive andmost delightful society.Although they do not go a-head as fast as someof the American cities, (for instance, as Buffalo,)still Upper Canada has, within the last ten or fifteenyears, taken a surprising start, and will now,if judiciously governed, increase in wealth almostCANADA. 67as fast as any of the American States. AboutToronto, most of the gentlemen have incomes offrom seven hundred to fifteen hundred pounds perannum, and keep handsome equipages; but thereare many other towns which have lately risen upvery rapidly. Peterborough is an instance of this.Peterborough in 1825 contained but one miserabledwelling ; now, in 1838, may be seen nearlyfour hundred houses, many of them large andhandsome, inhabited by about fifteen hundredpersons ; a very neat stone church, capable ofaccommodating eight hundred or nine hundredpersons,* a Presbyterian church of stone, twoThe building of this Church was undertaken by theinhabitants of Peterborough and its vicinity, belongingto the Church of England. In 1835 it was commenced,and, by great exertions, opened for Divine worship inDecember 1836, though not altogether finished. Ninehundred pounds was raised by voluntary contributions,not one farthing having been given by any public bodyto it. The gentlemen composing the building committeeare responsible for the remainder due, being five hundredpounds. An advertisement for subscriptions toliquidate this debt has been for some weeks past insertedin a London newspaper.68 Canada.dissenting places of worship, and a RomanCatholic church in progress. The town has inor near it, two grist, and seven saw-mills, fivedistilleries, two breweries, two tanneries, highteen or twenty shops (called stores), carriage,sleigh, waggon, chair, harness, and cabinetmakers, and most other useful trades. Stagesrun all the year, bringing mails five times a week;and steam-boats whilst the navigation is open ;there is one good tavern (White s), and two inferiorones. Families may now find houses ofany sizes to suit them, at moderate rents. Theroads in this neighbourhood are being greatlyimproved. The towns of Coburg, Port Hope,Colborne, Grafton, Brighton, River Trent, andBeaumont in the Newcastle district, are allequally prosperous, and, like Peterborough, aresurrounded by genteel families from the UnitedKingdom ; in short, the advancement of thisdistrict is almost incredible."But there is one important subject relative toemigration which must be considered : if it be,CANADA. 69as I trust my readers will be inclined to thinkwith me, a national question, it is highly expedientthat it should be not only assisted, but controlledby government. At present the mortalityis tremendous ; and I very much questionwhether there are not more lives sacrificed in thetransport of the emigrants, than subsequentlyfall a prey to disease in the western States,bordering on the Mississippi. With those whowould emigrate to the United States, we havenothing to do, neither do they so much requireour sympathy. The American packets are goodvessels, and they suffer little ; and when theyland at New York, Baltimore, and Philadelphia,the charity of the Americans is always ready fortheir relief. But with the poor emigrants whowould settle in Canada, the case is very different.It must be understood, that the Quebectrade is chiefly composed of worn-out and vessels, which cannot find employmentelsewhere; fora vessel which is in such a state thata cargo of dry goods could not be entrusted to70 CANADA.her, is still sufficiently serviceable for the timbertrade as, c allowing her bottom to be out witha cargo of timber she of course cannot founder.But if these vessels are sufficiently safe to bringtimber home, they are not sufficiently good vesselsto receive three or four hundred emigrants onboard.Leaky, bad sailers, ill-found, the voyageis often protracted, and the sufferings of the poorpeople on board are dreadful. Fever and otherdiseases break out among them, and they oftenarrive at Quebec with sixty or seventy people whoare carried to the hospital, independently of thosewho have died and been thrown overboard.Sometimes their provisions do not last out thevoyage, and they are obliged to purchase of thecaptain or others on board, (who have preparedfor the exigence,) and thus their little savings torecommence life with, are all swallowed up tosupport existence. I believe that what they sufferis dreadful ; and if ever there was a case whichwould call forth patriotism and sympathy, it isthe hardships of these poor people. AllowingCANADA. 71emigration not to be a national question, still itis a question for national humanity, and all thissuffering might be alleviated at comparatively avery trifling expense.If two or three of our smaller line-of-battleships now lying at their moorings, were to be jury-rigged,without any guns on board, and mannedwith a sloops ship s company, they wouldnot decay faster by running between Quebec andthis country than if they remained in harbour.One of these vessels would carry out 500 men,women, and children. Let the emigrants taketheir provisions on board, and should theirprovisions fail them, let there be a surplus fortheir supply at the cost price. Under this arrangement,you would have that order, cleanliness,and ventilation which would ensure them againstdisease, and proper medical attendance if itshould be required ; you would save thousandsof lives, and the emigrant, as he left theship, would feel grateful for the benefit conferred.But the assistance of government must72 CANADA.not end here: the emigrant, on his arrival, isadrift ; he knows not where to go ; he has no restingplace ; he is a perfect stranger to the countryand to every thing ; he exhausts his means beforehe can find employment or settle : other arrangementsare therefore necessary, if the work ofcharity is to be completed. Indeed, the wantof these arrangements is the cause of a verylarge proportion of the Canadian emigrantsleaving our provinces and settling in the UnitedStates, where they can immediately find employment; and Americans, agents of the land speculators,are continually on the look-out inCanada, persuading the emigrants, by all sortsof promises and inducements, to leave the provincesand to take lands in the States, belongingto their employers. Every emigrant lost to usis a gain to America ; and upon the increase ofthe English population depends the prosperity,of the Canadass, and our best chance of retainingthem in our possession.Both Upper and Lower Canada have one greatCANADA. 73advantage over most of the other territories ofthe United States, which is, that they are sovery healthy ; the winters,, in both provinces aredry, and, in Upper Canada, they are not severe ;and the summers are cool, compared with thoseof the United States. Indeed, in point of climate,they cannot be surpassed ; and I ratherthink, independently of its fine soil, which enablesit to grow every thing (for even tobaccogrows well in Upper Canada), that in mineralrichness it is not to be exceeded. It aboundsin water-power, and has several splendid rivers.As soon as the roads are made (for that is thepresent desideratum in the Upper Province), Ihave no hesitation in asserting, that it will be, ofall others, the most favourable spot for emigration.It is a man s own fault if, with common industry,he does not, in a few years, secure competenceand the happiness arising from independence,when it is accompanied by that greatestof all blessings health.VOL. III. E74 CANADA.There has been so strange and continued asystem of misrule on the part of the mother-countrywith respect to these provinces, that Iam not surprised at any thing which takes place ;but it is certain that the emigration to the Canadasshas been very much checked by the Governmentitself.The price of land in the United States isfixed at a dollar and a quarter per acre ; be it ofthe best quality, full of minerals, or with anyother important advantages, the price is still thesame. The set-up price in Canada is two dollarsper acre. If no more is offered it is sold atthat sum, but at no less. Now, whatever theGovernment may imagine, I can assure themthat this difference in the price is consideredvery important by those who emigrate, and thatthousands who would have settled in Canada,have, in consequence, repaired to the UnitedStates, much to our disadvantage ; and this appearsso contradictory, as the Government haveCANADA. 75very unwisely parted with enormous tracts ofthe best land, selling them to a Company at aprice which, with facilities for payment, reducesthe price paid per acre by this Company to, Ithink, about one shilling and three-pence, andfor which the Company now charge the sameprice as the Government ; thus giving a bonusto speculators which they refuse to those whowish to become bond Side settlers. I nevercould comprehend the grounds upon which theywere persuaded to so unwise an act as that.The lands were sold to the Company before thepresent Government were in power, but why theprice of the land still in possession of the Crownshould be raised higher than in the UnitedStates I cannot imagine. Sound policy wouldreduce it lower, for the increase of wealth in theprovince must ever consist in the increase of itspopulation.There are in Upper Canada several villages offree negroes, who have escaped from the UnitedStates, and should it be considered at any time76 CANADA.advisable to remove any of the West-indianpopulation, it would be very wise to give themland on the Upper Canada frontiers. Thenegroes thrive there uncommonly well, andhave acquired habits of industry ; and, as maybesupposed, are most inveterate against theAmericans, as was proved in the late disturbances,when they could hardly be controlled.They imagine (and very truly) that if the Americanswere to obtain possession of Canada, thatthey would return to slavery, and it is certainthat they are not only brave, but would die ratherthan be taken prisoners. This is a questionworth consideration, as out of an idle and uselessrace in the West-indies may be formed, atvery little expense, a most valuable frontier populationto these provinces. I am happy toperceive that, in the Report of Lord Durham, theimportance of these provinces to the mother-countryis fully acknowledged.These interests are indeed of great magnitude; and on the course which your MajestyCANADA. 77and your Parliament may adopt, with respectto the North American colonies, will depend thefuture destinies, not only of the million and ahalf of your Majesty s subjects who at presentinhabit those provinces, but of that vast populationwhich those ample and fertile territoriesare fit and destined hereafter to support. Noportion of the American continent possessesgreater natural resources for the maintenance oflarge and flourishing communities. An almostboundless range of the richest soil still remainsunsettled, and may be rendered available for thepurposes of agriculture. The wealth of inexhaustibleforests of the best timber in America,and of extensive regions of the most valuableminerals, have as yet been scarcely touched.Along the whole line of sea-coast, around eachisland, and in every river, are to be found thegreatest and richest fisheries in the world. Thebest fuel and the most abundant water-powerare available for the coarser manufactures, forwhich an easy and certain market will be found.78 CANADA.Trade with other continents is favoured by thepossession of a large number of safe and spaciousharbours ; long, deep, and numerous rivers, andvast inland seas, supply the means of easy intercourse; and the structure of the country generallyaffords the utmost facility for every species ofcommunication by land. Unbounded materialsof agricultural, commercial and manufacturingindustry are there ; it depends upon the presentdecision of the Imperial Legislature to determinefor whose benefit they are to be renderedavailable. The country which has founded andmaintained these colonies at a vast expense ofblood and treasure, may justly expect its compensationin turning their unappropriated resourcesto the account of its own redundant population; they are the rightful patrimony ofthe English people, the ample appanage whichGod and Nature have set aside in the NewWorld for those whose lot has assigned thembut insufficient portion in the Old. Underwise and free institutions, these great advan-CANADA. 79takes may yet be secured to your Majesty s subjects; and a connexion, secured fby the link ofkindred origin and mutual benefits, may continueto bind to the British Empire the ample territoriesof its North American provinces, and thelarge and flourishing population by which theywill assuredly be filled."SOCHAPTER IV.PREVIOUS to my entering into a further examinationof the Canada question, it will perhapsbe better to recapitulate, in as few words aspossible, what has already occurred, and theprincipal causes of the late insurrection.When the Canadian provinces were reducedby the British arms, the inhabitants, being entirelyFrench, were permitted to retain theirown laws, their own language in Courts andpublic offices, and all their vested rights whichhad been granted to them by the French government.It was a generous, but, as it has beenproved, an unwise policy. The form of government,as an English colony, was proposed, andacceded to by the French population, who, granada.81lifted by the liberality of their new rulers ycheerfully took the oath of allegiance. Fonmany years, indeed it may be said until theclose of the war of 1814, the population remainedalmost entirely French. England hadbeen so long engaged in war, and the annualexpenditure of life in her armies and her navieswas so great, that she could not permit, muchless encourage, emigration.At the close of the war of 1814, the censusof the population in the two Canadian provinceswas as follows : In Lower Canada, betweenthree and four hundred thousand ; in UpperCanada, from thirty to forty thousand, of whichnineteen-twentieths were of French extraction.But the emigration during the last twenty-fiveyears of peace has made a considerable change.The population of Lower Canada has increased tosix hundred thousand, and that of Upper Canadanow amounts to upwards of four hundred thousand.As the emigration has been almost whollyfrom the British dominions, it may be now fairlyE382 CANADA.assumed that, taking the two provinces together,the English and French population are now ona, par as to numbers ; the English preponderatein the Upper province as much as the Frenchdo in the Lower. But if we are to consider thetwo nations of settlers as to their respectivevalue as emigrants to the provinces, on the pointof capital, industry, and enterprize, the scalewill descend immediately in favour of the Englishpopulation. The French are inactive,adverse to speculation, or even improvement.Every habitant is content with his farm ashanded down to him by his progenitor, and thehigher classes who hold the seigneuries are satisfiedwith their seignorial rights and the meansof exaction which they afford to them. The privilegesof these seigneurs, or lords of the manor,in Lower Canada, are very extensive, and a barto all improvement or advance. They hold theexclusive right of hunting and fishing; all thewater privileges, such as the erection of sawmills,&c., are insured to them. The habitantCANADA. 83is even compelled to send his flour to be groundat the mill of the lord of the manor. At thesale of every property, the lord of the manorreceives one-twelfth of the proceeds. Thus, ifa farm worth a few hundred pounds was to fallinto the hands of an enterprizing man, and hewas to raise it to the value of thousands, morethan the prime-cost would be deducted for thelord of the manor if he were compelled to partwith it. This, with the other impediments toenterprize, has left Lower Canada in a state ofquiescence, and the emigrants who have goneover have passed it by that they might settle onthe more fertile and free province of UpperCanada. One of the writers in the daily pressof New York has very truly remarked :When the British first obtained the C ana-cas,its commerce consisted of a few peltries, conveyedto France by the vessels which broughtout the troops and carried back the disbandedregiments. The lumber trade was unknown.The importations were a nonentity. While at84 CANADA.present many hundreds of vessels are engagedin the direct timber trade, and more than onehundred and fifty vessels have been frequentlycounted on the river St. Lawrence. These, itmust be remembered, are almost exclusivelyowned by British merchants ; while the FrenchCanadians own the land in the same proportionas the English do the trade."It was the knowledge of these facts, and thatthe English were every year rising in importance,(for they had not only secured the whole trade, butwere gradually occupying the more fertile land ofthe Upper province,) which has created the jealousyand ill-will, and has been such a sourceof irritation to the French inhabitants of theLower province. I have dwelt upon these factsbecause there is a very general opinion (whichhas most unfortunately been acted upon by ourGovernments), that the legislature of the provinceshould be guided by the interests of the majority,and this they have considered to be infavour of the French population ; whereas in num-canada.85hers they are about equal, and in point of wealthand importance, the English population are mostdecidedly in the advance ; besides that, the formerpopulation would willingly separate themselvesfrom the mother-country, and therefore deservebut little favour, while the latter are loyal andattached to it. The French having the ascendancyof five to one in the Lower province, havedone all they can to check improvement. Publicworks which have cost large sums, have remaineduncompleted, because the House of Assemblyin the Lower province has refused toallow them to be carried on. Indeed, had theLower province been allowed to continue in hercareer of opposition, she would have eventuallyrendered difficult all communication betweenthe Upper province and the mother-country. 1This is acknowledged in Lord Durham s report,which saysWithout going so far as to accuse the Assemblyof a deliberate design to check the settlementand improvement of Lower Canada, it86 CANADA.cannot be denied that they looked with considerablejealousy and dislike on the increase andprosperity of what they regarded as a foreignand hostile race ; they looked on the province asthe patrimony of their own race ; they viewedit not as a country to be settled, but as one alreadysettled ; and instead of legislating in theAmerican spirit, and first providing for thefuture population of the province, their primarycare was, in the spirit of legislation which prevailsin the old world, to guard the interests andfeelings of the present race of inhabitants, towhom they considered the new comers as subordinate; they refused to increase the burthens ofthe country by imposing taxes to meet the expenditurerequired for improvement, and they alsorefused to direct to that object any of the fundspreviously devoted to other purposes. The improvementof the harbour of Montreal was suspended,from a political antipathy to a leadingEnglish merchant who had been the most activeof the commissioners, and by whom it had beenCANADA. 87conducted with the most admirable success. Itis but just to say, that some of the works whichthe Assembly authorized and encouraged, wereundertaken on a scale of due moderation, andsatisfactorily perfected and brought into operation.Others, especially the great communicationswhich I have mentioned above, the Assemblyshowed a great reluctance to promote or even topermit. It is true that there was considerablefoundation for their objections to the plan onwhich the Legislature of Upper Canada hadcommenced some of these works, and to themode in which it had carried them on ; but theEnglish complained that, instead of profiting bythe experience which they might have derivedfrom this source, the Assembly seemed only tomake its objections a pretext for doing nothing.The applications for banks, railroads, and canalswere laid on one side until some general measurescould be adopted with regard to such undertakings; but the general measures thus promised88 CANADA.were never passed, and the particular enterprizesin question were prevented. The adoptionof a registry was refused, on the alleged groundof its inconsistency with the French institutionsof the province, and no measure to attain thisdesirable end in a less obnoxious mode, was preparedby the leaders of the Assembly. Thefeudal tenure was supported, as a mild and justprovision for the settlement of a new country ;a kind of assurance given by a committee of theAssembly, that some steps should be taken toremove the most injurious incidents of the seignorialtenure, produced no practical results;and the enterprizes of the English were stillthwarted by the obnoxious laws of the country.In all these decisions of the Assembly, in itsdiscussions, and in the apparent motives of itsconduct, the English population perceived tracesof a desire to repress the influx and the successof their race. A measure for imposing a tax onemigrants, though recommended by the HomeCANADA. 89Government, and warranted by the policy ofthose neighbouring States which give the greatestencouragement to emigration, was arguedon such grounds in the Assembly, that it wasnot unjustly regarded as indicative of an intentionto exclude any further accession to theEnglish population ; and the industry of theEnglish was thus retarded by this conduct ofthe Assembly. Some districts, particularly thatof the Eastern Townships, where the Frenchrace have no footing, were seriously injured bythe refusal of necessary improvements ; and theEnglish inhabitants generally regarded the policyof the Assembly as a plan for preventingany further emigration to the province, of stoppingthe growth of English wealth, and of renderingprecarious the English property alreadyinvested or acquired in Lower Canada."It may be said, that latterly the French party,by the inconsiderate yielding of the Governmentat home, legislate for both provinces ; and findingthat they never could compete with the Eng-90 CANADA.lishin other points, their object has been to crushthem as much as possible.* The policy pursuedIt was not long after the conquest, that another andlarger class of English settlers began to enter the province.English capital was attracted to Canada by thevast quantity and valuable nature of the exportable produceof the country, and the great facilities for commerce,presented by the natural means of internal intercourse-theancient trade of the country was conducted on amuch larger and more profitable scale ; and new branchesof industry were explored. The active and regularhabits of the English capitalist drove out of all the moreprofitable kinds of industry their inert and careless competitorsof the French race ; but in respect of the greaterpart (almost the whole) of the commerce and manufacturesof the country, the English cannot be said to haveencroached on the French ; for, in fact, they createdemployments and profits which had not previously existed.A few of the ancient race smarted under the lossoccasioned by the success of English competition; butall felt yet more acutely the gradual increase of a classof strangers in whose hands the wealth of the countryappeared to centre, and whose expenditure and influenceeclipsed those of the class which had previouslyoccupied the first position in the country. Nor was theintrusion of the English limited to commercial enterprizes.By degrees, large portions of land were occupiedby them ; nor did they confine themselves to the unsettledand distant country of the townships. The wealthy capitalistinvested his money in the purchase of seignorialCANADA. 91by M. Papineau and his adherents, has thereforebeen to keep the Lower Province entirely in theproperties ; and it is estimated, that at the present momentfull half of the more valuable signifies are actuallyowned by English proprietors. The seigniorial tenure isone so little adapted to our notions of proprietary rights,that the new seigneur, without any consciousness or intentionof injustice, in many instances exercised hisrights in a manner which would appear perfectly fair inthis country, but which the Canadian settler reasonablyregarded as oppressive. The English purchaser foundan equally unexpected and just cause of complaint inthat uncertainty of the laws, which rendered his possessionof property precarious, and in those incidents of thetenure which rendered its alienation or improvement difficult.But an irritation, greater than that occasioned bythe transfer of the large properties, was caused by thecompetition of the English with the French farmer.The English farmer carried with him the experience andhabits of the most improved agriculture in the world.He settled himself in the townships bordering on thesignifies, and brought a fresh soil and improved cultivationto compete with the worn-out and slovenly farmof the habitant. He often took the very farm which theCanadian settler had abandoned, and, by superior management,made that a source of profit which had onlyimpoverished his predecessor. The ascendancy whichan unjust favoritism had contributed to give to theEnglish race in the government and the legal profession,their own superior energy, skill and capital secured to92 CANADA.hands of the French, and with this view theyhave, as much as possible, prevented Britishsettlers from obtaining land in Lower Canada ;and that their rule might be absolute, over theFrench population, they have prevented theireducation, so that they might blindly follow thosewho guided them. These two assertions will befully borne out by an examination into the publicrecords.The land being almost wholly in the possessionof the French, M. Papineau s first objectwas, to make the possession of landed propertythe tenure by which any employment of trustunder government could be held ; and in thisgreat object he succeeded. It must at once beperceived that, by this regulation alone, allthem in every branch of industry. They have developedthe resources of the country ; they have constructed orimproved its means of communication ; they have createdits internal and foreign commerce. The entirewholesale, and a large portion of the retail trade of theprovince, with the most profitable and flourishing farms,are now in the hands of this numerical minority of thepopulation.CANADA. 93British residents were excluded, and that if possessedof capital to any amount, whatever theirstake in the colony might be, they were ruledand dictated to by the French party. No personcould be an officer in the militia unless he was aland-owner. The wealthy English merchant hadto fall into the ranks, and be ordered about byan ignorant French farmer, a man who could notwrite or read, but made his cross to any paperpresented to him for his signature.By another enactment the grand juries were tobe selected from those who were land-owners,and the consequence was, that in two grandjuries selected in two succeeding years, there wasonly one man who could write or read out of thewhole number, and the others fixed their crossto the bills found.What was still more absurd was, that theoffice of trustee for the schools could only be heldby the same tenure, and in the Act passed, it isprovided, that the trustees for national educationmay be permitted to affix their cross to the school94 CANADA.reports, a more convincing proof of the state ofignorance in which the Canadian French populationhave been held and acknowledged to be so bythe French party, by the making such a provisoin the statute. I had a convincing proof myself ofthe ignorance of the French population during therebellion in Lower Canada. I handed a printedcircular to about four hundred prisoners who werecollected, for one of them to read aloud to the rest,and there was not one who could read print.Having secured the party in the province,the next object of M. Papineau and his adherentswas, to blind the Government at home :they sent home a list of grievances which requiredredress, and in this they were joined bythe English republican party. Among otherdemands, they insisted upon the right to theLower Assembly having the control of thecolonial revenues. So earnest was the Governmentat home to satisfy them, that every concessionwas made, and even the last great questionof controlling their own expenditure was con-canada.95seated to, upon the sole condition that the civillist, for the payment of the salary of the governorand other state officers, was secured.What was the conduct of M. Papineau andhis party as soon as they had gained their point?They immediately broke their faith with theGovernment at home, and refused to vote thesum for the civil list.For three years, the governor and all thepublic officers w r ere without their salaries, whichwere at last provided for by a vote of the EnglishParliament at home. This nefarious conduct ofthe French party had one good effect, it createda disunion with the English republican party,who, although they wished for reform, wouldbe no participators in such a breach of honour.That for many years there has been sad mismanagementon the part of the Government athome, cannot be denied, but the error has been thecontinual yielding to French clamour and misrepresentation,and the Government having lostsight of the fact that the English population96 CANADA.were rapidly increasing, and had an equal rightto the protection of the mother-country. It isthe English population who have had real causeof complaint, and who are justified in demandingredress ; the French have been only too welltreated, and their demands became more imperiousin proportion to the facility with whichthe Government yielded to them in their earnest,but mistaken, desire to put an end to the agitationof M. Papineau and his party. Mistakingthe forbearance of the English government forweakness, M. Papineau issued his inflammatoryappeals ; the people were incited to rebellion ;but even this conduct did not seem to rouse theGovernment at home, who had probably formedthe idea that the French Canadian was too peacefulto have recourse to arms. Emboldened bythis conduct on the part of Government, whichwas ascribed to fear, and finding themselves supportedby Mr. Joseph Hume and Mr. Roebuckat home, the republican party in Upper Canadaopenly declared itself, and a portion of theCANADA. 97Canadian press issued the most treasonable articleswithout molestation. The Americans werenot idle in fomenting this ill-will towards themother-country in the Upper Province, and thePapineau party proceeded to more active measures.Arrangements were made for a generalrising of the Lower Province ; the meeting of St.Charles took place, and resolutions were passed ofa nature which could no longer be overlooked bythe Provincial Government. For many monthsprevious to the meeting at St. Charles, theProvincial Government had been aroused andaware of the danger, and Lord Gosport perceivedthe necessity of acting contrary to theorders received from home. Proofs had beenobtained against those who were most active inthe intended rebellion, and at last warrants wereissued by the Attorney General for their apprehension.It was this sudden and unexpectedissue of the warrants which may be said to havesaved the provinces. It defeated all the plansof the conspirators, who had not intended toVOL in. F98 CANADA.have flown to arms until the next Spring, whentheir arrangements would have been fully madeand organized. This fact I had from Roulette,and three or four of the ringleaders, whom Ivisited in prison. They intended to have hadthe leaf on the tree, and the cold weather over,before they commenced operations ; and hadthey waited till then the result might have beenvery serious, but the issue of the warrants forthe apprehension of the leaders placed them inthe awkward dilemma of either being deprivedof them, or of having recourse to arms beforetheir plans were fully matured. The latter wasthe alternative preferred ; and the results of thisunsuccessful attempt are well described in LordDurham s report :The treasonable attempt of the Frenchparty to carry its political objects into effect byan appeal to arms, brought these hostile racesinto general and armed collision. I will notdwell on the melancholy scenes exhibited in theprogress of the contest, or the fierce passionsCANADA. 99which held an unchecked sway during the insurrection,or immediately after its suppression.It is not difficult to conceive how greatly theevils, which I have described as previously existing,have been aggravated by the war ; howterror and revenge nourished, in each portion ofthe population, a bitter and irreconcilable hatredto each other, and to the institutions of thecountry. The French population, who had forsome time exercised a great and increasing powerthrough the medium of the House of Assembly,found their hopes unexpectedly prostrated in thedust. The physical force which they had vauntedwas called into action, and proved to be utterlyinefficient. The hope of recovering their previousascendancy under a constitution similarto that suspended, almost ceased to exist. Removed*from all actual share in the governmentof their country, they brood in sullen silence overthe memory of their fallen countrymen, of theirburnt villages, of their ruined property, of theirextinguished ascendancy, and of their humbled100 CANADA.nationality. To the Government and the Englishthey ascribe these wrongs, and nourish againstboth an indiscriminating and eternal animosity.Nor have the English inhabitants forgotten intheir triumph, the terror with which they suddenlysaw themselves surrounded by an insurgentmajority, and the incidents which alone appearedto save them from the unchecked dominationof their antagonists. They find themselvesstill a minority in the midst of a hostile andorganized people ; apprehensions of secret conspiraciesand sanguinary designs haunt themunceasingly, and their only hope of safety issupposed to rest on systematically terrifyingand disabling the French, and in preventing amajority of that race from ever again beingpredominant in any portion of the legislature ofthe province. I describe in strong terms thefeelings which appear to me to animate eachportion of the population ; and the picture whichI draw represents a state of things so littlefamiliar to the personal experience of the peopleCANADA. 101of this country, that many will probably regardit as the work of mere imagination ; but I feelconfident that the accuracy and moderation ofmy description will be acknowledged; ty.all whohave seen the state of society in Lower "Canadaduring the last year. Nor do I exaggerate chj -, ,; ,inevitable constancy, any more than the intensityof this animosity. Never again will the presentgeneration of French Canadians yield a loyalsubmission to a British Government ; neveragain will the English population tolerate theauthority of a House of Assembly in which theFrench shall possess or even approximate to amajority."Although M. Papineau and his party werevery willing to fraternize with the discontentedparty in Upper Canada, and to call forth thesympathy and the assistance of the Americans,,their real intentions and wishes were to have madethe Canadass an independent French province,in strict alliance with France.* The assistance# " Nor does there appear to be the slightest chanceof putting an end to this animosity during the present102 CANADA.of the Upper Canada party would have beenaccepted until they were no longer required,generation. Passions inflamed during so long a period,cannot, ppeeclily be calmed. The state of educationwhi/ih T fravfc previously described as placing the peasantryentirely at the mercy of agitator?, the total ab-saracenf <&ny* class of persons, or any organization ofauthority that could counteract this mischievous influence,and the serious decline in the district of Montrealof the influence of the clergy, concur in rendering itabsolutely impossible for the Government to produce anybetter state of feeling among the French population. Itis even impossible to impress on a people so circumstancedthe salutary dread of the power of Great Britain,which the presence of a large military force in theprovince might be expected to produce. I have beeninformed, by witnesses so numerous and so trustworthythat I cannot doubt the correctness of their statements,that the peasantry were generally ignorant of the largeamount of force which was sent into their country lastyear. The newspapers that circulate among them hadinformed them that Great Britain had no troops to sendout; that in order to produce an impression on the mindsof the country-people, the same regiments were marchedbackwards and forwards in different directions, andrepresented as additional arrivals from home. Thisexplanation was promulgated among the people by theagitators of each village ; and I have no doubt that themass of the inhabitants really believed that the governmentwas endeavouring to impose on them by thisspecies of fraud. It is a population with whom au-canada.103and then there would have been an attempt, andvery probably a successful one, to drive awaythirty has no means of contact or explanation. It isdifficult even to ascertain what amount of influence theancient leaders of the French party continue to possess.[The name of M. Papineau is still cherished by thepeople ; and the idea is current that, at the appointedtime, he will return, at the head of an immense army,and re-establish " La Nation Canadienne."] But thereis great reason to doubt whether his name be not usedas a mere watchword ; whether the people are not infact running entirely counter to his counsels and policy ;and whether they are not really under the guidance ofseparate petty agitators, who have no plan but that ofa senseless and reckless determination to show inevery way their hostility to the British Government andEnglish race. Their ultimate designs and hopes areequally unintelligible. Some vague expectation of absoluteindependence still seems to delude them. Thenational vanity, which is a remarkable ingredient intheir character, induces many to flatter themselves withthe idea of a Canadian Republic ; the sounder informationof others has led them to perceive that a separationfrom Great Britain must be followed by a junctionwith the great Confederation on their southern frontier.But they seem apparently reckless of the consequences,provided they can wreak their vengeance on the English.There is no people against which early associations andevery conceivable difference of manners and opinions,104 CANADA.by every means in their power the Englishsettlers in Upper Canada to the United States.The Americans, on the other hand, cared nothinghave implanted in the Canadian mind a more ancientand rooted national antipathy than that which they feelagainst the people of the United States. Their morediscerning leaders feel that their chances of preservingtheir nationality would be greatly diminished by an incorporationwith the United States ; and recent symptomsof Anti-Catholic feeling in New England, wellknown to the Canadian population, have generated avery general belief that their religion, which even theydo not accuse the British party of assailing, would findlittle favour or respect from their neighbours. Yet noneeven of these considerations weigh against their presentall-absorbing hatred of the English ; and I am persuadedthat they would purchase vengeance and a momentarytriumph by the aid of any enemies, or submission to anyyoke. This provisional but complete cessation of theirancient antipathy to the Americans, is now admitted evenby those who most strongly denied it during the lastspring, and who then asserted that an American warwould as completely unite the whole population againstthe common enemy, as it did in 1813. My subsequentexperience leaves no doubt in my mind that the viewswhich were contained in my despatch on the 9th ofAugust are perfectly correct ; and that an invadingAmerican army might rely on the co-operation ofalmost the entire French population of Lower Canada. rCANADA. 105about the French or English grievances ,- theirsympathy arose from nothing less than a wishto add the Canadass to their already vast territories,and to drive the English from theirlast possessions in America ; but they also knewhow to wear the cloak as well as M. Papineau,and had the insurrection been successful, bothFrench and English would by this time havebeen subjected to their control, and M. Papineauwould have found that he had only been a toolin the hands of the more astute and ambitiousAmericans. Such is my conviction : but this iscertain, that whatever might have been the resultof the former insurrection, or whatever maybethe result of any future one (for the troublesare not yet over), the English in Upper Canadamust fall a sacrifice to either one party or theother, unless they can succeed (which, withtheir present numbers and situation, will bedifficult) in overpowering them both.It may be inquired, what were the causes ofdiscontent which occasioned the partial rising inF3106 CANADA.Upper Canada. Strange to say, although Mackenzie and his party were in concert and correspondencewith M. Papineau, the chief cause ofdiscontent arose from the partiality shewn bythe English government to the French Canadiansin Lower Canada ; their grievances were theirown, and they had no fellow-feeling with theFrench Canadians. If they had any prepossessionat all, it was in favour of joining theAmerican States, and to this they were instigatedby the number of Americans who hadsettled in Upper Canada. There were severalminor causes of discontent : the Scotch emigrantswere displeased because the governmenthad decided that the clergy revenues were to beallotted only for the support of the Episcopalchurch, and not for the Presbyterian. But thegreat discontent was because the English settlersconsidered that they had been unfairly treated,and sacrificed by the government at home. Butalthough discontent was general, a wish to rebelwas not so, and here it was that Mckenzie foundCANADA. 107himself in error, and M. Papineau was deceived;instead of being joined by thousands, as theyexpected, from the Upper Province, they couldonly muster a few hundreds, who were easilydispersed ; the feelings of loyalty prevailed, andthose whom the rebel-leaders expected wouldhave joined the standard of insurrection, enrolledthemselves to trample it under foot. Thebehaviour of the settlers in Upper Canada wasworthy of all praise : they had just grounds ofcomplaint ; they had been opposed and sacrificedto a malevolent and ungrateful French party inthe Lower Province ; yet when the questionarose as to whether they should assist, or putdown the insurrection, they immediately forgottheir own wrongs, and proved their loyalty totheir country.The party who adhered to Mckenzie maywell be considered as an American party ; forUpper Canada had been so neglected and uncaredfor, that the Americans had already obtainedgreat influence there. Indeed, when it is108 CANADA.stated that Mathews and Count, the two membersof the Upper House of Assembly who wereexecuted for treason, were both Americans, itis evident that the Americans had even obtaineda share in the legislation of the province.When I passed through the Upper Province, Iremarked that, independently of some of the bestland being held by Americans, the landlords ofthe inns, the contractors for transporting themails, and drivers of coaches, were almost withoutexception, Americans,One cause of the Americans wishing that theCanadass should be wrested from the Englishowas that, by an Act of the Legislature, theywere not able to hold lands in the province. Itis true that they could purchase them, but ifthey wished to sell them, the title was not valid.Colonel Prince, whose name was so conspicuousduring the late troubles, brought in a billto allow Americans to hold land in Upper Canada,but the bill was thrown out. It scarcelyneed be observed that Colonel Prince is now asCANADA, 109violent an opponent to the bill.* He has hadquite enough of Americans in Upper Canada.It was fortunate for the country that therewas such a man as Sir John Colborne, andColonel Prince is the gentleman who took with hisown hands General Sutherland and his aid-decamp, andwho ordered the Yankee pirates to be shot. Mr. Humehas thought proper to make a motion in the House ofCommons, reprobating this act as one of murder. Ibelieve there is little difference whether a man breaksinto your house, and steals your money; or burns yourhouse, and robs you of your cattle and other property.One is as much a case of burglary as the other. In thefirst instance you are justified in taking the robber s life,and why not in the second ? Those people who attackedthe inhabitants of a country with whom they were inprofound peace, were disowned by their own government,consequently they were outlaws and pirates, andit is a pity that Sutherland and every other prisonertaken had not been immediately shot. Mr. Hume mayflare up in the House of Commons, but I should like toknow what Mr. Hume s opinion would be if he was theparty who had had all his property stolen and his houseburnt over his head, in the depth of a Canadian winter. Isuspect he would say a very different say, as he has nosmall respect for the meum; indeed, I should be sorry tobe the party to be sentenced by Mr. Hume, if I had stolena few ducks out of the honourable gentleman s duck decoysnear Yarmouth.110 CANADA.aided by Sir Francis Head, at that period in thecommand of the two provinces. Of the first it isnot necessary that I should add my tribute ofadmiration to that which Sir John Colborne hasalready so unanimously received. Sir FrancisHead has not been quite so fortunate., and hasbeen accused (most unjustly) of rashness and wantof due precaution. Now the only grounds uponwhich this charge can be preferred is, his sendingdown to Sir John Colborne all the regular troops,when he was requested if possible so to do. Iwas at this period at Toronto, and as I had thepleasure of being intimate with Sir Francis, Ihad full knowledge of the causes of this decision.Sir Francis said, " I have but two hundred regulartroops ; they will be of great service in the LowerProvince, when added to those which Sir JohnColborne already has under his command. Herethey are not sufficient to stem an insurrection ifit be formidable. I do not know what may bethestrength of the rebels until they show themselves,but I think I do know the number whoCANADA. Illwill support me. Should the rebels prove ingreat force, these two companies of regular troopswill be overwhelmed, and what I consider is,not any partial success of the rebel party, butthe moral effect which success over regular troopswill create. There are, I am sure, thousands whoare at present undecided, who, if they heard thatthe regular troops, of whom they have such dread,were overcome, would join the rebel cause. Thisis what I fear ; as for any advantage gained overme, when I have only militia to oppose to them,that is of little consequence. When Sir JohnColborne has defeated them in Lower Canada,he can then come up here, with the regulartroops."I believe these to be the very words used bySir Francis Head when he asked my opinion onthe subject, and I agreed with him most cordially; but if any one is inclined to suppose,from the light, playful, and I must say, undearomatic style of Sir Francis s despatches, thathe had not calculated every chance, and made112 CANADA.every disposition which prudence and foresightcould suggest, they are very much mistaken.The most perfect confidence was reposed in himby all parties ; and the event proved that he wasnot out in his calculations, for with the militiaalone he put down the rebellion. During theshort time from Sir F. Head s going out, untilhe requested to be recalled, he did more goodto that province, and more to secure the Englishdominion than could be imagined, and had henot been governor of the province for some timeprevious to the rebellion, I strongly surmisethat it would have been lost to this country.The events of the rebellion are too fresh inthe reader s memory to be mentioned here. It is,however, necessary to examine into the presentstate of affairs, for it must not be supposed thatthe troubles have yet ceased.First, as to the French Canadian party. If Iam not very much mistaken, this may be consideredas broken up ; the severe lesson receivedfrom the English troops, and the want of con-canada.113licence in their leaders from their cowardice andinability, will prevent the French Canadiansfrom again taking up arms. They are naturallya peaceable, inoffensive, good-tempered people,and nothing but the earnest instigation of a portionof their priests, the notaries, and the doctors,(the three parties who most mix with the habitans),would have ever roused them to rebellion.As it is, I consider that they are efficientlyquelled, and will be quiet, at least for one generation,if the measures of the Government at homeare judicious. The cause of the great influenceobtained by the people I have specified overthe habitans is well explained in Lord Durham sReport. Speaking of the public seminaries, hesays :ir - The education given in these establishmentsgreatly resembles the kind given in theEnglish public schools, though it is rather morevaried. It is entirely in the hands of the Catholicclergy. The number of pupils in theseestablishments is estimated altogether at about a114 CANADA.thousand ; and they turn out every year, as farI could ascertain, between two and three hundredyoung men thus educated. Almost all ofthese are members of the family of some habitant,whom the possession of greater quicknessthan his brothers has induced the father or thecurate of the parish to select and send to theseminary. These young men, possessing a degreeof information immeasurably superior tothat of their families, are naturally averse toAvhat they regard as descending to the humbleoccupations of their parents. A few becomepriests ; but as the military and naval professionsare closed against the colonist, the greater partcan only find a position suited to their notionsof their own qualifications in the learned professionsof advocate, notary, and surgeon. Asfrom this cause these professions are greatlyoverstocked, we find every village in Lower Canadafilled with notaries and surgeons, withlittle practice to occupy their attention, andliving among their own families, or at any rateCANADA. 115among exactly the same class. Thus the personsof most education in every village belongto the same families, and the same originalstation in life, as the illiterate habitans whom Ihave described. They are connected with themby all the associations of early youth, and theties of blood. The most perfect equality alwaysmarks their intercourse, and the superior ineducation is separated by no barrier of manners,or pride, or distinct interests, from the singularlyignorant peasantry by which he is surrounded.He combines, therefore, the influencesof superior knowledge, and social equality, andwields a power over the mass, which I do notbelieve that the educated class of any other portionof the world possessThe second party, which are the discontented,yet loyal English of Upper Canada, are entitledto, and it is hoped will receive the justice theyclaim : they well deserved it. It is the. duty, aswell as the interest of the mother-country to fosterloyalty, enterprize, and activity, and it is chiefly116 CANADA.in Upper Canada that it is to be found. Onegreat advantage has arisen from the late troubles,which is, that they have driven most of theAmericans out of the province, and have createdsuch a feeling of indignation and hatred towardsthem in the breasts of the Upper Canadians,that there is no chance of their fraternizing forat least another half century. Nothing couldhave proved more unfortunate to the Americandesire of obtaining the Canadass than the resultof the late rebellions. Should the Upper Canadians,from any continued injustice and misruleon the part of the mother-country, be determinedto separate, at all events it will not be to allythemselves with the Americans. In Lord Durhams Report we have the following remarks :I have, in despatches of a later date thanthat to which I have had occasion so frequentlyto refer, called the attention of the Home Governmentto the growth of this alarming state offeeling among the English population. Thecourse of the late troubles, and the assistanceCANADA. 117which the French insurgents derived from somecitizens of the United States, have caused a mostintense exasperation among the Canadian loyalistsagainst the American government and people.Their papers have teemed with the most unmeasureddenunciations of the good faith of theauthorities, of the character and morality of thepeople, and of the political institutions of theUnited States. Yet, under this surface of hostility,it is easy to detect a strong under-currentof an exactly contrary feeling. As the generalopinion of the American people became moreapparent during the course of the last year, theEnglish of Lower Canada were surprised to findhow strong, in spite of the first burst of sympathy,with a people supposed to be struggling forindependence, was the real sympathy of theirrepublican neighbours with the great objects ofthe minority. Without abandoning their attachmentto their mother-country, they havebegun, as men in a state of uncertainty areapt to do, to calculate the probable consequences118 CANADA.of a separation, if it should unfortunately occur,and be followed by an incorporation with theUnited States. In spite of the shock which itwould occasion their feelings, they undoubtedlythink that they should find some compensationin the promotion of their interests ; they believethat the influx of American emigration wouldspeedily place the English race in a majority ;they talk frequently and loudly of what hasoccured in Louisiana, where, by means whichthey utterly misrepresent, the end neverthelessof securing an English predominance over aFrench population has undoubtedly been attained;they assert very confidently, that theAmericans would make a very speedy and decisivesettlement of the pretensions of the French ;and they believe that, after the first shock of anentirely new political state had been got over,they and their posterity would share in thatamazing progress, and that great material prosperity,which every day s experience shows themisthe lot of the people of the United States.CANADA. 119I do not believe that such a feeling has yetsapped their strong allegiance to the Britishempire ; but their allegiance is founded on theirdeep-rooted attachment to British, as distinguishedfrom French institutions. And if theyfind that that authority which they have maintainedagainst its recent assailants, is to be exertedin such a manner as to subject them againto what they call a French dominion, I feel perfectlyconfident that they would attempt to avertthe result, by courting, on any terms, an unionwith an Anglo-saxon people."Here I do not agree with his lordship. Thatsuch was the feeling previous to the insurrectionI believe, and, notwithstanding the defeatof the insurgents, would have remained so, hadit not been for the piratical attacks of theAmericans, which their own government couldnot control. This was a lesson to the UpperCanadians. They perceived that there was nosecurity for life or property no law to checkoutrage and they felt severely the consequences120 CANADA.of this state of things in the destruction of theirproperty and the attempts upon their lives by anation professing to be in amity with them. Fraternizewith the Americans the Upper Canadianswill not. They may be subdued by them if theythrow off the allegiance and protection of themother-country, as they would be hemmed inbetween two hostile parties, and find it almostimpossible, with their present population, towithstand their united efforts. But shoulda conflict of this kind take place, and theUpper Canadians be allowed but a short periodof repose, or could they hold the Americans incheck for a time, they would sweep the wholerace of the Lower Canadians from the face ofthe earth. Their feelings towards the LowerCanadians are well explained in Lord Durham sReport :44 In the despatch above referred to I alsodescribed the state of feeling among the Englishpopulation, nor can I encourage a hope thatthat portion of the community is at all moreCANADA. 121inclined to any settlement of the present quarrelthat would leave any share of power to the hostilerace. Circumstances having thrown theEnglish into the ranks of the government, andthe folly of their opponents having placed them,on the other hand, in a state of permanent collisionwith it, the former possess the advantageof having the force of government, and the authorityof the laws on their side in the presentstage of the contest. Their exertions duringthe recent troubles have contributed to maintainthe supremacy of the law, and the continuanceof the connexion with Great Britain ; but itwould, in my opinion, be dangerous to rely onthe continuance of such a state of feeling as nowprevails among them, in the event of a differentpolicy being adopted by the Imperial Government.Indeed, the prevalent sentiment amongthem is one of anything but satisfaction with thecourse which has been long pursued, with referenceto Lower Canada, by the British legislatureand executive. The calmer view, whichVOL III. G122 CANADA.distant spectators are enabled to take of theconduct of the two parties, and the dispositionwhich is evinced to make a fair adjustment of thecontending claims, appear iniquitous and injuriousin the eyes of men who think that theyalone have any claim to the favour of that government,by which they alone have stood fast.They complain loudly and bitterly of the wholecourse pursued by the Imperial Government,with respect to the quarrel of the two races, ashaving been founded on an utter ignorance of, ordisregard to the real question at issue, as havingfostered the mischievous pretensions of Frenchnationality, and as having, by the vacillationand inconsistency which marked it, discouragedloyalty and fomented rebellion. Every measureof clemency, or even justice, towards their opponents,they regard with jealousy, as indicatinga disposition towards that conciliatory policywhich is the subject of their angry recollection ;for they feel that being a minority, any returnto the due course of constitutional governmentCANADA. 123would again subject them to a French majority ;and to this I am persuaded they would neverpeaceably submit. They do not hesitate to saythat they will not tolerate much longer the beingmade the sport of parties at home, and thatif the mother-country forgets what is due to theloyal and enterprizing men of her own race, theymust protect themselves. In the significantlanguage of one of their own ablest advocates,they assert that Lower Canada must be Englishat the expense, if necessary, of not beingBritish."The third party, which is the American, isthe only one at present inclined to move, andin all probability they will commence as soon asthe winter sets in ; for however opposed to thisshameful violation of the laws of nations thePresident, officers, and respectable portion ofthe American Union may be, it is certain thatthe majority are represented by these marauders,and the removal of our troops would be a signalfor immediate aggression.124 CANADA.The Americans will tell you that the sympathy,as they term it, only exists on the bordersof the lakes ; that it extends no further, andthat they are all opposed to it, &c. Such is notthe case. The greatest excitement which wasshewn any where was perhaps at Albany, thecapital of the State of New York, on the Hudsonriver, and two hundred miles at least fromthe boundary ; but not only there, but even onthe Mississippi the feeling was the same; infact, it was the feeling of the majority. In aletter I received the other day from a friend atNew York, there is the following remark :Bill Johnson (the pirate on lake Ontario)held his levees here during the winter. Theywere thronged with all the best people of the-city."Now, the quarter from whence I received thisintelligence is to be relied upon ; and that itwas the case I have no doubt. And why shouldthey feel such interest about a pirate like BillJohnson ? Simply because he had assailed theCANADA. 125English. This may appear a trifle; but astraw thrown up shews in what direction thewind blows.At present there is no want of troops to defendthe Canadass against a foreign attack, andlittle inclination to rebel in the provinces themselves.That now required is, that the legislatureshould he improved so as to do justice toall parties, and such an encouragement given toenterprise and industry as to induce a more extendedemigration.Lord Durham has very correctly observed,that it is not now a conflict of principles betweenthe English and French, but a conflict ofthe two races. He says :I expected to find a contest between a governmentand a people: I found two nationswarring in the bosom of a single state : I founda struggle, not of principles, but of races ; andI perceived that it would be idle to attempt anyamelioration of laws or institutions until we126 CANADA.could first succeed in terminating a deadly animositythat now separates the inhabitants ofLower Canada into the hostile divisions ofFrench and English. 1But why should this conflict between the tworaces have taken place? Firstly, because theFrench, by the injudicious generosity of ourGovernment in allowing them to retain theirlanguage in public affairs, with all their customsand usages, were allowed to remain aFrench colony, instead of amalgamating themwith the English, as might have been done.Subsequently, because the interests of the Englishcolonists have been sacrificed to the French,who, nevertheless, became disaffected, and wouldhave thrown off the English dominion. LordDurham very correctly adds :Such is the lamentable and hazardous stateof things produced by the conflict of races whichhas so long divided the province of Lower Canada,and which has assumed the formidableCANADA. 127and irreconcilable character which I have depicted.In describing the nature of this conflict,I have specified the causes in which itoriginated ; and though I have mentioned theconduct and constitution of the colonial government,as modifying the character of the struggle,I have not attributed to political causes a stateof things which would, I believe, under anypolitical institutions have resulted from the verycomposition of society. A jealousy between tworaces, so long habituated to regard each otherwith hereditary enmity, and so differing inhabits,in language, and in laws, would havebeen inevitable under any form of government.That liberal institutions and prudent policymight have changed the character of the struggle,I have no doubt ; but they could not haveprevented it ; they could only have softened itscharacter, and brought it more speedily to amore decisive and peaceful conclusion. Unhappily,however, the system of government128 CANADA.pursued in Lower Canada has been based ORthe policy of perpetuating that very separationof the races, and encouraging these very notionsof conflicting nationalities which it ought tohave been the first and chief care of Governmentto check and extinguish. From the period ofthe conquest to the present time, the conductof the Government has aggravated the evil, andthe origin of the present extreme disorder maybefound in the institutions by which the characterof the colony was determined."We have, therefore, to legislate between thetwo parties, and let us, previous to entering uponthe question, examine into their respectivemerits. On the one hand we have a Frenchpopulation who, after having received every favourwhich could be granted with a due regardto freedom, have insisted upon, and have obtainedmuch more, and who in return for allthe kindness heaped upon them, excited by envyand jealousy of an energy and enterprize of whichCANADA. 129they were incapable, have risen in rebellion, withthe hopes of making themselves an independentnation.On the other hand we have a generous, high-spiritedrace of our own blood, and migrating fromour own soil, who, having been unfairly treated,and having jitst grounds of complaint againstthe mother-country, have nevertheless forgottentheir own wrongs, and, to a man, flown to arms,willing to shed their blood in defence of themother-country.Add to this, we have the French inhabitinga comparatively sterile country, without activityor enterprize ; the English, in a country fertile toexcess, possessing most of the capital, and theonly portion of the colonists to whom we cansafely confide the defence of that which I trust Ihave proved to the reader to be the most importantoutpost in the English dominions. Bearingall this in mind, and also remembering that ifthe emigration to Upper Canada again revive,130 CANADA.that this latter population will in a few yearsbe in an immense majority, and will ultimatelywholly swallow up all the former, we may nowproceed to consider what should be the policyof the mother-country.CHAPTER V.IN the last chapter I pointed out that in ourfuture legislation for these provinces, we hadto decide between the English and Frenchinhabitants; up to the present the Frenchhave been in power, and have been invariablyfavoured by the Government, much to the injuryof the English population. Before I offer anyopinion on this question, let us inquire whathas been the conduct of the French in their exerciseof their rights as a Legislative Assembly,and what security they offer us, to incline usagain to put confidence in them. In examininginto this question, I prefer, as a basis, the Reportof Lord Durham, made to the EnglishParliament. His lordship, adverting to the state132 CANADA.of hostility between the representative and executivepowers in our colonies, prefaces with aremark relative to our own country, which Ithink late events do not fully bear out ; hesays :-However partial the monarch might be toparticular ministers, or however he might navepersonally committed himself to their policy, hehas been invariably constrained to abandon both,as soon as the opinion of the people has beenirrevocably pronounced against them, throughthe medium of the House of Commons""This he repeats in an after part of the Report:When a ministry ceases to command a majorityin Parliament on great questions of policy,its doom is immediately sealed ; and it wouldappear to us as strange to attempt, for any time,to carry on a Government by means of ministersperpetually in a minority, as it would be to passlaws with a majority of votes against them."CANADA. 133If such be an essential part of our constitution,as his lordship asserts, surely we havesuffered an inroad into it lately.That the system of Colonial Government isdefective, I grant, but it is not so much fromthe check which the Legislative Council putsupon the Representative Assembly, as from thesecresy of the acts and decisions of that council.This, indeed, his lordship admits in some cases,and I think that I can fully establish that, withoutthis salutary check, the Legislative Assembly ofLower Canada would have soon voted themselvesFree and Independent States. Lord Durhamobserves :I am far from concurring in the censurewhich the Assembly and its advocates have attemptedto cast on the acts of the LegislativeCouncil. I have no hesitation in saying thatmany of the bills which it is most severelyblamed for rejecting, were bills which it couldnot have passed without a dereliction of its duty134 CANADA.to the constitution, the connexion with GreatBritain, and the whole English population ofthe colony. If there is any censure to be passedon its general conduct, it is for having confineditself to the merely negative and defensive dutiesof a legislative body ; for having too frequentlycontented itself with merely defeating objectionablemethods of obtaining desirable ends, withoutcompleting its duty by proposing measures,which would have achieved the good in viewwithout the mixture of evil. The national animositieswhich pervaded the legislation of theAssembly, and its thorough want of legislativeskill or respect for constitutional principles, renderedalmost all its bills obnoxious to the objectionsmade by the Legislative Council ; and theserious evil which their enactment would haveoccasioned, convinces me that the colony hasreason to congratulate itself on the existence ofan institution which possessed and used thepower of stopping a course of legislation that,CANADA. 135if successful, would have sacrificed every Britishinterest, and overthrown every guarantee oforder and national liberty."Again :One glaring attempt which was made directlyand openly to subvert the constitution of thecountry, was, by passing a bill for the formal repealof those parts of the 31 Geo. 3, c. 31, commonlycalled the Constitutional Act, by whichthe constitution and powers of the LegislativeCouncil were established. It can hardly besupposed that the framers of this bill were unaware,or hoped to make any concealment of theobvious illegality of a measure, which, commencingas all Canadian Acts do, by a recital of the31 Geo. 3, as the foundation of the legislativeauthority of the Assembly, proceeded immediatelyto infringe some of the most important provisionsof that very statute ; nor can it be supposedthat the Assembly hoped really to carryinto effect this extraordinary assumption ofpower, inasmuch as the bill could derive no legal136 CANADA.effect from passing the Lower House, unless itshould subsequently receive the assent of thevery body which it purported to annihilate."Take again the following observations of hislordship :"But the evils resulting from such open attemptsto dispense with the constitution were small, incomparison with the disturbance of the regularcourse of legislation by systematic abuse of constitutionalforms, for the purpose of deprivingthe other branches of the legislature of all reallegislative authority.It remained, however, for the Assembly ctLower Canada to reduce the practice to a regularsystem, in order that it might have themost important institutions of the province periodicallyat its mercy, and use the necessities ofthe government and the community for the purposeof extorting the concession of whateverdemands it might choose to make. Objectionablein itself, on account of the uncertainty andcontinual changes which it tended to introduceCANADA. 137into legislation, this system of temporary lawsderived its worst character from the facilitieswhich it afforded to the practice of tackingtogether various legislative measures.A singular instance of this occurred in 1836,with respect to the renewal of the jury law,to which the Assembly attached great importance,and to which the Legislative Council felta strong repugnance, on account of its havingin effect placed the juries entirely in the handsof the French portion of the population. Inorder to secure the renewal of this law, the A s-semble coupled it in the same bill by which itrenewed the tolls of the Machine Canal, calculatingon the Council not venturing to defeat ameasure of so much importance to the revenueas theater by resisting the former. The council,however, rejected the bill ; and thus the canalremained toll-free for a whole season, becausethe two Houses differed about a jury law."So much for their attempts to subvert the constitution.Now let us inquire how far these138 CANADA.patriots were disinterested in their enactments.First, as to grants for local improvements, howwere they applied ? His lordship observes :The great business of the Assemblies is,literally, parish business ; the making parishroads and parish bridges. There are in none ofthese provinces any local bodies possessing authorityto impose local assessments, for the managementof local affairs. To do these things is thebusiness of the Assembly ; and to induce theAssembly to attend to the particular interests ofeach county, is the especial business of its countymember. The surplus revenue of the provinceis swelled to as large an amount as possible, bycutting down the payment of public services toas low a scale as possible ; and the real duties ofgovernment are, sometimes, insufficiently providedfor, in order that more may be left to bedivided among the constituent bodies. Whenwe want a bridge, we take a judge to build it,was the quaint and forcible way in which a memberof a provincial legislature described the ten-canada.139deny to retrench, in the most necessary departmentsof the public service, in order to satisfythe demands for local works. This fund isvoted by the Assembly on the motion of itsmembers ; the necessity of obtaining the previousconsent of the Crown to money votes neverhaving been adopted by the Colonial Legislaturesfrom the practice of the British House ofCommons. There is a perfect scramble amongthe whole body to get as much as possible ofthis fund for their respective constituents; cabalsare formed, by which the different membersmutually play into each other s hands ; generalpolitics are made to bear on private business,and private business on general politics ; and atthe close of the Parliament, the member whohas succeeded in securing the largest portion ofthe prize for his constituents, renders an easyaccount of his stewardship, with confident assuranceof his re-election.Not only did the leaders of the LowerCanadian Assembly avail themselves of the140 CANADA.patronage thus afforded, by the large surplusrevenue of the province, but they turned thissystem to much greater account, by using it toobtain influence over the constituencies.u The majority of the Assembly of LowerCanada is accused by its opponents of having,in the most systematic and persevering manner,employed this means of corrupting the electoralbodies. The adherents of M. Papineau aresaid to have been lavish in their promises of thebenefits which they could obtain from the Assemblyfor the county, whose suffrages they solicited.By such representations, the return of membersof opposition politics is asserted, in many instances,to have been secured ; and obstinatecounties are alleged to have been sometimesstarved into submission, by an entire withdrawalof grants, until they returned members favourableto the majority. Some of the Englishmembers who voted with M. Papineau, excusedthemselves to their countrymen by alleging thatthey were compelled to do so, in order to get aCANADA. 141road or a bridge, which their constituents desired.Whether it be true or false, that theabuse was ever carried to such a pitch, it isobviously one, which might have been easilyand safely perpetrated by a person possessingM. Papineau s influence in the Assembly."Next for the grants for public education."But the most bold and extensive attemptfor erecting a system of patronage, wholly independentof the Government, was that whichwas, for some time, carried into effect by thegrants for education made by the Assembly, andregulated by the Act, which the LegislativeCouncil has been most bitterly reproached withrefusing to renew. It has been stated, as aproof of the deliberate intention of the LegislativeCouncil to crush every attempt to civilizeand elevate the great mass of the people, that itthus stopped at once the working of about 1,000schools, and deprived of education no less than40,000 scholars, who were actually profiting bythe means of instruction thus placed within their142 CANADA.reach. But the reasons which induced, or rathercompelled, the Legislative Council to stop thissystem, are clearly stated in the Report of thatbody, which contains the most unanswerablejustification of the course which it pursued. Bythat it appears, that the whole superintendenceand patronage of these schools had, by the expiredlaw, been vested in the hands of the countymembers ; and they had been allowed to managethe funds, without even the semblance of sufficientaccountability. The Members of the Assemblyhad thus a patronage, in this singledepartment, of about ^25,000 per annum, anamount equal to half of the whole ordinarycivil expenditure of the Province. They werenot slow in profiting by the occasion thus placedin their hands; and as there existed in theProvince no sufficient supply of competentschoolmasters and mistresses, they neverthelessimmediately filled up the appointments withpersons who were utterly and obviously incompetent.A great proportion of the teachersCANADA. 143could neither read nor write. The gentlemanwhom I directed to inquire into the state ofeducation in the Province, showed me a petitionfrom certain schoolmasters, which had come intohis hands ; and the majority of the signatureswere those of marks-men. These ignorant teacherscould convey no useful instruction to theirpupils ; the utmost amount which they taughtthem was to say the Catechism by rote. Evenwithin seven miles of Montreal, there was aschoolmistress thus unqualified. These appointmentswere, as might have been expected, jobbedby the members among the political partisans ;nor were the funds very honestly managed. Inmany cases the members were suspected, oraccused, of misapplying them to their own use ;and in the case of Beauharnois, where the seigneur,Mr. Ellice, has, in the same spirit ofjudicious liberality by which his whole managementof that extensive property has been marked,contributed most largely towards the educationof his tenants, the school funds were proved to144 CANADA.have been misappropriated by the county member.The whole system was a gross political abuse ;and, however laudable we must hold the exertionsof those who really laboured to relievetheir country from the reproach of being theleast furnished with the means of education ofany on the North American continent, the moreseverely must we condemn those who sacrificedthis noble end, and perverted ample means toserve the purposes of party."We will now claim the support of his lordshipupon another question, which is, how far is itlikely that the law will be duly administered ifthe power is to remain in the hands of the FrenchCanadian population ? Speaking of the Commissionersof Small Causes, his lordship observesI shall only add, that some time previous tomy leaving the Province, I was very warmly andforcibly urged, by the highest legal authoritiesin the country, to abolish all these tribunals atonce, on the ground that a great many of them,being composed entirely of disaffected FrenchCANADA. 145Canadians, were busily occupied in harassingloyal subjects, by entertaining actions againstthem on account of the part they had taken inthe late insurrection. There is no appeal fromtheir decision ; and it was stated that they hadin the most barefaced manner given damagesagainst loyal persons for acts done in the dischargeof their duty, and judgments by defaultagainst persons who were absent, as volunteersin the service of the Queen, and enforced theirjudgment by levying distresses on their property."Relative to the greatest prerogative of anEnglishman, the trial by jury, his lordshipobserves"But the most serious mischief in the administrationof criminal justice, arises from theentire perversion of the institution of juries, bythe political and national prejudices of thepeople. The trial by jury was introduced withthe rest of the English criminal law. For along time the composition of both grand andVOL. III. H146 CANADA.petit juries was settled by the governor, andthey were at first taken from the cities, whichwere the chefs lieux of the district. Complaintswere made that this gave an undue preponderanceto the British in those cities ; though,from the proportions of the population, it is notvery obvious how they could thereby obtainmore than an equal share. In consequence,however, of these complaints, an order wasissued under the government of Sir JamesKempt, directing the sheriffs to take the juriesnot only from the cities, but from the adjacentcountry, for fifteen leagues in every direction.An Act was subsequently passed, commonlycalled Mr. Tiger s Jury Act, extending theselimits to those of the district. The principleof taking the jury from the whole district towhich the jurisdiction of the court extended, is,undoubtedly, in conformity with the principlesof English law ; and Mr. Tiger s Act, adoptingthe other regulations of the English jury law,provided a fair selection of juries. But if weCANADA. 147consider the hostility and proportions of the tworaces, the practical effect of this law was to givethe French an entire preponderance in thejuries. This Act was one of the temporaryActs of the Assembly, and, having expired in1836, the Legislative Council refused to renewit. Since that period, there has been no jurylaw whatever. The composition of the jurieshas been altogether in the hands of the Government: private instructions, however, have beengiven to the sheriff to act in conformity withSir James Tempts ordinance ; but though hehas always done so, the public have had nosecurity for any fairness in the selection of thejuries. There was no visible check on the sheriff ;the public knew that he could pack a jury wheneverhe pleased, and supposed, as a matter ofcourse, that an officer, holding a lucrative appointmentat the pleasure of Government,would be ready to carry into effect those unfairdesigns which they were always ready to attributeto the Government. When I arrived in148 CANADA.the Province, the public were expecting the trialsof the persons accused of participation in thelate insurrection. I was, on the one hand,informed by the law officers of the Crown, andthe highest judicial authorities, that not theslightest chance existed, under any fair system ofgetting a jury, that would convict any of thesemen, however clear the evidence of their guiltmight be ; and, on the other side, I was givento understand, that the prisoners and theirfriends supposed that, as a matter of course, theywould be tried by packed juries, and that eventhe most clearly innocent of them would beconvicted.It is, indeed, a lamentable fact which mustnot be concealed, that there does not exist inthe minds of the people of this Province theslightest confidence in the administration ofcriminal justice ; nor were the complaints, orthe apparent grounds for them, confined to oneparty.The trial by jury is, therefore, at the presentCANADA. 149moment, not only productive in Lower Canadaof no confidence in the honest administration ofthe laws, but also provides impunity for everypolitical offence."I have made these long quotations from LordDurham s Report as his lordship s authority, hehaving been sent out as Lord High Commissionerto the Province, to make the necessaryinquiries, must carry more weight with thepublic than any observations of mine. All Ican do is to assert that his lordship is veryaccurate ; and, having made this assertion, I ask,what chance, therefore, is there of good government,if the power, or any portion of the power,be left in the hands of those who have in everyway proved themselves so a d verse to goodgovernment, and who have wound up such conductby open rebellion.The position of the Executive in Canada has,for a long while, been just what our position inthis country would be if the House of Commonswere composed of Chartist leaders. Every act150 CANADA.brought forward by them would tend to revolution,and be an infringement of the Constitution,and all that the House of Lords wouldhave to do, would be firmly to reject every billcarried to the Upper House. If our House ofCommons were filled with rebels and traitors, theGovernment must stand still, and such has beenfor these ten years the situation of the Canadiangovernment ; and, fortunate it is, that the outbreakhas now put us in a position that will enableus to retrieve our error, and re-model theconstitution of these Provinces. The questionswhich must therefore be settled previous to anyfresh attempts at legislation for these Canadians,are, are, or are not, the French population tohave any share in it ? Can they be trusted ? Arethey in any way deserving of it ? In few words,are the Canadass to be hereafter considered as aFrench or an English colony ?When we legislate, unless we intend to change,we must look to futurity. The question, then,is not, who are the majority of to-day, but whoCANADA. 151will hereafter be the majority in the CanadianProvinces ; for all agree upon one point, whichis, that we must legislate for the majority. Atpresent, the population is nearly equal, butevery year increases the preponderance of theEnglish ; and it is to be trusted that, by goodmanagement, and the encouragement of emigration,in half a century the French populationwill be so swallowed up by the English, asto be remembered but on record. If, again, weput the claims of British loyalty against thetreason of the French the English energy, activity,and capital, in opposition to the supineness,ignorance, and incapacity of the French population,it is evident, that not only in justice andgratitude, but with a due regard to our owninterests, the French Canadians must now bewholly deprived of any share of that power whichthey have abused, and that confidence of whichthey have proved themselves so unworthy. Iam much pleased to find that Lord Durham hasexpressed the same opinion, in the following re-152 CANADA.marks ; and I trust their importance will excuseto the reader the length of the quotation.The English have already in their hands themajority of the larger masses of property in thecountry ; they have the decided superiority ofintelligence on their side ; they have the certaintythat colonization must swell their numbersto a majority ; and they belong to the race whichwields the Imperial Government, and predominateson the American continent. If we nowleave them in a minority, they will never abandonthe assurance of being a majority hereafter,and never cease to continue the presentcontest with all the fierceness with which it nowrages. In such a contest, they will rely on thesympathy of their countrymen at home ; and ifthat is denied them, they feel very confidentof being able to awaken the sympathy of theirneighbours of kindred origin. They feel thatif the British Government intends to maintainits hold of the Canadass, it can rely on theEnglish population alone; that if it abandonsCANADA. 153its colonial possessions, they must become aportion of that great Union which will speedilysend forth its swarms of settlers, and, by forceof numbers and activity, quickly master everyother race. The French Canadians, on the otherhand, are but the remains of an ancient colonization,and are and ever must be isolated in themidst of an Anglo-saxon world. Whatevermay happen, whatever government shall be establishedover them, British or American, theycan see no hope for their nationality. They canonly sever themselves from the British empireby waiting till some general cause of dissatisfactionalienates them, together with the surroundingcolonies, and leaves them part of anEnglish confederacy ; or, if they are able, byeffecting a separation singly, and so either mergingin the American Union, or keeping up forafew years a wretched semblance of feeble independence,which would expose them more thanever to the intrusion of the surrounding population.I am far from wishing to encourage, in-H3154 CANADA.discriminately, these pretensions to superiorityon the part of any particular race ; but while thegreater part of every portion of the Americancontinent is still uncleared and unoccupied, andwhile the English exhibit such constant andmarked activity in colonization, so long will itbe idle to imagine that there is any portion ofthat continent into which that race will not penetrate,or in which, when it has penetrated, itwill not predominate. It is but a question oftime and mode ; it is but to determine whetherthe small number of French who now inhabitLower Canada shall be made English, under agovernment which can protect them, or whetherthe process shall be delayed until a much largernumber shall have to undergo, at the rude handsof its uncontrolled rivals, the extinction of anationality strengthened and embittered by continuance.And is this French Canadian nationality onewhich, for the good merely of that people, weought to strive to perpetuate, even if it wereCANADA. 155possible ? I know of no national distinctionsmarking and continuing a more hopeless inferiority.The language, the laws, the character ofthe North American Continent are English ; andevery race but the English (I apply this to allwho speak the English language) appears thereina condition of inferiority. It is to elevatethem from that inferiority that I desire to giveto the Canadians our English character. I desireit for the sake of the educated classes, whom thedistinction of language and manners keeps apartfrom the great empire to which they belong.At the best, the fate of the educated and aspiringcolonist is, at present, one of little hope, andlittle activity ; but the French Canadian is caststill further into the shade, by a language andhabits foreign to those of the Imperial Government.A spirit of exclusion has closed the higherprofessions on the educated classes of the FrenchCanadians, more, perhaps, than was absolutelynecessary ; but it is impossible for the utmost156 CANADA.liberality on the part of the British Governmentto give an equal position in the general competitionof its vast population to those who speak aforeign language. I desire the amalgamationstill more for the sake of the humbler classes.Their present state of rude and equal plenty isfast deteriorating under the pressure of populationin the narrow limits to which they are confined.If they attempt to better their condition,by extending themselves over the neighbouringcountry, they will necessarily get more and moremingled with an English population; if theyprefer remaining stationary, the greater part ofthem must be labourers in the employ of Englishcapitalists. In either case it would appear,that the great mass of the French Canadians aredoomed, in some measure, to occupy an inferiorposition, and to be dependent on the Englishfor employment. The evils of poverty and dependencewould merely be aggravated in a ten-folddegree, by a spirit of jealous and resentful nation-canada.157amity, which should separate the working classof the community from the possessors of wealthand employers of labour.I will not here enter into the question of theeffect of the mode of life and division of propertyamong the French Canadians, on the happinessof the people. I will admit, for the moment,that it is as productive of well-being as its admirersassert. But, be it good or bad, the periodin which it is practicable, is past ; for there isnot enough unoccupied land left in that portionof the country in which English are not alreadysettled, to admit of the present French populationpossessing farms sufficient to supply themwith their present means of comfort, under theirpresent system of husbandry. No populationhas increased by mere births so rapidly as thatof the French Canadians has since the conquest.At that period their number was estimated at60,000 : it is now supposed to amount to morethan seven times as many. There has been noproportional increase of cultivation, or of prossCANADA.duce from the land already under cultivation ;and the increased population has been in a greatmeasure provided for by mere continued subdivisionof estates. In a Report from a Committeeof the Assembly in 1826, of which Mr. AndrewStewart was chairman, it is stated, that since1784 the population of the signifies had quadrupled,while the number of cattle had onlydoubled, and the quantity of land in cultivationhad only increased one-third. Complaints ofdistress are constant, and the deterioration ofthe condition of a great part of the populationadmitted on all hands. A people so circumstancedmust alter their mode of life. If they wish tomaintain the same kind of rude, but well-provide agricultural existence, it must be byremoving into those parts of the country inwhich the English are settled ; or if they clingto their present residence, they can only obtaina livelihood by deserting their present employment,and working for wages on farms, or oncommercial occupations under English capitalists.CANADA. 159But their present proprietary and inactive conditionis one which no political arrangementscan perpetuate. Were the French Canadians tobe guarded from the influx of any other population,their condition in a few years would besimilar to that of the poorest of the Irish peasantry.There can hardly be conceived a nationalitymore destitute of all that can invigorate andelevate a people, than that which is exhibitedby the descendants of the French in Lower Canada,owing to their retaining their peculiarlanguage and manners. They are a people withno history, and no literature. The literature ofEngland is written in a language which is nottheirs ; and the only literature which their languagerenders familiar to them, is that of a nationfrom which they have been separated byeighty years of a foreign rule, and still more bythose changes which the Revolution and its consequenceshave wrought in the whole political,moral, and social state of France. Yet it is on160 CANADA.a people whom recent history, manners, andmodes of thought, so entirely separate fromthem, that the French Canadians are whollydependent for almost all the instruction andamusement derived from books: it is on thisessentially foreign literature, which is conversantabout events, opinions and habits of life, perfectlystrange and unintelligible to them, thatthey are compelled to be dependent. Theirnewspapers are mostly written by natives ofFrance, who have either come to try their fortunesin the province, or been brought into itby the party leaders, in order to supply thedearth of literary talent available for the politicalpress. In the same way their nationalityoperates to deprive them of the enjoyments andcivilizing influence of the arts. Though descendedfrom the people in the world that mostgenerally love, and have most successfully cultivatedthe drama though living on a continent,in which almost every town, great or small, hasan English theatre, the French population ofCANADA. 161Lower Canada, cut off from every people thatspeak its own language, can support no nationalstage.In these circumstances, I should be indeedsurprised the more reflecting part of the FrenchCanadians entertained at present any hope ofcontinuing to preserve their nationality. Muchas they struggle against it, it is obvious that theprocess of assimilation to English habits is alreadycommencing. The English language isgaining ground, as the language of the rich andof the employers of labour naturally will. Itappeared by some of the few returns, which hadbeen received by the Commissioner of Inquiryinto the state of education, that there are aboutten times the number of French children inQuebec learning English, as compared with theEnglish children who learn French. A considerabletime must, of course, elapse before thechange of a language can spread over a wholepeople ; and justice and policy alike require,162 CANADA.that while the people continue to use the Frenchlanguage, their government should take no suchmeans to force the English language upon themas would, in fact, deprive the great mass of thecommunity of the protection of the laws. But,I repeat, that the alteration of the character ofthe province ought to be immediately enteredon, and firmly, though cautiously, followed up ;that in any plan, which may be adopted for thefuture management of Lower Canada, the firstobject ought to be that of making it an Englishprovince ; and that, with this end in view, theascendancy should never again be placed in anyhands but those of an English population.Indeed, at the present moment, this is obviouslynecessary : in the state of mind in which I havedescribed the French Canadian population, asnot only now being, but as likely for a longwhile to remain, the trusting them with an entirecontrol over this province would be, in fact, onlyfacilitating a rebellion. Lower Canada must beCANADA. 163governed now, as it must be hereafter, by anEnglish population ; and thus the policy, whichthe necessities of the moment force on us, is inaccordance with that suggested by a comprehensiveview of the future and permanent improvementof the province. 1CHAPTER VI.I HAVE quoted largely from Lord Durham sReport, as in most points relative to LowerCanada, especially as to the causes which producedthe rebellion, the unwarrantable conductof the Legislative Assembly, and his opinions asto the character of the French Canadians, I considerthat the remarks are correct : they are corroboratedby my own opinions and observations :but I think that the information he has receivedrelative to Upper Canada is not only very imperfect,but certainly derived from parties whowere not to be trusted : take one simple instance.His lordship says in his Report, that thepetitioners in favour of Mathews and Count,who were executed, amounted to 30,000, whereasit is established, that the whole number of sig-canada.165natures only amounted to 4,574. Those who deceivehis lordship in one point would deceive himin another ; indeed his lordship had a task ofpeculiar difficulty, going out as he did, vestedwith such powers, and the intents of his missionbeing so well known. It is not those who are inhigh office that are likely to ascertain the truth,which is much more likely to be communicatedto a humble individual like myself, who travelsthrough a country and hears what is said onboth sides. The causes stated by his lordshipfor discontent in Upper Canada are not correct.I have before said, and I repeat it, that theymay almost be reduced to the following : thecheck put upon their enterprize and industryby the acts of the Lower Canadian Assembly ;and the favour shewn to the French by theColonial Office, aided by the machinations ofthe American party, who fomented any appearanceof discontent.There is in his lordship s Report, an apparentleaning towards the United States, and its in-166 CANADA.situations, at which I confess that I am surprised.Why his lordship, after shewing that the representativegovernment did all they possibly couldto overthrow the constitution, should propose anincrease of power to that representative government,unless, indeed, he would establish a democracyin the provinces, I am at a loss to imagine.That a representative body similar to thatwhich attempted to overturn the constitution inLower Canada can work well, and even usefullyreform when in the hands of loyal English subjects,is acknowledged by his lordship, who says,"the course of the Parliamentary contest in UpperCanada has not been marked by that singularneglect of the great duties of a legislative body,which I have remarked in the proceedings ofthe Parliament of Lower Canada. The statutebook of the Upper Province abounds with usefuland well-constructed measures of reform, andpresents an honourable contrast to that of theLower Province."Indeed, unless I have misunderstood his lord-canada.167ship he appears to be inconsistent, for in one portionhe claims the extension of the power of therepresentative, and in another he complains ofthe want of vigorous administration of the royalprerogative, for he says :The defective system of administration inLower Canada, commences at the very sourceof power ; and the efficiency of the public serviceis impaired throughout by the entire wantin the colony of any vigorous administration ofthe prerogative of the crown. vTo increase the power of the representative isto increase the power of the people, in fact tomake them the source of power ; and yet hislordship in this sentence acknowledges that thecrown is the source of power, and that a morevigorous administration of its prerogative is required.There are other points commented upon in hislordship s Report, which claim earnest consideration: one is, that of the propriety of municipalinstitutions. Local improvements, when left in168 CANADA.the hands of representative assemblies, are seldomjudicious or impartial, and should therefore bemade over either to the inhabitants or executive.The system of townships has certainly been onegreat cause of the prosperity of the United States,each township taxing itself for its own improvement,Although the great roads extendingthrough the whole of the Union are in the hands ofthe Federal Government, and the States Governmenttake up the improvement on an extensivescale in the States themselves, the townships,knowing exactly what they require, tax themselvesfor their minor advantages. The system inEngland is much the same, although perhaps notso well regulated as in America. Are not, however,municipal institutions valuable in anotherpoint of view ? Do they not prepare the peoplefor legislating ? are they not the rudiments oflegislation by which a free people learn to taxthemselves ? And indeed, it may also be asked,would not the petty influence and authorityconfided to those who are ambitious by theirCANADA. 169townsmen satisfy their ambition, and preventthem from becoming demagogues and disturbingthe country ?Whatever may be the future arrangementsfor ruling these provinces, it appears to me thatthere are two great evils in the present system ;one is, that the governors of the provinces havenot sufficient discretionary power, and the other,that they are so often removed. The evils arisingfrom the first cause have been pointed outin Lord Durham s Report:The complete and unavoidable ignorancein which the British public, and even the greatbody of its legislators, are with respect to thereal interests of distant communities, so entirelydifferent from their own, produces a general indifference,which nothing but some great colonialcrisis ever dispels ; and responsibility toParliament, or to the public opinion of GreatBritain, would, except on these great and rareoccasions, be positively mischievous, if it werenot impossible. The repeated changes causedVOL. III. ,170 CANADA.by political events at home having no connexionwith colonial affairs, have left, to most of thevarious representatives of the Colonial Departmentin Parliament, too little time to acquireeven an elementary knowledge of the conditionof those numerous and heterogeneous communitiesfor which they have had both to administerand legislate. The persons with whom the realmanagement of these affairs has or ought tohave rested, have been the permanent but utterlyirresponsible members of the office. Thus thereal government of the colony has been entirelydissevered from the slight nominal responsibilitywhich exists. Apart even from this great andprimary evil of the system, the presence of multifariousbusiness thus thrown on the ColonialOffice, and the repeated changes of its ostensibledirectors, have produced disorders in the managementof public business which have occasionedserious mischief, and very great irritation.This is not my own opinion merely ; for I dobut repeat that of a select committee of theCANADA. 171House of Assembly in Upper Canada, who, inaReport dated February 8, 1838, say, Itappears to your committee, that one of the chiefcauses of dissatisfaction with the administrationof colonial affairs arises from the frequentchanges in the office of secretary of state, towhom the Colonial department is intrusted.Since the time the late Lord Bathurst retiredfrom that charge, in 1827, your committee believethere has not been less than eight colonialministers, and that the policy of each successivestatesman has been more or less marked by adifference from that of his predecessor. Thisfrequency of change in itself almost necessarilyentails two evils ; first, an imperfect knowledgeof the affairs of the colonies on the part of thechief secretary, and the consequent necessityof submitting important details to the subordinateofficers of the department ; and, secondthe want of stability and firmness in the generalpolicy of the Government, and which, of course,creates much uneasiness on the part of the CANADA.errors, and other officers of the colonies, as towhat measures may be approved.< But undoubtedly (continues the Report)by far the greatest objection tother system is theimpossibility it occasions of any colonial minister,unaided by persons possessing local knowledge,becoming acquainted with the wants,wishes, feelings, and prejudices of the inhabitantsof the colonies, during his temporary continuancein office, and of deciding satisfactorilyupon the conflicting statements and claims thatare brought before him. A firm, unflinchingresolution to adhere to the principles of the constitution,and to maintain the just and necessarypowers of the crown, would do much towardssupplying the want of local information. Butit would be performing more than can be reasonablyexpected from human sagacity, if anyman, or set of men, should always decide in anunexceptionable manner on subjects that havetheir origin thousands of miles from the seat ofthe Imperial Government, where they reside,CANADA. 173and of which they have no personal knowledgewhatever; and therefore wrong may be oftendone to individuals, or a false view taken ofsome important political question, that in theend may throw a whole community into difficultyand dissension, not from the absence of themost anxious desire to do right, but from animperfect knowledge of facts upon which toform an opinion "This is all very true. There is nothing so difficultas to legislate for a colony from home. Thevery best theory is useless ; it requires that youshould be on the spot, and adapt your measuresto the circumstances and the growing wants ofthe country. I may add that it is wrong for theHome Government to consider the governmentgiven to the colony as permanent. All that themother-country can do is to give it one which?in theory, appears best adapted to secure thetrue freedom and happiness of the people;but leaving that form of government to beoccasionally modified, so as to meet the174 CANADA.changes which the colony may require, and toconform with its wants and its rising interests :all of which being unforeseen could not be providedfor by the prescience of man. Thegovernor, therefore, of a colony should be investedwith more discretionary power.The constant removal of the governor fromthe colony is also much to be deprecated. Onhis first arrival, he can only have formed theoreticalviews, which, in all probability, he willhave to discard in a few months. He finds himselfsurrounded by people in office, interested intheir own peculiar policy, and viewing thingsthrough their own medium. Inall colonies you willusually find an oligarchy, cemented by mutualinterest and family connection, and so bound uptogether as to become formidable if opposed tothe Government. Into the hands of these peoplea governor must, to a certain degree, fall ; andmust remain in them until he has had time tosee clearly and to judge for himself. But by thetime that he has just disenthralled himself, he isCANADA, 175removed, and another appointed in his place,and the work has to commence de novo.Lord Durham has proposed that the Canadassshould be united, and there certainly are somebenefits which would arise could their union takeplace. He asserts most positively that the Frenchparty must be annihilated. He says : " Itmust henceforth be the first and steady purposeof the British Government to establish an Englishpopulation, with English laws and languagein this province, and to trust its governmentto none but a decidedly English legislature."This is plain and clear ; but how is itto be effected ? The land of Lower Canada isstill in the hands of the French, and nearly fivehundred thousand out of six hundred thousandof the population are French.How, then, are we to make the LowerCanadass English ? We may buy up the seigneuries; we may insist upon the English languagebeing used in the Assembly and courtsof law, in public documents, &c. ; we may alter176 CANADA.the laws to correspond with those of the mother-country;but will that make the provinceEnglish ? We may even insist that none butEnglish-born subjects, or Canadian-born English,shall be elected to the House of Assembly,or hold any public office ; but will that make theprovince English ? Certainly not. There isno want of English-born demagogues, as well asFrench, in the province. The elections of theLower province are decided by the CanadianFrench, who are in the majority, and they wouldfind no difficulty in obtaining representativeswho would continue the former system of controllingthe executive and advocating rebellion.Is it, then, by altogether taking awayfrom the Canadian French the elective franchiseand giving it entirely into the hands ofthe English, that the province is to be madeEnglish ? If so, although I admit the Frenchhave proved themselves undeserving, and haveby their rebellion forfeited their birth-right, youthen place them in the situation of an injured.CANADA. 177oppressed, and sacrificed people ; reducing themto a state of slavery which, notwithstanding theiroffences, would still be odious to the present age.By what means, therefore, does his lordshipintend that the province shall become Englishby immigration ? That requires time ; andbefore the immigration necessary can take placethe Canadass may be again thrown into a rebellionby the French machinations. In our futurelegislation for the Canadass, we must alwaysbear in mind that the French population will beopposed to the Government and to the mother-country; and that there is no chance of a betterstate of feeling in the Lower province until theyshall become amalgamated and swallowed up byBritish immigration. Until that takes place, theunion of the Canadass will only create a conflictbetween the two races, as opposed to each other asfire and water, and nearly equal in numbers. Itwill be an immense cauldron, bubbling, steaming,and boiling over an incessant scene of strife andirritation a source of anxiety and expense to178 CANADA.the mother-country, and, so far from goinga-head, I should not be surprised if, in twentyyears hence, the English population should befound to be smaller than it now is. Politicaldissensions would paralyse enterprize, frightenaway capital, and, in all probability, involve usin a conflict with the United States. Until,therefore, I understand how the Lower Provinceis to become British, I cannot think a unionbetween the Canadass advisable.Whether his lordship is aware of it or not,I cannot say ; but there appears to me tobe a strong inclination to democracy in allhis proposed plans, and an evident leaningtowards the institutions of the United States.He wishes to make the Executive Governmentresponsible to the people ; he wouldmake one Federal Union of all our provinces,and institute the Supreme Court of Appealwhich they have in the United States. In short,change but the word governor for president,and we should have the American constitution,CANADA. 179and a " free and enlightened people;" that isto say, the French Canadians, who can neitherread nor write, governing themselves.So far from a Federal union between all ourtransatlantic possessions being advisable, I shouldthink, from their contiguity with the Americans,that it would be advisable to keep them separate.I am of the same opinion respecting the Canadass.I consider that, even as two provinces, they aretoo vast in territory already. Whether it be awoman looking after her servants and householdaffairs, or a captain commanding a ship, or agovernor ruling over a province, large or smallas may be the scale of operation, one of themost important points in good legislation,is the eye. A governor of a vast provincecannot possibly be aware of the wants of thevarious portions of the province. He is obligedto take the reports of others, and consequentlyvery often legislates unadvisedly.That the two provinces cannot remain intheir present state is acknowledged by all. The180 CANADA.question therefore is, can we rationally expectany improvement from their union ? Perhaps itmay appear presumptuous in me to venture todiffer from Lord Durham, who is a statesman bornand bred for this is not a party question in whicha difference of politics may bias one : it is a questionas to the well-governing of a most importantcolony and none will for a moment doubt that hislordship is as anxious as the Duke of Wellington,and every other well-wisher to his country,to decide upon that which he considers honestlyand honourably to be the best. It is really, therefore,with great deference that I submit to himwhether another arrangement should not bewell considered, .before the union of the twoprovinces is finally decided upon.His lordship has very truly observed, that inlegislating, we are to legislate for futurity ; ifnot, we must be prepared for change. Actingupon this sound principle, we are to legislateupon the supposition that the whole country ofUpper and Lower Canada is well peopled. WeCANADA. 181are not to legislate for the present population,but for the future. And how is this to be donein the present condition of the provinces ? Mostassuredly by legislating for territory for theamount of square acres which will eventually befilled up by emigration. I perfectly agree withhis lordship in the remark that " if the Canadiansare to be deprived of their representativegovernment, it would be better to do it in astraightforward way ; " but I submit that itwould be done in a straightforward way by theplan I am about to submit to him, and I considerit more advisable than that of convulsingthe two provinces by bringing together tworaces so inveterate against each other. Insteadof a union of the two provinces, I should thinkit more advisable to separate the Canadass intothree : Upper, Lower, and Middle Canada, theline of demarcation, and the capitals of each Provinceappearing already to be marked out. TheLower province would have Quebec, and be separatedfrom the Middle province by the Ottawa182 CANADA.river. The Middle province would have Montreal,and would extend to a line drawn fromLake Since to Lake Ontario, throwing into italt the townships on the American side of the St.Lawrence, which would do away with the greatobjection of the Upper province being dependentupon the Lower for the transport of goods upthe river, and the necessity of dividing betweenthe provinces the custom-house revenues. Underany circumstances, it would be very advantageousto have aport of entry and a custom-house, in ornearer to the Gulf of St. Lawrence, as shipswould then be able to make an extra voyageevery year. I should say that about Gasps wouldbe the spot. This bay being on the American,side of the river St, Lawrence would become theentry port for the Upper and Middle provinces,rendering them wholly independent of the Lower.The Upper province would comprehend all therest of the territory west of the line, drawn fromLake Superior, and have Toronto for its capital.This would be a pretty fair division of territory,CANADA. 183and each province would be more than sufficientfor the eye of the most active governor. Leteach province have its separate ,y6-governorand House of Assembly ; but let the UpperHouse, or Senate, be selected of equal numbersfrom each province, and assemble atQuebec, to decide, with the Governor-in-chiefof the provinces, upon the passing or rejectingof the bills of the three respective LowerHouses. This, although perfectly fair, wouldat once give in the Senate the preponderance tothe English of the Upper and Middle provinces.It would still leave to the Lower Canadianstheir franchise ; and their House of Assemblywould be a species of safety-valve for the demagoguesto give vent to their opinions, (withouttheir being capable of injuring the interests ofthe provinces,) until they gradually amalgamatedwith the British immigration. I merely offerthis plan as a suggestion to his lordship, and,of course, enter into no further detail.There are, however, one or two other points184 CANADA.which appear to me to be worthy of consideration.If the Canadass are of that importance whichI think them, there are no means which weshould not use to attach them to the mother-countryto make them partial to monarchicalinstitutions and to identify them with theBritish empire. We should make sacrificesfor them that we would not for other colonies; and therefore it is that I venture myopinion, that it would not only be politic,but just, to such an extensive territory andwhat will eventually be, such an extensive populationto permit each of the three provinces,(provided they are ever divided into three,) toselect one of their senate to represent them inthe British House of Commons. I considerit but an act of justice as well as of policy.This step would, as I said before, identify thesevaluable provinces with ourselves. They thenwould feel that they were not merely ruled by,butthat they were part and portion of, and assistedin, the government of the British empire. And toCANADA. 185draw the line as strictly as possible between themand their democratic neighbours, and to attachthem still closer to monarchical institutions,it should be proposed to the Sovereign of theserealms that an Order of knighthood and an Orderof merit expressly Canadian should be instituted.These last may be considered by many to be, andperhaps in themselves are, trifles ; but they areno trifles when you consider that they must militateagainst those democratic feelings of equalitywhich have been so industriously and so injuriouslycirculated in the provinces by our transatlanticdescendants. I cannot better concludethese observations than by quoting the opinionof so intelligent a nobleman as Lord Durham,who asserts most positively that " England, ifshe loses her North American colonies, mustsink into a second-rate power."CHAPTER VII.INDIANS.THERE was no subject of higher interest tomeduring my travels in North America, thanthe past and present condition of the Indiantribes. Were I to enter into the history of thepast, I could easily fill three or four volumeswith matter which I think would be found verywell worth perusing. It is to be lamentedthat there has been no correct history of theIndian tribes yet published. There are manyauthors in America well calculated to undertakethe task ; and the only reason which I can givefor its not having been already done, is that, probably,the American Government are not verywilling to open the archives of the Indian departmenteven to their own countrymen ; and, at thesame that time, an American author, who wouldINDIANS. 187adhere to the truth, would not become verypopular by exposing the system of rapine andinjustice which was commenced by the Englishwho first landed, and hasten continued up tothe present day by the Federal Government ofthe United States. Nevertheless, it is to belamented, now that the race is so fast disappearing,that a good historical account of themisnot published. There is no want of materialfor the purpose, even if the Governmentrefuse their aid; but at present, it is eitherscattered in various works, or when attemptedto be collected together, the author has not beenqual to the task.There is a question which has been raised byalmost every traveller in America, and thatis from whom are the American Indians descended? and I think, from the many works Ihave consulted, that the general opinion is,that they are descended from the lost tribes ofIsrael. We have never discovered any other188 INDIANS.nation of savages, if we may apply such a term tothe American Indians, who have not been idolaters; the American Indian is the only one whoworships the one living God. In a discourse,which was delivered by Mr. Noah, one of themost intelligent of the Jewish nation that I everhad the pleasure of being acquainted with, thereis much deep research, and a collection of thevarious opinions upon this subject. To quotefrom it would not do it justice, and I havetherefore preferred, as it is not long, giving thewhole of it in the Appendix, as it is not (thoughshould be more) generally known. In the secondvolume I have given a map of North America,in which I have laid down, as correctly as I can,and sufficiently so for the purpose, the supposedlocations of the various tribes, at the period thatthe White man first put his foot on shore inAmerica. I have said " as correctly as I can," forit would be as difficult to trace the outer edges ofa shifting sand-bank under water, as to lay downINDIANS. 189the exact portion of territory occupied by tribeswho were continually at war, and who advancedor retreated according as they were victorious orvanquished. Indeed, many tribes were totallyannihilated, or their remnants incorporated intoothers, living far away from their original territories: the Tuscororas, for instance, were drivenout of Carolina and admitted into the Mohawkconfederacy, which originally came down from theupper shores of the river St. Lawrence. TheWinnebagoes, also, were driven from the southand settled on the river Wisconsin. The Sacsand Foxes fought their way from the river St.Lawrence to the Fox river, in Wisconsin, andwere driven from thence, by the Ceremoniesand Chippewas, to the territory of Rock river,on the river Mississippi, where they remained,until deprived of their territory by the FederalGovernment, and sent away to the west ofthe river. I make these observations that themap may not be cavilled at by some hypercritic,who has thought that he has discovered190 INDIANS.a mare s nest ; it is as accurate as I can make it,and I profess to do no more.Notwithstanding the vicissitudes which continuallyoccurred, the tribes of North AmericanIndians may be classed as follows :The Algonquin stock of the North underwhich are comprehended the Chippewas, Ottawas,Ceremonies, Hurons, &c.The Southern tribes, who are also descendedfrom one stock, and comprise Creeks, Cherokees,Choctaws, Catawbaws, Chickasaws, &c.The Horse Indians of the West, as the Pawnees,Osages, Sioux, Kansas, Cumanches, &c.The Indians of the Rocky Mountains, asCrows, Snakes, and Blackfeet.All the above races were composed of numeroustribes, who acknowledged themselves asblood relations, but did not enter into any confederacyfor mutual support ; on the contrary,often warred they with each other. There wereother powerful tribes, which resided between thelakes and the Ohio, bordering on the huntingINDIANS. 191grounds of Kentucky and Tennessee, which portionappeared to be set aside, by general consent,not only for hunting but for war. There wereDelawares, or Lenni-Lenape, the Shawnees,Wyandots, Illinois, Peoria, and some others.The confederate tribes, and with which theearly settlers had to contend, were as follows :The Powhatan confederacy, comprising theMonacans, Monahoacs, and Powhatan, occupyingthe present state of Virginia from the seacoastto the Allegheny mountains.The New England confederacy, who residedin the present States of New England, composedof the Pequots, Narangassets, Nantucket, Poka-nokets, and Massachusetts tribes.And lastly, the confederacy of the five nations,or Mohawks, called Minos by the other Indians,and Iroquois by the French. This confederacywas composed of the Mohawks, Oneidas,Caguyas, Onondaga, and Senecas. TheTuscaroras were afterwards admitted as a sixth.I will make a few brief observations upon the192 INDIANS.various tribes, in the order I have set themdown.The Algonquin stock has suffered less than anyother, simply because they have been located sofarnorth, and their lands have not been required.The Chippewas are at present the most numeroustribe of Indians. The most celebratedchief of this stock was Pontiac, an Ottawa.After the Canadass were given up to the English,he proved a most formidable enemy ; he attemptedand, to a certain degree, succeeded inuniting the tribes against us, and had not hisplot been discovered, would, in all probability,have wrested from us Detroit, and every otherpost in our possession on the lakes. But Pontiaccould not keep up a standing army, whichwas so contrary to the habits of the Indians ;one by one the tribes deserted him, and sued forpeace. Pontiac would not listen to any negociations: he retired to Illinois, and was murderedby a Peoria Indian. The Ottawas, Chippewas,and Pottawatamies, who fought under him,INDIANS. 193avenged his death by the extermination ofnearly the whole tribe of Perils. Pontiac wasone of the greatest Indians in history.Of the Southern tribes there are not any recordssufficiently prominent for so short a notice.The Horse Indians of the West and those ofthe Rocky Mountains are scarcely known.The Midland tribes produced some greatmen. The Delay wares were at one period themost celebrated. The Shawanees, or Shawnees,do not appear to have been opposed to theWhites, until Boone and his adventurers crossedthe Allegiance, and took possession of thevalley of Kentucky. But the Shawnees have toboast of Tecumseh, a chief, as great in renownas Pontiac ; he also attempted to confederateall the tribes and drive away the Whites ; hishistory is highly interesting. He fell in battlefighting for the English, in the war of 1814.The confederate tribes on the eastern coast,were those with which the first settlers wereembroiled. The history of Virginia is remark-vol.III. K194 INDIANS.able for one of the most singular romances in reallife which ever occurred : I allude to Pocahontas,the daughter of the king of the Powhatan, whosaved the life of the enterprizing Captain Smith,at the imminent risk of her own. The romancewas not, however, wound up by their marriage,Captain Smith not being a marrying man ; butshe afterwards married a young Englishman, ofthe name of Randolph, ,vas brought to England,received at court, and paid much attention to byQueen Anne. Some of the first families inVirginia proudly and justly claim their descentfrom this noble girl.The New England Confederacy was opposedto the pilgrim fathers and their descendants.The chief tribe, the Wampanoags, have to boastof the third great chief among the Indian tribesKing Philip. His history is well known ;I have already referred to it in my Diary.If the reader will consult the histories ofPhilip, Pontiac and Tecumseh, who may fairly besaid to have been " great men," he will perceiveINDIANS. 195that in each case, these chiefs were the life andsoul of enterprize and action, and that it was bytheir talents, bravery, and activity, that the tribeswere confederated and led against the Whites. Assoon as they were gone, there were none who couldsucceed them or fill up their places, and the confederacieswere immediately broken up. But thiswas not the case with the celebrated five nations,or Mohawks, who, like the Romans of formerdays, spread their conquests until their name wasa terror wherever it was mentioned. Philip,Pontiac and Tecumseh were great men, but theMohawks confederacy was a nation of greatmen. When the French settled in Canada in1603, the Mohawks, or Iroquois a? they calledthem, were living near to where Montreal nowstands. They were at war with the Adirondacks,a very numerous and powerful nation, andwere beaten down towards the Lakes ; but theyrecovered themselves, and their opponents were intheir turn beaten down to Quebec. The warbetween the Adirondacks and the Iroquois is196 INDIANS.full of the most interesting details of courage onboth sides. The Iroquois having subdued, and,indeed, exterminated the Adirondacks, turnedtheir arms against several other tribes, whomthey vanquished ; they then attacked the Ottawasand Hurons, and drove them to the other sideof the Mississippi. The Illinois were next subdued,then the Miamies and Shawnees were drivenback for the time. Finally, they conquered theVirginian tribes, and warred against the Cherokees,Catawbas, and other nations of the South.Although it was impossible for them to holdthe vast extent of country which they had overrun,still it is certain that their very name wasso terrible that, from New England to the Mississippi,every town and village would be desertedat their approach.The chief portion of the Mohawks, under theircelebrated leader Brandt, served on the Britishside in the war of Independence, and at the closeof the war, they settled in lands given them bythe English, on the banks of Grand river inINDIANS. 197Canada in the year 1783. At the time they tookpossession of their land, their numbers amountedto nearly 8,000 ; but, as is every where the casewhere the Indians are settled and confined onreserved lands, they have now decreased to about2,500. A portion of the tribe of Senecas, oneof the Mohawk confederacy, joined the Americans; the remnants of them are still located a fewmiles from Buffalo, in the State of New York.Their chief, Red jacket, died lately ; he was agreat warrior and still greater orator.The most formidable opponents to the fivenations were the Delawares, or Lenni Lenape,who lived in Pennsylvania. The Delawares joinedthe British in the war of Independence.In the succeeding chapter, I shall give thereader a census of the American Indian tribeswhich still remain. It will be perceived thatthey are chiefly comprised of tribes which inhabitedthe Far West, and were until lately, almostunknown. Of the New England and Virginianconfederacies, once so powerful, not a vestige198 INDIANS.remains; of the Delawares, 826 still exist westof the Mississippi ; of the Shawanees, or Shawnees,once so terrible on the banks of the Ohio,1,272. In fact, all those Indians whose territorybounded the coast first taken possession of by theWhite men, have been annihilated. I have oftenheard it argued, when I was in the United States,that the Indianscould not be considered as havingany claim to the land, as they did not settle orcultivate it, and it is a general opinion that theylived almost entirely by the proceeds of the chase:but this is not a fact; indeed it is disproved by theearly settlers themselves, who acknowledge thatif they had not been supplied with corn by theIndians they must have starved. That theIndians did not grow more than was sufficientfor their own consumption is very probable, butthat they did cultivate the land is most certain ;indeed, when the country and soil were favourable,they appear to have cultivated to a great extent.When General Wayne destroyed the settlementsof the Miamies and Wyandots, on the MiamiINDIANS. 199river, in 1794, he says in his despatch, "neverhave I beheld such immense fields of corn in anypart of America as possessed by these Indians""The chase was considered by the Indians as apreparatory school for warriors, and was followedaccordingly ; indeed, a hunting party anda war party were often one and the same thing,as the hunting grounds were common, and whentribes who were at variance fell in with eachother, a conflict invariably ensued. My limitswill not permit me to enter into the subject morefully ; my object has been, in as few pages aspossible, to assist the map in giving the readersome idea of the location of the Aborigines ofAmerica. If he would know more of this interestingpeople, there are many very excellentworks concerning them written by Americans,which, were they collected together, would formamost valuable and important historyCHAPTER VIII.INDIANS.I Willow enter into a short examination of thepresent position of the remaining Indian tribes.The plan of the American Government has beento compel them to sell their lands and remove westof the Mississippi, to lands of which I doubt thatthe Americans have any right to claim an acre.That the removal of them is expedient I grant, andthat is all that can be said on the subject. Thatthe Indians were fated to melt away before thewhite men, like snow before the sun, is true ; still,it is painful to consider what has taken place fromthe period of our first landing, when we were receivedhospitably saved from starvation by thegenerous sacrifice of their small stores of grainpermitted to settle upon a small tract of landINDIANS. 201humbly solicited and that from the time that thewhite men once gained a footing on their shores,the Indians have been hunted like wild beastsfrom hill to hill, from river to river, and fromcountry to country, until nearly the whole of thevast continent may be said to have been wrestedfrom them. This system is still continued, onetribe being forced back westward upon another,till they come into conflict with, and destroy, eachother ; but the buffalo and other animals, uponwhich they depend for food, recede with them andgradually disappear. As Christians, we mustlament that the track for the advance of Christianityis cleared away by a series of rapine,cruelty, and injustice, at which every one mustshudder.The following is the Report to the AmericanGovernment, of the various tribes of Indiansremaining in the year 1837. It is divided intothree parts.202 INDIANS.Statement showing the number of Indians now east ofthe Mississippi ; of those that have emigrated fromthe east to the west of that river ; and those withinstriking distance of the Western frontier.1. Name and number of the tribes now east of theMississippi.1. Under treaty stipulations to remove west of theMississippi.Winnebagoes 4,500Ottawas of Ohio 100Pottawatamies of Indiana 2,950Chippewas, Ottawas, and Pottawatamies 1.500Cherokees 14,000Creeks 1,000Chickasaws 1,000Seminoles 5,000Appalachicolas 400Ottawas and Chippewas in the Peninsulaof Michigan 6,50036,9502. Not under treaty stipulations to remove.New York Indians 4,176Wyandots 575Miamies 1,100Ceremonies 4,000Ottawas and Chippewas of the lakes 2,56412,41549,365INDIANS. 2032. Number of Indians who have emigrated from theeast to the west of the Mississippi.Chickasaws 549Chippewas, Ottawas, ad Pottawatamies 2,191Choctaws 15,000Q paws 476Creeks 20,437Seminoles 407Appalachicolas 265Cherokees 7/JHKickapoos 588Delawares 826Shawnees 1 ,272Ottawas 374Was 222Piankeshaws 162Perils and Kaskaskias 132Pottawatamies of Indiana 53Senecas 25 1Senecas and Shawnees 211Total 51,327204 INDIANS.3. Number of the Indigenous Tribes within strikingdistance of the Western frontier.Sioux 21,600lows 1,500Sacs 4,800Foxes 1,600Sacs of the Missouri 500Osages 5,120Kansas 1,606Omahas 1,600Mottoes and Missouri 1,000Pawnees 12,500Camanches 19,200Noways 1,800Mandans 3,200Quapaws 450Minstrels 2,000Pagans 30,000Assinaboins 15,000Approaches 20,280Crees 3,000Arrepahas 3,000Gros Ventres 16,800Eutaws 19,200Crows 7,200Candles 2,000Poncas 900Arickarees 2J50Cheyennes 3,200Blackfeet 30,000Total 231,806INDIANS. 205Recapitulation.Number of Indians now east of the Mississippi 49,365Number of Indians who have emigrated fromeast to west side 51 ,327Number of indigenous tribes 231 ,806Aggregate 332,498Estimated number ofiuarriors.Whole number of Indians 332,498Assuming that every fifth one may be considereda warrior (and this is believed to be areasonable supposition), the number of warriorswill be 66,499War Department,Office of Indian Affairs, November 22, 1837.C. Harris,Commissioner.This force of the Indians, if ever they combined,would be very formidable, and they mightcertainly sweep away the whole white populationwest of the Mississippi. That there will hereafterbe an attempt of that kind is very probable, ashunger must eventually drive them to it ; but anysuccess in their attempt must depend very muchupon their leaders, and the possibility of combingINDIANS.nation. It certainly appears to have been anoversight on the part of the American Government,to concentrate the whole of the Indiansupon their frontiers in the way which they havedone ; still they could not well have acted otherwise.The removal of the Cherokees has beenthe most hazardous part of their proceeding,as they are very superior people ; and shouldthe other tribes put themselves under their directions,they would be formidable enemies.There is another circumstance which may renderthe Indians more serious enemies, which is,that they, having been located on the prairiecountry, have become Horse Indians, instead ofwhat is termed Wood Indians, and they have avast country behind them to retreat to in case ofnecessity. I do not think, however, that thereis, at present, much fear to be felt relative tothe Indians, although the Cherokees, the Sioux,and some other powerful tribes openly declaretheir hostile intentions as soon as an opportunityoffers for carrying them into execu-INDIANS. 207tion. That opportunity will not offer unlessAmerica is plunged into war with France orthis country, and then I am pretty confidentthat there will be a general rising of the Indians; when, whether they act in concert or not,they will give the Americans more occupationthan will be agreeable. The American Governmenthave not been insensible to the danger towhich they are exposed from this quarter, and,in 1837, the reports of military men were sentinto Congress as to the best plan of protectingtheir frontier. Whether those reports are intendedto be acted upon 1 know not ; but if so, thepresent regular army of the United States willnot be sufficient for the purpose, the lowestestimation for the garrisons of the proposed fortsbeing 7,000 rank and file, while at presenttheir rank and file on the army-list only amountsto 5,600.208 INDIANS.The American forts opposed to the Indiansare, at present :Fort Gratiot, River St. Clare.Mackinaw Island Fort.Fort Brady, St. Marie, Lake Superior.Fort Howard, Green Bay.Fort Winnebago, Wisconsin.Fort Crawford. Prairie des Chiens.Fort Snelling, St. Peters.Fort Leavenworth, Missouri.Fort Madison, Des Moines River.Jefferson Barracks, Missouri.Advanced Forts.Fort Towson, Red River.Fort Gibson, Arkansasand Grand Junction River.Fort Adams, Baton Rouge.There are one or two outposts also on theArkansas River. Tf all these forts were properlygarrisoned, they would take every disposablemusket in the regular army of the UnitedStates; whilst at present they have, inconsequenceIndia 7 s. 209of the protracted Florida war, scarcely sufficientmen to do the duty.Tn the report of the acting quarter-mastergeneral, the following garrisons are proposed forthe western frontier :Fort Snelling 300 men.Fort Crawford 300Upper forks of the Des Moines 400Fort Leavenworth 1,200Fort Gibson 1,500Fort Towson 800The eight posts of refuge proposed . 800The protection of the four depots . 200Jefferson barracks, as a corps of reserve1,500Total 7,000To which must be added, for the garrisons ofthe five Lakes forts, 1,500 at least, makingthe force necessary for the protection of theboundaries, to amount to 8,500 men. Colonel210 INDIANS.Gratiot, in his report, computes the force necessaryat 12,910 men.The letter of Mr. Poinsett to Congress willthrow much light upon this subject, and I shalltherefore insert it.Department of War,December 30, 1837.Sir : In answer to the resolution of theHouse of Representatives, in relation to theprotection of the western frontiers of the UnitedStates, I have the honour to transmit the accompanyingreports of the chief engineer andthe acting quarter-master general, together witha report of the commissioner of Indian affairs.That expected from General Gaines will be sentas soon as it is received.In presenting these documents, which areably drawn up, and contain full and satisfactoryinformation on all the topics embraced by theresolution, I might have considered my dutyfully discharged, had not other plans been pre-indians.211piously recommended, which I regard as entirelyinefficient, but which have received, in somemeasure, the sanction of Congress. A surveyhas been directed to determine the line of a road,which, it is contemplated, shall extend fromsome point of the Upper Mississippi to RedRiver, passing west of Missouri and Arkansas;and it is proposed to place a cordon of temporaryposts of ordinary construction along it, as asufficient measure for the defence of that part ofthe country. In pursuance of the orders ofCongress, officers have been appointed to performthat duty, and, upon their report being received,measures will be taken to carry into effect theintentions of Congress, unless, upon a deliberatereview of the whole matter, some more eligibleplan of defence shall be adopted. My own opinionhas been, from the time I first consideredthe subject, that such a chain of posts, strungalong the best road that can be constructed, furnishedwith all the means to operate, and withcompetent garrisons to occupy them, is not INDIANS.related to afford that protection which the borderStates have a right to expect from the Government,nor to redeem its pledge to protect theemigrant tribes from the savage and warlikepeople that surround them. The only possibleuse of such a road would be to facilitate occasionalcommunications .between the posts in timeof peace. Supplies would not be transportedalong it, for they must be brought from theinterior. Succours could not reach the posts bythat direction, for they would be furnished bythe militia within the line ; and any attempt toconcentrate the forces composing the garrisonsin the event of an outbreak, would probably beattended with disastrous consequences ; for thetroops, whose route must be well known, wouldbe exposed to be attacked and destroyed in detail.The enemy, having nothing to dread ontheir flanks or rear, might approach this roadwithout risk, and attack the detachments on theirline of march, before they could concentrate theirforces so as to offer an effectual resistance.INDIANS. 213After mature reflection, I am of opinionthat military posts ought to be established andkept up within the Indian territory, in such positionsas to maintain peace among the Indians,and protect the emigrant and feebler tribesagainst the stronger and more warlike nationsthat surround them ; which the United Statesare bound to do by treaty stipulations. Towithdraw those which now exist there, wouldbe to violate our faith, as there is reason toapprehend that it would be the signal of war.Persons well acquainted with that country assureus that war would break out among the Indiansjust so soon as the troops are removed fromthose posts ; and all accounts from that quarterconfirm that impression.Independently of the military protectionwhich the existence of these posts in the interiorof the Indian country afford to the emigratingtribes, and the good they are calculated toeffect by the beneficial influence the officers areenabled to exert over the surrounding Indians,214 INDIANS.they more effectually cover and protect the frontierthan ten times the number of fortresses,strung along in one line, could do.With the very limited knowledge of thatcountry as yet in possession of this department,it appears to me that six or seven permanentexterior posts would be sufficient to preserve thepeace of that frontier. It will be necessary, atthe same time, to establish, at convenient points,an interior line of posts, to serve as places ofrefuge for the inhabitants in periods of dangerand alarm, until the militia can march to theirsuccour from the interior, and the troops be putin motion upon the rear of the invaders. Eightof these would be amply sufficient, from whichpatrols might be kept up along the frontier toenforce the intercourse laws. Both descriptionsof forts should be so constructed as to be defendedby a small garrison, and in a manner thateach part may be successfully maintained againsta very superior force, both during the time thewhole is being completed, and in the event ofINDIANS. 215any portion of it being burnt or destroyed. Thisarrangement would require the establishment ofa few depots of arms and supplies, from whichcommunications should be opened to the posts.The accompanying skeleton map presents aview of the relative positions of the posts anddepots, and of the communications from themto the line of defence for the speedy transportationof succours and supplies. A regular forceof five thousand men would be sufficient to garrisonthese posts, and, with a competent reserveat Jefferson barracks, and an effective force atBaton Rouge, would, I think, both ensure thesafety of the western frontier, and enable theGovernment to fulfil all its treaty stipulations,and preserve its faith with the Indians. Iwould recommend, as an important auxiliary tothis system of defence, the organization of anefficient volunteer force, to be raised in each ofthe frontier States ; the men to be mustered intoservice for a certain term of time, the officers tobe appointed according to their State laws, and216 INDIANS.to be instructed a certain number of days ineach year by the regular officers of the UnitedStates army at the posts within the States, andto receive pay during that period. In this manneran efficient corps of officers may be created,and a body of volunteers be at hand to marchto the succour of the border settlers and repelthe invaders, whenever they are called upon bythe proper authority.I venture to hope, if these measures areadopted by Congress, and carried into effect atan early day, so as to anticipate any hostilemovement of the Indians, peace will be preservedon our Western borders ; but if theyshould, unfortunately, be delayed until the discontentwhich exists among many of the tribesbreaks out into open hostility, and the firstmovements of that wild and warlike people provesuccessful, as they infallibly would do in ourpresent unprepared state, it might require doublethe force and quadruple the means I have hereindicated to restore and preserve peace alongINDIANS. 217that extended frontier. All which is respectfullysubmitted.J. R. POINSETT.Hon. JAMES K. POLK,Speaker of the House of Representatives."The acting quarter-master-general, in hisreport, makes the following observation :The obligations of the Government in referenceto the Western frontier are of a very peculiarcharacter. It is first bound, by a commonduty, to protect its own border settlements,extending along a line of one thousand miles,against the incursions of numerous savage tribes,separated from those settlements by mere imaginarylines ; and it is next bound, by the solemntreaty stipulations, with such of those tribes ashave emigrated to that frontier, to protectthem at their new residences against all interruptionsor disturbances from any other tribesor nations of Indians, or from any other personor persons whatsoever.If these obligations are to be scrupulouslyVOL. in. L218 INDIANS.fulfilled in good faith, which would seem to bedue to our character as a nation professing apaternal care over these people, a military forceof thirty thousand men on the Western frontierwould scarcely be adequate to enable the Governmentto discharge its duties to its own citizens,and redeem these pledges of protection tothe Indians.It is not my intention, however, to proposesuch a force. Political expediency. I presume,would not tolerate it, however it might be justifiedby military considerations. It is merelyadverted to here in connexion with the heavyobligations which rest upon Government, andwhich have probably been contracted from timeto time, without any very nice calculation of themeans that would be necessary to a. faithful dischargeof them. I will, therefore, withoutenlarging upon this point, proceed to state theminimum force that is deemed necessary to giveprotection to the border settlements, and assistin preserving peace among them and their In-INDIANS. 219tian neighbours along the line of the frontier.These are great and important objects of themselves,without superadding the yet more difficulttask of protecting the emigrant tribes,whom our policy has placed beyond the frontier,from the wild and warlike Indians of the Far-west."And Colonel Gratiot, in his report, makes thefollowing admission. Speaking of the second,or middle, section, he says :"Second, or Middle Section. The countrybeyond this line is mostly elevated and free frommarshy ground ; is abundantly watered, thinlywooded, healthy, and has been assigned for thepermanent residence of the tribes which havebeen, or are to be, removed from the States andterritories east of the Mississippi, and is stilloccupied by the Aborigines originally foundwithin its limits. In numbers they count, accordingto some estimates, 131,000, and cansend to the field 26,200 warriors. As yet, nocommunity of feeling, except of deep and lasting220 INDIANS.hatred to the white man, and more particularlyto the Anglo-Americans, exists among them ;and, unless they coalesce, no serious difficultyneed be apprehended from them. Not so, however,should they be induced to unite for purposesoffensive and defensive : their strengthwould then become apparent, create confidence,and, in all probability, induce them to give ventto their long-suppressed desire to revenge pastwrongs, which is restrained, as they openly andfreely declare, by fear alone. That such a unionwill be formed at no distant day, we have everyreason to believe ; and the period may be acceleratedby their growing wants, and thepolicy of Mexico to annoy Texas, and raisean impenetrable barrier in the direction of herfrontier."That at present the Western frontier is defencelessis undeniable, and the Florida wardoes not appear to be at all nearer to a conclusionthan it was two or three years ago. Thatthe Indians to the west of the Mississippi areINDIANS. 221not ignorant of what is going on is very certain;and the moral effect arising from the protracteddefence of the Seminoles may eventually provemost serious, and be attended with enormousexpense to the United States.The Federal Government takes every precautionto impress the Indians with an idea of theimpossibility of their opposing the white men.The agents persuade the chiefs to go down toWashington to see their great father,, the President.On these occasions they are accompaniedby the Indian agent and interpreter,and, of course, all their expenses are paid. Theyare lodged at the hotels, taken to all places ofpublic amusement, and provided with conveyances.But the policy of the Government is tocause them to make a circuit through all themost populous cities, as the crowds attracted bythe appearance of the Indians give them an extraordinaryand incorrect idea of the Americanpopulation. Wherever they go they are in acrowd. If they are at the windows of an hotel,still the crowds are immense ; and this is what222 INDIANS.the Government is anxious should take place.I was at Boston when the two deputations of theSioux and Sacs and Foxes tribes arrived. Thetwo nations being at enmity, the Sioux were conductedthere first, and left the town on the arrivalof the Sacs and Foxes, or there would probablyhave been a fight. The Governor receivedthe latter in the Town-hall., and made a speech ;I was present. I thought at the time that itwas not a speech that I would have made tothem, and if I mistook not, it brought up recollectionsnot very agreeable to the chiefs,although they were too polkic to express theirfeelings. But a few years before, their landseast of the Mississippi had been wrested fromthem in the most unfair way, as I have mentionedin my remarks upon the treatment of theIndians by the American Government.Governor Everett commenced his speech asfollows :Chiefs and warriors of the confederatedSacs and Foxes, you are welcome to our Hallof Council. You have come a far way, fromINDIANS. 223your red friends of the West, to visit your whitebrethren of the East. We are glad to take youby the hand. We have heard before of the Sacand the Fox tribes: we have heard much oftheir chiefs, warriors, and great men: we arenow glad to see them here. We are of Massachusetts: the red men once resided here : theirwigwams were on yonder hill : and their CouncilChamber was here. When our fathers cameover the great waters, they were a small band,and you were powerful : the red man stood onthe rock by the seaside, and looked at themwith friendly eyes : he might have pushed theminto the water, but took them by the hand, andsaid welcome, white man. Our fathers werehungry, and the red man gave them corn andvenison. Our fathers were cold, and the redman spread his blanket over them and madethem warm. We are now great and powerful,but we will remember in our prosperity thebenefits bestowed by our red brethren in ouradversity."224 INDIANS.Up to the present, they certainly have forgottenthem ! .But the fate of the red man appears to benearly decided. What between their wars witheach other, the use of spirituous liquors, andthe diseases imported by the whites, they dwindleaway every day. The most fatal disease tothem is the small-pox. The following account,which I have extracted from one of the Americanpapers, was confirmed to me by a letter from FortSnelling. :Appalling destruction of North-west Indiansby Small-pox.We gave yesterday an account of the originof this epidemic by means of a steam-boattrading on the Missouri. To-day we subjoin,from the St. Louis bulletin slip of March 3d,a detailed account of its ravages. The diseasehad reached the remote band of the Blackfeet,and thousands of them had fallen victims. Theydo not blame the traders.INDIANS. 225The Pipe Stem a chief of great influence,when dying, called his people around him, andhis last request was, that they would love theirtraders, and be always governed by their advice.6 1 may, says one of the traders, * be blamed fornot using measures to arrest the progress of thedisease, but without resort to arms on the arrivalof the boat with supplies, the Indians could nothave been driven from the fortAn express went two days a-head of theboat, but it was of no use preaching to theIndians to fly they flocked down to the boat asusual when she arrived. The peltry trade inthat quarter is ruined for years. The companyagent at Fort Union, writes, Nov. 30, that alltheir prospects on the Upper Missouri aretotally prostrated. The epidemic spread intothe most distant part of the Assinaboin country,and this tribe were dying by fifties and hundredsa day. The disease appeared to be of a peculiarlymalignant cast ; some, a few moments afterL3226 INDIANS.severe attacks of pain in the head and loins, felldown dead, and the bodies turned black immediatelyafter, and swelled to three times theirnatural size. The companies erected hospitals,but they were of no use. The carts were constantlyemployed burying the dead in holes;afterwards, when the earth was frozen, they wereconsigned to the water. Many of the squawsare left in a miserable condition. The diseasehas not reached the Sioux, many of whom havebeen vaccinated.The Mandans, numbering 1,600, living inpermanent villages 1,600 miles above St. Louis,have all died but thirty-one.The Minstrels, or Gros Ventres, livingnear the Mandans, numbering about 1,000,were, by our last accounts, about one half dead,and the disease still raging.The Arickarees, amounting to 3,000, whobut lately abandoned a wandering life, andjoined the Mandans, were about half dead, andINDIANS. 227the disease still among them. It is probablethey have been reduced in proportion to theMandans.44 The Assinaboins, a powerful tribe, about9,000 strong, living entirely by the chase, andranging north of the Missouri, in the plainsbelow the Rocky Mountains, down towards theHudson s Bay Company, on the north RedRiver, are literally annihilated. Their principaltrade was at Fort Union, mouth of the YellowStone,44 The Crees, living in the same region, numbering3,000, are nearly all destroyed. Thegreat nation called Blackfeet, who wander andlive by the chase, ranging through all the regionof the Rocky Mountains, divided into bandsPagans, Gros Ventres, Blood Indians, andBlackfeet, amounting in all to 50,000 or 60,000,have deeply suffered. One thousand lodges orfamilies have been destroyed, and the diseasewas rapidly spreading among the different bands.228 INDIANS.The average number in a lodge is from six toeight persons.The boat that brought up the small-poxmade her voyage last summer, and the ravagesof the distemper appear to have been greatestin October. It broke out among the Mandans,July 15th. Many of the handsome Arickareeswho had recovered, seeing the disfiguration oftheir features, committed suicide; some bythrowing themselves from rocks, others bystabbing, shooting, &c. The prairie has becomea grave yard ; its wild flowers bloom over thesepulchres of Indians. The atmosphere formiles is poisoned by the stench of hundreds ofcarcases unburied. The women and childrenare wandering in groups without food, or howling-overthe dead. The men are flying in everydirection. The proud, warlike, and noble lookingBlackfeet are no more. The deserted lodgesare seen on the hills, but no smoke issues fromthem. No sound but the raven s croak, andINDIANS. 229the wolf s long howl, breaks the awful stillness.The wolves fatten on the dead carcases.The scene of desolation is described as appallingbeyond the powers of imagination toconceive."That they may give the Americans muchtrouble, however, previous to their final extermination,is true, and that they are very anxiousto revenge themselves, is equally certain. Thegreatest misfortune which could happen to theUnited States would be a union or mixture ofthe negroes with the Indian tribes. If this wereto take place, the population would, in all probability,rapidly increase, instead of falling awayas it now does ; as then the negro populationwould till the ground sufficiently for the supportof themselves and the Indians, as they nowdo among the Creek and Seminole tribes,who have plenty of cattle and corn. TheAmerican Indian in his natural state suffersmuch from hunger, and this is one cause ofthe non-increase of their population. What230 INDIANS.might be effected by the bands now concentratedon the American frontier, if at any future timethey should become amalgamated with the negroes,will be fairly estimated by the reader when hehas read the account I am about to lay beforeim of the war in Florida.CHAPTER IX.CAUSES OF THE FLORIDA WAR.MOST of my countrymen are aware that theAmericans have been carrying a war against theFlorida Indians for the last two or three years ;the details, however, are not so well known ; andas this Florida war ought to be a lesson to theAmericans, and may, as a precedent to the otherIndians, prove of great importance, I shallenter into the particulars of it. I am moved,indeed, so to do, as it will afford the reader avery fair specimen of the general policy andmode of treatment shewn to the Indians by theAmerican Government. Florida was ceded bySpain to the United States as a set-off against500,000 dollars, claimed by the Americansfor spoliations committed on her commerce.232 CAUSES OF THEThe white population of Florida is not verynumerous even now ; the census of 1830 gave18,000 whites and 16,000 slaves, independent ofthe Florida Indians, or Seminoles. Seminolesis a term for runaways or wanderers; the Indiantribes in Florida being a compound of theold Florida Indians, two varieties of Creeks, whoquitted their tribe previous to their removal westof the Mississippi, and Africans who are slaves toathenians. Their numbers at the commencementof the war were estimated as follows :Warriors.TheMico-sukee Indians, of which Osseous,or Asseola, was one of the principalchiefs 400Creek and Spanish Indians 850Negroes 600 to 700In all about 1900 warriors.The chief of the whole Seminole nation isMic-e-no-pah, and next to him in consequence,as orator of the nation, is an Indian of thename of Jumper. It must be observed thatFLORIDA WAR. 233these Indians, having slaves, cultivated theground and had large stocks of cattle. Florida,like all the confines of the United States, had awhite population not very creditable to anycountry, and many of these people went theremore with a view of robbing the Indians of theirnegroes and cattle, and bellingham in the WesternStates, than with any intention of permanentlysettling in the country.As soon as the Florida were ceded by theSpanish, the American Government perceivedthe expediency of removing the Indians fromthe territories, and, on the 18th of September1823, a treaty was entered into with the Indians,by which the Indians, on their part, agreed toremove to the westward after twenty years fromthat date, that is on September 18th, 1843. Bythe same treaty the American Governmentsecured to the Indians a tract of land in Florida,containing five millions of acres, for their subsistenceduring the time that they remained inthat State ; and agreed to pay the Indians certainI234 CAUSES OF THEadvances, in consequence of their surrenderingall title to the rest of the Florida country, andengaging to confine themselves to the limits ofthe territory allotted to them.Nothing could be more plain or simple thanthe terms of this treaty, which, in consequence ofthe council being held at this spot, was denominatedthe treaty of Camp Moultrie.The third article in the treaty of Camp Soultrie runs as follows : " The United States willtake the Florida Indians under their care andpatronage, and will afford them protectionagainst all per sons whatsoever"One of the great errors committed by theAmerican Government was in binding itself toperform what was not in its power. It could nomore protect these Indians against the whitemarauders than it could prevent the insurgentsfrom attacking Upper Canada. The arm of theFederal Government is too weak to reach its own.confines, as will hereafter be shewn by its ownacknowledgment. The consequence was that.FLORIDA WAR. 235very soon after the treaty of Camp Moultrie hadbeen signed, the Indians were robbed and plunderedby the miscreants who hovered near themfor that purpose.An American author states that two men,Robinson and Tilbury, belonging to Georgia,contrived to steal from one chief twenty slaves,to the value of 15,000 dollars, and carried themto New Orleans. I will however quote a portionof the work.Another influential chief, Emachitochustern,commonly called John Walker, was robbed of anumber of slaves in a somewhat similar manner.After making an appeal to the governmentagent, without the least chance of redress, hesays : c I don t like to make any trouble or tohave any quarrel with white people, but, if theywill trespass on my lands and rights, I mustdefend myself the best way I can, and if theydo come again they must bear the consequences.But is there no civil law to protect me ? are the236 CAUSES OF THEnegroes belonging to me to be stolen away publiclyin the face of all law and justice ? carriedoff and sold to fill the pockets of these landpirates ? Douglass and his company have hireda man, who has two large trained dogs for thepurpose, to come here and take off others. Heis from Mobile, and follows catching negroes.Colonel John Blunt, another estimablechief, was inhumanly beaten by a party of whitemen, who robbed him of several hundred dollars ;he made application to the authorities, but thevillains were allowed to escape.tc These facts show how mild and forbearingthe Seminoles have acted under the most tryingcircumstances; and even when their propertyhas been assailed in this way, they have, innumerousinstances, refrained from makingresistance; their hands were bound, as theseverest punishment awaited any attack theymight make upon the intruders, even though circumstancesjustified it. But as the Indian sevidence could not be received in a court of jus-floridaWAR. 237time, the white man s oath would condemn him tothe most torturing punishment."But in every way were the poor Indians theprey of the white men. The same author says,among many other cases brought forward, " Aman, by the name of Floyd, was employed byan Indian woman to recover some negroes forher, and instead of presenting a mere power ofattorney for her signature, she found, alas! it wasa bill of sale for all her negroes ! Anotherindividual was requested by Miconopy, governorof the Seminoles, to draw a piece of writing forhim, to which, without suspicion of Us character,he attached his name ; it was soon after discoveredto be a conveyance of a large tract ofland !Another source of profit to these scoundrelswas the obtaining by fraudulent means from theIndians, orders upon the American Governmentfor the payment of portions of their annuitygranted in return for the cession of the territory.u One of the government agents was a delinquent238 CAUSES OF THEto them for a considerable amount. He robbedhe principal interpreter of the nation, a veryinfluential black chief by the name of Abraham,of several hundred dollars, by getting a receiptfrom him without paying the money, under theplea that it was necessary to send the receipt toWashington, where it was filed to the credit ofthe agent. Several other Indians of influencewere robbed in a similar manner ; and when theydemanded the money from the succeeding agent,they were told that the government would notpay them. Is not this an unsound principle toadopt in our intercourse with the Indians ? Is itjust or honourable for us to send our own agentsamong them, without their approval, and nothold ourselves responsible for their conduct? Ifwe were indebted to a nation, and the funds aresent through an agent to pay over, and heneglects to do so, are we not still liable, andwould not a civilized power still hold us responsible?"I have mentioned these facts to show thatFLORIDA WAR. 239the Indians were justified in their want of faith inthe white men : they were robbed and pillagedand had no redress ; nay, they were imprisonedas thieves for taking away their own cattle whichhad been stolen from them, although theyshowed their own marks and brands uponthem. Whether the American Governmentsuffered all this spoliation with a view to disgustthe Indians and incline them to remove to thewestward, the reader will be better able to judgefor himself when he has read a few pages more.The Florida people were now subjected toretaliation on the part of the Indians, who,finding that they could obtain no redress,naturally took the law into their own hands,and loss of life on both sides was the consequence.This produced petition after petitionfrom the Florida white population to thegovernment, requesting that the Indians mightbe moved west prior to 1 843, the period agreedupon by the treaty of Camp Moultrie. ColonelGadsden, a citizen of Florida, was appointed240 CAUSES OF THEcommissioner to treat with the Indians, and onthe 8th of April 1832, had an interview withMioe-no-pah, and a few other chiefs. The Indiansrequested thirty days to collect the opinions ofthe absent chiefs, and on the 8th of May 1832,they met the commissioner, according to appointment,at Payne s Landing. The commissionerhad a great deal of difficulty in obtaining theirconsent ; to the removal, which was ultimatelygiven upon certain conditions.By this treaty, the Indians agreed to removewest upon being paid a certain sum for thereserved land ; an annuity for a certain numberof years ; and other advantages, which wouldoccupy too much space to particularize here.The treaty was signed by Mic-e-no-pah, thehead chief, Jumper, and thirteen more.But the treaty was assented to upon one condition,which was, that the Seminoles were satisfiedwith the lands apportioned to them west ofthe Mississippi. This is acknowledged by ColonelGadsden, in his letter to the Secretary of War,FLORIDA WAR. 241who says " There is a condition prefixed to theagreement, without assenting to which theFlorida Indians most positively refused to negotiatefor their removal west of the Mississippi.Even with the condition annexed, there was areluctance (which with some difficulty was overcome)on the part of the Indians, to bind themselvesby any stipulations before a knowledge offacts and circumstances would enable them tojudge of the advantages or disadvantages of thedisposition the government of the United Stateswished to make of them. They were finallyinduced, however, to assent to the agreement."The final ratification of the treaty will dependupon the opinion of the seven chiefs selected toexplore the country west of the Mississippi river.If that corresponds to the description given, orisequal to the expectations formed of it, therewill be no difficulty on the part of the Seminoles."There was a very unwise delay on the part ofthe American government after the signing ofthis second treaty. More than two years were per-VOL. III. M242 CAUSES OF THEmitted to elapse before any appropriation of landwas made for the Indians, who became dissatisfied,and the treaty was by them pronounced tobe " a white man s treaty," which they did notany longer consider to be binding.But there were other reasons why the Seminolesdid not consider the treaty as binding ; they didnot like the lands alloted to them. A deputationof seven was sent west of the Mississippi: the land they acknowledged was goodland, but they found that they were close to thePawnee territory, and that that tribe was proverbiallyfamous for stealing cattle and horses.It was also the determination of the AmericanGovernment, as they were considered as a portionof the Creek nation, to settle them nearto and incorporate them with that nation. Thisdid not suit them; the Creeks had claimed manyof their slaves, and they knew that they had nochance with so superior a force as that of theCreek nation, who would have taken all theirslaves from them. As, therefore, the PawneesFLORIDA WAR. 243would have stolen all their cattle, and the Creekshave taken all their slaves, they considered thatutter destitution would be the consequence of theremoval as proposed by the American Government.To get over the latter difficulty, thegovernment proposed that the Seminoles shouldsell their slaves previous to their removing, batthis they objected to. The American author Ihave quoted says :It was then suggested to them that, by asale of these negroes before they left Florida,they would augment their resources, and couldgo into their new country without the dread ofexciting the cupidity of the Creeks. But theseIndians have always evinced great reluctance toparting with slaves : indeed the Indian loves hisnegro as much as one of his own children, andthe sternest necessity alone would drive him tothe parting: this recommendation was, therefore,viewed with evident alarm, and as the rightof retaining possession of them was guaranteedM 2244 CAUSES OF THEby the commissioner, strong doubts were raisedas to the sincerity of the pledge.The Seminole Indians are poor agriculturistsand husbandmen, and withal too indolent to tillthe ground, and, without their negroes, wouldliterally starve : besides, should they dispose ofthem they could not be replenished in a newcountry. Again : the opposition of the slavesthemselves to being sold to the whites wouldexcite all their energies to prevent emigration,for they dread the idea of being transferred tosugar and cotton plantations, where they must besubject to the surveillance of the overseer. Thelife of a slave among the Indians, compared withthat of negroes under overseers, is one of luxuryand ease ; the demands upon him are verytrifling, scarcely ever exceeding eight or tenbushels from the crop, the remainder beingapplied to his own profit : they live separate,and often remote, from their owners, and enjoyan equal share of liberty. The negro is alsoFLORIDA WAR. 245much more provident and ambitious than hismaster, and the peculiar localities of the countryeminently facilitate him in furnishing the Indianwith rum and tobacco, which gives him a controllinginfluence over the latter, and at thesame time affords him an immense profit ; sothat it can be easily imagined that the negroeswould in no manner be benefitted by thechange."On the 23d of October, 1834, being two yearsand a half after the signing of the second treatyat Payne s Landing, a council of Indians wasagain summoned by the agent, who informedthem that all they had now to answer were thefollowing questions :Will you incorporate yourselves with theCreek nation in the Far West ?Will you have money for your cattle whichyou leave here on your arrival there, or willyou have cattle in return ?Will you go by water, or by land ?246 CAUSES OF THEWill you have your next annuity paid inmoney or in goods ?Upon this, the chiefs retired and held a privatecouncil. It is said that Asseola, the principalchief of the tribe of Micosukees, persuadedthem strongly to resist going, and declared thathe would consider as his enemy any one whoagreed to go. Asseola had not signed the treaty.The next day the council was resumed, and thechiefs made the following replies to the agent.The first who spoke was Holata Mico, principalwar chief. He expressed his wish thatthere should be no quarrelling, at the same timethat he gave his evidence as to the truth of thefirst book of Moses.Holata Mico then rose, and said c Godmade all of us, and we all came from onewoman, sucked one bubby ; we hope we shallnot quarrel ; that we will talk until we getthroughMiconopy then said When we were atFLORIDA WAR. 247Camp Moultrie we made a treaty, and we wereto be paid our annuity for twenty years. Thatis all I have got to say."Jumper said At Camp Moultrie theytold us all difficulties should be buried fortwenty years, from the date of the treaty madethere ; that after this we held a treaty at Payne sLanding, before the twenty years were out ; andthey told us we might go and see the country,but that we were not obliged to remove. Theland is very good, I saw it, and was glad to seeit ; the neighbours there are bad people ; I donot like them bad Indians, the Pawnees. Iwent and saw the place ; I told the agent that Iwas a rogue ; that he had brought me to theplace here alongside, and among the rogues, thebad Pawnees, because I am a rogue. I went tosee the land, and the commissioners said thatthe Seminoles must have that land. When wewent west to see the land, we had not sold ourland here, and we were told only to go and seeit. The Indians there steal horses, and take248 CAUSES OF THEpacks on their horses ; they all steal horses fromthe different tribes ; I do not want to go amongsuch people ; your talk seems always good, butwe don t feel disposed to go west.Charley Amathla then rose, and said6 The speakers of the nation are all dead ; butI recollect some of their words when they hadthe meeting at Camp Moultrie. I was not there,but heard that we would be at peace, and thatwe would have our annuity paid to us for twentyyears. White people have told me that thetreaty at Camp Moultrie, which was made bygreat men, and not to be broken, had securedthem for twenty years; that seven years ofthat treaty are still unexpired. I am no halfbreed, and do not lean on one side If they tellme to go after the seven years, I say nothing.As to the proposition made us by the agentabout removing, I do not say T will not go ;but I think that, until the seven years are out,I give no answer. My family I love dearlyand sacredly. I do not think it right to takeFLORIDA WAR. 2A9them right off. Our father has often said to methat he loves his children and they love him.When a man is at home, and got his stock abouthim, he looks upon it as the subsistence of himselfand family. Then when they go off, theyreflect and think more seriously than whenquiet at home. I do not complain of the agent stalk. My young men and family are all aroundme. Should I go west, I should lose many onthe path. As to the country west, I looked atit ; a weak man cannot get there, the fatiguewould be so great ; it requires a strong man. "This talk made the agent very angry ; hetold them that they should stand by the treatyat Payne Landing ; he desired them to retire,and when they came again to act like chiefsand honourable men.October 25, 1834. The council covered at.11 o clock. Interpreters as yesterday.The agent said to the council, c I am readyto receive your answers to the questions which Isubmitted to you,M 3250 CAUSES OF THEHolato Mico. I have only to repeat whatI said yesterday, and to say that the twenty yearsfrom the treaty at Moultrie has not yet expired.I never gave my consent to go west ; the whitesmay say so, but I never gave my consent." 1Jumper. 4 We are not satisfied to go untilthe end of twenty years, according to the treatyat Camp Moultrie. We were called upon togo to the west, beyond the Mississippi. It is agood country ; this is a poor country, we know.We had a good deal of trouble to get there ;what would it be for all our tribe.Miconopy. ( I say, what I said yesterday, Idid not sign the treaty." 1Agent c Abraham, tell Miconopy that Isay he lies ; he did sign the treaty, for here ishis name. "Miconopy here asserts that he did not signthe treaty, which certainly appears to be afalsehood : but it should be remembered that, bythe agent s own admission, it was only a conditionalsignature by a portion of the chiefs, pro-floridaWAR. 251vide that they liked the location offered tothem ; and as they objected to this, the treatywas certainly, in my opinion, null and void.Indeed, the agent had no right to demand thesignatures when such an important reservationwas attached to the treaty. I do not give thewhole of the agent s reply, as there is so muchrepetition ; the following are extracts:I have told you that you must stand toyour bargain. My talk is still the same. Youmust go west. Your father, the President, whois your friend, will compel you to go. Therefore,be not deluded by any hope or expectationthat you will be permitted to remain here. Youhave expressed a wish to hear my views andopinion upon the whole matter, As a man, andyour friend, I will this day deign to reason withyou ; for I want to show you that your talk ofto-day is the foolish talk of a child."Jumper says, they agreed at Payne s Landingto go and examine the country west, butthey were not bound to remove to it until the20*2 CAUSES OF THEnation should agree to do so, after the return ofthe delegation ; and he adds, what others of youhave said, that the treaty at Camp Moultrie wasto stand for twenty years. Such a talk fromJumper surprises me, for he is a man of sense.He understands the treaty at Payne s Landing,which he signed ; he was the first named in thattreaty, of the delegation appointed to go west ;he knows that that treaty gave him and themembers of the delegation authority to decidewhether the nation should remove or not.The Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws andCherokees, who live in the States, are movingwest of the Mississippi river, because they cannotlive under the white people s laws ; they aregone and going, and the Seminole nation are asmall handful to their number. Two governmentscannot exist under the same boundary ofterritory. Where Indians remain within thelimits of a state or territory until the jurisdictionof a state or territory shall be extendedover them, the Indian government, laws andFLORIDA WAR. 253chieftains, are for ever done away the Indiansare subject to the white man s law. The Indianmust be tried, whether for debt or crime, in thewhite man s court ; the Indian s law is not to beknown there ; the Indian s evidence is not to beadmitted there ; the Indian will, in every thing,be subject to the control of the white man. Itis this view of the subject which induces yourfather, the President, to settle his red childrenbeyond the limits of the states and territorieswhere the white man s law is never to reach you,and where you and your children are to possessthe land, while the grass grows and the waterruns. He feels for his red children as a fathershould feel. It is, therefore, that he made thetreaty with you at Payne s Landing, and for thesame reason he will compel you to comply withyour bargain. But let us look a little moreclosely into your own situation. Suppose (whatis however impossible) that you could be permittedso remain here a few years longer, whatwould be your condition ? his land will soon254 CAUSES OF THEbe surveyed) sold to, and settled by, the whites.There is now a surveyor in the country ; thejurisdiction of the territory will soon be extendedover this country. Your laws will besetaside, your chiefs will cease to be chiefs ;claims for debt and for your negroes would besetup against you by bad white men, or youwould perhaps be charged with crimes affectinglife; you would be hauled before the white manscourt ; the claims against you for debt, for yournegroes or other property, and the charges ofcrime preferred against you, would be decidedby the white mans law. White men would bewitnesses against you ; Indians would not bepermitted to give evidence ; your condition, inavery few years, would be hopeless wretchedness."What an admission from their father, the President,after having, in the third article of thetreaty of Camp Moultrie, declared that theUnited States will afford the Florida Indiansprotection against all persons whatsoever ! ! !FLORIDA WAR. 255Thus, you may see, that were it possible foryou to remain here a few years longer, youwould be reduced to hopeless poverty, and whenurged by hunger to ask, perhaps, of the manwho thus would have ruined you (and is,perhaps, now tampering with you for the purposeof getting your property) for a crust of bread,you might be called an Indian dog, and beordered to clear out. [Here Asseola, who wasseated by Miconopy, urged him to be firm inhis resolution.] Your father, the President,sees all these evils, and will save you from themby removing you west ; and I will stand up forthe last time to tell you, that you must go; and ifnot willingly, you will be compelled to go. Ishould have told you that no more annuity willbe paid to you here. [ Asseola replied, that hedid not care whether any more was ever paid.]I hope you will, on more mature reflection, actlike honest men, and not compel me to reportyou to your father, the President, as faithless toyour engagements."256 CAUSES OF THEAsseola said, the decision of the chiefs wasgiven; that they did not intend to give anyother answer.Miconopy said T do not intend to remove.The Agent. < I am now fully satisfied thatyou are wilfully disposed to be entirely dishonestin regard to your engagements with the President,and regret that I must so report you.The talk which I have made to you must andwill stand. "Thus, indeed, the council and the partiesseparated. The American government was supine,thinking, probably, that the Indians wouldnot resist much longer ; but the Indians, on theother hand, laid up large stores of powder andlead. Six months elapsed, and then the Indianswere informed that they were to hear the lasttalk of the father, the President on this side ofthe Mississippi. On the 22d of April, 1835,the Indians assembled, and had the followingcommunication from General Jackson :FLORIDA WAR. 257To the Chiefs and Warriors of the SeminoleIndians in Florida.MY CHILDREN : I am sorry to have heardthat you have been listening to bad counsels.You know me, and you know that I would notdeceive, nor advise you to do any thing that wasunjust or injurious. Open your ears and attendto what I shall now say to you. They are thewords of a friend, and the words of truth.The white people are settling around you.The game has disappeared from your country.Your people are poor and hungry. All thisyou have perceived for some time. And nearlythree years ago, you made an agreement withyour friend, Colonel Gadsden, acting on thepart of the United States, by which you agreed tocede your lands in Florida, and to remove andjoin your brothers, the Creeks, in the countrywest of the Mississippi. You annexed a conditionto this agreement, that certain chiefs,named therein, in whom you placed confidence,should proceed to the western country, and CAUSES OF THEamine whether it was suitable to your wants andhabits ; and whether the Creeks residing therewere willing to permit you to unite with themas one people, and if the persons thus sent, weresatisfied on these heads, then the agreementmade with Colonel Gadsden was to be in fullforce.In conformity with these provisions, thechiefs named by you proceeded to that country,and having examined it, and having becomesatisfied respecting its character and the favourabledisposition of the Creeks, they entered intoan agreement with commissioners on the part ofthe United States, by which they signified theirsatisfaction on these subjects, and finally ratifiedthe agreement made with Colonel Gadsden.I now learn that you refuse to carry intoeffect the solemn promises thus made by you,and that you have stated to the officers of theUnited States, sent among you, that you willnot remove to the western country.My children : T have never deceived, norFLORIDA WAR. 259will I ever deceive, any of the red people. Itell you that you must go, and that you willgo, Even if you had a right to stay, how couldyou live where you now are ? You have soldall your country. You have not a piece as largeas a blanket to sit down upon. What is to supportyourselves, your women and children ?The tract you have ceded will soon be surveyedand sold, and immediately afterwards will beoccupied by a white population. You will soonbe in a state of starvation. You will commitdepredations upon the property of our citizens.You will be resisted, punished, perhaps killed.Now, is it not better peaceably to remove to afine, fertile country, occupied by your own kindred,and where you can raise all the necessariesof life, and where game is yet abundant ? Theannuities payable to you, and the other stipulationsmade in your favour, will make yoursituation comfortable, and will enable you toincrease and improve. If, therefore, you hada right to stay where you now are, still every260 CAUSES OF THEtrue friend would advise you to remove. But youhave no right to stay, and you must go. I amvery desirous that you should go peaceablyand voluntarily. You shall be comfortablytaken care of and kindly treated on the road,and when you arrive in your new country, provisionswill be issued to you for a year, so thatyou can have ample time to provide for yourfuture support.But lest some of your rash young menshould forcibly oppose your arrangements forremoval, I have ordered a large military forceto be sent among you. I have directed thecommanding officer, and likewise the agent,your friend, General Thompson, that everyreasonable indulgence be held out to you. ButI have also directed that one-third of yourpeople, as provided for in the treaty, be removedduring the present season. If you listen to thevoice of friendship and truth, you will go quietlyand voluntarily. But should you listen to thebad birds that are always flying about you, andFLORIDA WAR. 261refuse to remove, I have then directed the commandingofficer to remove you by force. Thiswill be done. I pray the Great Spirit, therefore,to incline you to do what is right.Your friend,A. JACKSON."Washington, February 16, 1835."/Several of the Indian chiefs replied, wishingfor amity but unwilling to quit ; but the councilwas broken up by the agent, who informed themthat he had been sent there to enforce the treaty :he had warriors enough to do it, and he woulddo it. It was the question now whether theywould go of their own accord, or by force ?This determination on the part of the agentinduced some of the chiefs to waver, and eventuallyeight principal chiefs and eight sub-chiefssigned the articles agreeing to remove;but Miconopy^ the chief of the whole tribes,Jumper, the second in consequence, and threeother powerful chiefs, refused. Upon this, the262 CAUSES OF THEagent took upon himself the most unwarrantableresponsibility, by saying, Miconopy was nolonger chief of the nation, and that his nameand the other opposing chiefs were now struckout of the council of the nation.That such an act as this was the cause of thegreatest irritation to the Seminoles there can beno doubt ; and the conduct of the agent was reprovedby the Secretary of War, who, in hisletter, observes,It is not necessary for me to enter intomuch detail on the subject presented by you.I understand from Mr. Harris, that he communicatedto you the President s views on the subjectof the chiefs whom you declined to recognizein all questions connected with the removalof the Seminoles. I understand that the Presidentdeemed this course an incorrect one ; andit seems to me obviously liable to strong objections.We do not assume the right of determiningwho shall be the chiefs in the variousIndian tribes ; this is a matter of internal policyFLORIDA WAR. 263which must necessarily be left to themselves.And if, when we have a grave matter for adjustmentwith one of the tribes, we undertaketo say it shall be determined by a particularclass of individuals, we certainly should renderourselves obnoxious to censure. It appears tomethe proper course, upon important questions,is to treat directly with the tribe itself; and ifthey depute their chiefs, or any other individualto act for them, we must either recognizesuch authority or abandon the object inview""In June 1835, Asseola, the chief of Micosu-keep, who did not appear at the council, but whowas the most determined opponent of the treaty,came in to complain of the treatment his peoplehad received from some white men, one ofthem having been wounded. He received noredress, and saying something offensive to theagent, he was thrown into prison. To obtainhis release he promised to sign the treaty, at264 CAUSES OF THEleast, so it is said, and that he did sign it ; butthis must be considered only as an Indian stratagem: he had been imprisoned without anycause, and it is to be presumed that he thoughthimself justified in escaping by a correspondingfraud on his own part. The month after this occurrence,some of the tribe of Asseola murdereda government mail-carrier.The Indians made one more effort : they calleda council, and offered to remove to the west ofthe Mississippi, provided they had lands and anagent for themselves ; but this was sternly refusedby the government, who sent back as ananswer, that their great father, General Jackson,had been " made very angry." The attacksand depredations upon the Indians were nowmore frequent, and the majority of them determinedupon resistance. Only six chiefs, out ofall who had signed the treaty, acted to their wordand brought in their cattle, &c. for the governmentagent, to be sold previous to their nigraWAR. 265tion. Five of their chiefs removed to the protectionof Brooke s Fort, as they feared that theSeminoles would punish them for their revolt.One of them, Charley Amathla, was preparing tofollow the others, when Asseola and two otherchiefs went to his house and insisted that heshould not remove his people. Charley Amathlareplied that he had already pledged his wordthat he would abide by the promise which hemade to their great father, and that if hislife paid the forfeit, he felt bound to adhere tothat promise. He said he had lived to see hisnation a ruined and degraded people, and he believedthat their only salvation was in removingto the West : that he had made arrangementsfor his people to go, and had delivered to theagent all their cattle, so that he had no excusenow for not complying with his engagements.One of the chiefs then informed himthat the crisis was come : he must either jointhem in their opposition, or suffer death, andthat two hours would be allowed him to consultVOL III. N266 CAUSES OF THEhis people and declare his determination. He replied,that his mind was unalterable, and hispeople could not make him break his word ; thatif he must die he hoped they would grant himtime enough to make some arrangements for thegood of his people. At this moment Asseolaraised his rifle and was about to fire, whenAbraham arrested the murderous aim, and requestedthem all to retire for a council with theother chiefs. Asseola, with a small party, however,separated themselves from the main bodyof the Indians, and returned to Charley Agathas, and shot him. Thirteen of Amathla speople immediately escaped to Fort King, whilethe others, deterred by their fears, remaineduntil the return of the principal band, whenthey joined the hostile party."This was a fine trait in the Indian, andproves that the Seminoles are not the faithlesspeople they are represented to be by thegovernment agents. The death of this nobleIndian was the signal for the commencement ofFLORIDA WAR. 267hostilities ; the Indians immediately abandonedall their towns, and, concealing their trail, removedtheir families to a place of safety, whichhas ever since baffled all conjecture as to itswhereabout, and its secresy been a subject of thegreatest astonishment.CHAPTER X.FLORIDA WAR.IT is naturally conjectured that the Seminolesretreated to some portion of the vast swampswhich surround the Ouithlacoochee river; butcertain it is that since the commencement of thewar, in December 1835, up to the present time,their retreat has never been discovered. Maraudingparties now commenced on the part of theIndians, who took summary vengeance on thosewho had robbed and maltreated them. The wholecountry from Fort Brooke to Fort King was in astate of conflagration, and the whites were compelledto abandon every thing, and seek protectionunder the forts. At the outbreak of hostilitiesthe American force in the departmentdid not amount to five hundred men. TheFLORIDA WAR. 269militia were called out, but military storeswere not at hand, and it was decided that thetroops must wait for reinforcements before anyattack could be made upon the Indians ; thegreat object was to throw a reinforcement intoFort King.General Clinch, who commanded at FortBrooke, having been reinforced with thirty-ninemen from Key West, no time was lost in preparingtwo companies for the above service. Onthe 24th of December 1835, a force of one hundredmen, and eight officers, with a field-piece,under the command of Major Dade, commencedtheir march.On the morning of the 28th, when it hadproceeded four miles from the encampment ofthe previous night, this force was attackedby the Indians, whose first volley was verydestructive, Major Dade with almost everyman of the advanced guard falling dead. TheIndians were repelled by the troops under CaptainGardner, upon whom the command then270 FLORIDA WAR.devolved, and the Americans proceeded to throwup breastworks; but before they could raisethem high enough for efficient protection, theIndians attacked them again. The Americansbrought their field-piece into play, but thebreastworks not being high enough, the Indiansshot down every man who attempted to workthe gun. All the officers, and more than two-thirdsof the American troops had fallen, whenthe survivors found that all their ammunitionwas expended. The Indians, perceiving this,rushed in, and, with the exception of two men,who, although severely wounded, contrived toconceal themselves, and ultimately to make theirescape, not one of the whole detachment wasspared.The force of the Indians is supposed to havebeen about three hundred and fifty or fourhundred. The contest lasted six hours ; and itmust be admitted that nothing could be moregallant than the defence made by the troopsagainst such a superior force.FLORIDA WAR. 271On the afternoon of the same day, the Americanshad to lament the loss of General Thompson,the Indian agent at Fort King. Imprudentlystrolling out about three hundred yardsfrom the fort, he was attacked by the Indians,who waited in ambush for him, and, with Lieut.Smith and three other people belonging to thefort, was shot dead. This party of Indianswas headed by Asseola, who had warned GeneralThompson that the white men should sufferfor their treatment of him. His peculiar andshrill war yell was given as the Indian partyretreated, to let the whites know to whom theywere indebted for the massacre.General Clinch having been reinforced atFort Brooke, (where he had two hundred regulartroops,) with five hundred volunteers under thecommand of General Call, now moved with thewhole force of seven hundred men.On the 30th of December, as they werepassing the Ouithlacoochee river, the Indians272 Florida WAR.watched their opportunity, and, when a portiononly of the troops had gained the opposite side,commenced an attack, which was vigorouslyand successfully resisted ; the Indians, in littlemore than an hour, were beaten off. The battlewas, however, severe, and the Americans sustaineda loss of sixty-three killed and wounded.The Indian force is supposed to have amountedto seven hundred men.But independently of these conflicts with the militiaand regulars, the ravages of the Indians overthe whole country are stated to have been mostfearful. Women and children were murdered, andthe hearth made desolate in every portion of thecountry. In the more settled parts near St. Augustine,the sugar-cane plantations, with the expensiveworks attached to them, were destroyed,and in many cases the slaves who were on theplantations were either carried off, or, voluntarilyjoining the Indians, increased the strength ofthe enemy. More than a hundred estates wereFLORIDA WAR. 273thus laid waste, the average loss upon each estatebeing computed, independently of the loss of thenegroes, at fifty thousand dollars.The intelligence of this havoc, and the massacreof Major Dade and his whole party, soonreached the neighbouring States, and a requisitionfor assistance made by General Clinch,was promptly responded to. Meetings wereorganized at Augusta, Savannah, Darien, andCharleston, and in a few days nearly twothousand volunteers were ready to march tothe theatre of war. Indeed, the cause nowbecame the cause of all the slave-holding States,and was taken up with the usual energy of theAmericans.In Louisiana the same spirit was shewn. GeneralGaines was at that time on a tour of inspection,and had received orders to take chargeof the troops assembling on the Mexican frontier;but, at the request of the volunteers, he tookthe command of them until he could receive fartherorders from Washington. The assistance of274 FLORIDA WAR.the American naval forces were demanded andobtained, and General Gaines having receivedintelligence that Fort Brooke was invested bythe Indians, sent an express to General Clinch atFort King, to say that he would join him with hisforces to relieve the post. The Seminole Indianswho had agreed to the treaty, remained firm totheir word, and took up arms against theirbrethren, and a large force was now marchingfrom all directions to the succour of the whites.I ought here to observe, that not only at thecommencement, but ever since the war has continued,the difficulty and expense of forwardingsupplies have been very great, and the Americantroops have undergone the severest privations,as well as great mortality from sickness anddisease.On the 13th February 1836, General Gaines,having arrived at Fort Brooke, reviewed his force,which amounted to between eleven hundred andtwelve hundred men, and commenced his marchto relieve Fort King, at which post he arrivedFLORIDA WAR. 275on the 2d February, without falling in with anyof the Indians. The general then made a detourin pursuit of the enemy. On the 27th, whenthe force was crossing the Ouithlacoochee River,it was assailed by the Indians, who retired aftera skirmish of three-quarters of an hour, the lossof the Americans being very trifling. On the,28th, when again fording the river, the Indiansmade another attack, which was continued fornearly four hours, and the Americans had tolament the loss of Major Izard, who was killed,and two other officers were wounded. Onthe 29th, the Indians again attacked, with aforce of at least a thousand men, with a view offorcing the American troops from the breastworkwhich they had thrown up ; the Indians, afterabout two hours * fighting, set fire to the highgrass ; but, unfortunately for them, the windsuddenly changed, and, instead of burning outthe American troops, all their own concealedpositions were burnt up and exposed, and theywere compelled to retire. The loss on the Indian276 FLORIDA WAR*side was not known, but was supposed to beheavy ; that on the part of the Americansamounted to thirty-two killed and wounded.General Gaines, finding that the Indians were sonear him, now despatched expresses for a supplyof ammunition, being resolved, if possible, tobring them to a general action. The sufferings ofthe American troops were very severe, and theywere killing their horses for subsistence ; but thecamp was secure, in consequence of the Indianshaving burnt down all the means of concealmentso necessary in their mode of warfare. Notwithstandingwhich, on the 1st, 2d, and 3d of March,the camp was vigorously assailed. On the eveningof the 5th, the Indian interpreter came infrom the Seminoles, stating that they wished tohold a council, and did not want any morefighting. On the 6th, a truce was held, whenAsseola and other chiefs made their appearance,saying, that if the Americans would not crossthe river, they would remain on their own sideof it, and not commit any more ravages. ThisFLORIDA WAR. 277was, in fact, nothing but the original proposalof the Indians, that they should remain uponthe land which had been assigned to them by thetreaty of Camp Moultrie. The reply of GeneralGaines was, that he was not authorized to make atreaty with them ; their arms must be givenup, and they must remain on the other side ofthe river, until the American Government sentthem away west of the Mississippi. While thisnegociation was pending, General Clinch arrivedwith the succour and reinforcements, much tothe joy of the American troops, who were halfstarved. General Gaines, who had heard thatGeneral Scott had been appointed to the commandin Florida, now resigned that authority toGeneral Clarke, and on the lath, the troopsarrived at Fort Drank. It hardly need be observed,that the treating with the Indians endedin nothing. General Scott having assumed thecommand, arrived at Fort Drank on the 13thMarch 1836. He had had previously to contendwith heavy rains and almost impracticable roads,278 FLORIDA WAR.and was encumbered with a heavy baggagetrain ; his whole force amounted to nearly 5,000men. This he divided into a centre and twowings, with a view to scour the whole country, andforce the Indians from their retreats ; but in vain.The Indians being on the flanks of each division,occasional skirmishes took place ; but when thetroops arrived to where the Indians were supposedto be, not a man was to be seen, nor could theydiscover the retreat of their families. Occasionallythe Indians attacked the outposts with greatvigour, and were bravely repulsed; but thewhole army of 5,000 men, did not kill and capturemore than twenty Indians. As far as I canjudge, nothing could be better than the arrangementsof General Scott, but the nature of thecountry to which the Indians had retreated, renderedit almost impossible for troops to act.The swamps extended over a great surface ofground; here and there was an island on whichthe Indians could remain; while to attack them,the troops would have to wade up to their necksFLORIDA WAR. 279for miles, and as soon as they arrived the Indianswere gone.It is not my intention to follow up all thedetails of the petty warfare which has continuedto the present time. General Scott resigned thecommand, and was succeeded by GeneralJessopp.On the 20th October 1837, after nearly a year sskirmishing, Asseola was persuaded to come in, toa council. The flags of truce were hoisted by theAmericans, and Asseola, carrying a flag of trucein his hand, and accompanied by other chiefs andabout 50 warriors, came in to talk. On their arrival,they were surrounded by bayonets, and madeprisoners by the orders of the Federal Government,who, despairing of subduing the Indians,had recourse to this shameful breach of faith.The proud spirit of Asseola could not endureconfinement : he died in prison. Other chiefswere kidnapped in the same traitorous manner ;but, severe as the loss must have been to theIndians, it did not appear to discourage them.The war was still carried on by those who were280 FLORIDA WAR.left, and, indeed, is still continued ; for the ranksof the Indians are said to be filled up by runawayslaves, and some of the Creek Indians whohave not yet quitted Georgia. On the 25thof December 1837, a severe battle was foughtbetween the Indians and the American troops,at a spot between Pease Creek and the BigCypress Swamps ; on this occasion the Americanslost Colonels Thompson and Gentry, withtwenty-eight killed, and one hundred and elevenwounded. Since that I am not aware that anyimportant combat has taken place; but it is certainthat the Seminoles, notwithstanding theloss of their leaders, still hold out and defy thewhole power of the United States.It is asserted in the American papers that theloss of lives on the American side, from the enemyand from disease, amounts to between two andthree thousand men, and that the expenses of thewar are now estimated at 30,000,000 of dollars.How far these calculations may be correct Icannot pretend to say, but it is notorious that aFLORIDA WAR. 281handful of Indians, estimated, at the commencementof the war, at about 1,900, have contendedagainst armies of four or five times their number,commanded by gallant and able officers; thatthis small band of Indians, notwithstandingtheir losses from the weapons of the enemy andtheir still greater losses from breach of faith,have now for four years held out against theAmerican Government, and have contrived tosubsist during that period ; and that the retreatof their wives and families has never been discovered,notwithstanding the Americans have afriendly portion of the Seminoles acting withthem. Indeed, if we are to believe the Americanstatements, the war is almost as far from its conclusionnow as it was at its commencement.*Although the Federal Government has set its faceagainst the Indians making war with each other (orat least pretends so to do), it would appear by the following notice, that, in their necessity, they have notadhered to the following resolutions :Extract of a Letter, datedFORT BROOKE, FLORIDA, JUNE 14.The Cherokees and Choctaws are soon expected in282 CAUSES OF THEI have hastily narrated the causes and principalevents of the war, as they are little known inEngland. The Americans, even if they expendtwice as much money, must persevere, until theyhave extirpated every Indian, and settled theterritory with white people ; if they do not, theFlorida swamps will become the resort of runawayslaves, and the precedent of what can bedone, encourage a general rising of the slaves inthe adjoining States, who will only have to retireto the banks of the Ouithlacoochee and defendthemselves. So fatal is the climate to the European,that America even now will probably haveto sacrifice life and treasure to a much greater extentbefore she obtains possession of the territory.I shall conclude by quoting a portion of aletter from the Genoese Traveller which appearedin the Times newspaper.this country, when there will be a war of exterminationand no quarter shown. The affairs here are just thesame as two years ago. The war is no nearer ended.But we do hope that the offer of ten dollars for each Seminolescalp will be a great inducement for the Cherokeesand Choctaws to cut and slash among them."FLORIDA WAR. 283The war was unrighteous in its commencement,and has been continued for years undercircumstances the most profligate. There hasnot been a single campaign in which the armyhas not reaped a plentiful harvest of mortificationand disgrace. When brought into actionboth officers and men fought valiantly, but thecharacter of the country, its deep morasses andswamps, and the ignorance of the troops ofIndian warfare, have uniformly tended to producethe most disastrous defeats.There is not to be found on the page of history,in any country, an instance of a scatteredremnant of a tribe, so few in number, defendingthemselves against the assaults of a disciplined andnumerous army, with the same heroism and triumphantresult ts with those of the Seminoles in resistingthe American troops. In every campaign theinvaders have been at least ten to one againstthe invaded. At no period have the Indiansbeen able to muster more than 700 or 800 waresFLORIDA Warriors,and it is doubtful whether they haveever had more than half that number, whilethe American army, when in the field, hasuniformly amounted to from 6,000 to 10,000men."REPLYTOTHE EDINBURGH REVIEW.THE art of reviewing may be compared toFrench cookery; it has no medium it musteither be first-rate or it is worth nothing : nay,the comparison goes much further, as the attemptat either not only spoils the meat, but halfpoisons the guests. The fact is, good reviewingis of the highest order of literature, for a goodreviewer ought to be superior to the party whosewritings he reviews. Such men as Southey,Croaker, and Lockhart on the one side, Brougham,Fontblanque, and Riotous on the other,will always command respect in their vocations,however much they may be influenced by politicalfeelings, or however little you may coincidewith them in opinion. But, passing overthese, and three or four more cordons bleus,what are reviewers in general ? men of a degreeof talent below that of the author whose works285 REPLY TO THEthey presume to decide upon ; the major portionof whom, having failed as authors, arepossessed with but one feeling in their disappointment,which is to drag others down totheir own debased level. To effect this, youhave malevolence substituted for wit, and high-soundingwords for sense; every paltry advantageis taken that can be derived from anintentional misrepresentation of your meaning,and (what is the great secret of all) from unfairquotations of one or two lines, carefully omittingthe context an act of unpardonable dishonestytowards the author, and but too often successfulin misleading the reader of the Review. Byacting upon this last-mentioned system, there isno book, whatever its merits may be, whichcannot be misrepresented to the public : awork espousing atheism may be made toappear wholly moral ; or, the Holy Scripturesthemselves condemned as licentious and indecent.If such reviewing is fair, a jurymay, upon a similar principle, decide upon acase by the evidence in favour of the pro-edinburghREVIEW. 287section ; and beauty or deformity in architecturebe pronounced upon by the examinationof a few bricks taken out from different portionsof a building.That, latterly, the public have been more inclinedto judge for themselves, than to pin their faith uponreviews, is certain ; nevertheless, when what istermed a "slashing article " upon a popular workmakes its appearance, the public are too apt to receiveit without scrutiny. Satisfied with the generaleffect, as with that produced in a theatricalrepresentation, they do not bear in mind that thatwhich has the appearance of gold, would proveupon examination to be nothing more than tinsel.Were all reviewers to be reviewed by authorsas well as all authors by reviewers, the authorswould have the best of it in the melee. Again,were reviewers obliged to put their names totheir several articles, there would be a great differencein their style ; but, secure in their incognitofrom the disgrace of exposure, theymake no scruple to assert what they well knowto be false, and, coward-like, to assail those who288 REPLY TO THEhave seldom an opportunity, whatever may betheir power, to defend themselves. Never, perhaps,was there a better proof of the truth ofthe foregoing observations than is afforded bythe article in the Edinburgh Review upon thefirst portion of my work on America ; and as Ihave some pages to spare, I shall now take theunusual liberty of reviewing the Reviewer.First, let me introduce to the public the writerof the article Miss Harriet Martineau. Myreaders may inquire how I can so positivelymake this assertion ? I reply that it is owing tomy " craft*" A person who has long dealt inpictures will, without hesitation, tell you thename of the painter of any given work : ashepherd with a flock of three or four hundredsheep under his charge, will know every oneof them individually, although to people ingeneral, one sheep is but the counterpart ofthe others. Thus, there are little varietiesof style, manner, and handling of the pen,which become evident to practised writers,although they are not always so to readers. ButEDINBURGH REVIEW. 289even if these peculiarities were not sufficient, themanner in which the article is managed (theremarks of Miss Martineau upon the merits ofMiss Martineau) in my mind establishes to conviction,that the major portion of the article, ifnot the whole, has proceeded from her pen. Thisis a matter of no consequence, and I only mentionit that my readers may understand whyMiss Martineau, who forms so prominent afeature in the Edinburgh article, will also occasionallyappear in mine. My reply, however, isnot addressed to her, but to the EdinburghReviewer.I have no doubt the Reviewer will mostpositively deny that Miss Martineau had anythingto do with the Review of my work :that of course. With his permission, I willrelate a little anecdote. " When the RoyalGeorge went down at Spithead, an old gentleman,who had a son on board, was bewailinghis loss. His friends came to console him.I thought, 1 observed one of them, < thatVOL. III. O290 REPLY TO THEyou had received a letter ? < Yes replied theold gentleman, but it was from Jack himself.6 Well, what more would you have ? ; Ah, 1replied the old gentleman, * had it been from thecaptain, or from one of his messmates, or, indeed,from anybody else, it would have consoledme ; but Jack, he is such an incorrigible liar,that his very assertion that he is safe, convincesme that he has gone to the bottom"Now my opinion of the veracity of the EdinburghReview may be estimated by the aboveanecdote; the very circumstance of its denialwould, with me, be sufficient to establish thefact. But to proceed.The Review has pronounced the first portionof my work to be light and trifling, and full oferrors; it asserts that I have been hoaxed bythe Americans ; that I am incapable of soundreasoning ; cannot estimate human nature ; and,finally, requests as a favour that I will write nomore. Such are the general heads of the Review.Now here we have a strange inconsistency, forEDINBURGH REVIEW. 291why should the Edinburgh Review, if the workbe really what he asserts it to be, " light andtrifling," &c , waste so much powder and shotupon a tomtit ? Why has he dedicated twenty-sevenpages of ponderous verbosity to so lightand trifling a work ? How seldom is it thatthe pages of the Quarterly or Edinburgh condescendto notice even the very best of lightliterature ! Do they not, in their majesty, considerit infra dig. to review such works, andhave not two or three pages bestowed upon thembeen considered as an immense favour on theirpart, and a high compliment to the authors ?Notwithstanding which, we have here twenty-sevenpages of virulent attack upon my lightand trifling work. Does not the Edinburgh reviewerat once shew that the work is not lightand trifling? does he not contradict his own assertions,by the labour and space bestowed uponit? nay, more, is it not strange that he shouldthink it necessary to take the unfair advantageof reviewing a work before it is half finished,292 REPLY TO THEand pounce upon the first portion, with the hopesof neutralizing the effects which he evidentlydreads from the second.I will answer the question for him. Heindulges in his precipitate and unmeasured attacks,because he feels that the work is writtenin a style that will induce every one to read it ;because he feels assured that the occasional, andapparently careless hits at democracy, are onlypreparatory to others more severe, and that thesewill come out in the second part, which will beread with as much avidity as the first. He perceivesthe drift of the work ; he feels that it hasbeen purposely made amusing, and that it willbe more injurious to the cause which theEdinburgh Review upholds than a more labouredtreatise ; that those who would not lookat a more serious work will read this, and thatthe opinions it contains will be widely disseminated,and impressed without the readers beingaware of it ; moreover, that it will descend to aclass of readers who have hitherto been unin-EDINBURGH REVIEW. 293formed upon the subject : in short, he apprehendsthe greater danger to his cause from thework having, as I have said, been made amusing,and from its being in appearance, although notin reality, " light and trifling."I candidly acknowledge that the Reviewer isright in his supposition: my great object has beento do serious injury to the cause of democracy.To effect this, it was necessary that I shouldwrite a book which should be universally readnot merely by the highly educated portion ofthe community, for they are able to judge forthemselves ; but read by every tradesman andmechanic; pored over even by milliners girls, andboys behind the counter, and thumbed to piecesin every petty circulating library. I wrote thework with this object, and I wrote accordingly.Light and trifling as it may appear to be, everypage of it (as I have stated) has been the subjectof examination and deliberation : it has givenme more trouble than any work I ever wrote ;29.4 REPLY TO THEand, my labour having been so far crownedwith success, I trust that I shall have " done theState some service"* The review in theEdinburgh will neither defeat nor obstruct mypurpose, as that publication circulates chieflyamong those classes who have already formedtheir opinions ; and I have this advantage overit, that, as for one that reads the Edinburgh Review,fifty will read my work, so will fifty readmy reply who will never trouble themselvesabout the article in the Edinburgh Review.And now let us enter a little into detail. TheReviewer finds great fault with my introduction,as being wholly irreverent to the Diary whichfollows it. I admit, that if it were an introductionto the Diary alone, there then would be someA very acute reviewer has observed of my firstportion, that there always appeared as if there was somethingleft behind and not told. He was right ; I haveentered into every subject just as deeply as I dared toventure, without wearying the class of readers forwhom, although not avowedly, yet in reality, the workhas chiefly been written. The second portion will thereforebe found almost as light and trifling as the first.EDINBURGH REVIEW. 295justice in his remark. But such is not the case :an introduction is, I believe, generally understoodto refer to the whole of the work, not aportion of it ; and now that the work is complete,I leave it to the public to decide whether theintroduction is suitable or not, as bearing uponthe whole. I believe, also, it is the generalcustom to place an introduction at the commencementof a work; I never heard of one beingintroduced into the middle or at the end of it.The fault, therefore, of its imputed irrelevancy isnot mine : it is the Reviewer s, who has thoughtproper to review the work before it was complete.He quotes me, as saying, " Capt. object was to examine and ascertainwhat were the effects of a democratic form ofgovernment upon a people which, with all itsforeign admixture, may still be considered asEnglish ;" and then, without waiting till I havecompleted my task, he says, that the presentwork " has nothing, or next to nothing, todowith such an avowal." Whether such an296 REPLY TO THEassertion has any thing to do with the worknow that it is completed, I leave the publicto decide. The Reviewer has no excuse forthis illiberal conduct, for I have said, in my Introduction," In the arrangement of this work,I have considered it advisable to present to thereader first, those portions of my Diary whichmay be interesting, and in which are recordedtraits and incidents which will bear stronglyupon the commentaries I shall subsequentlymake ; n notwithstanding which the reviewer hasthe mendacity to assert that, " not until the lastparagraph of the last volume, does he learn forthe first time that the work is not complete." Iwill be content with quoting his own wordsagainst him " An habitual story tetter prefersinvention to description."The next Instance of the Reviewer s dishonestyis, his quoting a portion of a paragraph and rejectingthe context. He quotes, u I had notbeen three weeks in the country before I decidedupon accepting no more invitations, charily asEDINBURGH REVIEW. 297they were made, 11 and upon this quotation hefounds an argument that, as I did not enter intosociety, I could of course have no means ofgaining any knowledge of American characteror the American institutions. Now, if the reviewerhad had the common honesty to finish theparagraph, the reason why I refused the invitationswould have been apparent ; " because Ifound that, although invited, my presence was arestraint upon the company, and every one wasafraid to speak" Perhaps the sagacity of theReviewer will explain what information I waslikely to gain from people who would not opentheir mouths. Had he any knowledge of theAmericans, he would admit that they never willventure to give their opinions in the presence ofeach other ; it was not that they were afraid ofme, but of each other, as M, Tocqueville hasvery truly pointed out in his work. Moreover,I have now, for the first time, to learn that mebest way of arriving at the truth is to meeto 3298 REPLY TO THEpeople who are on their guard, and whose objectis to deceive.There is a malevolent feeling in the assertion,that I have treated all other previous writerson America with contempt ; and here again heintentionally quotes falsely. My words arethe majority of those who have preceded me."As nearly as I can reckon, there have been aboutfifty works published on America, out of which-there are not ten which deserve attention ; andthe ample quotations I have made from M.Tocqueville, Captain Hamilton, and others, incorroboration of my own opinions, fully evincethe respect I have for their writings. In fact,the whole article is a tissue of falsehood and misrepresentation,and so weak that hardly one ofits positions is tenable. Can any thing be moreabsurd, or more shallow, than to quote theMississippi scheme and Mr. Lav as a proofthat the French are, as well as the English andAmericans, a speculative nation : one solitaryEDINBURGH REVIEW. 299instance of a portion of the French having,about sixty or seventy years ago, been inducedto embark their capital, is brought forward,while the abject supineness of the French populationof Lower Canada, in juxta-position withthe energy and enterprize of the Americans, hasfor half a century stared us in the face !The Reviewer has the kindness repeatedly toinform me that I have been hoaxed by the Americans,and, most unfortunately for himself, hehas brought forward the " Original Draft of theDeclaration of Independence" as a proof of it.That he would be very glad to prove it to be ahoax, I believe ; as it is a sad discovery, and onewhich the American democrats should have keptsecret. That the Americans did hoax MissMartineau, and that they would have hoaxedme if they could, I admit, but even the Reviewermust acknowledge that they would not hoaxthemselves. Now it so happens, that this document,which has not long been discovered, is inthe splendid public library of Philadelphia :300 REPLY TO THEit has been carefully preserved in a double plate-glassframe, so as to be read on both sides withouthandling; it is expensively mounted, andshewn to every visitor as a great curiosity, as itcertainly is, the authenticity of it being undeniable,and acknowledged by the Americans.The paragraph which was expunged is verbatimas I gave it a paragraph which affords moreproof, if further proof were necessary, thatJefferson was one of the most unprincipled menwho ever existed. The Reviewer recommendsmy perusal of the works of this "great and goodman"as Miss Martineau calls him. I suspectthat I have read more of Mr. Jefferson andother American authors than ever the Reviewerhas ; and I consider the writings of this Fatherof Democracy, opposed to his private life, to bearemarkable type of democracy in theory and inpractice. To borrow a term from the Reviewer,those writings are " brave words to proceedfrom an infidel, who proved his ardent love ofliberty by allowing his own children to be putEDINBURGH REVIEW. 301up to auction at his death, and wear away theirexistence in misery and bondage. I cannot helphere observing a trifling inconsistency on thepart of the Reviewer. After lauding the Fatherof Democracy, and recommending me to readhis works ; after sneering at our aristocracy byobserving, " that no kind of virtue that we haveheard of can suffer much from the loss of acourt and of an hereditary nobility ;" after, inshort, defending and upholding democracy inevery page, all of a sudden the Reviewer turnsround and says, " We are no general admirersof democracy" Indeed ! if not general,you certainly appear to be particularadmirers ; and if neither general nor particular,may I inquire what the Edinburgh Review hasbeen frothing, fizzing, hissing, and bubblingabout, like a tea-kettle in a passion, for theselast twenty years ?Never was there a more convincing proof ofthe boldness and arrogance which Reviewers(trusting to the irresponsibility arising from their302 REPLY TO THEconcealment) assume, than is afforded by thefollowing passage in the Edinburgh article :An ardent pursuit of wealth and deep religiousfeelings go very well together"It is not for me to reply to the Reviewer in thisinstance ; I must hand him over to higher authority.I must oppose the everlasting doctrinesof inspiration to the cold, heartless, and arrogantphilosophy of an Edinburgh reviewer. In vainare we again and again forewarned in the Scripturesagainst the love of money ; in vain has ourSaviour denounced it ; in vain have the apostlesfollowed in his steps. Let the Reviewer, if heever has looked into the Bible, refer to theepistles to the Colossians and to the Ephesians.St. Paul declares that covetousness is idolatry.Hear also what he sayeth to Timothy :But they that wish to be rich fall intotemptation and a snare, and into manyfoolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men indestruction and perdition." " For the love ofmoney is the root of all evil"EDINBURGH REVIEW. 303Our Divine Master is even more explicit, forhe says " No servant can serve two masters ;for either he will hate the one, and love theother; or else he will hold to the one, anddespise the other. Ye cannot serve God andMammon" Thus says our Lord now hearthe Edinburgh Reviewer. " An ardent pursuitof wealth and deep religious feelings go verywell together."Here the Edinburgh Reviewer has placed himselfon the horns of a dilemma. The Holy Writingsassert most positively and repeatedly onething, while he asserts another. If, therefore,he acknowledge the Scriptures, he must at thesame time acknowledge his own previous error,and, I may add, his deep sin : if, on the contrary,he still hold to his own opinion, hath henot denied his faith, and is he not worse thanan infidel ?The Reviewer sneers at my observation, thatWashington had no power to control the natureof man. 1 * It may be, as he observes, a very304 REPLY TO THEsimple remark ; but, at all events, it has oneadvantage over his own, which is, that it is avery true one. Miss Martineau makes an observationin her book, which is quite as great atruism as mine ; for she also says that " Humannature i& the same every where."How far I have succeeded in my analysis ofhuman nature it is not for me to decide ; butthat it is the same every where I will now ventureto support by something more than assertionon the part of Miss Martineau.When I was at Boston, in company withsome of the young ladies, the conversationturned upon Miss Martineau, with whom theystated that they had been intimate. Naturallyanxious to know more of so celebrated a personage,I asked many questions. I was toldmuch to interest me, and, among other littleanecdotes, they said that Miss Martineau usedto sit down surrounded by the young ladies,and amuse them with all the histories of herformer loves. She would detail to them " howEDINBURGH REVIEW. 305Jack sighed and squeezed her hand ; how Tomwent down on h<s knees ; how Dick swore andSam vowed ; and how she was still Miss Martineau."And thus would she narrate and theylisten until the sun went down, and the fireflydanced, while the frogs lifted up their voicesin full concert.And I said to myself, " Who would havesupposed that this Solon in petticoats wouldever have dwelt upon her former days of enthusiasmand hope, or have cherished the reminiscencesof love ? How true it is that humannature is the same every where."Once more :I was conversing with a lady at New York,who informed me that she had seen a letter fromMiss M., written to a friend of her s, after herreturn to England, in which Miss M. declaredthat her door was so besieged with the carriagesof the nobility, that it was quite uncomfortable,and that she hardly knew what to do.Thinks I to myself I recollect an old story.306 REPLY TO THEOh ! Grandmother," cried Tom, running in,out of breath, " there s at least a thousand catsin our garden." " No, no, Tom," quickly replied,the old lady ; " not a thousand, Tom."Well I m sure there s five hundred. 1 " No,nor five hundred," replied the old lady, nottaking her eyes off her knitting"" " Well, then,grandmother, I m sure there s fifty. 5 " I don tthink there are fifty, Tom"" Well, at allevents, there s our cat and another." " Ah !Tom," replied the old lady, " that may be."I believe that the carriage of Lord Broughamis occasionally to be seen at the door of MissMartineau.But when I heard this I was pleased, for Isaid to myself, " So, then, this champion of democracy,this scorner of rank and title, is flatteredby the carriages of the nobility crowding at herdoor;" and, again I said to myself, " humannature is the same every where"But the Reviewer, in his virulence, has notbeen satisfied with attacking me ; he hasEDINBURGH REVIEW. 307thought it necessary to libel the whole professionto which I have the honour to belong.He has had the folly and impertinence tomake the following remark : " No landsmencan have been on board of a ship a week, withoutcoming to the conclusion that a sensiblehouse dog is more like the people he has left athome than most of his new companions, and thatit (the house dog) would be nearly as capableof solving problems on national character."Indeed 1 !Is it possible that the Reviewer should stillremain the dupe of such a vulgar error ? Thatat one time it was the custom to send to sea thefool of the family, is certain, and had the Reviewerflourished in those days, he would probablyhave been the one devoted to the servicebut tempora mutantur. Is the Reviewer awarethat one-half, and certainly the most successfulhalf, of English diplomacy, is now carried onby the admirals and captains, not only in theMediterranean, but all over the world. Is he308 REPLY TO THEaware that when the Foreign Office wishes to doits work cheaply and well, it demands a vesselfrom the Admiralty, which is made over to thatoffice, and is set down as employed on " particularservice :*" that during that service thecaptain acts from instructions given by theForeign Office alone, and has his cabin piledwith voluminous documents ; and that, like theunpaid magistracy of England, we sailors do allthe best of the work, and have nothing but ourtrouble for our pains. Nay, even the humbleindividual who pens this remonstrance was formonths on this very service, and, when it wascompleted, the Foreign Office expressed to theAdmiralty its satisfaction at his conduct duringhis short diplomatic career.House dogs! Hear this, ye public of England !A sensible house dog is to be preferred to St.Vincent, Nelson, Collingwood, Mouth, andall those great men who have aided their countryas much with their pen as with their sword ;as much by their acuteness and firmness inEDINBURGH REVIEW. 309diplomacy, as by their courage and conduct inaction.Now, Mr. Reviewer, don t you feel a littleashamed of yourself? Would you really liketo give up your name as the author of thisbare-faced libel? Would you like openly toassert that such is your opinion, and that youwill stand by it ?No liberal, high-minded man, whatever hispolitics may have been, has ever refused to dojustice to a service which has been the bulwarkof England. Lord Brougham has lately publisheda work containing the lives of celebratedpersons in the reign of George III. ; I willjust quote a few passages from his life of LordSt. Vincent.The present sketches would be imperfect ifLord St. Vincent were passed over in silence, forhe was almost as distinguished among the statesmen,as the warriors of the age.A statesman of profound views and of penesREPLY TO THEoration, hardly equalled by any other man ofhis time.But the consummate vigour and wisdom ofhis proceedings during the dreadful period ofthe unity, are no less a theme of wonder andof praise.When the Addington ministry was formed,he was placed at the head of the Admiralty;and now shone forth in all its lustre that greatcapacity for affairs with which he was endowedby nature, and which ample experience of men,habits of command, and an extended life of deepreflection, had matured.The capacity of a statesman and the valourof the hero, outshone by the magnanimousheart which beats only to the measures of generosityand justice."Here, again, the Reviewer is in what theYankees would call an "everlasting awkwardfix ;" for he contradicts Lord Brougham, thepatron and sole supporter of his fast-waningEDINBURGH REVIEW. 311review, without the aid of whose admirable pen,it would long ago have gone to its proper place.He must now either admit that he is himselfwrong, or that it is Lord Brougham who is inerror. He has but to choose.I have but one more remark to make uponthe review itself. At the close of it, the Reviewerobserves, that my remarks upon themarine are interesting and useful. How doeshe know ? Upon his own argument, if wehouse dogs are not competent upon shorematters, he must be equally ignorant of anythingconnected with our profession ; and Itherefore consider it a piece of unpardonablepresumption on the part of a land lubber likehim to offer any opinion on the subject.The Reviewer, whoever it may be, has provedhimself wholly incompetent to his task ; he has attacked,but has yet to learn the art of parrying,as has been proved by his laying himself so open.His blows have been stopped, and, withoutgiving, he has received severe punishment. I am312 REPLY TO THEthe more surprised at this, as I really consideredthat there was a certain tact in the EdinburghReview, which enabled it to know where to directthe blow, so as to make it tell ; a species ofprofessional knowledge proper to executioners,reviewers, and cab-drivers, and which may besummed up in the following axiom : " Thegreat art of flogging is, to know where to finda bit of raw"So little have I felt the castigation intended,that I have had some compunction in administeringthis discipline to the Reviewer in return.Surely the Edinburgh Review can put a betterhead on, when it takes notice of this secondportion of my work ? I will give it an anecdote.A lady of my acquaintance was blessed witha son, then about three years old. She was veryindulgent, and he was very much spoiled. Atlast he became so unmanageable that she feltit was her imperative duty to correct him. Shewould as soon have cut off her right arm, butEDINBURGH REVIEW. 313that would not have mended the matter, nor thechild. So one day, when the young gentlemanhad been more than usually uproarious, shepulled up his petticoats and administered whatshe considered a most severe infliction. Havingso done, with a palpitating heart she sat downto recover herself, miserable that she had beencompelled to punish, but attempting to consoleherself with the reflection that she had done herduty. What then was her surprise to have herreveries interrupted by the young urchin, who(appearing only to have been tickled came uptoher, and laying down his head on her lap,pulled up his coats, and cried, " More whipping,Ma; please, more whipping." So weakhas been the wrist, whether it be feminine ornot, that has applied the punishment, thatI also feel inclined to exclaim with the child,More whipping, (Miss Martineau?) please,more whipping."The Reviewer has pronounced that " noauthor is cleverer than his works" If noVOL. III. P314 REPLY TO THEauthor be cleverer than his works, it is equallycertain that no reviewer is cleverer than hisreview. Does the Reviewer recollect the fable ofthe jackass who put on the lion s skin ? Whydid he not take warning from the fabled follyof his ancestor and hold his tongue ? He mightstill have walked about and have been supposedto be a Reviewer.He asserts that I am not capable of seriousreflection : he is mistaken. I have seldom cutthe leaves of the Edinburgh, having beensatisfied with looking at its outside, andthinking how very appropriate its colours ofblue and yellow were to the opinions which itadvocates. But at times I have been more serious.I have communed with myself as it lay beforeme, and I have mentally exclaimed : Here is awork written by men whom the Almighty hasendowed with talents, and who will, if therebe truth in Scripture, have to answer for thetalents committed to their keeping, yet thesemen, like madmen, throw about fire, and cry it isEDINBURGH REVIEW. 315only in sport; they uphold doctrines as perniciousas, unfortunately, they are popular ; disseminateerror under the most specious guise ; wage waragainst the happiness of their fellow-creatures,unhinging society, breeding discontent, wavingthe banner of infidelity and rebellion, andinviting to anarchy and bloodshed. To suchprostitution of talent to this work of thedevil, they are stimulated by their pride andtheir desire of gain ! And I have surmised thathereafter they will have their reward ; but,remembering that we are forbid to judge, Ihave checked my thoughts as they have turnedupon what might hereafter be the portionbelow of an Edinburgh Reviewer.APPENDIX.Discourse on the Evidences of the AMERICANINDIANS being the Descendants of the LOSTTRIBES OF ISRAEL.THOSE who study the Scriptures, either as a matterof duty or pleasure who seek in them divinerevelations, or search for the records of history, cannotbe ignorant of the fact that the Jewish nation, atan early period, was divided into twelve tribes, andoccupied their ancient heritage under geographicaldivisions, during the most splendid periods underthe kingdoms of Judah and of Israel.Their early history the rise, progress, and downfallof the nation the proud distinction of being thechosen people their laws, government, and warstheir sovereigns, judges, and temples their sufferings,dispersions, and the various prophecies concerningthis ancient and extraordinary people, cannotbe unknown to you all. For their history is318 APPENDIX.the foundation of religion, their vicissitudes theresult of prophecy, their restoration the fulfilment ofthat great promise made to the Patriarch Abraham,almost I may say in the infancy of nature.It is also known to you that the Jewish nationwas finally overpowered, and nine and a half of thetribes were carried captives to Samaria ; two and ahalf, to wit : Judah, Benjamin, and half Manasseh,remained in Judea or in the transporting cities.The question before us for consideration is, whathas become of the missing or dispersed tribes towhat quarter of the world did they direct their footsteps,and what are the evidences of their existenceat this day ?An earthquake may shake and overturn the foundationsof a city the avalanche may overwhelm thehamlet and the crater of a volcano may pour itslava over fertile plains and populous villages but awhole nation cannot vanish from the sight of theworld, without leaving some traces of its existence,some marks of habits and customs.It is a singular fact that history is exceedinglyconfused, or rather, I may say, dark, respecting theultimate dispersion of the tribes among the cities ofthe Medes. The last notice we have of them isfrom the second Book of Esdras, which runs thus :Whereas thou safest another peaceable multitude: these are the ten tribes which were carriedaway prisoners out of their own land in the time ofSea, whom Salmanazar, king of Assyria, led awaycaptive, and he carried them over the waters, so theycame unto another land.APPENDIX. 319They took this counsel among themselves thatthey would leave the multitude of the heathen, andgo into a further country wherein never mankinddwelt, that they might there keep their statutes,which they never kept in their own land (Assyria),and there was a great way to go, namely, a year anda half."Esdras, however, has been deemed apocryphal.Much has been said concerning the doubtful characterof that writer. He wrote in the first century ofthe Christian church, and Tertullian, St. Irenaeus,Clemens Alexandria, Pico di Miranda, and manylearned and pious men, had great confidence in hiswritings. Part of them have been adopted by Protestants,and all considered orthodox by Catholics.With all his old Jewish attachments to the propheciesand traditions, Esdras was nevertheless a convertto Christianity. He was not an inspired writer oraprophet, although he assumed to be one, and followedthe course as well as the manner of Daniel.The Book of Esdras, however, is of great antiquity,and as an historical record is doubtless entitled togreat respect.The precise number which left Babylon and othercities, and took to the desert, cannot be accuratelyknown; but they were exceedingly numerous, forthe edict of Ahasuerus, which decreed their destruction,embraced 127 provinces, and reached fromEthiopia to the Indies. Benjamin of Tela, whotravelled in the eleventh century through Persia,mentions that in some of the provinces, at the timeof that decree, the Jews occupied forty cities, two320 APPENDIX.hundred boroughs, one hundred castles, which contained300,000 people. I incline to the opinion that300,000 of the tribes left Persia.There is no doubt that, hi the march from theEuphrates to the north-east coast of Asia, many ofthe tribes hesitated in pursuing the journey : someremained in Tartary, many went into China. Alvarezstates in his History of China, that the Jews had beenliving in that kingdom for more than six hundredyears. He might with great probability have said1,600 years. He speaks of their being very numerousin some of the provinces, and having synagogues inmany of the great cities, especially in thatof Hinan andin its metropolis Kai-tong-fu, where he represents themto have a magnificent place of worship, and a repositoryfor the Holy Volume, adorned with richly embroideredcurtains, in which they preserve an ancientHebrew manuscript roll.They know but little of the Mosaic law, and onlyrepeat the names of David, Abraham, Isaiah, andJacob. In a Hebrew letter written by the Jews ofCochin China to their brethren at Amsterdam, theygive as the date of their retiring into India, the periodwhen the Romans conquered the Holy Land.It is clearly evident, therefore, that the tribes, intheir progress to a new and undiscovered country,left many of their numbers in China and Tartary,and finally reached the Straits of Bearing, where nodifficulty prevented their crossing to the north-westcoast of America, a distance less than thirty miles,interspersed with the Copper Islands, probably frozenover ; and reaching our continent, spread themselvesin the course of two thousand years to Cape Horn,APPENDIX . 32 1the more hardy keeping to the north, to Labrador,Hudson s Bay, and Greenland ; the more cultivatedfixing their residence in the beautiful climate andrich possessions of Central America, Mexico, andPeru.But it may here be asked, could the scatteredremnants of Israel have had the courage to penetratethrough unknown regions, and encounter the hardshipsand privations of that inhospitable country ?Could they have had the fortitude, the decision, thepower, to venture on a dreary pilgrimage of eighteenmonths, the time mentioned by Esdras as the periodof their journey ? Could they not ? What obstacleshad hitherto impeded their progress, that had brokendown their energies, or impaired their constancy andfidelity ?They knew that their brethren had severed thechains of Egyptian bondage ; had crossed in safetythe arm of the Red Sea ; had sojourned for years inthe wilderness ; had encamped near Mount Sinai,and had possessed themselves of the Holy Land.They remembered the kingdoms of Judah andIsrael in all their glory; they had witnessed theerection and destruction of their Temple ; they hadfought and conquered with the Medes, the Assyrians,the Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans. Theyhad encountered sufferings upon sufferings unmoved ;had bowed their necks submissively to the yoke.Kings, conquerors, nations, Christians, Mahomettans, and Heathens, all had united iu the design ofdestroying the nation; but they never despaired ;they knew they were the elect and chosen of the3r322 APPENDIX.Lord. The oath, that He never would abandon hispeople, had been fulfilled 3,500 years, and, therefore,with the cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night,they abandoned the Heathens and the Persian territory,passed the confines of Tartary and China, and,no doubt, through great sufferings, reached thenorth-eastern coast of Asia, and came in sight ofthat continent, wherein, as they had reason to believe," mankind never before had dwelt."On the discovery of America by Columbus, and thediscoveries subsequent to his time, various tribes ofIndians or savages were found to inhabit this ourcontinent, whose origin was unknown.It is, perhaps, difficult for the human mind to decideon the character and condition of an extremesavage state. We can readily believe that children abandonedin infancy in a savage country, and survivingthis abandonment, to grow up in a state of nature,living on herbs and fruits, and sustaining existenceas other wild animals, would be stupid, without language,without intellect, and with no greater instinctthan that which governs the brute creation. Wecan conceive nothing reduced to a more savage condition; with cannibal propensities, an ungovernableferocity, or a timid apprehension, there can be but alink that separates them from other classes of animalcreation. So with herds of men in a savagestate, like herds of buffalo or wild horses on ourprairies, they are kept together by sounds commonamongst themselves, and are utterly unacquaintedwith the landmarks of civilization.This, however, was not the condition of the Ames323rican Indians when first discovered. They were asingular race of men, with enlarged views of life, religion,courage, constancy, humanity, policy, eloquence,love of their families ; with a proud and gallantbearing, fierce in war, and, like the ancients,relentless in victory. Their hospitality might bequoted as examples among the most liberal of thepresent day. These were not wild men these werea different class from those found on the Sandwichand Feegee Islands. The red men of America, bearingas they do the strongest marks of Asiatic origin,have, for more than two thousand years (and dividedas they are in upwards of three hundred differentnations) been remarkable for their intellectual superiority,their bravery in war, their good faith in peace,and all the simplicity and virtues of their patriarchalfathers, until civilization, as it is called, had renderedthem familiar with all the vices which distinguishthe present era, without being able to enforce any ofthe virtues which are the boast of our present enlightenedtimes.It is, however, in the religious belief and ceremoniesof the Indians that I propose showing some ofthe evidences of their being, as it is believed, thedescendants of the dispersed tribes. The opinion isfounded1st. In their belief in one God.2d. In the computation of time by their ceremoniesof the new moon.3d. In their divisions of the year in four seasons,answering to the Jewish festivals of the feast of324 APPENDIX.flowers, the day of atonement, the feast of the tabernacle,and other religious holidays.4th. In the erection of a temple after the mannerof our temple, and having an ark of the covenant,and also the erection of altars.5th. By the divisions of the nation into tribes,with a chief, or grand sachem at their head.6th. By their laws of sacrifices, ablutions, marriages; ceremonies in war and peace, the prohibitionsof eating certain things, fully carrying out the Mosaicinstitutions ; by their traditions, history, character,appearance, affinity of their language to theHebrew, and finally, by that everlasting covenant ofheirship exhibited in a perpetual transmission of itsseal in their flesh.If I shall be able to satisfy your doubts and curiosityon these points, you will certainly rejoice withme in discovering that the dispersed of the chosenpeople are not the lost ones that the promises heldout to them have been thus far realised, and that allthe prophecies relative to their future destination willin due time be strictly fulfilled.It has been the general impression, as beforementioned, that great resemblance existed betweensome of the religious rites of the Jews, and the peculiarceremonies of the Indians ; and the belief in oneGreat Spirit has tended to strengthen the impression ;yet this mere resemblance only extended so far as toadmit of the belief, that they possibly may have descendedfrom the dispersed tribes, or may have beenof Tartar or Malay origin.APPENDIX. 325It was, however, a vague and unsatisfactory suspicion,which, having no tangible evidence, has beenrejected, or thrown aside as a mere supposition. Allthe missionaries and travellers among the Indiantribes since the discovery of America Adair, Heck-elder,Chartreux, M Kenzie, Bartram, Bartram,Smith, Penn, Mrs. Simon, who has written a veryinteresting work on this subject, &c., have expressedopinions in favour of their being of Jewish originthe difficulty, however, under which they all labouredwas simply this ; they were familiar with the religiousrites, ceremonies, traditions, and belief of theIndians, but they were not sufficiently conversantwith the Jewish rites and ceremonies to show theanalogy. It is precisely this link in the chain ofevidence that I propose to supply.It has been said that the Indians, believing in onegreat Spirit and Fountain of Life, like the Jews,does not prove their descent from the missing tribes,because in a savage state their very ignorance andsuperstition lead them to confide in the works ofsome divine superior being. But savages are apt tobe idolaters, and personate the deity by some carvedfigure or image to whom they pay their adoration, andnot, like the Indians, having a clear and definite ideaof one great Ruler of the universe, one great Spirit,whose attributes are as well known to them as to us.But if the continued unerring worship of one Godlikethe Jews prove nothing, where did they acquirethe same Hebrew name and appellation of that deity ?If tradition had not handed down to them the ineffableAPPENDIX.able name as also preserved by the Jews, how did theyacquire it in a wilderness where the word of theLord was never known ?Adair, in whom I repose great confidence, andwho resided forty years among them, in his workpublished in 1775, says, " The ancient heathensworshipped a plurality of gods, but these Indianspay their devoirs to Lo-ak (Light) Ish-ta-hoola-aba,distinctly Hebrew, which means the great supremebeneficent holy Spirit of Fire who resides above."They are," says Adair, " utter strangers to allthe gestures practised by the Pagans in their religiousrites they kiss no idols, nor would they kiss theirhands in tokens of reverence or willing obedience."These tribes," says Adair, " so far from beingAtheists, use the great and dreadful name of God, whichdescribes his divine essence, and by which he manifestedhimself to Moses ! and are firmly persuadedthat they now live under the immediate governmentof the Almighty Ruler. Their appellative for Godis Isto-hoolo, the Hebrew of Esh-Eshys, from Jshto,Great, but they have another appellative, which withthem, as with us, is the mysterious essential name ofGod, which they never mention in common speech,and only when performing their most sacred religiousrites, and then they most solemnly divide it insyllables, with intermediate words, so as not to pronouncethe ineffable name at once."Thus, in their sacred dances at their feast of thefirst-fruits, they sing Aleluyah and Meshes, from theHebrew of Masheach, Messiah, the anointed one.APPENDIX. 327Yo meshes," " He meshes," " Wah meshehah,"thus making the Hallelujah, the Messiah, the Jehovah.Can we, for a moment, believe that these sacredwell-known Hebrew Words found their way by accidentto the wilderness ? Or can it be doubted that, likethe fire of the burning bush, which never is extinguished,those words of religious adoration are thesacred relics of tradition, handed down to themfrom generation to generation ? "In the same manner,"says Adair, " they sing on certain other religiouscelebrations, ailyo ailyo, which is the Hebrew el forGod, by his attribute of omnipotence. They likewisesing hewah, hewah, He chyra, the " immortal soul."Those words sung at their religious rejoicing arenever uttered at any other time, which must haveoccasioned the loss of their divine hymns. They onsome occasions sing Shilu yo Shilu he Shilu wah.The three terminations make up in their order thefour lettered divine name in Hebrew. Shilu is evidentlyShaleach, Shiloh, the messenger, " the peacemaker."The number of Hebrew words used in their religiousservices is incredible ; thus, in chiding anyonefor levity during a solemn worship, they say,Che hakeet Kana, " you resemble those reproved inCanaan," and, to convey the idea of criminality, theysay Packet Canada, "the sinners of Canaan."They call lightning eloah, and the rumbling ofthunder rowan, from the Hebrew reach, " spirit."Like the Israelites, they divide the year into fourseasons, with the same festivals ; they calculate by328 APPENDIX.moons, and celebrate, as the Jews do, the berachahhalebana, the blessing for the new moon.The Indians have their prophets and high-priests,the same as the Jews had ; not hastily selected,but chosen with caution from the most wise and discreet,and they ordain their high-priests by anointingand have a most holy place in their sanctuaries, likethe Holy of Holies in the temple. The archimedes,or high-priest, wears, in resemblance to the ancientbreast-plate, a white conch-shell ornamented so as toresemble the precious stones on the Urim, and insteadof the golden plate worn by the Levite on hisforehead, bearing the inscription Modish Ladonaye,the Indian binds his brows with a wreath of swan sfeathers, and wears a tuft of white feathers, whichhe calls Yatira.The Indians have their ark, which they invariablycarry with them to battle, well guarded. In speakingof the Indian places of refuge, Adair says, " Iobserved that if a captive taken, by the reputedpower of the holy things of their ark, should be ableto make his escape into one of these towns, or eveninto the winter house of the Archimedes, he is deliveredfrom the fiery torture, otherwise inevitable.This, when taken in connection with the many otherfaint images of Mosaic customs, seems to point atthe mercy seat of the sanctuary. It is also worthyof notice, that they never place the ark on the ground.On hilly ground, where large stones are plenty, theyrest it thereon, but on level prairies, upon short logs,where they also seat themselves. And when we consider,"continues Adair, " in what a surprising man-appendix.329ner the Indians copy after the ceremonial law of theHebrews, and their strict purity in the war camps ;that opal, " the leader," obliges all during the firstcampaign which they have made with the belovedark, to stand every day, they are not engaged inwarfare, from sunrise to sunset, and after a fatiguingday s march and scanty allowance, to drink warmwater embittered with rattle-snake root very plentifully,in order to purification ; that they have also asstrong a faith in the power of their ark as ever theIsraelites had in theirs, ascribing the success of oneparty to their stricter adherence to the law, than theother, we have strong reason to conclude them ofHebrew origin. The Indians have an old tradition,that when they left their own native land, theybrought with them a sanctified rod, by order of anoracle, which they fixed every evening in the ground,and w r ere to remove from place to place on the continent,towards the sun rising, till it budded in onenight s time. I have seen other Indians, says thesame writer, who related the same thing. Insteadof the miraculous direction to which they limit it,in their western banishment, it appears more likelythat they refer to the ancient circumstance of therod of Aaron, which, in order to check the murmurof those who conspired against him, was, in his favour,made to bud blossoms and yield almonds at oneand the same time. It is a well attested fact, and is herecorroborated by Adair, that in taking female captives,the Indians have often protected them, butnever despoiled them of honour.This statement of Adair, in relation to the ark, is330 APPENDIX.corroborated by several travellers. Major Long, amore recent traveller, in his expedition to theRocky Mountains, says, in relation to the ark,It is placed upon a stand, and is never suffered totouch the earth. No person dare open all the coverings.Tradition informs them that curiosity inducedthree different persons to examine the mysteriousshell, who were immediately punished for their profanationby instant blindness." This is the Jewishpunishment pronounced for looking on the holy ofholies even now for looking on the descendants ofthe high priest who alone have the privilege ofblessing the people.The most sacred fast day uniformly kept by theJews is the day of atonement, usually falling in themonth of September or early in October. This isdeemed in every part of the world a most solemnfast, and great preparations are made for its celebration.It is in the nature of expiation of sin, of fullconfession, penitence, and prayer ; and is precededby ablution and preparation of morning prayer forsome time.It is a very sacred fast, which lasts from sunset onone day until the new moon is seen on the succeedingevening. It is not in the nature of a gloomydesponding penance, but rather a day of solemnrejoicing, of hope and confidence, and is respectedby those most indifferent to all other festivals throughoutthe year.Precisely such a fast, with similar motives, andnearly at the same period of the year, is kept by theIndian natives generally.APPENDIX. 331Adair, after stating the strict manner in which theIndians observe the revolutions of the moon, and describingthe feast of the harvest, and the first offeringsof the fruits, gives a long account of the preparationsin putting their temple in proper order for the greatday of atonement, which he fixes at the time whenthe corn is full eared and ripe, generally in the latterend of September. He then proceeds :Now one of the waiters proclaims with a loudvoice, for all the warriors and beloved men whomthe purity of their law admits, to come and enterthe beloved square and observe the fast. He alsoexhorts the women and children, with those whohave not been initiated in war, to keep apart accordingto the law.Four sentinels are now placed one at each cornerof the holy square, to keep out every living creatureas impure, except the religious order, and thewarriors who are not known to have violated the lawof the first fruit offering, and that of marriage, sincethe last year s expiation. They observe the fast tillthe rising of the second sun ; and be they ever sohungry in the sacred interval, the healthy warriorsdeem the duty so awful, and disobedience so inexpressiblyvicious, that no temptation would induce themto violate it. They at the same time drink plentifullyof a decoction of the button snake root, in orderto vomit and dense their sinful bodies."In the general fast, the children and men ofweak constitutions, are allowed to eat, as soon asthey are certain that the sun has begun to declinefrom his meridian altitude.332 APPENDIX.Now every thing is hushed. Nothing but silenceall around. The great beloved man, and his belovedwaiter, rising up with a reverend carriage, steadycountenance and composed behaviour, go into thebeloved place, or holiest, to bring them out thebeloved fire. The former takes a piece of dry poplar,willow, or white oak, and having cut a hole, but notso deep as to reach through it ; he then sharpensanother piece, and placing that in the hole, and bothbetween his knees, he drills it briskly for severalminutes, till it begins to smoke or by rubbing twopieces together for a quarter of an hour, he collectsby friction the hidden fire, which they all consider asproceeding from the holy spirit of fire.The great beloved man, or high priest, addressesthe warriors and women ; giving all the particular,positive injunctions and negative precepts they yetretain of the ancient law. He uses very sharp languageto the women. He then addresses the wholemultitude. He enumerates the crimes they havecommitted, great and small, and bids them look atthe holy fire which has forgiven them. He presseson his audience, by the great motives of temporalgood and the fear of temporal evil, the necessity ofa careful observance of the ancient law, assuring themthat the holy fire will enable their prophets, the rainmakers, to procure them plentiful harvests, and givetheir war leaders victory over their enemies. Hethen orders some of the fire to be laid down outside ofthe holy ground, for all the houses of the various associatedtowns, which sometimes lay several miles apart."Mr. Bartram, who visited the southern Indians inAPPENDIX. 3331778, gives an account of the same feast, but inanother nation. He says, " that the feast of firstfruitsis the principal festival. This seems to endthe old and begin the new ecclesiastical year. Itcommences when their new crops are arrived tomaturity. This is their most solemn celebration."With respect to the sacrifices, we have had nonesince the destruction of the temple, but it wascustomary among the Jews, in the olden time, tosacrifice daily a part of a lamb. This ceremony isstrictly observed by the Indians. The hunter, whenleaving his wigwam for the chase, puts up a prayerthat the great Spirit will aid his endeavours to procurefood for his wife and children, and when hereturns with the red deer, whatever may be thecravings of hunger, he allows none to taste until hehas cut part of the flesh, which he throws in the fireas a sacrifice, accompanied with prayer. All travellersspeak of this practice among the Indians, soclearly Hebrew in its origin.The bathing, anointing, ablutions, in the coldestweather, are never neglected by the Indians, and,like the Jews of old, they anoint themselves withbear s oil.The Mosaic prohibition of eating unclean animals,and their enumeration, are known to you all. Itwould be supposed that, amidst the uncertainty ofan Indian life, all kinds of food would be equallyacceptable. Not so : for, in strict conformity withthe Mosaic law, they abstain from eating the bloodof any animal, they abominate swine flesh, they donot eat fish without scales, the eel, the turtle or sea334 APPENDIX.cow : and they deem many animals and birds to beimpure. These facts are noticed by all writers, andparticularly by Edwards in his History of the West-indies.The latter able historian, in noticing theclose analogy between the religious rites of the Jewsand Indians, says, " that the striking conformity ofthe prejudices and customs of the Caribbee Indians,to the practices of the Jews, has not escaped thenotice of such historians as Camilla, Du Tertre, andothers ;" and Edwards also states, that the Indianson the Roanoke, punished their women caught inadultery, by stoning them to death before the assemblyof the people.Among the Musical laws is the obligation of onebrother to marry his brother s widow, if he die withoutissue. Major Long says, " if the deceased hasleft a brother, he takes the widow to his lodge aftera proper interval and considers her as his wife,"This is also confirmed by Charleviux.It would occupy a greater space of time than I canafford, to trace a similitude between all the Indianrites and religious ceremonies, and those of theJewish nation. In their births, in their separationafter the births of their children, in their dailyprayers and sacrifices, in their festivals, in theirburials, in the employment of mourners, and in theirgeneral belief, I see a close analogy and intimate connection,with all the ceremonies and laws which areobserved by the Jewish people; making a dueallowance for what has been lost, and misunderstood,in the course of upwards of 2,000 years.A general belief exists among most travellers, thatAPPENDIX. 335the Indians are the descendants of the missingtribes.Menassah Ben Israel wrote his celebrated treatiseto prove this fact, on the discovery of America.William Penn, who always acted righteously towardsthe Indians, and had never suspected thatthey had descended from the missing tribes, says, inaletter to his friends in England, " I found themwith like countenances to the Hebrew race. I considerthese people under a dark night, yet theybelieve in God and immortality, without the aidof metaphysics. They reckon by moons, they offertheir first ripe fruits, they have a kind of feast oftabernacles, they are said to lay their altars withtwelve stones, they mourn a year, and observe theMosaic law with regard to separation."Emanuel de Morals, in his history of Brazil,declares that America has been peopled by theCarthaginian and Israelites, and as to the Israeliteshe says, nothing is wanting but circumcision, to constitutea perfect resemblance between them and theBrazilians,The Rev. Mr. Beatty, a very worthy missionary,says, " I have often before hinted, that I have takengreat pains to search into the usages and customs otheIndians, in order to see what ground there wasfor supposing them to be part of the ten tribes, andI must own, to my no small surprise, that a numberof their customs appear so much to resemble those ofthe Jews, that it is a great question with me,whether we can expect to find among the ten tribes,wherever they are at this day, all things considered336 APPENDIX.more of the footsteps of their ancestors than amongthe different Indian tribes."Monsieur de Guignes, an old French historian, inspeaking of the discoveries made in America, beforethe time of Columbus, says, "These researches,which of themselves give us great insight into theorigin of the Americans, lead to the determination ofthe route of the colonies sent to the continent ;" andhe proceeds to give reasons for his belief, that thegreater part of them passed thither " by the mosteastern extremities of Asia, where the two continentsare only separated by a narrow strait, easy to cross."Bertram, in his discovery of the sources of theMississippi, after a full and interesting account ofthe Indians, says, "Different authors have broughtthem hither from all parts of the world. I was atfirst induced to join with those who derived themfrom the Hebrews. It seemed impossible for me todoubt that, by so doing, I should be building on animpregnable foundation." He then proceeds to provetheir Asiatic origin by many interesting facts.The late Earl of Crawford and Lindsay, publishedhis travels in America, in 1801. " It is curious andpleasing," says he, "in reading the travels of thosewho have been among these people, to find how theircustoms comport with the laws of Moses ;" and afterdescribing at length their religious rites and ceremonies,his lordship emphatically observes, " Itis a sound truth, that the Indians are descended fromthe ten tribes ; and time and investigation will moreand more enforce its acknowledgment."It is, however, in Mexico and Peru, that we mustAPPENDIX. 337look for the most enlightened and the most wealthyof the Indian race. On the representations of Montesini,who travelled in South America, the learnedRabbi Menassah Ben Israel, as I have said before,wrote his famous work La Esperanza de Israel, whichhe published in Amsterdam, in 1650, endeavouringwith great zeal to prove, that the Indians in Northand South America were the descendants of themissing tribes ; and Cromwell, to whom the workwas dedicated, was greatly interested in the evidencesproduced on that occasion. Montesini, travellingthrough the province of Quis, found that his Indianguide was a Jew, and pursuing his inquiries, discoveredthat immense numbers lived behind the Cordilleras.Francis, the name of his guide, admitted toMontesini, that his God was called Adonai, andthat he acknowledged. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,as his ancestors, and they claimed to have descendedfrom the tribe of Reuben.Acosta contends that they have a tradition relativeto the deluge ; that they preserve the rite of circumcision; they offer the first-fruits, and in Peru theyeat the Paschal Lamb ; they believe in the resurrection,and clothe the dead with the richest equipage.Lopez de Gomara says, that some of them, and notall, are circumcised. Acosta continues, " the Mexicanspoint out the various stations as their ancestorsadvanced into their country, and it is precisely theroute which they must have held, had they beenemigrants from Asia."Menassah Ben Israel declares, that the Indians ofMexico had a tradition, that their magnificent placeVOL. III. Q338 APPENDIX.of worship had been built by a people who wore theirbeards, and were more ancient than their Incas. Inthe Universal History of 1748, it is affirmed, that theMexicans and other American Indians rend their garments,in order the more effectually to express griefthe Hebrew custom at this day.Lopez de Gomara states, that the Mexicans offersacrifices of the first-fruits, and, when Cortez approachedMexico, Monte zama shut himself up for thespace of eight days in fasting and prayer. Emanuelde Mores and Acosta say, that the Brazilians marryin their own tribes and families ; and Escorbatusaffirms, that he frequently heard the southern tribesrepeat the sacred notes Ha-le-lu-yah. Malvendastates, that several tomb-stones were found in St.Michael s, with ancient Hebrew characters.When the Spaniards invaded Mexico, the Cholulawas considered a holy city by the natives, with magnificenttemples, in which the High Priest Quetza-colt preached to man, and would permit no otherofferings to the Master of Life than the first-fruitsof the harvest. " We know by our traditions," saidthe venerable Prince Montezuma to the SpanishGeneral Cortez, that we who inhabit this countryare not the natives but strangers who come from agreat distance."Don Alonzo Erecella, in his history of Chili, says,the Araucanians acknowledge one Supreme Being,and believe in the immortality of the soul ; and theAbb Clavigero declares, that they have a traditionof the great deluge. The laws and ceremonies ofthe Peruvians and Mexicans have, no doubt, beenAPPENDIX. 339corrupted in the course of many ages, both in theirsacrifices and worship.Their great and magnificent temple, evidently inimitation of that erected by Solomon, was foundedby Mango Capac, or rather by the Inca Yupanque,who endowed it with great wealth. Clavagero andDe Vega, in their very interesting account of thistemple say, " what we called the altar was on theeast side of the temple. There were many doors tothe temple, all of which were plated with gold, andthe four walls the whole way round were crownedwith a rich golden garland, more than an ell inwidth. Round the temple were five square pavilions,whose tops were in the form of pyramids. Thefifth was lined entirely with gold, and was for theuse of the Royal High-priest of sacrifices, and inwhich all the deliberations concerning the templewere held. Some of the doors led to the schoolswhere the Incas listen to the debates of the philosophers,sometimes themselves explaining the laws andordinances."Mexico and Central America abound in curiosities,exemplifying the fact of the Asiatic origin of the inhabitants; and it is not many years ago, that theruins of a whole city, with a wall nearly seven milesin circumference, with castles, palaces, and temples,evidently of Hebrew or Phoenician architecture,was found on the river Palenque. The thirty-fifthnumber of the Foreign Quarterly Review containsan interesting account of those antiquities.The ruins of this city of Guatemala, in CentralAmerica, as described by Del Rio in 1782, when340 APPENDIX.taken in conjunction with the extraordinary, I maysay, wonderful antiquities spread over the entiresurface of that country, awaken recollections in thespecimens of architecture which carry us back tothe early pages of history, and prove beyond theshadow of doubt, that we who imagined ourselves tobe the natives of a new world, but recently discovered,inhabit a continent which rivalled the splendourof Egypt and Syria, and was peopled by a powerfuland highly cultivated nation from the old world.When we speak of what is called Mexican antiquities,we must not confound the rude labours of moderntimes, with the splendid perfections which distinguishedthe efforts of those who reared the Egyptianpyramids, and built the temples of Thebes andMemphis. It is not Mexican antiquities, but theantiquities of Tultecan ; and in addition to the ruinsof Palenque, on this our continent, there are pyramidslarger than those of Sahara in Egypt, at Cholula,Otamba, Paxaca, Milan, Tlascola, and on themountains of Tescoca, together with hieroglyphics,planispheres and zodiacs, a symbolic and Phoenixalphabet ; papyrus, metres, triglyphs, and templesand buildings of immense grandeur ; military roads,aqueducts, viaducts, posting stations and distances ;bridges of great grandeur and massive character, allpresenting the most positive evidences of the existenceof a powerful enterprizing nation, which musthave nourished two thousand years before the Spanishconquest. Take, for example, the descriptionof the temple at Palenque, which Lord Gainsborough,in his travels, not only declares was built by theAPPENDIX. 341Jews, and is a copy of Solomon s temple, but which,no doubt, is precisely the model of the temple describedby Ezekiel. Travellers speak of it in thefollowing terms :It may be appropriately called an ecclesiasticalcity, rather than a temple. Within its vast precinctsthere appear to be contained (as indeed was,in some measure, the case with the area that embracedthe various buildings of Solomon s temple)a pyramidal tower, various sanctuaries, sepulchres ; asmall and a large quadrangular court, one surrounded,as we have said, by cloisters ; subterranean initiatorygalleries beneath ; oracles, courts of justice,high places, and cells or dwellings for the variousorders of priests. The whole combination of thebuildings is encircled by a quadrilateral plasteredportico, embracing a quadrangular area, and restingon a terraced platform. This platform exhibits thesame architectural model, which we have describedas characterizing the single temples. It is composedof three graduated stuccoed terraces, sloping inwards,at an angle of about seventy degrees, in the form ofa truncated pyramid. Four central staircases (onefacing each of the cardinal points) ascend these terracesin the middle of each lateral facade of thequadrangle ; and four gates fronting the same cardinalpoints, conduct from the top of each staircaseinto the body of the building, or into the greatcourt. The great entrance, through a plasteredgateway, fronts the east, and descends by a secondflight of steps into the cloistered court. On thevarious pilasters of the upper terrace are the APPENDIX.topes, with singular sculptures. On descending thesecond staircase into the cloistered court, on oneside, appears the triple pyramidal tower, which maybeinferred, from the curious distribution of littlecells which surround the central room of each story,to have been employed as a place of royal or privatesepulture. It would be pronounced a striking andtasteful structure, according to any architectural rule.On another side of the same cloistered court is thedetached temple of the chief god, to whom the wholereligious building appears to have been devoted, whoappears to have been the great and only god of thenations who worshipped in this temple. Beneaththe cloisters, entered by staircases from above, arewhat we believe to be the initiatory galleries. Theseopened into rooms, one of which has a stone couchin it, and others are distinguished by unintelligibleapparatus carved in stone. The only symbol describedas found within these sacred haunts is, however,perfectly Asiatic, and perfectly intelligible ; wemean two contending serpents. The remnant of analtar, or high place, occupies the centre of the cloisteredquadrangle. The rest of the edifice is takenup with courts, palaces, detached temples, open divans,baths, and streets of priestly cells, or houses,in a greater or less degree of dilapidation." * * *It is perfectly clear, from the few records of theirreligious rites which have come down to us, andwhich are principally derived from the extraordinaryrolls of American papyrus,* on which their beautifulFormed of prepared fibres of the Mastery.Appendix. 343hieroglyphical system is preserved (there is one ofconsiderable extent in the Dresden Museum), thatthey were as simple, perhaps we may add with propriety,as innocent. Not only does it appear thatthey had no human sacrifices, but no animal sacrifices.Flowers and fruits were the only offerings madeto the presiding divinity of their temples."But who were the Tultequans and Azeteques, thefounders of this empire in America ; who built thepyramids of Cholula and city of Palenque ? Not theJews.Here we have a most singular diversion from thepath on which we originally set out another extraordinarydiscovery, marked, too, by events no lessextraordinary than amazing.They were the Canaanites, the scriptural Titans,who, according to the sacred historian, built withwalls and towers reaching to the heavens. Thebuilders of the Tower of Babel, the family of theshepherd kings who conquered Egypt, and built thepyramids, and were driven from Syria by Joshua.The men who finally founded Tyre and Carthage,navigated round the continent of Africa, and sailedin their small craft across the Atlantic, and landedin the Gulf of Mexico.The Phoenicians were the founders of Palenque,Milan, Papantla, Quemada, Cholula, Child, andAntiquary.When I studied the history of these people, on theruins of Carthage, it was said by antiquarians present,that the Carthaginian had a colony at a considerabledistance, which they secretly maintained ;344 APPENDIX.and when I was at Tangier, the Mauritania mauritaniaof the ancients, I was shown the spot wherethe pillar was erected, and was standing at the timeof Ibn, the Moorish historian, on which was inscribed,in the Phoenician language, " We are theCanaanites who fled from Joshua, the son of Nun,that notorious robber." From that spot, then . . .the pillars of Hercules, now known as the Straits ofGibraltar, they crossed to our continent, and foundeda great empire of the Ophite worship, with Syrianand Egyptian symbols. Now, mark the issue. Fifteenhundred years after the expulsion of the Canaanitesby Joshua, the ten tribes pass over theStraits of Bearing to the continent of America, andpoured down upon these people like the Goths andVandals. The descendants of Joshua a second timefell on the Canaanites on another continent, knowingthem well as such, and burn their temples, and destroytheir gigantic towers and cities.When Columbus discovered America, he found aninnocent people in a demi savage state, with Jewishtraditions, and the only reference to early times wasa vague impression that the ruins they saw werebuilt by giants, and a people called wanderingmasons.I have the most settled conviction of this theory.The magnificent ruins w r which are to be seen at thisday in Mexico and Central America, were the worksof the Phoenicians, and the irruption of the wanderingtribes from the north-west coast of America sweptthat nation away, and have ever since maintainedpossession of this country, until white men haveAPPENDIX. 345thinned their ranks, and gradually encroached upon,and usurped a great part of their territory.The only opposition made to the general declarationof travellers, that the Indians are of Jewishdescent, is, that they are red men, and are beardless.Now, take the olive complexion of the Jews in Syria,pass the nation over the Euphrates into a warmerclimate, let them mingle with Tartars and Chinese,and after several generations reach this continent,their complexion would undergo some shades of hueand colour; and as to beards, they cannot growwhile they are continually plucked, as is the Indiancustom. The colour proves nothing against theirorigin. Take our fellow-citizens on our easternborders, and compare their florid colour with thesickly hue and sallow complexions of those livingon the southern shores, in the pal met toes and everglades,and we shall see a marked distinction, andyet they are members of the same family.Du Prate, speaking of the traditions of the Matchestribe, relates that in answer to the question, " Whencecome you ?" their reply was, " All that we know isthat our fathers, to come hither, followed the sun,and came from the place where he rises. Theywere long in their journey; they were nearlyperishing ; and were brought to this wilderness ofthe sun setting without seeking it." Stuart saysof the Indians of Surinam, on the authority of Fascialearned Jew residing there, that the dialect ofthose Indians common in Guiana is soft, agreeable,and regular, and their substantives are Hebrew.Their language, in the roots, idioms, and particularQ 3346 APPENDIX.construction, has the genius of the Hebrew language,as their orations have the bold, laconic, and figurativestyle of the Hebrew prophets."The Rev. Mr. Chapman says of the Osages, " itis their universal practice to salute the daw r n ofevery morning with their devotion." A custom alwaysprevailing among pious Jews.Malvenda and Acosta both affirm, that the nativeshad a tradition of a jubilee, according to the jubileeof Israel.Dr. Beatty, in speaking of the festival of the firstfruitsby the Indians west of the Ohio, says, " atthis ceremony twelve of their old men divide a deerinto twelve parts, and these men hold up the venisonand fruits with their faces to the east, acknowledgingthe bounty of God to them. A singular andclose imitation of the ceremonies and sacrifices ofthe temple." The doctor further says, " they haveanother feast which looks like the Passover."Sir Alexander Mckenzie, in his tour to thenorth-west coast, says, that " the Chepewyan Indianshave a tradition among them, that they originallycame from another country, inhabited by verywicked people, and had traversed a great lake whichwas in one place narrow and shallow, and full ofislands, where they had suffered great misery ; anda further tradition has it that nine parts of then-nationout of ten passed over the river. The Mexicansaffirm, that seven tribes or houses passed fromthe east to the wilderness."Bertram says, that the skeletons of the mammothsfound in Kentucky ana Missouri, and other parts ofAPPENDIX. 347America, have been ascertained to resemble preciselythose which have been found in Siberia and theeastern part of Asia, showing the facility of communicationbetween the two coasts. And here it maybewell to state a fact, which is strongly corroborativeof the view we have taken, not only of the possibilityof passing from one continent to the other,but of the actual and probably constant communicationbetween them. Charleroi, says, he knew aCatholic priest, called Father Gallon, in Canada,who was recalled to Paris after his mission had beenended, and who was subsequently appointed to asimilar mission in China. One day in Tartary, hesuddenly encountered a Huron woman with whomhe had been well acquainted in Canada, and who informedhim that she had been captured, and passedfrom nation to nation, until she reached the northwestcoast, when she crossed into Tartary.Since delivering the present lecture, I have receiveda letter from Mr. Catlin, the celebrated painter,who for the last five years has been residing amongthe Indians. Mr. Catlin says,The first thing that strikes the traveller in anIndian country as evidence of their being of Jewishorigin, (and it is certainly a very forcible one,) is thestriking resemblance which they generally bear incontour, and expression of head, to those people.In their modes and customs, there are many strikingresemblances, and perhaps as proof, they go muchfurther than mere personal resemblance. Amongstthose customs, I shall mention several that haveattracted my attention, though probably they have348 APPENDIX,never before been used for the same purpose ; andothers I may name, which are familiar to you, andwhich it may not be amiss to mention, as I have seenthem practised while in their country.The universal custom among them of buryingtheir dead with feet to the east, I could conceive tohave no other meaning or object than a journey tothe east after death like the Jews who expected totravel under ground after death to the land of Canaan.On inquiry, I found that though they wereall going towards the setting sun, during theirlife-times, they expected to travel to the east afterdeath.Amongst the tribes, the women are not allowedto enter the medicine lodge ; as they were notallowed in Judea to enter the court of Israel. Likethe Jewish custom also, they are not allowed to minglein worship with the men; and at meals, arealways separated.In their modes, hastings, feasting, or sacrifices,they have also a most striking resemblance. Amongstall the western tribes, who have not been persuadedfrom those forms by white men, they are still foundscrupulously and religiously adhering to, and practisingthem to the letter. The very many timesand modes of sacrificing, remind us forcibly of thecustoms of the Israelites ; and the one in particular,which has been seen amongst several of the tribes,though I did not witness it myself, wherein, like themanner of the peace-offering, the firstling andthat of the male is offered, and no lone is to bebroken. Such circumstances afford the strongestAPPENDIX. 349kind of proofs. All the tribes have a great feast atthe dawn of spring, and at those feasts their varioussacrifices are made. At the approach of the seasonof green corn, a feast of the first ears are sacrificedwith great solemnity, followed by feasting anddancing : so at the ripening of different kinds offruit. The first and best piece that is cut from abuffalo is always Neo Dante.Over the medicine lodge, and also over thelodges of the most distinguished chiefs, are hung onhigh poles large quantities of fine cloth, white buffalorobes, or other most costly articles which can beprocured, there to decay, an offering to the GreatSpirit.The bunch of willow boughs with which eachdancer is supplied, in the Mandan religious ceremonies,the sacrificing and other forms therein observed,certainly render it somewhat analogous to the Israelitishfeast of tabernacles.The universal practice of solus cum sola of thewomen, ablution and anointing with bear s grease,is strikingly similar to the Jewish custom. Everyfamily has a small lodge expressly [for this purpose,and when any one of the family are ready for it, itis erected within a few rods, and meat is carried toher, where she dwells, and cooks and eats by herself,an object of superstitious dread to every personin the village.The absence of every species of idolatry amongstthe North American Indians, affords also a strikingproof of the ceremonial law, and stamps them at350 APPENDIX.once, in one respect, at all events, differing from allother savage tribes of which we have any knowledge."What are, I may ask, the characters of thesepeople ? On the discovery of America by Columbus,nearly 2,000 years after the dispersion of the Hebrewtribes, the whole continent is found peopled,not with a race of wild men, of cannibals, of savages,but with a race of intellectual, moral, innocent persons,divided into many hundred nations, and spreadover 8,000 miles of territory. "I swear to yourmajesties, * said Columbus, writing to Ferdinand andIsabella, " that there is not a better people in theworld than these ; more affectionate or mild. Theylove their neighbours as themselves ; their languageis the sweetest, the softest and the most cheerful, forthey always speak smilingly." Major Long says,they are the genuine sons of nature ; they have allthe virtues nature can give, without the vices ofcivilization. They are artless, fearless, and live inconstantexercise of moral and Christian virtues,though they know it not."Charleroi gives his testimony in their behalf.They manifest," says he, " much stability in theirengagements, patience in affliction, and submissiveacquiescence in what they apprehend the will ofProvidence. In all this they display a nobleness ofsoul and constancy of mind, at which we rarely arrive,with all our philosophy and religion."Du Prate contends that they have a greater degreeof prudence, faithfulness, and generosity than thoseAPPENDIX. 351who would be offended with a comparison with them.No people says he, " are more hospitable andfree."Bartram, who lived many years in the Creek nation,says, " Joy, contentment, love and friendshipwithout guile or affectation, seem inherent in them,or predominant in their vital principle, for it leavesthem but with their breath. They are," says he,just, honest, liberal and hospitable to strangers ;considerate and affectionate to their wives, children,and relations ; frugal and persevering, charitable andforbearing."Who are they ? Men do not grow up like stonesor trees or rocks ; they are not found in herds likewild animals. God, that made man in his own image,gave to the Indians an origin and parentage, likeunto the rest of the great family of mankind, thework of his own almighty hand. From whom, then,did our red brethren, the rightful owners of thiscontinent, descend?There seems to be no difference of opinion thatthey are of Asiatic origin, and not indigenous to oursoil. Nearly all writers and historians concur onthis point they are Asiatic they crossed to thecontinent of America from Asia ; but who are they,and from whom have they descended ?Eldad, who wrote learnedly of the twelve tribes,in 1300, contends, that the tribe of Dan went intoEthiopia, and pretends that the tribes of Naphtali,Gad, and Asher, followed. That they had a king oftheir own, and could muster 120,000 horse and100,000 foot. In relation to part of these three352 APPENDIX.tribes, there might have been some truth in it, forTigleth Pelisse did compel them to go into Ethiopia.Issachar, he contends, remained with the Medes andPersians. Zebulon extended from the mountains ofPharan to the Euphrates. Reuben dwelt behindPharan, and spoke Arabic. Ephraim and half Manassehwere thrown on the southern coast. Benjaminof Tela places Dan, Asher, Naphtali, andZebulon on the banks of the river Gowan. In themidst of all these contradictory and vague statements,two opinions prevail among Jews and Christians, inearly and late periods. One is, that the ten tribeswent into Tartary, where they remained ; the other,that from Tartary they penetrated into America.Manasseh Ben Israel, the most learned of thenation, declares that they passed into America. Les-carbonbelieves that the Indians are the posterity ofHam, expelled by Joshua, and who passed out of theMediterranean, and were driven by storms to theAmerican coast. Grotius contends, that the inhabitantsof the new world were originally from Greenland; and while Passage frankly admits, that manifesttracts of Judaism are to be found in America,he contends, that the tribes could not have overcomethe warlike Scythian and penetrated to this continent,and that they remained in Halak and Hebe,and in the cities of the Medes.Truth, no doubt, lies between these opinions.Many of the tribes passed into Egypt and Ethiopia,many remained in Persia and Tartary ; all did notmake for the north-west coast, nor was it necessarythat all should do so. There were degrees of pietyAPPENDIX. 353and condition then as now. Restore Jerusalem tomorrow,and all the Jews will not return there.Rabbi Akiba contends, that all the noble familiesremained in Persia. A number, a considerable number,no doubt, impressed with a solemn belief that ifthey remained in Persia they would in time becomeidolaters, and lose all the landmarks of their ancientfaith, resolved, like those who went out of Egypt, toremain no longer in bondage, and, as Esdras says,they departed for a country " wherein mankind neverbefore had dwelt" and the resolution was perfectlyfeasible. It was a thickly populated country, and bykeeping on the borders of China, they would, withinthe time prescribed, namely, eighteen months, havereached our continent. At this day there is aconstant intercourse between the continents, and atrip to the Rocky Mountains, once so terrifying, isnow a mere summer s journey.If the Indians of America are not the descendantsof the missing tribes, again I ask, from whom arethey descended ? From the Egyptians ? Wherein,in their belief, is there the least resemblance to theworship of Isis and Osiris, or the Hieroglyphics orhistorical reminiscences of that very ancient people ?Are they a part of the fierce Scythian ? Their warlikepropensities would prove them to be so ; butwhere among those barbarians do we discover thebelief in one Great Spirit, together with the softervirtues, the purity and talents of the Indians ? Arethey of the Tartar race ? Their complexion, " theshadowed livery of the burning sun," might beoffered in evidence ; they have not the flat head, the354 APPENDIX.angular and twinkling eye, nor the diminutive figureof the Chinese or Tartars.The Indians have distinct Jewish features, andneither in mind, manners, nor religion, bear anyaffinity to the Tartar race. I have endeavoured toshow this by their traditions, by their religion, bytheir ceremonies, which retain so much of the ancientworship. But there is one proof more, which, inmy mind, removes all doubt. Sir Alexander mckenzie,in his journal of a tour to the north westcontinent of America, declares from his own observation,that the Chippewa r a Indians practise circumcision,which fact is corroborated by several othertravellers amongst the various tribes.It will scarcely be necessary for me to refer youto the many prophetic warnings relative to the sins,the denunciations, the promises, the dispersion andredemption of the Jewish people, which we findthroughout the Bible. With that good book you allare or should be familiar it is a delightful book,view it in any manner you please. Let the unbelieversneer and the philosopher doubt, it is certainthat the most important events predicted by theprophets have come to pass, giving an assurancewhich is stripped of all doubt, that what remains tobe fulfilled, will be fulfilled. In what direction arewe to look for the missing tribes according to theprophets ? From Jeremiah we learn that they areto come from a country north and west from Judea.From Isaiah, " it is a country far from Judea," andanswering also "from the ends of the earth."In Zachariah we are told, it must be in the w r es-appendix.355tern regions, or the country of the going down ofthe sun ; and according to the historian, Esdras, itmust be a land wherein mankind never before haddwelt, and, of course, free from the residence of theheathen.Our prophet Isaiah has a noble reference to thedispersed tribes and their redemption, which may behere appropriately quoted. I use his language, theHebrew, which from its peculiar associations shouldbe always interesting to you.il? "iKicrriK r-. Up rp raw Tir *pDv King era mmab^oi Bnani onnaci ons nwisjiQ IKvru *)DKi on:6 DJ KIWI : DTI "Rei monninrvrn : n rnsaa jniKn a enimovaAnd it shall come to pass in that day, that theLord shall set his hand the second time to recoverthe remnant of his people, which shall be left fromAssyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathos, andfrom Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, andfrom Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.And he shall set up an ensign for the nations,and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gathertogether the dispersed of Judah, from the four cornersof the earth.And there shall be a highway for the remnantof his people, w r which shall be left from Assyria, likeas it was to Israel, in the day that he came up outof the land of Egypt."356 APPENDIX.May I not with propriety refer, among other evidences,to the cruel persecutions which have uniformlybeen practised towards the Indians of thiscontinent, not unlike those which the chosen peoplehave suffered for the last eighteen centuries ?What makes you so melancholy ?" said GeneralKnox to the chief of an Indian deputation, that hewas entertaining in this city, at the close of therevolutionary war. " I ll tell you, brother," saidthe aged chief ; "I have been looking at your beautifulcity the great water full of ships, the finecountry, and see how prosperous you all are. But,then, I could not help thinking that this fine countrywas ours. Our ancestors lived here. They enjoyedit as their own in peace. It was the gift of the GreatSpirit to them and their children. At last, whitemen came in a great canoe. They only asked to letthem tie it to a tree, lest the water should carry itaway. We consented. They then said some oftheir people were sick, and they asked permission tolandthem, and put them under the shade of thetrees. The ice then came, and they could not goaway. They then begged a piece of land to buildwigwams for the winter. We granted it to them.They then asked corn to keep them from starving.We furnished it out of our own scanty supply. Theypromised to go away when the ice melted. Whenthis happened, they, instead of going, pointed to thebig guns round the wigwams, and said, we shall stayhere. Afterwards came more : they brought intoxicatingdrinks, of which the Indians became fond.They persuaded them to sell their land, and, finally,APPENDIX. 357have driven us back, from time to time, to the wilderness,far from the water, the fish, and the oysters.They have scared away our game my people arewasting away. We live in the want of all things,while you are enjoying abundance in our fine andbeautiful country. This makes me sorry, brother,and I cannot help it."These persecutions and repeated acts of crueltyand injustice appear to have no termination thework of destruction, commenced with the Narragansett,will extend to the Ceminoles, and gradually tothe blue waters of the Pacific. Look even now atthe contest maintained by a handful of Indians in theeverglades of Florida. Do they war against unequalnumbers for a crown for a part of that immensesurplus which overflows from the coffers of a countrywhich was once their own ? No they fight for theprivilege of dying where the bones of their ancestorslie buried : and yet we, Christians as we call ourselves,deny them that boon, and drive the lords ofthe soil into the den of the otter.In referring to the splendid specimens of Indianoratory, where, I would ask, can you find suchwisdom, such lofty and pure eloquence, among theChinese and Tartars, even at this day ?The Indians, like the Hebrews, speak in parables.Of their dialects, there is no doubt that the Algonquinsand Huron are the parents of five hundredIndian tongues they are copious, rich, regular,forcible, and comprehensive ; and although here andthere strong Hebrew analogies may be found, yet it358 APPENDIX.is reasonable to suppose, that the Indian languagesare a compound of all those tongues belonging to thevarious Asiatic nations through which they passedduring their pilgrimage.Firmly as I believe the American Indian to havebeen descended from the tribes of Israel, and thatour continent is full of the most extraordinary vestigesof antiquity, there is one point, a religious aswell as an historical point, in which you may possiblycontinue to doubt, amidst almost convincingevidences.If these are the remnants of the nine and a halftribes which were carried into Assyria, and if we areto believe in all the promises of the restoration, andthe fulfilment of the prophecies, respecting the finaladvent of the Jewish nation, what is to become ofthese our red brethren, whom w r e are driving beforeus so rapidly, that a century more will find themlingering on the borders of the Pacific Ocean ?Possibly the restoration may be near enough toinclude even a portion of those interesting people.Our learned Rabbis have always deemed it sinful tocompute the period of the restoration ; they believethat when the sins of the nation were atoned for,the miracle of their redemption would be manifested.My faith does not rest wholly in miracles Providencedisposes of events, human agency must carrythem out. That benign and supreme power whichthe children of Israel had never forsaken, has protectedthe chosen people amidst the most appallingdangers, has saved them from the uplifted sword ofAPPENDIX. 359the Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians,the Greeks, and the Romans, and while themost powerful nations of antiquity have crumbled topieces, we have been preserved, united, and unbroken,the same now as we were in the days of the patriarchsbrought from darkness to light, from theearly and rude periods of learning to the brightreality of civilization, of arts, of education and ofscience.The Jewish people must now do something forthemselves ; they must move onward to the accomplishmentof that great event long foretold longpromised long expected ; and when they DO move,that mighty power which has for thousands of yearsrebuked the proscription and intolerance shown tothe Jews, by a benign protection of the whole nation,will still cover them with his invincible standard.My belief is, that Syria will revert to the Jewishnation by purchase, and that the facility exhibited inthe accumulation of wealth, has been a providentialand peculiar gift to enable them, at a proper time, tore-occupy their ancient possessions by the purse -string instead of the sword.We live in a remarkable age, and political eventsare producing extraordinary changes among thenations of the earth.Russia, with its gigantic power, continues to presshard on Turkey. The Pacha of Egypt, taking advantageof the improvements and inventions of menof genius, is extending his territory and influence tothe straits of Babelmandel on the Red Sea, and to360 APPENDIX.the borders of the Russian empire ; and the combinedforce of Russia, Turkey, Persia, and Egypt, seriouslythreaten the safety of British possessions in the EastIndies. An immediate and balancing power is requiredto check this thirst of conquest and territorialpossession, and to keep in check the advances ofRussia in Turkey and Persia, and the ambition andlove of conquest of Egypt. This can be done byrestoring Syria to its rightful owners, not by revolutionor blood, but as I have said, by the purchase ofthat territory from the Pacha of Egypt, for a sumof money too tempting in its amount for him torefuse, in the present reduced state of his coffers.Twelve or thirteen millions of dollars have beenspoken of in reference to the cession of that interestingterritory, a sum of no consideration to theJews, for the good-will and peaceable possession ofa land, which to them is above all price. Under theco-operation and protection of England and France,this re-occupation of Syria within its old territoriallimits is at once reasonable and practicable.By opening the ports of Damascus, Tripoli, Joppa,Acre, &c., the whole of the commerce of Turkey,Egypt, and the Mediterranean will be in the handsof those, who, even now in part, control the commerceof Europe. From the Danube, the Dneister,the Ukraine, Wallachia, and Moldavia, the best ofagriculturists would revive the former fertility ofPalestine. Manufacturers from Germany and Holland; an army of experience and bravery from Franceand Italy ; ingenuity, intelligence, activity, energy,APPENDIX. 361and enterprize from all parts of the world, would,under a just, a tolerant, and a liberal government,present a formidable barrier to the encroachments ofsurrounding powers, and be a bulwark to the interestsof England and France, as well as the risingliberties of Greece.Once again unfurl the standard of Judah on MountZion, the four corners of the earth will give up thechosen people as the sea will give up its dead,at the sound of the last trumpet. Let the cry beJerusalem as it was in the days of the Saracen andthe lion-hearted Richard of England, and the ragsand wretchedness which have for eighteen centuriesenveloped the persons of the Jews, crushed as theywere by persecution and injustice, will fall to theearth ; and they will stand forth, the richest, themost powerful, the most intelligent nation on theface of the globe, with incalculable wealth, and holdingin pledge the crowns and sceptres of kings.Placed in possession of their ancient heritage by andwith the consent and co-operation of their Christianbrethren, establishing a government of peace andgood will on earth, it may then be said, behold thefulfilment of prediction and prophecy : behold thechosen and favoured people of Almighty God, who,in defence of his unity and omnipotence, have beenthe outcast and proscribed of all nations, and who,for thousands of years, have patiently endured theseverest of human sufferings, in the hope of thatgreat advent of which they never have despaired ;and then, when taking their rank once more among theVOL. III. B362 APPENDIX.nations of the earth, with the good wishes and affectionateregards of the great family of mankind, theymay by their tolerance, their good faith, their charity,and enlarged liberal views, merit what has beensaid in their behalf by inspired writers, " Blessedare they who bless Israel."THE END.Printed by J. L. Cox and SONS, 75, Great Queen Street,Lincoln s-Inn Fields.