SOCIETY IN AMERICAHARRIET MARTINEAU,AUTHOR OF " ILLUSTRATIONS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.'IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDONSAUNDERS AND Motley, CONDUIT STREET.1837.LONDON:PRINTED BY IBOTSOV AND PAI.MKR,SAVOY STREET.CONTENTS.VOL. II.PART II.PageECONOMY The Northern Lakes . . iCHAPTER I.AGRICULTURE . . . .29SECTION I. Disposal of Land . . .66II. Rural Labour . .93CHAPTER II.TRANSPORT AND MARKETS . . .171SECTION I. Internal Improvements . . 209CHAPTER III.MANUFACTURES . . . .219SECTION I. The Tariff . . . .231Ii Manufacturing Labour . . 242CONTENTS.CHAPTER IV.COMMERCE . . . . .venesectionI. The Currency . ' . ' . 273II. Revenue and Expenditure . 288CHAPTER V.MORALS OP ECONOMY . * . . . 293/' SECTION I Morals of Slavery . . . 312II. Morals of Manufactures . 352III. Morals of Commerce . . 359SOCIETY IN AMERICA.PART II.CONTINUED.ECONOMY.WHILE we were at Detroit, we were most stronglyurged to return thither by the Lakes, insteadof by either of the Michigan roads. Fromplace to place, in my previous travelling, I hadbeen told of the charms of the Lakes, and especiallyof the Island of Mackinaw. Every officer'slady who has been in garrison there, is eloquentupon the delights of Mackinaw. As our wholeparty, however, could not spare time to-make sowide a circuit, we had not intended to indulge ourselveswith a further variation in our travels thanto take the upper road back to Detroit; havingleft it by the lower. On Sunday, June 27th, news2 ECONOMY.arrived at Chicago that this upper road had beenrendered impassable by the rains. A sailing vessel,the only one on the Lakes, and now on her firsttrip, was to leave Chicago for Detroit and Buffalo,the next day. The case was clear: the partymust divide. Those who were obliged to hastenhome must return by the road we came : the restmust proceed by water. On Charley's account,the change of plan was desirable; as the heatswere beginning to be so oppressive as to rendertravelling in open wagons unsafe for a child. Itwas painful to break up our party at the extremepoint of our journey ; but it was clearly right. SoMr. and Mrs. L. took their chance by land; andthe rest of us went on board the Milwaukee, attwo o'clock on the afternoon of the 28th.Mrs. F. and I were the only ladies on board ;and there was no stewardess. The steward wasobliging, and the ladies' cabin was clean and capacious; and we took possession of it with a feelingof comfort. Our pleasant impressions, however,were not of long duration. The vessel was crowdedwith persons who had come to the land sales atChicago, and were taking their passage back toMilwaukee ; a settlement on the western shore ofthe lake, about eighty miles from Chicago. Tillwe should reach Milwaukee, we could have theladies' cabin only during a part of the day. I sayECONOMY. 3a part of the day, because some of the gentry didnot leave our cabin till near nine in the morning ;and others chose to come down, and go to bed, asearly as seven in the evening, without troublingthemselves to give us five minutes' notice, or towait till we could put up our needles, or wipeour pens. This ship was the only place in Americawhere I saw a prevalence of bad manners. It wasthe place of all others to select for the study ofsuch; and no reasonable person would look foranything better among land-speculators, and settlersin regions so new as to be almost withoutwomen. None of us had ever before seen, inAmerica, a disregard of women. The swearing wasincessant; and the spitting such as to amaze myAmerican companions as much as myself.Supper was announced presently after we hadsailed ; and when we came to the table, it was full,and no one offered to stir, to make room for us.The captain, who was very careful of our comfort,arranged that we should be better served henceforth;and no difficulty afterwards occurred. Atdinner, the next day, we had a specimen of howsuch personages as we had on board are managedon an emergency. The captain gave notice, fromthe head of the table, that he did not choose ourparty to be intruded on in the cabin ; and that anyonewho did not behave with civility at table shouldB 24 ECONOMY.be turned out. He spoke with decision and good-humour;and the effect was remarkable. Everythingon the table was handed to us ; and no mOreof the gentry came down into our cabin to smoke,or throw themselves on the cushions to sleep, whilewe sat at work.Our fare was what might be expected on LakeMichigan. Salt beef and pork, and sea-biscuit ;tea without rail, bread, and potatoes. Charleythrove upon potatoes and bread ; and we all hadthe best results of food, health and strength.A little schooner which left Chicago at the sametime with ourselves, and reached Milwaukee first,was a pretty object. On the 29th, we were onlytwenty-five miles from the settlement ; but thewind was so unfavourable that it was doubtfulwhether we should reach it that day. Some of thepassengers amused themselves by gaming, down inthe hold ; others by parodying a methodist sermon,and singing a mock hymn. We did not get rid ofthem till noon on the 30th, when we had the pleasureof seeing our ship disgorge twenty-five intoone boat, and two into another. The atmospherewas so transparent as to make the whole scene appearas if viewed through an opera-glass; the still,green waters, the dark boats with their busy oars,the moving passengers, and the struggles of one torecover his hat, which had fallen overboard. WeECONOMY. 5were yet five miles from Milwaukee ; but we couldsee the bright, wooded coast, with a few white dotsof houses.While Dr. F. went on shore, to see what was tobe seen, we had the cabin cleaned out, and took,once more, complete possession of it, for both dayand night. As soon as this was done, seven youngwomen came down the companion-way, seatedthemselves round the cabin, and began to questionus. They were the total female population of Milwaukee; which settlement now contains four hundredsouls. We were glad to see these ladies; forit was natural enough that the seven women shouldwish to behold two more, when such a chanceoffered. A gentleman of the place, who came onboardthis afternoon, told me that a printing-presshad arrived a few hours before ; and that a newspaperwould speedily appear. He was kind enoughto forward the first number to me a few weeksafterwards ; and I was amused to see how pathetican appeal to the ladies of more thickly-settled districtsit contained ; imploring them to cast a favourableeye on Milwaukee, and its hundreds ofbachelors. Milwaukee had been settled since thepreceding November. It had good stores ; (tojudge by the nature and quantity of goods sentashore from our ship;) it had a printing-press andnewspaper, before the settlers had had time to get6 ECONOMY.wives. I heard these new settlements sometimescalled "patriarchal:" but what would the patriarchshave said to such an order of affairs ?Dr. F. returned from the town, with apple-pies,cheese, and ale, wherewith to vary our ship diet.With him arrived such a number of towns-people,that the steward wanted to turn us out of ourcabin once more : but we were sturdy, appealed tothe captain, and were confirmed in possession.From this time, began the delights of our voyage.The moon, with her long train of glory, was magnificentto-night ; the vast body of waters on whichshe shone being as calm as if the winds were dead.The navigation of these lakes is, at present, amystery. They have not yet been properly surveyed.Our captain had gone to and fro on LakeHuron, but had never before been on Lake Michigan; and this was rather an anxious voyage to him.We had got aground on the sand-bar before Milwaukeeharbour ; and on the 1st of July, all handswere busy in unshipping the cargo, to lighten thevessel, instead of carrying her up to the town. Anelegant little schooner was riding at anchor near us ;and we were well amused in admiring her, and inwatching the bustle on deck, till some New-englandyouths, and our Milwaukee acquaintance,brought us, from the shore, two newspapers, somepebbles, flowers, and a pitcher of fine strawberries.ECONOMY. 7As soon as we were off the bar, the vessel hoveround, and we cast anchor in deeper water. Charleywas called to see the sailors work the windlass,and to have a ride thereon. The sailors were verykind to the boy. They dressed up their dog forhim in sheep-skins and a man's hat; a sight tomake older people than Charley laugh. Theytook him down into the forecastle to show himprints that were pasted up there. They asked himto drink rum and water with them : to whichCharley answered that he should be happyto drink water with them, but had rather nothave any rum. While we were watching thered sunset over the leaden waters, betokening achange of weather, the steamer " New York" cameploughing the bay, three weeks after her time ;such is the uncertainty in the navigation of thesestormy lakes. She got aground on the sand-bank,as we had done ; and boats were going from her tothe shore and back, as long as we could see.The next day there was rain and some wind.The captain and steward went off to make finalpurchases : but the fresh meat which had been bespokenfor us had been bought up by somebodyelse ; and no milk was to be had ; only two cowsbeing visible in all the place. Ale was the onlyluxury we could obtain. When the captain returned,he brought with him a stout gentleman,one of the proprietors of the vessel, who must have8 ECONOMY.a berth in our cabin as far as Mackinaw; thoseelsewhere being too small for him. Under the circumstances,we had no right to complain; so wehelped the steward to partition off a portion of thecabin with a counterpane, fastened with four forks.This gentleman, Mr. D., was engaged in the furtrade at Mackinaw, and had a farm there, to whichhe kindly invited us.On Sunday, the 3rd, there was much speculationas to whether we should be at Mackinaw in timeto witness the celebration of the great day. Alldesired it ; but I was afraid of missing the ManitouIsles in the dark. There was much fog ; the windwas nearly fair ; the question was whether it wouldlast. Towards evening, the fog thickened, and thewind freshened. The mate would not believe wewere in the middle of the lake, as every one elsesupposed. He said the fog was too warm not tocome from near land. Charley caught somethingof the spirit of uncertainty, and came to me in high,joyous excitement, to drag me to the side of theship, that I might see how fast we cut through thewaves, and how steadily we leaned over the water,till Charley almost thought he could touch it. Heburst out about the "kind of a feeling" that it wasnot to see a bit of land," and not to know wherewe were ; and to think " if we should upset !" andthat we never did upset : it was " a good and a badfeeling at once ;" and he should never be able toECONOMY. 9tell people at home what it was like. The boy hadno fear : he was roused, as the brave man loves tobe. Just as the dim light of the sunset was fadingfrom the fog, it opened, and disclosed to us, just athand, the high, sandy shore of Michigan. It was wellthat this happened before dark. The captain hastenedup to the mast-head, and reported that we wereoff Cape Sable, forty miles from the Manitou Isles.Three bats and several butterflies were seen today,clinging to the mainsail, blown over fromthe shore. The sailors set their dog at a bat, ofwhich it was evidently afraid. A flock of prettypigeons flew round and over the ship ; of which sixwere shot. Four fell into the water; and theother two were reserved for the matters breakfast;he being an invalid.We were up before five, on the morning of the4th of July, to see the Manitou Isles, which werethen just coming in sight. They are the SacredIsles of the Indians, to whom they belong. Manitouis the name of their Great Spirit, and of everythingsacred. It is said that they believe theseislands to be the resort of the spirits of the departed.They are two : sandy and precipitous atthe south end ; and clothed with wood, from thecrest of the cliffs to the north extremity, whichslopes down gradually to the water. It was a cool,sunny morning, and these dark islands lay still,B 510 ECONOMY.and apparently deserted, on the bright greenwaters. Far behind, to the south, were two glitteringwhite sails, on the horizon. They remained insightall day, and lessened the feeling of lonelinesswhich the navigators of these vast lakes cannot buthave, while careering among the solemn islandsand shores. On our right lay the Michigan shore,high and sandy, with the dark eminence, called theSleeping Bear, conspicuous on the ridge. No landspeculators have set foot here yet. A few Indiandwellings, with evergreen woods and sandy cliffs,are all. Just here, Mr. D. pointed out to us aschooner of his which was wrecked, in a snowstorm,the preceding November. She lookedpretty and forlorn, lying on her side in that desolateplace, seeming a mere plaything thrown inamong the cliffs. " Ah !" said her owner, with asigh, " she was a lovely creature, and as stiff as achurch." Two lives were lost. Two young Germans,stout lads, could not comprehend the ordersgiven them to put on all their clothing, and keepthemselves warm. They only half-dressed themselves: " the cold took them," and they died.The rest tried to make fire by friction of wood ;but got only smoke. Some one found traces of adog in the snow. These were followed for threemiles, and ended at an Indian lodge, where thesailors were warmed, and kindly treated.ECONOMY. 1 1During the bright morning of this day we passedthe Fox and Beaver Islands. The captain was infine spirits, though there was no longer any prospectof reaching Mackinaw in time for the festivitiesof the day. This island is chiefly known as aprincipal station of the great north-western furtrade. Others know it as the seat of an Indianmission. Others, again, as a frontier garrison. Itis known to me as the wildest and tenderest littlepiece of beauty that I have yet seen on God'searth. It is a small island, nine miles in circumference,being in the strait between the Lakes Michiganand Huron, and between the coasts of Michiganand Wisconsin.Towards evening the Wisconsin coast came intoview, the strait suddenly narrowed, and we wereabout to bid farewell to the great Lake whose totallength we had traversed, after sweeping round itssouthern extremity. The ugly light-ship, whichlooked heavy enough, came into view about sixo'clock ; the first token of our approach to Mackinaw.The office of the light-ship is to tow vesselsin the dark through the strait. We were tooearly for this ; but perhaps it performed that officefor the two schooners whose white specks of sailshad been on our southern horizon all day. Nextwe saw a white speck before us ; it was the barracksof Mackinaw, stretching along the side of its12 ECONOMY,green hills, and clearly visible before the towncame into view.The island looked enchanting as we approached,as I think it always must, though we had the advantageof seeing it first steeped in the most goldensunshine that ever hallowed lake or shore. Thecolours were up on all the little vessels in the harbour.The national flag streamed from the garrison.The soldiers thronged the walls of the barracks; half-breed boys were paddling about in theirlittle canoes, in the transparent waters; the half-french,half-Indian population of the place were allabroad in their best. An Indian lodge was on theshore, and a picturesque dark group stood besideit. The cows were coming down the steep greenslopes to the milking. Nothing could be morebright and joyous.The houses of the old French village are shabby-looking,dusky, and roofed with bark. There aresome neat yellow houses, with red shutters, whichhave a foreign air, with their porches and flightsof steps. The better houses stand on the first ofthe three terraces which are distinctly marked.Behind them are swelling green knolls; beforethem gardens sloping down to the narrow slip ofwhite beach, so that the grass seems to grow almostinto the clear rippling waves. The gardenswere rich with mountain ash, roses, stocks, currantECONOMY. 13bushes, springing corn, and a great variety ofkitchen vegetables. There were two small pierswith little barks alongside, and piles of wood forthe steam-boats. Some way to the right stood thequadrangle of missionary buildings, and the whitemission church. Still further to the right was ashrubby precipice down to the lake ; and beyond,the blue waters. While we were gazing at all this,a pretty schooner sailed into the harbour after us,in fine style, sweeping round our bows so suddenlyas nearly to swamp a little fleet of canoes, eachwith its pair of half-breed boys.We had been alarmed by a declaration from thecaptain that he should stay only three hours at theisland. He seemed to have no intention of takingus ashore this evening. The dreadful idea occurredto us that we might be carried away fromthis paradise, without having set foot in it. Welooked at each other in dismay. Mr. D. stood ourfriend. He had some furs on board which were tobe landed. He said this should not be done tillthe morning; and he would take care that hispeople did it with the utmost possible slowness.He thought he could gain us an additional hour inthis way. Meantime, thunder-clouds were comingup rapidly from the west, and the sun was near itssetting. After much consultation, and an assurancehaving been obtained from the captain that we14 ECONOMY.might command the boat at any hour in the morning,we decided that Dr. F. and Charley should goashore, and deliver our letters, and accept any arrangementsthat might be offered for our seeingthe best of the scenery in the morning.Scarcely any one was left in the ship but Mrs.F. and myself. We sat on deck, and gazed as ifthis were to be the last use we were ever to haveof our eyes. There was growling thunder now,and the church bell, and Charley's clear voice fromafar : the waters were so still. The Indians lighteda fire before their lodge ; and we saw their shiningred forms as they bent over the blaze. Wewatched Dr. F. and Charley mounting to the garrison;we saw them descend again with the commandingofficer, and go to the house of the Indianagent. Then we traced them along the shore, andinto the Indian lodge; then to the church; thenthe parting with the commandant on the shore, andlastly, the passage of the dark boat to our shipside.They brought news that the commandantand his family would be on the watch for us beforefive in the morning, and be our guides to as muchof the island as the captain would allow us time tosee.Some pretty purchases of Indian manufactureswere brought on board this evening ; light mattingof various colours, and small baskets of birch-bark,ECONOMY. 15embroidered with porcupine-quills, and filled withmaple sugar.The next morning all was bright At fiveo'clock we descended the ship's side, and from theboat could see the commandant and his dog hasteningdown from the garrison to the landing-place.We returned with him up the hill, through the bar-backyard;and were joined by three members ofhis family on the velvet green slope behind thegarrison. No words can give an idea of the charmsof this morning walk. We wound about in a vastshrubbery, with ripe strawberries under foot, wildflowersall around, and scattered knolls and openingvistas tempting curiosity in every direction.Now run up," said the commandant, as we arrivedat the foot of one of these knolls. I did so,and was almost struck backwards by what I saw.Below me was the Natural Bridge of Mackinaw, ofwhich I had heard frequent mention. It is a limestonearch, about one hundred and fifty feet highin the centre, with a span of fifty feet; one pillarresting on a rocky projection in the lake, the otheron the hill. We viewed it from above, so that thehorizon line of the lake fell behind the bridge, andthe blue expanse of waters filled the entire arch.Birch and ash grew around the bases of the pillars,and shrubbery tufted the sides, and dangled fromthe bridge. The soft rich hues in which the whole16 ECONOMY.was dressed seemed borrowed from the autumnsky.But even this scene was nothing to one wesaw from the fort, on the crown of the island ; oldFort Holmes, called Fort George when in the possessionof the British. I can compare it to nothingbut to what Noah might have seen, the first brightmorning after the deluge. Such a cluster of little paradisesrising out of such a congregation of waters,I can hardly fancy to have been seen elsewhere.The capacity of the human eye seems here suddenlyenlarged, as if it could see to the verge ofthe watery creation. Blue, level waters appear toexpand for thousands of miles in every direction ;wholly unlike any aspect of the sea. Cloud shadows,and specks of white vessels, at rare intervals,alone diversify it. Bowery islands rise out of it;bowery promontories stretch down into it ; while atone'sfeet lies the melting beauty which one almostfears will vanish in its softness before one's eyes ;the beauty of the shadowy dells and sunny mounds,with browsing cattle, and springing fruit and flowers.Thus, and no otherwise, would I fain think did theworld emerge from the flood. I was never beforeso unwilling to have objects named. The essentialunity of the scene seemed to be marred by any distinctionof its parts. But this feeling, to me new,did not alter the state of the case ; that it was LakeECONOMY. 1 7Huron that we saw stretching to the eastward;Lake Michigan opening to the west ; the island ofBois Blanc, green to the brink in front ; and RoundIsland and others interspersed. I stood now atthe confluence of those great northern lakes, thevery names of which awed my childhood ; callingup, as they did, images of the fearful red man ofthe deep pine-forest, and the music of the moaningwinds, imprisoned beneath the ice of winter. Howdifferent from the scene, as actually beheld, dressedin verdure, flowers, and the sunshine of a summer'smorning !It was breakfast-time when we descended to thebarracks; and we despatched a messenger to thecaptain to know whether we might breakfast withthe commandant. We sat in the piazza, and overlookedthe village, the harbour, the straits, and thewhite beach, where there were now four Indian lodges.The island is so healthy that, according to thecommandant, people who want to die must gosomewhere else. I saw only three tombstones inthe cemetery. The commandant has lost but oneman since he has been stationed at Mackinaw ;and that was by drowning. I asked about the climate;the answer was, " We have nine monthswinter, and three months cold weather."It would have been a pity to have missed thebreakfast at the garrison, which afforded a strongcontrast with any we had seen for a week. We18 ECONOMY.concealed, as well as we could, our glee at theappearance of the rich cream, the new bread andbutter, fresh lake trout, and pile of snowwhiteThere is reason to think that the mission is theleast satisfactory part of the establishment on thisisland. A great latitude of imagination or representationis usually admitted on the subject of missionsto the heathen. The reporters of this oneappear to be peculiarly imaginative. I fear thatthe common process has here been gone throughof attempting to take from the savage the venerableand the true which he possessed, and to force uponhim something else which is to him neither venerablenor true.The Indians have been proved, by the success ofthe French among them, to be capable of civilisation.Near Little Traverse, in the north-west partof Michigan, within easy reach of Mackinaw, thereis an Indian village, full of orderly and industriousinhabitants, employed chiefly in agriculture. TheEnglish and Americans have never succeeded withthe aborigines so well as the French ; and it maybedoubted whether the clergy have been a muchgreater blessing to them than the traders.It was with great regret that we parted with thecommandant and his large young family, and steppedinto the boat to return to the ship. The captainlooked a little grave upon the delay which allECONOMY. 19his passengers had helped to achieve. We sailedabout nine. We were in great delight at havingseen Mackinaw, at having the possession of its singularimagery for life : but this delight was at presentdashed with the sorrow of leaving it. I couldnot have believed how deeply it is possible to regreta place, after so brief an acquaintance with it.We watched the island as we rapidly receded,trying to catch the aspect of it which had given itits name the Great Turtle. Its flag first vanished: then its green terraces and slopes, its whitebarracks, and dark promontories faded, till thewhole disappeared behind a headland and lighthouseof the Michigan shore.Lake Huron was squally, as usual. Little remarkablehappened while we traversed it. We enjoyedthe lake trout. We occasionally saw thefaint outline of the Capitoline Islands and Canada.We saw a sunset which looked very likethe general conflagration having begun : the wholewestern sky and water being as if of red flame andmolten lead. This was succeeded by paler fires.A yellow planet sank into the heaving waters tothe south ; and the northern lights opened like asilver wheat-sheaf, and spread themselves half overthe sky. It is luxury to sail on Lake Huron, andwatch the northern lights.On the 7th we were only twenty miles from20 ECONOMY.the river St. Clair : but the wind was " rightahead," and we did not reach the mouth of theriver till the evening of the 8th. The approachand entrance kept us all in a state of high excitement,from the captain down to Charley. On theafternoon of the 8th, Fort Gratiot and the narrowmouth of the St. Clair, became visible. Our scopefor tacking grew narrower, every turn. The captaindid not come to dinner ; he kept the lead goingincessantly. Two vessels were trying with us forthe mouth of the river. The American schoonergot in first, from being the smallest. The Britishvessel and ours contested the point stoutly for along while, sweeping round and crossing Bach other,much as if they were dancing a minuet. A squallcame, and broke one of our chains, and our rivalbeat us. In the midst of the struggle, we couldnot but observe that the sky was black as night towindward; and that the captain cast momentaryglances thither, as if calculating how soon he mustmake all tight for the storm. The British vesselwas seen to have come to an anchor. Our sailswere all taken in, our anchor dropped, and a grimsilence prevailed. The waters were flat as iceabout the ship. The next moment, the sky-organbegan to blow in our rigging. Fort Gratiot wasblotted out ; then the woods ; then the other ship ;then came the orderly march of the rain over theECONOMY. 21myrtle-green waters ; then the storm seized us.We could scarcely see each others' faces, exceptfor the lightning ; the ship groaned, and draggedher anchor, so that a second was dropped.In twenty minutes, the sun gilded the fort, thewoods, and the green, prairie-like, Canada shore.On the verge of this prairie, under the shelter of theforest, an immense herd of wild horses were seenscampering, and whisking their long tails. A cloudof pigeons, in countless thousands, was shadowingalternately the forests, the lake, and the prairie ;and an extensive encampment of wild Indians wasrevealed on the Michigan shore. It was a darkcurtain lifted up on a scene of wild and singularbeauty.Then we went to the anxious work of tackingagain. We seemed to be running aground oneither shore, as we approached each. Our motionswere watched by several gazers. On the Canadaside, there were men on the sands, and in a canoe,with a sail which looked twice as big as the bark.The keepers of the Gratiot light-house looked outfrom the lantern. A party of squaws, in the Indianencampment, seated on the sands, stoppedtheir work of cleaning fish, to see how we gotthrough the rapids. A majestic personage, hisarms folded in his blanket, stood on an eminencein the midst of the camp ; and behind him, on the22 ECONOMY.brow of the hill, were groups of unclothed boysand men, looking so demon-like, as even in thatscene to remind me of the great staircase in theballet of Faust. Our ship twisted round and roundin the eddies, as helplessly as a log, and stuck, atlast, with her stern within a stone's throw of theIndians. Nothing more could be done that night.We dropped anchor, and hoped the sailors wouldhave good repose after two days of tacking toachieve a progress of twenty miles. Two or threeof them went ashore, to try to get milk. Whilethey were gone, a party of settlers stood on thehigh bank, to gaze at us ; and we were sorry to seethem, even down to the little children, whiskingboughs without ceasing. This was a threat ofmosquitoes which was not to be mistaken. Whenthe sailors returned, they said we were sure tohave a good watch kept, for the mosquitoes wouldlet no one sleep. We tried to shut up our cabinfrom them ; but they were already there ; and I,for one, was answerable for many murders beforeI closed my eyes. In the twilight, I observedsomething stirring on the high bank ; and on lookingclosely, saw a party of Indians, stepping along,in single file, under the shadow of the wood. Theirsimplest acts are characteristic ; and, in their wildstate, I never saw them without thinking of ghostsor demons.ECONOMY. 23In the morning, I found we were floating downthe current, stern foremost, frequently swinginground in the eddies, so as to touch the one shoreor the other. There seemed to be no intermissionof settlers' houses ; all at regular distances alongthe bank. The reason of this appearance is a goodold French arrangement, by which the land is dividedinto long, narrow strips, that each lot mayhave a water frontage. We w r ere evidently returningto a well-settled country. The more comfortablehouses on the Canada side were surroundedby spacious and thriving fields: the poorer bydreary enclosures of swamp. We saw a good garden,with a white paling. Cows were being milked.Cow-bells, and the merry voices of singing children,were heard from under the clumps ; and pilesof wood for the steam-boats, and large stocks ofshingles for roofing were laid up on either hand.The Gratiot steamer puffed away under the Michiganbank. Canoes shot across in a streak oflight ; and a schooner came down the clear river,as if on the wing between the sky and the water.I watched two horsemen on the shore, for manymiles, tracing the bay pony and the white horsethrough the woody screen, and over the brooks,and along the rickety bridges. I could see thatthey were constantly chatting, and that they stoppedto exchange salutations with every one they met or24 ECONOMY.overtook. These, to be sure, were few enough. Iwas quite sorry when the twilight drew on, andhid them from me. I saw a little boy on a log,with a paddle, pushing himself off from a bank ofwild roses, and making his way in the sunshine, upthe river. It looked very pretty, and very unsafe ;but I dare say he knew best. The captain andmate were both ill to-day. The boat was sentashore for what could be had. The men madehaste, and rowed bravely ; but we were carrieddown four miles before we could " heave to," forthem to overtake us. They brought brandy forthe captain; and for us, butter just out of thechurn. The mosquitoes again drove us from thedeck, soon after dark.The next morning, the 10th, the deck was ingreat confusion. The captain was worse: themate was too ill to command; and the second mateseemed to be more efficient in swearing, and gettingthe men to swear, than at anything else. Afterbreakfast, there was a search made after a pilferer,who had abstracted certain small articles from ourcabin ; among which was Charley's maple-sugarbasket, which had been seen in the wheel-house,with a tea-spoon in it. This seemed to point outone of the juniors in the forecastle as the offender;the steward, however, offered to clear himself by-takingan oath, " on a bible as big as the ship,"ECONOMY. 25that he knew nothing of the matter. As we didnot happen to have such a bible on board, we couldnot avail ourselves of his offer, A comb and toothbrush,which had been missing, were found, restoredto their proper places : but Charley's pretty basketwas seen no more.It was a comfortless day. We seemed withineasy reach of Detroit ; but the little wind we hadwas dead ahead ; the sun was hot ; the mosquitoesabounded ; the captain was downcast, and the passengerscross. There was some amusement, however.Dr. F. went ashore, and brought us milk, ofwhich we each had a draught before it turned sour.He saw on shore a sight which is but too common.An hotel-keeper let an Indian get drunk ; and thenmade a quarrel between him and another, for selfishpurposes. The whites seem to have neither honournor mercy towards the red men.A canoe full of Indians, two men and four children,came alongside, this afternoon, to offer totraffic. They had no clothing but a coarse shirteach. The smallest child had enormous ear-ornamentsof blue and white beads. They wereclosely packed in their canoe, which rockedwith every motion. They sold two large basketsfor a quarter dollar and two loaves of bread.Their faces were intelligent, and far from solemn.The children look merry, as childrenVOL. II. C26 ECONOMY.should. I saw others fishing afar off, till long afterdark. A dusky figure stood, in a splendid attitude,at the bow of a canoe, and now paddled with oneend of his long lance, now struck at a fish with theother. He speared his prey directly through themiddle ; and succeeded but seldom. At dark, apine torch was held over the water; and by itsblaze, I could still see something of his operations.The groaning of our ship's timbers told us, beforewe rose, that we were in rapid motion. The windwas fair ; and we were likely to reach Detroit, fortymiles, to dinner. Lake St. Clair, with its placidwaters and low shores, presents nothing to look at.The captain was very ill, and unable to leave hisberth. No one on board knew the channel of theDetroit river but himself; and, from the time weentered it, the lead was kept going. When wewere within four miles of Detroit, hungry, hot,tired of the disordered ship, and thinking of friends,breezes, and a good dinner at the city, we wentaground, grinding, grinding, till the ship trembledin every timber. The water was so shallowthat one might have touched the gravel on eitherside with a walking-stick. There was no hope ofour being got off speedily. The cook applied himselfto chopping wood, in order to lighting a fire,in order to baking some bread, in order to give usECONOMY. 27something to eat ; for not a scrap of meat, or anounce of biscuit, was left on board.It occurred to me that our party might reach thecity, either by paying high for one of the ship'sboats, or by getting the mate to hail one of theschooners that were in the river. The boats couldnot be spared. The mate hoisted a signal for aschooner ; and one came alongside, very fully ladenwith shingles. Fifteen of us, passengers, with ourluggage, were piled on the top of the cargo, andsailed gently up to the city. The captain was tooill, and the mate too full of vexation, to bid us farewell;and thus we left our poor ship. We wereglad, however, to pass her in the river, the nextday, and to find that she had been got off the shoalbefore night.As we drew near, Charley, in all good faith,hung out his little handkerchief to show the peopleof Detroit that we were come back. They did notseem to know us, however. " What !" cried somemen on a raft, to the master of our schooner,have you been robbing a steam-boat?" " No,"replied the master, gravely ; " it is a boat that hasgone to the bottom in the lakes." We expectedthat some stupendous alarm would arise out of this.When we reached New York, a fortnight after, wefound that our friends there had been made uneasyby the news that a steam-boat had sunk on thec228 ECONOMY.Lakes, and that eight hundred passengers weredrowned. Catastrophes grow as fast as other thingsin America.Though our friends did not happen to see Charley'spocket-handkerchief from the river, they weresoon about us, congratulating us on having madethe circuit of the Lakes. It was indeed matter ofcongratulation.I have now given sketches of some of the mostremarkable parts of the country, hoping that a prettydistinct idea might thus be afforded of their primaryresources, and of the modes of life of their inhabitants.I have said nothing of the towns, in thisconnexion; town-life in America having nothingvery peculiar about it, viewed in the way of generalsurvey. The several departments of industry willnow be particularly considered.CHAPTER I.AGRICULTURE.Plus un peuple nombreux se reproche, moins le gouvernementpeut usurper sur le Souverain. Advantage d'un gouvernementtyrannique est done en ceci, d'agir a grandes distances. Asaide des points d'appui qu'il se donne, sa force augmente au loin,comme celle des levies. Celle du peuple, au contraire, n'agitque concentred : elle s'evapore et se perd en attendant, commeeffet de la poudre sparse a terre, et qui ne prend feu que graina grain. Les pays les moins peuples sont ainsi les plus propresa la tyrannie. Les betes forces ne pregnant que dans lesdeserts."Rousseau.THE pride and delight of Americans is in theirquantity of land. I do not remember meeting withone to whom it had occurred that they had toomuch. Among the many complaints of the minority,this was never one. I saw a gentleman strike hisfist on the table in an agony at the country being soconfoundedly prosperous :" I heard lamentations30 AGRICULTURE.over the spirit of speculation; the migration ofyoung men to the back country; the fluctuatingstate of society from the incessant movement westwards; the immigration of labourers from Europe ;and the ignorance of the sparse population. Allthese grievances I heard perpetually complained of;but in the same breath I was told in triumph of therapid sales of land ; of the glorious additions whichhad been made by the acquisition of Louisiana andFlorida, and of the probable gain of Texas. Landwas spoken of as the unfailing resource againstover manufacture ; the great wealth of the nation ;the grand security of every man in it.On this head, the two political parties seem to bemore agreed than on any other. The federalistsare the great patrons of commerce ; but they areasproud of the national lands as the broadest ofthe democrats. The democrats, however, may beregarded as the patrons of agriculture, out of theslave States. There seems to be a natural relationbetween the independence of property and occupationenjoyed by the agriculturist, and his watchfulnessover State Rights and the political importanceof individuals. The simplicity of country life, too,appears more congenial with the workings of democraticinstitutions, than the complex arrangementsof commerce and manufactures.The possession of land is the aim of all action,AGRICULTURE. 31generally speaking, and the cure for all social evils,among men in the United States. If a man is disappointedin politics or love, he goes and buys land.If he disgraces himself, he betakes himself to a lot inthe west If the demand for any article of manufactureslackens, the operatives drop into the unsettledlands. If a citizen's neighbours rise abovehim in the towns, he betakes himself where he canbe monarch of all he surveys. An artisan works,that he may die on land of his own. He is frugal,that he may enable his son to be a landowner.Farmers' daughters go into factories that they mayclear off the mortgage from their fathers' farms ;that they may be independent landowners again.All this is natural enough in a country colonisedfrom an old one, where land is so restricted inquantity as to be apparently the same thing aswealth. It is natural enough in a young republic,where independence is of the highest political value.It is natural enough in a country where politicaleconomy has never been taught by its only effectualpropounder social adversity. And, finally,it falls out well for the old world, in prospect ofthe time when the new world must be its granary.The democratic party are fond of saying that theUnited States are intended to be an agriculturalcountry. It seems to me that they are intended tobe everything. The Niagara basin, the Mississippi32 AGRICULTURE.valley, and the South, will be able to furnish thetrading world with agricultural products for ever,for aught we can see. But it is clear that thereare other parts of the country which must haverecourse to manufactures and commerce.The first settlers in New England got land, andthought themselves rich. Their descendants havegone on to do the same ; and they now find themselvespoor. With the exception of some Southerners,ruined by slavery, who cannot live withintheir incomes, I met with no class in the UnitedStates so anxious about the means of living as thefarmers of New England. In the seventeenth century,curious purchases of land were made, andthe fathers were wealthy. In those days, a certainfarmer Dexter bought the promontory of Galant,which stretches out into Massachusetts Bay, ofBlack Willed, an Indian chief, for a suit of clothes ;the part of the promontory called Great Galantmeasuring a mile and a half in circuit. Others,who held land in similar or larger quantities, dividedit equally among their children, whose portionshad not been subdivided below the point ofcomfort, when the great west on the one hand, andthe commerce of the seas on the other, opened newresources. From this time, the consolidation ofestates has gone on, nearly as fast as the previousdivision. The members of a family dispose of theirAGRICULTURE. 33portions of land to one, and go to seek betterfortunes elsewhere than the rocky soil of NewEngland can afford. Still, while the populationof Massachusetts is scarcely above half that ofLondon, its number of landowners is greater thanthat of all England.The Massachusetts farmers were the first to decline; but now the comparative adversity of agriculturehas extended even into Vermont. A fewyears ago, lenders of money into Vermont receivedthirty per cent, interest from farmers : now theyare glad to get six per cent. ; and this does not arisefrom the farmers having saved capital of their own.They have but little property besides their land.Their daughters, and even their sons, resort to domesticservice in Boston for a living. Boston usedto be supplied from Vermont with fowls, butter, andeggs : but the supply has nearly ceased. This ispartly owing to an increased attention to the growthof wool for the manufacturers ; but partly also tothe decrease of capital and enterprise among thefarmers,In Massachusetts the farmers have so little propertybesides their land, that they are obliged tomortgage when they want to settle a son or daughter,or make up for a deficient crop. The great InsuranceCompany at Boston is the formidable creditorto many. This Company will not wait a day forc 534 AGRICULTURE.the interest If it is not ready, loss or ruin ensues.Many circumstances are now unfavourable to theold-fashioned Massachusetts farmer. Domesticmanufactures, which used to employ the daughters,are no longer worth while, in the presence of thefactories. The young men, who should be thedaughters' husbands, go off to the west The ideaof domestic service is not liked. There is an expensivefamily at home, without sufficient employment; and they may be considered poor. Theseare evils which may be shaken off any day. I speakof them, not as demanding much compassion, butas indicating a change in the state of affairs ; andespecially that New England is designed to be amanufacturing and commercial region. It is alreadycommon to see agriculture joined with other employments.The farmers of the coast are, naturally,fishermen also. They bring home fish, manure theirland with the offal ; sow their seed, and go out againto fish while it is growing. Speaking is nowjoined with farming. In the long winter evenings,all the farmers' families around Lynn are busy shoe-making; and in the spring, they turn out into thefields again. The largest proportion of factorygirls too is furnished by country families.The traveller may see, by merely passing throughthe country, without asking information, how farNew England ought to be an agricultural country,Agriculture. 35if the object of its society be to secure the comfortof its members, rather than the continuance of oldcustoms. The valleys, like that of the Connecticutriver, whose soil is kept rich by annual inundations,and whose fields have no fences, gladdenthe eye of the observer. So it is with particularspots elsewhere, where, it may be remarked, thefences are of the ordinary, slovenly kind, and toomuch care does not seem to have been bestowedon the arrangements and economy of the estate.Elsewhere, may be seen stony fields, plots of thegreenest pasture, with grey rocks standing up inthe midst, and barberry bushes sprinkled all about:trim orchards, and fences on which a great deal ofspare time must have been bestowed. Instead ofthe ugly, hasty snake fence, there is a neatly builtwall, composed of the stones which had strewed thefields : sometimes the neatest fence of all ; a wall ofstones and sods, regularly laid, with a single railalong the top : sometimes a singular fence, whichwould be perfect, but for the expense of labour required;roots of trees, washed from the soil, andturned side upwards, presenting a complete ,needing no mending, and lasting thefor ever" of this world. About these farm-houses,a profusion of mignonette may be seen ; and inthe season, the rich major convolvulus, or scarletrunners, climbing up to the higher windows. The.36 AGRICULTURE.dove-cotes are well looked to. There has evidentlybeen time and thought for everything. This is allvery pretty to look at, even bewitching to thosewho do not see beneath the surface, nor know thathearts may be aching within doors about perilousmortgages, and the fate of single daughters ; but, itbeing known that such worldly anxieties do exist,it is not difficult to perceive that these are the placesin which they abide.There is, of course, a knowledge of the difficultyon the spot ; but not always a clear view of comingevents, which include a remedy. The commonestway of venting any painful sensibility on the subject,is declamation against luxury; or rather,against the desire for it in those who are supposedunable to afford it. This will do no good. If thePilgrim Fathers themselves had had luxury beforetheir eyes, they would have desired to have it ; andthey would have been right. Luxury is, in itself,a great good. Luxury is delicious fare, of anyand every kind : and He who bestowed it meant allmen to have it. The evil of luxury is in its restriction; in its being made a cause of separation betweenmen, and a means of encroachment by someon the rights of others. Frugality is a virtue onlywhen it is required by justice and charity. Luxuryis vicious only when it is obtained by injustice, andcarried on into intemperance. It is a bad thingAGRICULTURE. 37that a Massachusetts farmer should mortgage hisfarm, in order that his wife and daughters may dresslike the ladies of Boston ; but the evil is not in thedress ; it is rather in his clinging to a mode of lifewhich does not enable him to pay his debts. Thewomen desire dress, not only because it is becoming,but because they revolt from sinking, even outwardly,into a lower station of life than they onceheld : and this is more than harmless ; it is honourable.What they have to do is to make up theirminds to be consistent. They must either godown with their farm, for love of it, and the wayswhich belong to it : or they must make a betterliving in some other manner. They cannot havethe old farm and its ways, and luxury too. Nobodyhas a right to decide for them which they ought tochoose ; and declaiming against luxury will thereforedo no good. It is, however, pretty clear whichthey will choose, while luxury and manufactureare growing before their eyes; and, in that case,declaiming against luxury can do little but harm :it will only destroy sympathy between the declaimersand those who may find the cap fit.One benevolent lady strongly desires and advisesthat manufactures should be put down ; and theincreased population all sent away somewhere, thatNew England may be as primitive and sparselypeopled as in days when it was, as she supposes,38 AGRICULTURE.more virtuous than now. Whenever she can makeout what virtue is, so as to prove that New Englandwas ever more virtuous than now, her plansmay find hearers; but not till then. I mentionthese things merely to show how confirmed is thetendency of New England to manufactures, in preferenceto agriculture.There is one certain test of the permanent fitnessof any district of country for agricultural purposes ;the settlement of any large number of Germans init. The Germans give any price for good land, anduse it all. They are much smiled at by the vivaciousand enterprising Americans for their plodding,their attachment to their own methods, andthe odd direction taken by their pride.* The partof Pennsylvania where they abound is called theBoeotia of America. There is a story currentagainst them that they were seen to parade with aI might add their matter-of-fact credulity, strongly resemblingromance. As a specimen of the quizzing common with regardto the Germans, I give an anecdote. At the time when the strugglebetween Adams and Jackson was very close, a supporter ofAdams complained to Mr. W. that it was provoking that somebodybad persuaded the Germans in Pennsylvania that Mr. Adams hadmarried a daughter of George III. ; a report which would costhim all their votes. Mr. W. said, " Why do not you contradict it 1"O," replied his friend, " you know nothing of those people.They will believe everything, and unbeliever nothing. No : insteadof contradicting the report, we must allow that Adams marrieda daughter of George III. ; but add that Jackson married two."AGRICULTURE. 39banner, on which was inscribed " No schools," whenthe State legislature was about establishing a schoolsystem. On the other hand, it is certain that theyhave good German newspapers prepared amongthemselves : that their politics do them high honour,considering the very short political education theyhave had : and that they know more of politicaleconomy than their native neighbours-they showby their votes that they understand the tariff andbank questions ; and they are staunch supportersof democratic principles.Nothing can be more thriving than the settlementsof Germans, when they have once beenbrought into order. Their fields are well fenced ;their implements of the most substantial make;and their barns a real curiosity. While the familyof the farmer is living in a poor log-house, or ashabby, unpainted frame-house, the barn has allthe pains of its owner lavished upon it. I sawseveral, freshly painted with red, with eleven glasswindows, with Venetian blinds, at each end, andtwelve in front. They keep up the profitablecustoms of their country. The German women arethe only women seen in the fields and gardens inAmerica, except a very few Dutch, and the slavesin the south. The stores of pumpkins, apples, andonions in the stoup (piazza) are edifying to behold.40 AGRICULTURE.Under them sits the old dame of the house, spinningat her large wheel ; and her grand-children,all in grey homespun, look as busy as herself.The German settlers always contrive to have amarket, either by placing themselves near one, orbestirring themselves to make one. They have noidea of sitting down in a wilderness, and growingwild in it. A great many of them are market-gardenersnear the towns.*It is scarcely possible to foresee, with distinctness,the destination of the southern States, east ofthe Alleghanies, when the curse of slavery shall beremoved. Up to that period, continual deteriorationis unavoidable. Efforts are being made tocompensate for the decline of agriculture by pushingthe interests of commerce. This is well; forthe opening of every new rail-road, of every newI heard some interesting facts about the Germans in Pennsylvaniafrom Mr. Gallatin, who lived among them for some time.A fact regarding this gentleman shows what the obscurity ofcountry life in the United States may be. His estate was originallyin Virginia. By a new division, it was thrown into the backof Pennsylvania. He ceased to be heard of, for some years, in theinterval of his engaging in public affairs. During this time, anadvertisement appeared in a newspaper, asking for tidings ofone Albert Gallatin ;" and adding that if he were still living,he might, on making a certain application, hear of something tohis advantage.AGRICULTURE. 41pier, is another blow given to slavery. The agricultureof Virginia continues to decline ; and herrevenue is chiefly derived from the rearing of slavesas stock for the southern market. In the north andwest parts of this State, where there is more farmingthan planting, it has long been found that slavery isruinous; and when I passed through, in the summerof 1835, I saw scarcely any but whites, for somehundreds of miles along the road, except where aslave trader was carrying down to the south theremains that he had bought up. Unless some newresource is introduced, Virginia will be almost impoverishedwhen the traffic in slaves comes to anend ; which, I have a strong persuasion, will be thecase before very long. The Virginians themselvesare, it seems, aware of their case. I saw a factory atRichmond, worked by black labour, which wasfound, to the surprise of those who tried the experiment,to be of very good quality.The shores of the south, low and shoaly, areunfavourable to foreign commerce. The want of asufficiency of good harbours will probably impel theinhabitants of the southern States to renew theiragricultural pursuits, and merely confine themselvesto internal commerce. The depression of agricultureis only temporary, I believe. It began fromslavery, and is aggravated by the opening of therich virgin soils of the south-west. But the time42 AGRICULTURE.will come when improved methods of tillage, withthe advantage of free labour, will renew the prosperityof Virginia, and North and South Carolina.No mismanagement short of employing slaveswill account for the deterioration of the agriculturalwealth of these States. When the traveller observesthe quality of some of the land now undercultivation, he wonders how other estates couldhave been rendered so unprofitable as they are.The rich Congreve bottoms, in South Carolina, lookinexhaustible ; but some estates, once as fine, nowlie barren and deserted. I went over a plantation,near Columbia, South Carolina, where there werefour thousand acres within one fence, each acreworth fifteen hundred dollars. This land has beencropped yearly with cotton since 1794, and is nowbecoming less productive ; but it is still very fine.The cotton seed is occasionally returned to the soil ;and this is the only means of renovation used. Fourhundred negroes work this estate. We saw thefield trenched, ready for sowing. The sowing isdone by hand, thick, and afterwards thinned. I sawthe cotton elsewhere, growing like twigs. I sawalso some in pod. There are three or four pickingsof pods in a season ; of which the first gatheringis the best. Each estate has its cotton press.In the gin, the seed is separated from the cotton ;and the latter is pressed and packed for sale.AGRICULTURE. 43There seems nothing to prevent the continuanceor renovation of the growth of this product, undermore favourable circumstances. Whether the riceswamps will have to be given up, or whether theymay be tilled by free black labour, remains to beseen. The Chinese grow rice ; and so do the Italians,without the advantage of free black labour.If, in the worst case, the rice swamps should haveto be relinquished, the loss would be more than compensatedby the improvement which would takeplace in the farming districts; land too high forplanting. The western, mountainous parts of theseStates would thus become the most valuable.It was amusing to hear the praises of corn (Indiancorn) in the midst of the richest cotton, rice,and tobacco districts. The Indian looks with silentwonder upon the settler, who becomes visibly acapitalist in nine months, on the same spot wherethe red man has remained equally poor, all his life.In February, both are alike bare of all but land,and a few utensils. By the end of the next November,the white settler has his harvest of corn ;more valuable to him than gold and silver. It willprocure him many things which they could not. Aman who has corn, may have everything. He cansow his land with it ; and, for the rest, everythingeats corn, from slave to chick. Yet, in the midstof so much praise of corn, I found that it cost a44 AGRICULTURE.dollar a bushel; that every one was complainingof the expenses of living ; that, so far from muttonbeing despised, as we have been told, it was muchdesired, but not to be had ; and that milk was agreat rarity. Two of us, in travelling, asked for adraught of milk. We had each a very small ,and were charged a quarter-dollar. Thecultivation of land is as exclusively for exportableproducts, as in the West Indies, in the worst daysof their slavery ; when food, and even bricks forbuilding, were imported from England. The totalabsence of wise rural economy, under the presentsystem, opens great hope of future improvement.The forsaken plantations are not so exhausted oftheir resources as it is supposed, from their producinglittle cotton, that they must be. The desertedfields may yet be seen, some day, againfruitful in cotton, with corn-fields, pasturage, andstock, (not human,) flourishing in appropriatespots.Adversity is the best teacher of economy here, aselsewhere. In the first flush of prosperity, when aproprietor sits down on a rich virgin soil, and theprice of cotton is rising, he buys bacon and cornfor his negroes, and other provisions for his family,and devotes every rod of his land to cotton-growing.I knew of one in Alabama, who, like his neighbours,paid for his land and the maintenance ofAGRICULTURE. 45his slaves with the first crop, and had a large sumover, wherewith to buy more slaves and more land.He paid eight thousand dollars for his land, andall the expenses of the establishment, and had, atthe end of the season, eleven thousand dollars inthe bank. It was thought, by a wise friend of thisgentleman's, that it was a great injury, instead ofbenefit to his fortune, that his labourers were notfree. To use this wise man's expression, "it takestwo white men to make a black man work ;" andhe was confident that it was not necessary, on anypretence whatever, to have a single slave in Alabama.Where all the other elements of prosperity exist,as they do in that rich new State, any quality andamount of labour might be obtained, and the permanentprosperity of the country might be secured.If matters go on as they are, Alabama will in timefollow the course of the south-eastern States, andfind her production of cotton declining; and shewill have to learn a wiser husbandry by vicissitude.But matters will not go on as they are to thatpoint. Cotton-growing is advancing rapidly inother parts of the world where there is the advantageof cheap, free labour ; and the southern Statesof America will find themselves unable to withstandthe competition of rivals whom they now despise,but by the use of free labour, and of the improvedmanagement which will accompany it. There is46 AGRICULTURE.already a great importation of mules for field workfrom the higher western States. Who knows butthat in time there may be cattle-shows, (like thoseof the more prosperous rural districts of the north, )where there are now slave markets; or at leastagricultural societies, whereby the inhabitants maybeput in the way of obtaining tender " sheep'smeat," while cotton may be grown more plentifullythan even at present ?I saw at Charleston the first great overt act ofimprovement that I am aware of in South Carolina.One step has been taken upwards ; and when I sawit, I could only wish that the slaves in the neighbourhoodcould see, as clearly as a stranger could,the good it portended to them. It is nothing morethan that an enterprising gentleman has set up arice-mill, and that he avails himself to the utmostof its capabilities ; but this is made much of in thatland of small improvement; as it ought to be.The chaff is used to enrich the soil ; and the proprietorhas made lot after lot of bad land very profitablefor sale with it, and is thus growing rapidlyrich. The sweet flour, which lies between thehusk and the grain, is used for fattening cattle.The broken rice is sold cheap ; and the rest finds agood market. There are nine persons employed inthe mill, some white and some black; and manymore are busy in preparing the lots of land, and inAGRICULTURE. 47building on them. Clusters of houses have risenup around the mill.Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, present theextreme case of the fertility of the soil, the prosperityof proprietors, and the woes of slaves. I foundthe Virginians spoke with sorrow and contempt ofthe treatment of slaves in North and South Carolina: South Carolina and Georgia, of the treatmentof slaves in the richer States to the west : and, inthese last, I found the case too bad to admit of aggravation.It was in these last that the mostheart-rending disclosures were made to me by theladies, heads of families, of the state of society, andof their own intolerable sufferings in it. As I wentfurther north again, I found an improvement.There was less wealth in the hands of individuals,a better economy, more intelligent slaves, and morediscussion how to get rid of slavery. Tennesseeis, in some sort, naturally divided on the question.The eastern part of the State is hilly, and fit forfarming ; for which slave labour does not answer.The western part is used for cotton-planting; andthe planters will not yet hear of free labour. Themagnificent State of Kentucky has no other drawbackto its prosperity than slavery; and its inhabitantsare so far convinced of this that they will,no doubt, soon free themselves from it. They canesAGRICULTURE.not look across the river, and witness the prosperityof Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio, without beingaware that, with their own unequalled natural advantages,they could not be so backward as theyare, from any other cause.Kentucky is equally adapted for agriculture andcommerce. She may have ports on the rivers,along her whole northern and western boundary ;and she has already roads superior to almost anyin the United States. She is rich in stone, andmany other minerals ; in mineral waters, and in asoil of unsurpassed fertility. The State is morethickly settled than is evident to the passing traveller; and the effect will appear when more markets,or roads to existing markets, are opened. Inone small county which I visited, my host and hisbrother had farms of fifteen hundred acres each ;and there were two hundred and fifty other farmsin the county. Sometimes these farms are dividedamong the children. More commonly, all thesons but one go elsewhere to settle. In this case,the homestead is usually left to the youngest son,who is supposed likely to be the most attached tothe surviving parent.The estates of the two brothers, mentionedabove, comprising three thousand acres, werebought of the Indians for a rifle. We passedAGRICULTURE. 49a morning in surveying the one which is a grazingfarm. There is a good red-brick house for thefamily: and the slave-quarter is large. Nothingcan be more beautiful than the aspect of the estate,from the richness of its vegetation, and the drovesof fine cattle that were to be seen everywhere. Inever saw finer cattle. The owner had just refusedsixty dollars apiece for fourteen of them. Fifteenacres of the forest are left for shade; and there,and under single oaks in the cleared pasture, wereherds of horses and mules, and three donkeys ; theonly ones I saw in the United States.We passed an unshaded meadow, where the grasshad caught fire every day at eleven o'clock, thepreceding summer. This demonstrates the necessityof shade.We passed " a spontaneous rye-field." I askedwhat " spontaneous" meant here; and found that afine crop of rye had been cut the year before ; andthat the nearly equally fine one now before ushad grown up from the dropped seed,We enjoyed the thought of the abundance ofmilk here, after the dearth we had suffered in theSouth. Forty cows are milked for the use of thefamily and the negroes, and are under the care ofseven women. The proprietor declared to me thathe believed his slaves would drive him mad.VOL, II. D50 AGRICULTURE.Planters, who grow but one product, suffer muchless from the incapacity and perverse will of theirnegroes : the care of stock is quite another matter ;and for any responsible service, slaves are totallyunfit.Instead of living being cheaper on countryestates, from the necessaries of life being raised onthem, it appears to be much more expensive.This is partly owing to the prevailing pride of havingnegroes to show. One family, of four persons,of my acquaintance, in South Carolina, whose styleof living might be called homely, cannot manageto live for less than three thousand dollars a year.They have a carriage and eleven negroes. It ischeaper in Kentucky. In the towns, a family maylive in good style for two thousand five hundreddollars a year ; and for no great deal more in thecountry. A family entered upon a good house,near a town, with one hundred and twenty acres ofland, a few years ago, at a rent of three hundreddollars. They bought house and land, and broughttheir slaves, and now live, exclusive of rent andhire of servants, for two thousand dollars a year, ingreater numbers and much higher style than theSouth Carolina family.The prospects of agriculture in the States northwestof the Ohio are brilliant The stranger wholooks upon the fertile prairies of Illinois and In-AGRICULTURE. 51diana, and the rich alluvions of Ohio, feels theiniquity of the English corn laws as strongly as inthe alleys of Sheffield and Manchester. The inhumanperverseness of taxing food is there evidentin all its enormity. The world ought never to hearof a want of food, no one of the inhabitants of itscivilised portions ought ever to be without themeans of obtaining his fill, while the mighty westernvalley smiles in its fertility. If the aristocracyof England, for whom those laws were made, andby whom they are sustained, could be transportedto travel, in open wagons, the boundless prairies,and the shores of the great rivers which wouldbring down the produce, they would groan to seefrom what their petty, selfish interests had shut outthe thousands of half-starved labourers at home.If they could not be convinced of the very plaintruth, of how their own fortunes would be benefitedby allowing the supply and demand of food to taketheir natural course, they would, for the moment,wish their rent-rolls at the bottom of the sea,rather than that they should stand between thecrowd of labourers and the supply of food whichGod has offered them. The landlords of Englanddo not go and see the great western valley ; but,happily, some of the labourers of England do.Far off as that valley is, those labourers will makethemselves heard from thence, by those who have52 AGRICULTURE.driven them there; and will teach the brethrenwhom they have left behind where the blame oftheir hunger lies. Every British settler whoploughs a furrow in the prairie, helps to plough upthe foundations of the British Corn Laws.There is a prospect, not very uncertain or remote,of these prairie lands bringing relief to a yetmore suffering class than either English labourers orlandlords; the sugar-growing slaves of the south.Rumours of the progress of sugar-making from beetin France have, for some time past, been interestingmany persons in the United States ; especially capitalistsinclined to speculate, and the vigilant friendsof the slave. Information has been obtained, andsome trials made. Individuals have sown tenacres and upwards each, and manufactured sugarwith a small apparatus. The result has been encouraging; and a large manufactory was to beopened in Philadelphia on the 1st of Novemberlast. Two large joint-stock companies have beenfounded, one in New Jersey and the other in Illinois.Their proceedings have been quickened bythe frosts of several successive seasons, which haveso cut off the canes in the south, as that it cannotsupply one quarter of the domestic consumption :whereas it had previously supplied half. Some ofthe southern newspapers have recommended thesubstitution of beet for canes. However soon thisAGRICULTURE. 53may be done, the northern sugar planters, withtheir free labour, will surely overpower the southin the competition. This is on the suppositionthat beet will answer as well as canes ; a suppositionwhich will have been granted whenever thesouth begins to grow beet in preference to canes.A heavy blow would be inflicted on slavery bythe success of the beet companies. The conditionof the cane growing slaves cannot be made worsethan it is. I believe that even in the West Indiesit has never been so dreadful as at present in someparts of Louisiana. A planter stated to a sugar ^refiner in New York, that it was found the besteconomy to ivory off the stock of negroes once inseven years.The interest excited by this subject of beet-growingis very strong throughout the UnitedStates. Some result must ensue which will be aninstigation to further action. The most importantwould be the inducing in the south either the useof free labour in sugar-growing, or the surrenderof an object so fatal to decent humanity.The prettiest amateur farm I saw was that ofthe late Dr. Hosack, at Hyde Park, on the Hudson.Dr. Hosack had spared no pains to improvehis stock, and his methods of farming, as well asthe beauty of his pleasure-grounds. His merits in54 AGRICULTURE.the former departments the agricultural societiesin England are much better qualified to appreciatethan I ; and they seem to have valued his exertions ;to judge by the medals and other honourable testimonialsfrom them which he showed to me. Asfor his pleasure-grounds, little was left for the handof art to do. The natural terrace above theriver, green, sweeping, and undulating, is surpassinglybeautiful. Dr. Hosack's good taste led himto leave it alone, and to spend his pains on thegardens and conservatory behind. Of all thebeautiful country-seats on the Hudson, none can,I think, equal Hyde Park ; though many bear amore imposing appearance from the river.Though I twice traversed the western part of theState of New York, I did not see the celebratedfarm of Mr. Wadsworth ; the finest, by all accounts,in the United States. The next best thing to seeingit was hearing Mr. Wadsworth talk about it,especially of its hospitable capabilities. This onlyincreased my regret at being unable to visit it.The most remarkable order of land-owners thatI saw in the United States was that of the Shakersand the Rappites ; both holding all their propertyin common, and both enforcing celibacy. The interestwhich would be felt by the whole of societyin watching the results of a community of propertyAGRICULTURE. 55is utterly destroyed by the presence of the otherdistinction ; or rather of the ignorance and superstitionof which it is the sign.The moral and economical principles of thesesocieties ought to he most carefully distinguishedby the observer. This being done, I believe itwill be found that whatever they have peculiarlygood among them is owing to the soundness oftheir economical principles ; whatever they havethat excites compassion, is owing to the badness oftheir moral arrangements.I visited two Shaker communities in Massachusetts.The first was at Hancock, consisting ofthree hundred persons, in the neighbourhood of anotherlebanon, consisting of seven hundred persons.There are fifteen Shaker establishments orfamilies" in the United States, and their totalnumber is between fiyeaju^ six thousand. Thereis no question of their entire success, as far aswealth is concerned. A very moderate amount oflabour has secured to them in perfection all thecomforts of life that they know how to enjoy, andas much wealth besides as would command theintellectual luxuries of which they do not dream.The earth does not show more flourishing fields,gardens, and orchards, than theirs. The houses arespacious, and in all respects unexceptionable. Thefinish of every external thing testifies to their56 AGRICULTURE.wealth, both of material and leisure. The floor oftheir place of worship, (the scene of their peculiarexercises,) the roofs of their houses, their stair-carpets,the feet of their chairs, the springs of theirgates, and their spitting-boxes, for even theseneat people have spitting-boxes show a nicetywhich is rare in America. Their table fare isof the very best quality. We had depended ona luncheon among them, and were rather alarmedat the refusal we met, when we pleaded our longride and the many hours that we should have towait for refreshment, if they would not furnish uswith some. They urged, reasonably enough,that a steady rule was necessary, subject as thecommunity was to visits from the company at LebanonSprings. They did not want to makemoney by furnishing refreshments, and did not desirethe trouble. For once, however, they kindlygave way; and we were provided with deliciousbread, molasses, butter, cheese and wine; all homemade,of course. If happiness lay in bread andbutter, and such things, these people have attainedthe sternum bonum. Their store shows whatthey can produce for sale. A great variety ofsimples, of which they sell large quantities to London; linen-drapery, knitted wares, sieves, baskets,boxes, and confectionary ; palm and feather fans,pin-cushions, and other such trifles ; all these mayAGRICULTURE. 57be had in some variety, and of the best quality. Ifsuch external provision, with a great amount ofaccumulated wealth besides, is the result of cooperationand community of property among anignorant, conceited, inert society like this, whatmight not the same principles of association achieveamong a more intelligent set of people, stimulatedby education, and exhilarated by the enjoyment ofail the blessings which Providence has placedwithin the reach of man ?The wealth of the Shakers is not to be attributedto their celibacy. They are receiving aperpetual accession to their numbers from amongthe " world's people," and these accessions areusually of the most unprofitable kind. Widowswith large families of young children, are perpetuallyjoining the community, with the view of obtaininga plentiful subsistence with very moderatelabour. The increase of their numbers does notlead to the purchase of more land. They supplytheir enlarged wants by the high cultivation of theland they have long possessed ; and the superfluityof capital is so great that it is difficult to conceivewhat will be done with it by a people so nearlydead to intellectual enjoyments. If there had beenno celibacy among them, they would probably havebeen far more wealthy than they are ; the expensesof living in community being so much less, and theD 558 AGRICULTURE.produce of co-operative labour being so muchgreater than in a state of division into families.The truth of these last positions can be denied bynone who have witnessed the working of a co-operativesystem. The problem is to find the principleby which all shall be induced to labour theirshare. Any such principle being found, the wealthof the community follows of course.Whether any principle to this effect can bebrought to bear upon any large class of society inthe old world, is at present the most important dispute,perhaps, that is agitating society. It willnever now rest till it has been made matter of experiment.If a very low principle has served thepurpose, for a time at least, in the new world, thereseems much ground for expectation that a farhigher one may be found to work as well in themore complicated case of English society. Thereis, at least, every encouragement to try. Whilethere are large classes of people here whose conditioncan hardly be made worse ; while the presentsystem (if such it may be called) imposes care onthe rich, excessive anxiety on the middle classes,and desperation on the poor : while the powerfulare thus, as it were, fated to oppress ; the striversafter power to circumvent and counteract ; and thepowerless to injure, it seems only reasonable thatsome section, at least, of this warring populationAGRICULTURE. 59should make trial of the peaceful principles whichare working successfully elsewhere. The co-operativemethods of the Shakers and Rappites mightbe tried without any adoption of their spiritualpride and cruel superstition. These are so farfrom telling against the system, that they promptthe observer to remark how much has been donein spite of such obstacles.There must be something sound in the principleson which these people differ from the rest ofthe world, or they would not work at all ; but thelittle that is vital is dreadfully encumbered withthat which is dead. Like all religious persuasionsfrom which one differs, that of the Shakers appearsmore reasonable in conversation, and in their dailyactions, than on paper and at a distance. In actuallife, the absurd and peculiar recedes before thetrue and universal; but, I own, I have never witnessedmore visible absurdity than in the way oflife of the Shakers. The sound part of their principleis the same as that which has sustained alldevotees ; and with it is joined a spirit of fellowshipwhich makes them more in the right than the anchoritesand friars of old. This is all. Their spiritualpride, their insane vanity, their intellectualtorpor, their mental grossness, are melancholy towitness. Reading is discouraged among them.Their thoughts are full of the one subject of AGRICULTURE.back: with what effect, may be easily imagined.Their religious exercises are disgustingly full of it.It cannot be otherwise : for they have no other interestingsubject of thought beyond their daily routineof business; no objects in life, no wants, nohopes, no novelty of experience whatever. Theirlife is all dull work and no play.The women, in their frightful costume, closeopaque caps, and drab gowns of the last degree oftightness and scantiness, are nothing short of disgusting.They are averse to the open air and exercise; they are pallid and spiritless. They lookfar more forlorn and unnatural than the men.Their soulless stare at us, before their worship began,was almost as afflicting as that of the lowestorder of slaves ; and, when they danced, they werelike so many galvanised corpses. I had been ratherafraid of not being able to keep my countenanceduring this part of their worship; but there wasno temptation to laugh. It was too shocking forridicule. Three men stood up, shouting a monotonoustune, and dangling their crossed hands, witha pawing motion, to keep time, while the restdanced, except some old women and young children,who sat out. The men stamped, and thewomen jerked, with their arms hanging by theirsides; they described perpetually the figure of asquare ; the men and boys on one side, the womenAGRICULTURE. 61and girls on the other. There were prayers besides,and singing, and a sermon. This last wasof a better quality than usual, I understood. Itwas (of all improbable subjects) on religious liberty,and contained nothing outrageously uncommon, exceptthe proposition that the American revolutionhad drawn the last, of the teeth of the red dragon.It is not to be supposed that the children whoare carried in by their widowed, or indolent, orpoor, or superstitious parents, are always acquiescentin their destination. I saw many a brightface within the prim cap-border, which bore a prophecyof a return to the world ; and two of theboys stamped so vigorously in the dance, that it wasimpossible to imagine their feelings to be very devotional.The story of one often serves as an indexto the hearts of many. I knew of a girl who wascarried into a Shaker community by her widowedmother, and subjected early to its discipline. Itwas hateful to her. One Sunday, when she was, Ibelieve, about sixteen, she feigned illness, to avoidgoing to worship. When she believed every oneelse gone, she jumped out of a low window, and uponthe back of a pony which happened to be in the field.She rode round and round the enclosure, withoutsaddle or bridle, and then re-entered the house.She had been observed, and was duly reprimanded.She left the community in utter weariness and62 AGRICULTURE.disgust. A friend of mine, in a neighbouring village,took the girl into her service. She neversettled well in service, being too proud for the occupation; and she actually went back to the samecommunity, and is there still, for no better reasonthan the saving of her pride. Her old teachershad, it thus appeared, obtained an influence overher, notwithstanding the tyranny of their discipline ;and it had not been of a wholesome moral nature.But no more words are necessary to show howpride, and all other selfishness, must flourish in acommunity which religiously banishes all the tenderestcharities of life.The followers of Mr. Rapp are settled at Economy,on the Ohio, eighteen miles below Pittsburgh.Their number was five hundred when Iwas there ; and they owned three thousand acresof land. Much of their attention seems to be givento manufactures. They rear silkworms, and werethe earliest silk-weavers in the United States. Atmy first visit they were weaving only a flimsy kindof silk handkerchief; last summer I brought awaya piece of substantial, handsome black satin. Theyhave sheep-walks, and a large woollen manufactory.Their factory was burnt down in 1 834 ; thefire occasioning a loss of sixty thousand dollars ; amere trifle to this wealthy community. Theirvineyards, corn-fields, orchards, and gardens glad-agriculture.63den the eye. There is an abundance so much beyondtheir need that it is surprising that theywork ; except for want of something else to do. TheDutch love of flowers was visible in the plants thatwere to be seen in the windows, and the rich carnationsand other sweets that bloomed in the gardenand green-house. The whole place has asuperior air to that of either of the Shaker " families"that I saw. The women were better dressed ; morelively, less pallid; but, I fear, not much wiser. Mr.Rapp exercises an unbounded influence over hispeople. They are prevented learning any languagebut German, and are not allowed to converse withstrangers. The superintendent keeps a close watchover them in this respect. Probationers must servea year before they can be admitted : and the managersown that they dread the entrance of youngpeople, who might be " unsettled ;" that is, not sufficientlysubservient.I was curious to learn how five hundred personscould be kept in the necessary subjection by one.Mr. Rapp's means are such that his task is not verydifficult. He keeps his people ignorant ; and hemakes them vain. He preaches to them theirown superiority over the rest of the world so incessantlythat they fully believe it ; and are persuadedthat their salvation is in his hands. At firstI felt, with regard both to them and the Shakers, a64 AGRICULTURE.strong respect for the self-conquest which couldenable them to endure the singularity, the onecommunity, of its non-intercourse with strangers ;the other, of its dancing exhibitions ; but I soonfound that my respect was misplaced. One and all,they glory in the singularity. They feel no awkwardnessin it, from first to last. This vanity is thehandle by which they are worked.Mr. Rapp is now very old. His son is dead. Itremains to be seen what will become of his community,with its immense accumulation of wealth,when it has lost its dictator. It does not appearthat they can go on in their present state without adictator. They smile superciliously upon Mr.Owen's plan, as admitting " a wrong principle,"marriage. The best hope for them is that they willchange their minds on this point, admitting theeducational improvements' which will arise out ofthe change, and remaining in community with regardto property. This is the process now in actionamong the seceders from their body, settledon the opposite bank of the river, a short distancebelow Economy.These seceders were beguiled by Count Leon, astranger, who told the people a great deal that wastrue about Mr. Rapp, and a great deal that wasfalse about himself. It is a great pity that CountLeon was a swindler ; for he certainly opened theAGRICULTURE. 65eyes of the Economy people to many truths, andmight have done all that was wanted, if he had himselfbeen honest. He drew away seventy of thepeople, and instigated them to demand of Mr. Rapptheir share of the accumulated property. It wasrefused ; and a suit was instituted against Mr. Rapp,in whose name the whole is invested. The lawyerscompromised the affair, and Mr. Rapp disbursed120,000 dollars. Count Leon obtained, and abscondedwith almost the whole, and died in Texas ;the burial-place of many more such men. With theremnant of their funds, the seventy seceders purchasedland, and settled themselves opposite toBeaver, on the Ohio. They live in community, butabjuring celibacy; and have been joined by somethorough-bred Americans. It will be seen howthey prosper.Though the members of these remarkable communitiesare far from being the only agriculturistsin whom the functions of proprietor and labourerare joined, the junction is in them so peculiar as tomake them a separate class, holding a place betweenthe landowners of whom I have before spoken, andthe labourers of whom I shall have to treat.66 DISPOSAL OF LAND.SECTION I.DISPOSAL OF LAND.THE political economists of England have longwondered why the Americans have not done whatolder nations would be glad to do, if the opportunityhad not gone by ; reserved government lands,which, as it is the tendency of rent to rise, mightobviate any future increase of taxation. There aremore good reasons than one why this cannot bedone in America.The expenses of the general government are sosmall that the present difficulty is to reduce thetaxation so as to leave no more than a safe surplusrevenue in the treasury ; and there is no prospectof any increase of taxation ; as the taxpayers arelikely to grow much faster than the expenses of thegovernment.The people of the United States choose to beproprietors of land, not tenants. No one can yetforesee the time when the relation of landlord andtenant (except in regard to house property) willbe extensively established in America, More thanabillion of acres remain to be disposed of first.DISPOSAL OF LAND. 67The weightiest reason of all is that, in the UnitedStates, the people of to-day are the government ofto-day ; the people of fifty years hence will be thegovernment of fifty years hence ; and it would notsuit the people of to-day to sequestrate their propertyfor the benefit of their successors, any betterthan it would suit the people of fifty years hence tobe legislated for by those of to-day. A democraticgovernment must always be left free to be operatedupon by the will of the majority of the time being.All that the government of the day can do is toascertain what now appears to be the best principleby which to regulate the disposal of land, and thento let the demand and supply take their naturalcourse.The methods according to which the disposal ofland is carried on are as good as the methods ofgovernment almost invariably are in America. Thedeficiency is in the knowledge of the relation whichland bears to other capital and to labour.* A fewclear-headed men have foreseen the evil of so greata dispersion of the people as has taken place, andhave consistently advocated a higher price being setupon land than that at which it is at present sold.Such men are now convinced that evils which seemI need hardly mention that I read " England and America"before I set out on my travels. It will appear that I am underobligations to that valuable work for much guidance.68 DISPOSAL OF LAND.to bear no more relation to the price of land thanthe fall of an apple to the motions of the planets,are attributable to the reduction in the price of governmentlots: that much political blundering, andreligious animosity ; much of the illegal violence,and much of the popular apathy on the slave question,which have disgraced the country, are owing tothe public lands being sold at a minimum price ofa dollar and a-quarter per acre. Many excellentleaders of the democratic party think the people atlarge less fit to govern themselves wisely than theywere five-and-twenty years ago. This seems to meimprobable; but I believe there is no doubt thatthe dispersion has hitherto been too great ; andthat the intellectual and moral, and, of course,the political condition of the people has therebysuffered.The price of the public lands was formerly twodollars per acre, with credit. It was found to be abad plan for the constituents of a government to beits debtors ; and there was a reduction of the priceto a dollar and a quarter, without credit. In fortyyears, above forty millions of acres have been sold.The government cannot arbitrarily raise the price.If any check is given to the process of dispersion, itmust arise from the people perceiving the true stateof their own case, and acting accordingly.Some circumstances seem at present to favour theDISPOSAL OF LAND. 69process of enlightenment ; others are adverse to it.Those which are favourable are, the high prosperityof manufactures and commerce, the essentialrequisite of which is the concentration of labourers :the increasing immigration of labourers from Europe,and the happy experience which they forceupon the back settler of the advantage of an increasedproportion of labour to land ; and the approachingcrisis of the slavery question ; when every one willsee the necessity of measures which will keep theslaves where they are. Of the extraordinary, andI must think, often wilful error of taking for grantedthat all the slaves must be removed, in order tothe abolition of slavery, I shall have to speak elsewhere.The circumstances unfavourable to an understandingof the true state of the case about the disposalof land are, the deep-rooted persuasion thatland itself is the most valuable wealth, in all places,and under all circumstances : and the complicationof interests connected with the late acquisition ofLouisiana and Florida, and the present usurpationof Texas.Louisiana was obtained from the French, not onaccount of the fertile new land which it comprehended,but because it was essential to the veryexistence of the United States that the mouth ofthe Mississippi should not be in the possession of70 DISPOSAL OF LAND.another people. The Americans obtained themouth of the Mississippi ; and with it, unfortunately,large tracts of the richest virgin soil, on whichslavery started into new life, and on which " theperspiration of the eastern States" (as I have heardthe settlers of the west called) rested, and grewbarbarous while they grew rich. A fact has latelytranspired in the northern States which was alreadywell known in the south, that the purchase ofFlorida was effected for the sake of the slaveholders.It is now known that the President wasoverwhelmed with letters from slave-owners, complainingthat Florida was the refuge of their runaways; and demanding that this retreat should beput within their power. Florida was purchased.Many and great evils have already arisen out of itsacquisition. To cover these, and blind the peopleto the particular and iniquitous interests engagedin the affair, the sordid faction benefited raises aperpetual boast in the ears of the people abouttheir gain of new territory, and the glory and profitof having added so many square miles to their alreadyvast possessions.In the eyes of those of the people who donot yet see the whole case, the only evil whichhas arisen out of the possession of Florida, isthe Seminole warfare. They breathe an intensehatred against the Seminole Indians; andDISPOSAL OF LAND. 71many fine young men have gone down into Florida,and lost their lives in battle, without being awarethat they were fighting for oppressors against theoppressed. Probably few of the United Statestroops who fell in the late Seminole war knew howthe strife arose. According to the laws of theslave States, the children of the slaves follow thefortunes of the mother. It will be seen, at a glance,what consequences follow from this ; how it operatesas a premium upon licentiousness amongwhite men ; how it prevents any but mock marriagesamong slaves ; and also what effect it musthave upon any Indians with whom slave womenhave taken refuge. The late Seminole war aroseout of this law. The escaped slaves had intermarriedwith the Indians. The masters claimed thechildren. The Seminole fathers would not deliverthem up. Force was used to tear the children fromtheir parents' arms, and the Indians began theirdesperate, but very natural work of extermination.They have carried on the war with eminent success,St. Augustine, the capital, being now the only placein Florida where the whites can set their foot. Ofcourse, the poor Indians will ultimately succumb,however long they may maintain the struggle : but,before that, the American people may possiblyhave learned enough of the facts of the case tosilence those who boast of the acquisition of Florida,as an increase of the national glory.72 DISPOSAL OF LAND.It would be a happy thing for them if they shouldknow all soon enough to direct their national reprobationupon the Texan adventurers, and wash theirhands of the iniquity of that business. This wouldsoon be done, if they could look upon the wholeaffair from a distance, and see how the fair fame oftheir country is compromised by the avarice andcraft of a faction. The probity of their people, theirmagnanimity in money matters, have always beenconspicuous, from the time of the cession of theirlands by the States to the General Government,till now : and, now they seem in danger of forfeitingtheir high character through the art of the few,and the ignorance of the many. The few are obtainingtheir end by flattering the passion of themany for new territory, as well as by engaging theirbest feelings on behalf of those who are supposed tobe fighting for their rights against oppressors.There is yet hope. The knowledge of the realstate of the case is spreading ; and, if only time canbe gained, the Americans will yet be saved fromthe eternal disgrace of adding Texas to their honourableUnion.The brief account which I shall give of what isprematurely called the acquisition of Texas, 'vsgrounded partly on historical facts, open to theknowledge of all ; and partly on what I had the opportunityof learning at New Orleans, from someDISPOSAL OF LAND. 73leaders and agents in the Texan' cause, who didwhat they could to enlist my judgment and sympathieson behalf of their party. I went in entireignorance of the whole matter. My first knowledgeof it was derived from the persons above-mentioned,whose objects were to obtain the good-will of suchEnglish as they could win over ; to have their affairswell spoken of in London; and to get the tide ofrespectable English emigration turned in their direction.With me they did not succeed : with someothers they did. Several English are already buriedin Texas ; and there are others whose repentancethat they ever were beguiled into aiding such acause will be far worse than death. The more Iheard of the case from the lips of its advocates, theworse I thought of it : and my reprobation of thewhole scheme has grown with every fact which hascome out since.Texas, late a province of Mexico, and then oneof its confederated States, lies adjacent to Louisiana.The old Spanish government seem to have hadsome foresight as to what might happen, to judgeby the jealousy with which they guarded this partof their country from intrusion by the Americans.The Spanish Captain-general of the internal provinces,Don Nemesis Salted, used to say that hewould, if he could, stop the birds from flying overthe boundary between Texas and the United States.74 DISPOSAL OF LAND.Prior to 1820, however, a few adventurers, chieflyIndian traders, had dropped over the boundary line,and remained unmolested in the eastern corner ofTexas. In 1820, Moses Austin, of Missouri, wasprivileged by the Spanish authorities to introducethree hundred orderly, industrious families, professingthe Catholic religion, as settlers into Texas.Moses Austin died ; and his son Stephen prosecutedthe scheme. Before possession of the land was obtained,the Mexican Revolution occurred; but thenew government confirmed the privilege grantedby the old one, with some modifications. The chiefof the settlers and his followers were liberally enrichedwith lands, gratis ; on the conditions of theiroccupying them ; of their professing the Catholicreligion ; and of their being obedient to the laws ofthe country.Other persons were tempted by Austin's successto apply for grants. Many obtained them, and disposedof their grants to joint stock companies; sothat Texas became the scene of much land-speculation.The companies began to be busy aboutstock" and " scrip," which they proffered as preparatorytitles to land ; and a crowd of ignorant andcredulous persons, and of gamblers, thus becamegreedy after lands which no more belonged to anyAmericans than Ireland.Leave was given to the actual settlers by theDISPOSAL OF LAND. 75Mexican Government to introduce, for ten years,duty free, all articles, not contraband, that werenecessary for their use and comfort. Under thispermission, much smuggling went on : and manyadventurers settled in Texas for the very purposeof supplying the neighbouring Indian tribes withcontraband articles. Arms and ammunition wereplentifully furnished to the savages ; and slaves tothe settlers; though slavery had been abolished inthe country, by whose laws the settlers had engagedto live.The next step was, an offer on the part of theUnited States Government to purchase Texas, inorder to incorporate it with the Union. The offerwas instantly and indignantly rejected by the Mexicans.It may seem surprising that even with thepassion for territory that the people of the UnitedStates have, they should desire to purchase Texas,while above a billion of acres of land at home werestill unoccupied. Slavery is found to be the solutionof this, as of almost every other absurdity andunpleasant mystery there. Slavery answers onlyon a virgin soil, and under certain conditions of thesupply of labour. It is destined to die out of theStates which it has impoverished, and which comemost closely into contrast with those which areflourishing under free labour. It is evidently destinedsoon to be relinquished by Missouri, Rene276 DISPOSAL OF LAND.lucky, Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware ; and notvery long afterwards, by the Carolinas, and perhapsTennessee. The proprietors of slaves have adouble purpose in acquiring new territory : to obtaina fresh field for the labour of the slaves theypossess; and, (what is at least as important,) tokeep up the equality of the representation of theslave and free States in Congress. We have beforeseen that there is a provision against the introductionof slavery into the lands north-west of the Ohio.When to the representation of the new States ofthis region, shall be joined that of the old Stateswhich relinquish slavery, the remaining slave Stateswill be in a hopeless minority in Congress, unlessa representation from new slave regions can be provided.Texas is to be obtained first ; and, if desirable,to be divided into several States ; and afterwards,the aggressions on the Mexican territorywill doubtless be repeated, as often as a new areafor slave labour is wanted ; and an accession of representation,for the support of slavery, is neededin Congress. Thus it happens that a host of land-speculators,adventurers and slave-owners have, foralong series of years, been interested in the acquisitionof Texas.On the refusal of the Mexican Government tosell Texas, the newspapers of the slave holding portionof the United States began to indicate methodsDISPOSAL OF LAND. 77of obtaining the territory, and to advocate the useof any means for so desirable an object. The agentof the United States at the Mexican capital is believedto have been instigated by his government tointrigue for the purpose which could not be obtainedby negotiation. The settlers in Texas made itknown along the Mississippi that they might soonbe strong enough to establish slavery openly, indefiance of Mexico. This brought in an accessionof slave-holding settlers, who evaded the Mexicanlaws, by calling their slaves " apprentices for ninety-nineyears." The Mexicans took alarm ; decreedin the State Legislature of Texas that no apprenticeshipshould, on any pretence, be for a longerterm than ten years ; forbade further immigrationfrom the United States ; and sent a small body oftroops to enforce the prohibition. This was in 1 829and 1830.In 1832, the Mexican troops were unfortunatelywanted near the capital, and called in from thefrontiers and colonies. The settlers shut up thecustom-houses in their part of the country, anddefied the laws as much as they pleased. Then agreat number of restless, bad spirits began to pourinto Texas from the whole of the United States ;men who had to fly from their creditors, or from thepursuit of justice. There was probably never seena more ferocious company of ruffians than Texas78 DISPOSAL OF LAND,contains at this moment. These men, who had nothingto lose, now set to work to wrench the territoryfrom the hands of the Mexicans. Theyactually proceeded, in 1833, to organize a StateGovernment ; opposed earnestly but feebly by thehonest, original settlers, who were satisfied with thecontract under which they had settled, and hadeverything to lose by the breach of it. A Conventionwas called, to prepare a State Constitution,which Stephen Austin had the audacity to carry tothe Mexican capital, to pray for its ratification bythe Mexican Congress. After some time, he wascommitted to prison on a charge of treasonable conspiracy.He was still in prison when I was at NewOrleans, in May, 1835; and no one of the personswho conversed with me on Texan affairs alluded tothe fact. They spoke of him as if living and actingamong the settlers. He wrote to the colonists fromhis prison, advising strict obedience to the Mexicanlaws ; and, finally, gave his promise to thegovernment to promote order in the colonies ; andwas dismissed, by the clemency of the administration,without further punishment than an imprisonmentof nearly two years.The wilder adventurers among the settlers had-chafed at his advice, but found it necessary to bequiet for a time. The Mexican government puttoo much trust in them on this account, and re-DISPOSAL OF LAND. 79stored, during Austin's imprisonment, the freedomof immigration, on the old conditions. The libertywas again shamelessly abused. Slaves were importedfrom Africa, via Cuba, and illegal land speculationswere carried on with more vigour thanever. Troops were again sent from the capital tore-open the custom-houses, and enforce their regulations.But it was now too late.It had long been a settled agreement betweenthe Texan adventurers and many slave-holders ofthe south, that if slavery could no otherwise beperpetuated in Texas, it should be done by theseizure of that province ; all possible aid beinggiven by the residents in the United States, whowere a party to the agreement, This was avowedby the adventurers in Texas ; and the avowal hasbeen justified by the subscriptions of money, arms,and stores, which have been sent through NewOrleans ; the companies of volunteers that havegiven their strength to the bad cause ; and theefforts of members of Congress from the south tohurry on the recognition of the independence ofTexas by the United States Government. It waswith shame and grief that I heard, while I was inNew York, last spring, of the public meeting there,which had been got up by men who should haveput the influence of their names to a better use,a public meeting in behalf of the Texan adverseDISPOSAL OF LAND.turners, where high-sounding common-places hadbeen played off about patriotism, fighting for thedearest rights of man, and so forth. The purposewas, I believe, answered for the time. The priceof stock rose; and subscriptions were obtained.The Texan cause was then in the lowest state ofdepression. It soon revived, in consequence of anunfortunate defeat of the Mexicans, and the captureof the President of their republic, Santa Anna.This, again, was made to serve as the occasion ofa public dinner at New York, when some eminentmembers of Congress were passing through, to theSprings, in the summer. The time will come whenthose gentlemen will look back upon their speechesat that dinner as among the deeds which, dying,they would most wish to blot. By this time, however,the true character of the struggle was beginningto be extensively recognised : and, day byday, the people of the United States have beensince awakening to the knowledge of how theyhave been cheated in having their best sympathiescalled forth in behalf of the worst of causes. Thegreat fear is, lest this should prove to be too late ;lest, the United States having furnished the meansby which the usurpation of Texas has been achieved,the people of the Union should be persuaded thatthey must follow their common, and otherwise fairrule, of acknowledging the independence of allDISPOSAL OF LAND. 81States that are de facto independent, withouthaving anything to do with the question de jure.What has been the national conduct of the UnitedStates on this great question ? The governmenthas been very nearly impartial. It must be allowedthat factions and individuals were already doing somuch that, if the government wished all possiblesuccess to the Texans, it could hardly do betterthan be quiet while they were receiving the aid ofits constituents. While the theft of Texas has beenachieved, (if it be achieved,) by United Statesmen,money and arms, the general government hasbeen officially regarding it as ostensibly and actuallya foreign affair. However much may be true ofthe general belief in the interest of its members inthe success of the Texan aggression, the governmenthas preserved a cool and guarded tonethroughout ; and the only act that I know of forwhich it can be blamed is for not removing GeneralGaines from his command on the frontier, on hismanifestation of partisanship on the Texan side.General Gaines was ordered to protect the settlerson the south-western frontier, who might be indanger from the Mexicans, and from the fierceIndians who were engaged on the Mexican side ofthe quarrel. General Gaines wrote to head quartersof his intentions of crossing, to attack theE 582 DISPOSAL OF LAND.Mexicans, not only the inner bounds of the UnitedStates territory, but the disputed boundary, claimedby the United States, and disallowed by Mexico.Immediate orders were despatched to him to do nosuch thing ; to confine himself, except in a strongemergency, to the inner boundary ; and on no accountwhatever to cross the disputed line. Thiswas not enough. An officer who had shown himselfso indisposed to the neutrality professed byhis government, should have been sent where hecould indulge his partialities with less hazard to thenational honour.Some senators from the south pressed, last session,with indecent haste, for the recognition ofthe independence of Texas. The speech of Ex-presidentAdams remains as an eternal rebuke tosuch.* This speech was the most remarkable individualact of the session ; and no session hasbeen distinguished by one more honourable. Therewas no attempt at a reply to it, in or out of eitherHouse. Mr. Adams left no resource to the advocatesof the Texan cause but abuse of himself:the philosophy of which he, no doubt, understoodas well as other people. Various public men, invarious public assemblies, have declared their desirefor the success of the Texans ; and have joinedSee Appendix A.DISPOSAL OF LAND. 83with this the avowal that the value of slaves willrise fifty per cent., as soon as the independence ofTexas is acknowledged.The war is not yet over. The vicissitudes havebeen so great, each party has appeared at timesin so hopeless a condition, that the friends of Americanhonour, and the foes of slavery, do not yetdespair of the ultimate expulsion of the aggressors,and the restoration of Texas to Mexico. If thesehopes must be surrendered, if slavery is to be reestablishedon a constitutional basis, in a vast territorywhere it had been actually abolished, if anew impulse is thus to be given to the traffic innative Africans,* if the fair fame of the Anglo-theTexans pretend to deny that the slave-trade will receive,or is receiving, an impulse from them. The case is this. In theTexan constitution, the importation of slaves, except from theUnited States, is declared piracy. A most wealthy slave-owner ofLouisiana told me, in 1835, that the annual importation of nativeAfricans (by smuggling) was from thirteen thousand to fifteenthousand. This has much increased since. As long as there is amarket for slaves, there will be the slave-trade, though there werea preventive cruiser to every mile of the ocean.An official gentleman, from the British West Indies, informedme that much mischief has ensued from the withdrawing of twoor three small British schooners, which used to cruise about theislands, and were broken up on the plea of economy ; it beingsupposed that vessels so small could do no good which wouldcompensate for their expense. This is a mistake. If a slave shipsurrenders on summons, the ship and cargo are forfeited, and that84 DISPOSAL OF LAND.Americans is to be thus early, and thus deeplystained, good men must rouse themselves the moreto enlighten the ignorance through which the misfortunehas happened. They must labour to exhibitthe truth, keeping unshaken their faith in thetheory of their constitution that " the majority willbe in the right."It is much to be feared that, even if Texas wereacknowledged tomorrow to be a Mexican State,an injury would be found to have been done to theAmerican people, which it will take a long timeand much experience to repair. No pains havebeen spared to confirm the delusion, that the possessionof more and more land is the only thing tobe desired, alike by the selfish and the patriotic ;by those who would hastily build up their own fortunes,and by those who desire the aggrandisementof their country. No one mourned with me moreearnestly over this popular delusion than a memberof Congress, who has since been one of the mostvehement advocates of the Texan cause, and hasthereby done his best to foster the delusion. Heis all. If a gun is fired, in defence, the captain and crew becomethereby liable to be hanged as pirates. Of course, those who manaslave ship are ready to surrender to a cock-boat, with two meninit, rather than become liable to hanging for property in whichthey can have, at most, but a very small interest. Thus a schoonerrenders as good aid, and is as much an object of dread, in this kindof service, as a larger vessel.DISPOSAL OF LAND. 85told me that the metaphysics of society in the southafford a curious study to the observer ; and thatthey are humbling to a resident. He told me that,so far from the honour and happiness of any regionbeing supposed to lie in the pursuit of the higherobjects of life, any man would be pronouncedimbecile" who, having enough for his moderatewants, should prefer the enjoyment of his patrimony,his family relations, and intercourse withthe society in which he was brought up, to wanderingaway in pursuit of more land. He complainedthat he was heart-sick when he heard of Americanbooks : that there was no character of permanencein anything ; all was fluctuation, except the passionfor land, which, under the name of enterprise,or patriotism, or something else that was creditable,would last till his countrymen had pushed theirout-posts to the Pacific. He insisted that the onlyconsolation arose from what was to be hoped whenpioneering must, perforce, come to a stop. Hetold me of one and another of his intelligent andpleasant young neighbours, who were quitting theirhomes and civilised life, and carrying their bridesas bondwomen" into the wilderness, because fineland was cheap there. If all this be true of theyoung gentry of the south, as I believe it is, whathope is there that the delusion will not long remain86 DISPOSAL OF LAND.among those who have no other guides than Experience; that slowest of all teachers ?The people of the United States have, however,kept their eyes open to one great danger, arising fromthis love of land. They have always had in view thedisadvantage of rich men purchasing tracts largerthan they could cultivate. They saw that it wascontrary to the public interest that individualsshould be allowed to interpose a desert betweenother settlers whose welfare depends much on theirhaving means of free communication, and a peopledneighbourhood ; and that it is inconsistent with republicanmodes that overgrown fortunes shouldarise by means of an early grasping of large quantitiesof a cheap kind of property, which must inevitablybecome of the highest value in course oftime. The reduction in the price of land wouldprobably have been greater, but for the temptationwhich the cheapening would hold out to capitalists.Another reason assigned for not still further loweringthe price is, the danger of depreciating a kindof property held by the largest proportion of thepeople. This is obviously unsound; since theproperty held by this large proportion of the peopleis improved land, whose relation in value to otherkinds of property is determined by quite othercircumstances than the amount of the original pur-disposalOF LAND. 87chase-money. The number of people who sellagain unimproved land is so small as not to beworthy to enter into the account.Large grants of land have been made to schoolsand colleges. Upwards of eight millions of acreshave, I believe, been thus disposed of. Thereseems no objection to this, at the time it was done ;as there can be no doubt that grants will be cultivatedthat have such an interest hanging on theircultivation. These grants were made while therewas a national debt. Now, there is a surplus revenue; and appropriations of this kind had betterbe made henceforth from the money which hasarisen from the sale of land than in a way whichwould force more land into the market. It is tobe hoped, too, that no more recompenses for publicservice will be offered in land, like the large grantswhich were made to soldiers after the revolutionarywar. The soldiers have disposed of their landsmuch under the government price, in order to obtaina sale ; and the hurtful dispersion of settlers,and the sale of tracts too large to be well cultivated,have been thereby assisted.The great question incessantly repeated throughoutthe United States is, what is to be done withthe immense amount of land remaining unsold;and with the perpetually increasing revenue arisingfrom the sale, as it proceeds ? Various proposesDISPOSAL OF LAND.tons are afloat, none of which appear to me sowise as some which remain to be offered. Oneproposition is to divide the lands again among theStates, apportioning the amount according to therepresentation in Congress, or to the population asgiven by the last census. Besides the difficulty ofmaking the apportionment fairly, this plan wouldafford fatal inducements to a greater dispersion ofpeople than has yet taken place. It is also arguedthat no constitutional power exists by which thecession of 1787 can be reversed.Another proposition is, to let the sale of landsgo on as it does now, and divide the proceeds amongthe several States, for purposes of Education, Colonisationof the coloured race, and Internal Improvements.Under such a plan, there would beendless disputes about the amounts to be paid overto the different States. The general governmentwould have a new and dangerous function assignedto it. Besides, as much of the surplus revenue isderived from duties, it seems a shorter and morenatural method to leave off levying money that isnot wanted, than to levy it, use it, and make a distributionof other funds among the States. Thissubject will, however, come under considerationhereafter.Others propose that nothing should be done :that the lands should go on being sold according toDISPOSAL OF LAND. - 89the present demand, and the proceeds to accumulate,till some accident happens, a war, or otherexpensive adventure, to help to dissipate them.The first part of the proposition will probablystand good ; for it seems a difficult thing to raisethe price of land again : an impossible thing, tillthe people shall show that they understand thecase by demanding an increase of price : but thesecond part of the proposition cannot be accededto. It is inconsistent with the first principles ofdemocracy that large sums of money should accumulatein the hands of the general government.The accumulation must be disposed of, and thesources of revenue restrained.There are modes of advantageously disposing ofthe surplus revenue which are obvious to thosewhose economical experience is precisely the reverseof that of the people of the United States.They are not likely to be at present assented to,perhaps even to be tolerated by the inhabitants ofthe new world. Such as they are, they will bepresented in the next section.The lowest price given of late for land, that Iheard of, was a quarter-dollar per acre ; (for theseare not times when three thousand acres are to behad for a rifle; and a whole promontory for a suitof clothes ) Some good land may be still had, ata distance from roads and markets, from those who90 DISPOSAL OF LAND.want to turn their surplus land into money, for aquarter-dollar per acre. Some that I saw in NewHampshire under these circumstances has advancedin five years to a dollar and a half per acre :and some of about equal quality, about fifteenmiles nearer to a market, sold at the same time forten dollars per acre. I saw some low land, on thebanks of the river, near Pittsburg, which wouldnot sell at any price a few years ago, when saltwas brought over the mountains on pack-horses,and sold at a dollar a quart. Now salt is obtainedin any quantity by digging near this land ; and themeadow is parted into lots of ten acres each, whichsell at the rate of one thousand dollars per acre.This is, no doubt, in prospect of the salt-workswhich are destined to flourish here. The highestprice I heard of being given (unless in a similarcase in New York) was for street lots in Mobile ;one hundred and ten dollars per foot frontage.For agricultural purposes, the price of landvaries, according to its fertility, and, much more,to its vicinity to a market, in a manner which cannoteasily be specified. I think the highest price Iheard of was fifteen hundred dollars per acre.This was in the south. In the north and west, Iheard of prices varying from thirty to one hundreddollars, even in somewhat retired situations. Onething seems to be granted on all hands : that a set-disposalOF LAND. 91tier cannot fail of success, if he takes good land, inahealthy situation, at the government price. Ifhe bestows moderate pains on his lot, he may confidentlyreckon on its being worth at least doubleat the end of the year : much more, if there aregrowing probabilities of a market.The methods according to which the sales of thepublic lands in the United States are conductedare excellent. The lots are so divided as to precludeall doubt and litigation about boundaries.There is a general land-office at Washington, anda subordinate one in each district, where all businesscan be transacted with readiness and exactitude.Periodical sales are made of lands which itis desirable to bring into the market. These aredisposed of to the highest bidder. The advance ofthe population into the wilderness is thus mademore regular than it would be if there were not arendezvous in each district, where it could be ascertainedhow the settlement of the neighbouringcountry was going on ; titles are made more secure ;and less impunity is allowed to fraud.The pre-emption laws, originally designed forthe benefit of poor settlers, have been the greatestprovocative to fraud. It seemed hard that a squatter,who had settled himself on unoccupied land, anddone it nothing but good, should be turned off withoutremuneration, or compelled to purchase his92 DISPOSAL OF LAND.own improvements; and in 1830, a bill was thereforepassed, granting a pre-emption right to squatterswho had taken such possession of unsold lands.It provided that when two individuals had cultivateda quarter section of land, (one hundred andsixty acres,) each should have a pre-emption rightwith regard to half the cultivated portion : andeach also to a pre-emption of eighty acres anywhereelse in the same land district. Of course,abundance of persons took advantage of this law toget the best land very cheap. Two men, bymerely cutting down, or blazing a few trees, orcamping out" for a night or two, on a goodquarter-section, have secured it at the minimumprice. A Report to Congress states that there isreason to believe that " large companies have beenfounded, who procure affidavits of improvements tobe made, get the warrants issued upon them, andwhenever a good tract of land is ready for sale,cover it over with their floats, (warrants of the requiredhabitation,) and thus put down competition.The frauds upon the public, within the past year,(1835,) from this single source, have arisen tomany millions of dollars." Such errors in mattersof detail are sure to be corrected soon after beingdiscovered. The means will speedily be found ofshowing a due regard to the claims of squatters,without precipitating the settlement of land by un-ruralLABOUR. 93fairly reducing its price in the market. Whatevermethods may tend to lessen rather than to increasethe facilities for occupying new land, must, on thewhole, be an advantage, while the disproportionbetween land and labour is so great as it now is inthe western regions of the United States.SECTION II.RURAL LABOUR.English farmers settling in the United Statesused to be a joke to their native neighbours. TheEnglishman began with laughing, or being shocked,at the slovenly methods of cultivation employed bythe American settlers : he was next seen to lookgrave on his own account ; and ended by followingthe American plan.The American ploughs round the stumps of thetrees he has felled, and is not very careful to measurethe area he ploughs, and the seed he sows.The Englishman clears half the quantity of land,clears it very thoroughly ; ploughs deep, sowsthick, raises twice the quantity of grain on halfthe area of land, and points proudly to his crop.94 RURAL LABOUR.But the American has, meantime, fenced, cleared,and sown more land, improved his house and stock,and kept his money in his pocket. The Englishmanhas paid for the labour bestowed on his beautifulfields more than his fine crop repays him.When he has done thus for a few seasons, till hismoney is gone, he learns that he has got to a placewhere it answers to spend land to save labour ; thereverse of his experience in England ; and he soonbecomes as slovenly a farmer as the American, andbegins immediately to grow rich.It would puzzle a philosopher to compute howlong some prejudices will subsist in defiance of,not only evidence, but personal experience. Thesesame Americans, who laugh (reasonably enough)at the prejudiced English farmer, seem themselvesincapable of being convinced on a point quite asplain as that between him and themselves. Thevery ground of their triumph over him is theirknowledge of the much smaller value of land, andgreater value of labour, in America than in England: and yet, there is no one subject on which somany complaints are to be heard from every classof American society as the immigration of foreigners,The incapacity of men to recognise blessingsin disguise has been the theme of moralists in allages : but it might be expected that the Americans,in this case, would be an exception. It is wonderfulLABOUR. 95ful, to a stranger, to see how they fret and toil,and scheme and invent, to supply the deficiency ofhelp, and all the time quarrel with the one meansby which labour is brought to their door. Theimmigration of foreigners was the one complaintby which I was met in every corner of the freeStates; and I really believe I did not conversewith a dozen persons who saw the ultimate goodthrough the present apparent evil.It is not much to be wondered at that gentlemenand ladies, living in Boston and New York,and seeing, for the first time in their lives, half-nakedand squalid persons, in the street, shouldask where they come from, and fear lest theyshould infect others with their squalor, and wishthey would keep away. It is not much to be wonderedat that the managers of charitable institutionsin the maritime cities should be weary of theclaims advanced by indigent foreigners : but it issurprising that these gentlemen and ladies shouldnot learn by experience that all this ends well, andthat matters are taking their natural course. Itwould certainly be better that the emigrants shouldbe well clothed, educated, respectable people ; (exceptthat, in that case, they would probably neverarrive;) but the blame of their bad condition restselsewhere, while their arrival is, generally speaking,almost a pure benefit. Some are intemperate and96 RURAL LABOUR.profligate ; and such are, no doubt, a great injuryto the cities where they harbour; but the greaternumber show themselves decent and hardworkingenough, when put into employment. Every Americanacknowledges that few or no canals or railroadswould be in existence now, in the UnitedStates, but for the Irish labour by which they havebeen completed : and the best cultivation that is tobe seen in the land is owing to the Dutch and Germansit contains. What would housekeepers dofor domestic service without foreigners? If theAmerican ports had been barred against immigration,and the sixty thousand foreigners per annum,with all their progeny, had been excluded, wherewould now have been the public works of the UnitedStates, the agriculture, the shipping ?The most emphatic complainers of the immigrationof foreigners are those who imagine that themorals of society suffer thereby. My own convictionis that the morals of society are, on the whole,thereby much improved. It is candidly allowed,on all hands, that the passion of the Irish for theeducation of their children is a great set-off againstthe bad qualities some of them exhibit in their ownpersons ; and that the second and third generationsof Irish are among the most valuable citizens of therepublic. The immigrant Germans are more soberand respectable than the Irish ; but there is moreRURAL LABOUR, 97difficulty in improving them and their children.The Scotch are in high esteem. My own opinionis that most of the evils charged upon the immigrantsare chargeable upon the mismanagement ofthem in the ports. The atrocious corruption ofthe New York elections, where an Irishman, justlanded, and employed upon the drains, perjureshimself, and votes nine times over, is chargeable,not upon immigration, nor yet upon universal suffrage,but upon faults in the machinery of registration.Again, if the great pauper-palace, over theSchuylkill, near Philadelphia, be half full of foreigners; if it be true that an Irish woman wasseen to walk round it, and heard to observe thatshe should immediately write over for all herrelations ; the evil is chargeable upon there beinga pauper-palace, with the best of food and clothing,and no compulsion to work, in a country wherethere is far more work and wages than there arehands to labour and earn. There is in New Yorka benevolent gentleman who exercises a most usefuland effectual charity. He keeps a kind of registryoffice for the demand and supply of emigrantlabour; takes charge of the funds of such emigrantsas are fortunate enough to have any; andbefriends them in every way. He declares that hehas an average of six situations on his list readyVOL. II. F98 RURAL LABOUR.for every sober, able-bodied man and woman thatlands at New York.The bad moral consequences of a dispersion ofagricultural labour, and the good moral effects of anadequate combination, are so serious as to render itthe duty of good citizens to inform themselves fullyof the bearings of this question before they attemptto influence other minds upon it. Those who haveseen what are the morals and manners of familieswho live alone in the wilds, with no human opinionaround them, no neighbours with whom to exchangegood offices, no stimulus to mental activity,no social amusements, no church, no life, nothingbut the pursuit of the outward means of living, anyonewho has witnessed this will be ready to agreewhat a blessing it would be to such a family toshake down a shower of even poor Irish labourersaround them. To such a family no tidings oughtto be more welcome than of the arrival of ship-loadafter ship-load of immigrants at the ports, somefew of whom may wander thitherward, and byentering into a combination of labour to obtainmeans of living, open a way to the attainmentof the ends. Sixty thousand immigrants a-year !What are these spread over so many thousandsquare miles? If the country could be lookeddown upon from a balloon, some large clusters ofRURAL LABOUR. 99these would be seen detained in the cities, becausethey could not be spared into the country ; otherclusters would be seen about the canals and railroads; and a very slight sprinkling in the backcountry, where their stations would be marked bythe prosperity growing up around them.The expedients used in the country settlementsto secure a combination of labour when it is absolutelynecessary, show how eminently deficient itis. Every one has heard of the " frolic" or " bee,"by means of which the clearing of lots, theraising of houses, the harvesting of crops isachieved. Roads are made, and kept by contributionsof labour and teams, by settlers. For therest, what can be done by family labour alone is sodone, with great waste of time, material, and toil.The wonderful effects of a " frolic," in every way,should serve, in contrast with the toil and difficultyusually expended in producing small results, toincline the hearts of settlers towards immigrants,and to plan how an increase of them may be obtained.Minds are, I hope, beginning to turn in thisdirection. In New England, where there is themost combination of labour, and the poorest land, itis amusing to see the beginning of discoveries on thishead. I find, in the United States' Almanac for1835, an article on agricultural improvements, {pre-F2100 RURAL LABOUR.supposing a supply of labour as the primary requisite,) which bears all the marks of freshness and originality,of having been a discovery of the writer's.If such improvements as are possible, or eveneasy," (where there is labour at hand,) " weremade in the husbandry of this country, many andgreat advantages would be found to arise. Astwice the number of people might be supported onthe same quantity of land, all our farming townswould become twice as populous as they are likelyto be in the present state of husbandry. Therewould be, in general, but half the distance to travelto visit one's friends and acquaintances. Friendsmight oftener see and converse with each other.Half the labour would be saved in carrying thecorn to mill, and the produce to market; half thejourneying saved in attending our courts ; and halfthe expense in supporting government, and inmaking and repairing roads ; half the distancesaved in going to the smith, weaver, clothier, &c. ;half the distance saved in going to public worship,and most other meetings ; for where steeples arefour miles apart, they would be only two or three.Much time, expense and labour would, on these accounts,be saved ; and civilisation, with all the socialvirtues, would, perhaps, be proportionally promotedand increased."Before this can be done, there must be hands toRURAL LABOUR. 101do it. Steeples must remain four or fourteen milesapart, till there are beings enough in the interveningspace to draw them together. I saw, on theMississippi, a woman in a canoe, paddling up againstthe stream ; probably, as I was told, to visit aneighbour twenty or thirty miles off. The onlycomfort was that the current would bring her backfour times as quickly as she went up. What ablessing would a party of emigrant neighbours beto a woman who would row herself twenty milesagainst the stream of the Mississippi for companionship!Instead of complaining of the sixty thousandemigrants per annum, and lowering the price ofland, so as to induce dispersion, it would be wise, ifit were possible, in the people of the United Statesto bring in sixty thousand more labourers per annum,and raise the price of land. This last cannot,perhaps, be done: but why should not theother ? With a surplus revenue that they do notknow what to do with, and a scarcity of the labourwhich they do not know how to do without, whynot use the surplus funds accruing from the landsin carrying labour to the soil ?It is true, Europeans have the same passion forland as the Americans ; and such immigrants wouldleave their employers, and buy for themselves, assoon as they had earned the requisite funds : but102 RURAL LABOUR.these, again, would supply the means of bringingover more labour ; and the intermediate services ofthe labourers would be so much gained. If thearrangements were so made as to bring over sober,respectable labourers, without their being in anywaybound to servitude, (as a host of poor Germansonce were made white slaves of,) if, the landand labour being once brought together, and repaymentfrom the benefited parties being secured, (ifdesired,) things were then left to take their naturalcourse, a greater blessing could hardly befal theUnited States than such an importation of labourers.I was told, in every eastern city, that it was acommon practice with parish officers in Englandto ship off their paupers to the United States. Itook some pains to investigate the grounds of thischarge, and am convinced that it is a mistake ; thatthe accusation has arisen out of some insulated case.I was happy to be able to show my Americanfriends how the supposed surplus population of theEnglish agricultural counties has shrunk, and insome cases disappeared, under the operation of thenew Poor Law, so that, even if the charge had everbeen true, it could not long remain so. By thetime that we shall be enabled to say the same of theparishes of Ireland, the Americans will, doubtless,have discovered that they would be glad of all theRURAL LABOUR. 103labourers we had ever been able to spare ; if onlywe could send them in the form of respectable menand women, instead of squalid paupers, looking asif they were going from shore to shore, to rousethe world to an outcry against the sins and sorrowsof our economy.It will scarcely be credited by those who are notalready informed on the subject, that a propositionhas been made to send out of the country an equalnumber of persons to the amount brought into it ;ship loads of labourers going to and fro, likebuckets in a well : that this proposition has beenintroduced into Congress, and has been made thebasis of appropriations in some State legislatures :that itinerant lecturers are employed to advocatethe scheme : that it is preached from the pulpit,and subscribed for in the churches, and that in itsbehalf are enlisted members of the administration,a great number of the leading politicians, clergy,merchants, and planters, and a large proportion ofthe other citizens of the United States. It matterslittle how many or how great are the men engagedin behalf of a bad scheme, which is so unnaturalthat it cannot but fail : it matters little, as far asthe scheme itself is concerned ; but it is of incalculableconsequence as creating an obstruction. Foritself, the miserable abortion the Colonisation104 RURAL LABOUR.scheme might be passed over; for its active resultswill be nothing ; but it is necessary to refer toitin its passive character of an obstruction. It isnecessary to refer thus to it, not only as a matterof fact, but because, absurd and impracticable asthe scheme clearly is, when viewed in relation tothe whole state of affairs in America, it is not soeasy on the spot to discern its true character. Somany perplexing considerations are mixed up withit by its advocates ; so many of those advocates aremen of earnest philanthropy, and well versed in thedetails of the scheme, while blind to its generalbearing, that it is difficult to have general principlesalways in readiness to meet opposing facts ; tohelp adopting the partial views of well-meaningand thoroughly persuaded persons ; and to knowwhere to doubt, and what to disbelieve. I went toAmerica extremely doubtful about the character ofthis institution. I heard at Baltimore and Washingtonall that could be said in its favour, by personsconversant with slavery, which I had not thenseen. Mr. Madison, the President of the ColonisationSociety, gave me his favourable views of it.Mr. Clay, the Vice-president, gave me his. So didalmost every clergyman and other member of societywhom I met for some months. Much time,observation, and reflection were necessary to form ajudgment for myself, after so much prepossession,RURAL LABOUR. 105even in so clear a case as I now see this to be.Others on the spot must have the same allowanceas was necessary for me : and, if any pecuniary interestbe involved in the question, much more. But,T am firmly persuaded that any clear-headed man,shutting himself up in his closet for a day's studyof the question, or taking a voyage, so as to be ableto look back upon the entire country he has left,being careful to take in the whole of its economicalaspect, (to say nothing, at present, of the moral,)can come to no other conclusion than that thescheme of transporting the coloured population ofthe United States to the coast of Africa is absolutelyabsurd ; and, if it were not so, would be absolutelypernicious, But, in matters of economy,the pernicious and the absurd are usually identicalNo one is to be blamed for the origin of slavery.Because it is now, under conviction, wicked, it doesnot follow that it was instituted in wickedness.Those who began it, knew not what they did. Ithas been elsewhere* ably shown how slavery hasalways, and, to all appearance, unavoidably existed,in some form or other, wherever large new tracts ofland have been taken possession of by a few agriculturalsettlers. Let it be granted that negro slaverywas begun inadvertently in the West India islands,England and America.F5106 RURAL LABOUR.and continued, by an economical necessity, in thecolonies of North America.What is now the state of the case ? Slavery, of avery mild kind, has been abolished in the northernparts of the Union, where agricultural labour canbe carried on by whites, and where such employmentsbear a very reduced proportion to manufacturingand commercial occupations. Its introductioninto the north-western portions of the countryhas been prohibited by those who had had experienceof its evils. Slavery, generally of a veryaggravated character, now subsists in thirteenStates out of twenty-six, and those thirteen arethe States which grow the tobacco, rice, cottonand sugar; it being generally alleged that riceand sugar cannot be raised by white labour,while some maintain that they may. I foundfew who doubted that tobacco and cotton may begrown by white labour, with the assistance frombrute labour and machinery which would followupon the disuse of human capital. The amountof the slave population is now above two millionsand a half. It increases rapidly in the States whichhave been impoverished by slavery ; and is killedoff, but not-with equal rapidity, on the virgin soilsto which alone it is, in any degree, appropriate.It has become unquestionably inappropriate inMaryland, Delaware, Virginia, and Kentucky. Tothese I should be disposed to add Missouri, andRURAL LABOUR. 107North Carolina, and part of Tennessee and SouthCarolina. The States which have more slave labourthan their deteriorated lands require, sell it tothose which have a deficiency of labour to theirrich lands. Virginia, now in a very depressed condition,derives her chief revenue from the rearingof slaves, as stock, to be sent to Alabama, Mississippi,and Louisiana. The march of circumstancehas become too obvious to escape the attentionof the most short-sighted. No one can fail toperceive that slavery, like an army of locusts, is compelledto shift its place, by the desolation it hasmade. Its progress is southwards ; and now, havingreached the sea there, south-westwards. If therewere but an impassable barrier there, its doomwould be certain, and not very remote. This doomwas apparently sealed a while ago, by the abolitionof slavery in Mexico, and the fair chance thereseemed of Missouri and Arkansas being subjectedto a restriction of the same purport with that imposedon the new States, north-west of the Ohio.This doom has been, for the present, cancelled bythe admission of slavery into Missouri and Arkansas,and by the seizure of Texas by American citizens.The open question, however, only regardsits final limits. Its speedy abolition in many of theStates may be, and is, regarded as certain.The institution of slavery was a political anoma-108 RURAL LABOUR.ly at the time of the Revolution. It has now becomean economical one also. Nothing can preventthe generality of persons from seeing this,however blind a few, a very few persons on the spotmay be to the truth.*It has thus obviously become the interest of allto whom slavery still is, or is believed to be, a gain ;of those who hold the richest lands ; of those whorear slaves for such lands ; of all who dread change ;of all who would go quietly through life, and leaveit to a future generation to cope with their difficulty,it has become the interest of all such to turntheir own attention and that of others from thefact that the time has come when the slaves oughtto be made free labourers. They cannot put downthe fact into utter silence. Some sort of compromisemust be made with it. A tub must be thrownto the whale. A tub has been found which willalmost hold the whale.It may surprise some that I speak of those who are blind toslavery being an anomaly in economy as ' few.' Among the manyhundreds of persons in the slave States, with whom I conversedon the subject of slavery, 1 met with only one, a lady, who defendedthe institution altogether: and with perhaps four or fivewho defended it as necessary to a purpose which must be fulfilled,and could not be fulfilled otherwise. All the rest who vindicatedits present existence did so on the ground of the impossibility ofdoing it away. A very large number avowed that it was indefensiblein every point of view.RURAL LABOUR. 109It is proposed by the Colonisation Society thatfree persons of colour shall be sent to establish andconduct a civilised community on the shores ofAfrica. The variety of prospects held out by thisproposition to persons of different views is remarkable.To the imaginative, there is the picture ofthe restoration of the coloured race to their paternalsoil : to the religious, the prospect of evangelisingAfrica. Those who would serve God and Mammonare delighted at being able to work their slavesduring their own lives, and then leave them to theColonisation Society with a bequest of money,(when money must needs be left behind,) to carrythem over to Africa. Those who would be doing,in a small way, immediately, let certain of theirslaves work for wages which are to carry themover to Africa. Those who have slaves too cleveror discontented to be safe neighbours, can shipthem off to Africa. Those who are afraid of therising intelligence of their free coloured neighbours,or suffer strongly under the prejudice ofcolour, can exercise such social tyranny as shalldrive such troublesome persons to Africa, Theclergy, public lecturers, members of legislatures,religious societies, and charitable individuals, bothin the north and south, are believed to be, and believethemselves to be, labouring on behalf of slaves,when they preach, lecture, obtain appropriations,110 RURAL LABOUR.and subscribe, on behalf of the Colonisation Society.Minds and hearts are laid to rest, opiateinto a false sleep.Here are all manner of people associated forone object, which has the primary advantage ofbeing ostensibly benevolent. It has had Mr. Madisonfor its chief officer : Mr. Clay for its second.It has had the aid, for twenty years, of almost allthe presses and pulpits of the United States, andof most of their politicians, members of government,and leading professional men and merchants,and almost all the planters of twelve states, andall the missionary interest. Besides the subscriptionsarising from so many sources, there have beenlarge appropriations made by various legislatures.What is the result? Nothing. Ex nihil nihiljit.Out of a chaos of elements no orderly creation canarise but by the operation of a sound principle :and sound principle here, there is none.In twenty years, the Colonisation Society hasremoved to Africa between two and three thousandpersons ; * while the annual increase of theslave population is, by the lowest computation,sixty thousand ; and the number of free blacks isupwards of three hundred and sixty-two thousand.With the condition of the African colony, we have herenothing to do. We are now considering the Colonisation Societyin its professed relation to American slavery.RURAL LABOUR. IllThe chief officers of the Colonisation Societylook forward to being able, in a few years, to carryoff the present annual increase, and a few more ;by which time the annual increase will amount tomany times more than the Society will have carriedout from the beginning.The leading Colonisation advocates in the southobject to abolition, invariably on the ground thatthey should be left without labourers : whereas itis the Colonisation scheme which would carry awaythe labourers, and the abolition scheme whichwould leave them where they are. To say nothingof the wilfulness of this often-confuted objection,it proves that those who urge it are notin earnest in advocating Colonisation as ultimateemancipation.As far as I could learn, no leading member ofthe Colonisation Society has freed any of his slaves.Its president had sold twelve, the week before Ifirst saw him. Its vice-president is obscde by hisslaves ; but retains them all. And so it is, throughthe whole hierarchy.The avowal of a southern gentleman, " We haveour slaves, and we mean to keep them," is echoedon political occasions by the same gentlemen of theColonisation Society, who, on politic or religiousoccasions, treat of colonisation as ultimate emancipation.132 RURAL LABOUR.While labourers are flocking into other parts ofthe country, at the rate of sixty thousand per annum,and are found to be far too few for the wantsof society, the Colonisation scheme proposes tocarry out more than this number ; and fails of allits ostensible objects till it does so. A glance atthe causes of slavery, and at the present economyof the United States, shows such a scheme to beabald fiction.It alienates the attention and will of the people,(for the purposes of the few,) from the principle ofthe abolition of slavery, which would achieve anyhonest objects of the Colonisation Society, andmany more. Leaving, for the present, the moralconsideration of the case, abolition would not onlyleave the land as full of labourers as it is now, butincalculably augment the supply of labour by substitutingwilling and active service, and improvedmethods of husbandry, for the forced, inferior labour,and wasteful arrangements which are alwaysadmitted to be co-existent with slavery.The greater number of eminent Abolitionists,eminent for talents, zeal and high principle, areconverted Colonisationists.This is surely enough.It appears to me that the Colonisation Societycould never have gained any ground at all, but forthe common supposition that the blacks must goRURAL LABOUR. 113somewhere. It was a long while before I couldmake anything of this. The argument always ranthus.Unless they remain as they are, Africa isthe only place for them. It will not do to givethem a territory ; we have seen enough of that withthe Indians. We are heart-sick of territories : theblacks would all perish. Then, the climate of Canadawould not suit them : they would perish there.The Haytians will not take them in : they have ahorror of freed slaves. There is no rest for thesoles of their feet, anywhere but in Africa !"Why should they not stay where they are?'Impossible. The laws of the States forbid freednegroes to remain."At present, on account of the slaves who remain.In case of abolition, such laws would berepealed, of course : and then, why should not theblacks remain where they are ?'They could never live among the whites in astate of freedom."Why ? You are begging the question."They would die of vice and misery."Why more than the German labourers ?"They do in the free States. They are dyingout there constantly.""What makes them more vicious than otherpeople ?"114 RURAL LABOUR.The coloured people always are."You mean because their colour is the badge ofslavery ?"Yes."Then, when it is no longer so, the degradation,for aught you know, will cease."This is the circle, described by those who pity theslaves. There is another, appropriate to those whopity the masters.What is to become of the planters, without anylabourers ? They must shut up and go away ; forthey cannot stay in their houses, without any labourerson the plantations."Are the slaves to be all buried ? Or are theyto evaporate ? or what?"O, you know, they would all go away. Nothingwould make them stay when they were oncefree."They would change masters, no doubt. Butas many would remain in the area as before. Whynot?"The masters could not possibly employ them.They could never manage them, except as slaves."So you think that the masters could not havethe labourers, because they would go away : andthe labourers must go away, because the masterswould not have them."To prevent any escape by a nibble in this circle,RURAL LABOUR. 115the other is brought up round it, to prove that thereis no other place than Africa for the blacks to goto: and thus, the alternative of slavery or colonisationis supposed to be established.All action, and all conversation, on behalf of thisinstitution, bears the same character, of arguing inacircle. A magic ring seems drawn round thosewho live amidst slavery ; and it gives a circularcharacter to all they think and say and do upon thesubject. There are but few who sit within it whodistinctly see anything beyond it. If there were butany one moral giant within, who would heave a blowat it with all the force of a mighty principle, itwould be shattered to atoms in a moment ; and thewhite and black slaves it encloses would be free atonce. This will be done when more light is pouredin under the darkness which broods over it : andthe time cannot now be far off.Whenever I am particularly strongly convincedof anything, in opposition to the opinion of any ormany others, I entertain a suspicion that there ismore evidence on the other side than I see. I feltso, even on this subject of slavery, which has beenclear to English eyes for so long. I went into theslave States with this suspicion in my mind ; and Ipreserved it there as long as possible. I believethat I have heard every argument that can possiblybe adduced in vindication or palliation of slavery,116 RURAL LABOUR.under any circumstances now existing ; and I declarethat, of all displays of intellectual perversionand weakness that I have witnessed, I have metwith none so humbling and so melancholy as theadvocacy of this institution. I declare that I knowthe whole of its theory ; a declaration that I darenot make with regard to, I think, any other subjectwhatever : the result is that I believe there is nothingrational to be said in vindication or palliationof the protraction of slavery in the UnitedStates. Having made this avowal, it will not beexpected that I should fill my pages with a widesuperficies of argument which will no more bear atouch than pond-ice, on the last day of thaw. As Idisposed in my mind the opposite arguments ofslave-holders, I found that they ate one another up,like the two cats that Sheridan told of; but withoutleaving so much as an inch of tail,One mistake, perhaps, deserves notice. Restlessslave-holders, whose uneasiness has urged themto struggle in their toils, and find themselves unableto get out but by the loss of everything, (but honourand conscience,) pointed out to me the laws of theirStates, whereby the manumission of slaves is rendereddifficult or impossible to the master, remainingon the spot, and prospectively fatal to the freedslave ; pointed out to me these laws as renderingabolition impossible. To say nothing of the feeble-ruralLABOUR. 117ness of the barriers which human regulations presentto the changes urged on by the great naturallaws of society, it is a sufficient answer thatthese State laws present no obstacle to general,though they do to particular, emancipation. Theywill be cancelled or neglected by the same willwhich created them, when the occasion expires withwhich they sprang up, or which they were designedto perpetuate. The institution of slavery was notformed in accordance with them : they arose out ofthe institution. They are an offset; and, to usethe words of one of their advocates, spoken in anotherconnexion, " they will share the fate of offsets,and perish with the parent."It is obvious that all laws which encourage thedeparture of the blacks must be repealed, whentheir slavery is abolished. The one thing necessary,in the economical view of the case, is that efficientmeasures should be taken to prevent an unwise dispersionof these labourers : measures, I mean,which should in no way interfere with their personalliberty, but which should secure to themgenerally greater advantages on the spot than theycould obtain by roaming. It has been distinctlyshown that slavery originated from the difficulty ofconcentrating labour in the neighbourhood of capitalists.Where the people are few in proportion tothe land, they are apt to disperse themselves over it ;118 RURAL LABOUR.so that personal coercion has been supposed necessary,in the first instance, to secure any efficientcultivation of the land at all. Though the dangerand the supposed necessity are past, in all but therawest of the slave States, the ancient fact shouldbe so borne in mind as that what legislation thereis should tend to cause a concentration, rather thanadispersion of the labourers. Any such tendencywill be much aided by the strong local attachmentsfor which negroes are remarkable. It is not onlythat slaves dread all change, from the intellectualand moral dejection to which they are reduced; fearingeven the removal from one plantation to another,under the same master, from the constant vagueapprehension of something dreadful. It is not onlythis, (which, however, it would take them sometimeto outgrow,) but that all their race show a kind offeline attachment to places to which they are accustomed,which will be of excellent service to kindmasters when the day of emancipation comes. Forthe rest, efficient arrangements can and will doubtlessbe made to prevent their wandering furtherthan from one master to another. The abolition ofslavery must be complete and immediate : that isto say, as a man either is or is not the property ofanother, as there can be no degrees of ownership ofa human being, there must be an immediate andcomplete surrender of all claim to negro men, woeLABOUR. 119men, and children as property : but there may andwill doubtless be arrangements made to protect,guide, and teach these degraded beings, till theyhave learned what liberty is, and how to use it.Liberty to change their masters must, under certainreasonable limitations, be allowed ; the educationof their children must be enforced. Theamount of wages will be determined by naturallaws, and cannot be foreseen, further than that theymust necessarily be very ample for a long time tocome. It will probably be found desirable to fixthe price of the government lands, with a view tothe coloured people, at that amount which will bestobviate squatting, and secure the respectable settlementof some who may find their way to thewest.Suggestions of this kind excite laughter amongthe masters of slaves, who are in the habit of thinkingthat they know best what negroes are, and whatthey are capable of. I have reasons for estimatingtheir knowledge differently, and for believing thatnone know so little of the true character and capabilitiesof negroes as their owners. They mightknow more, but for the pernicious and unnaturalsecrecy about some of the most important factsconnected with slave-holding, which is inducedpartly by pride, partly by fear, partly by pecuniaryinterest. If they would do themselves and their120 RURAL LABOUR.slaves the justice of inquiring with precision whatis the state of Hayti ; what has taken place in theWest Indies ; what the emancipation really wasthere ; what its effects actually are, they would obtaina clearer view of their own prospects. So theywould, if they would communicate freely about certainfacts nearer home : not only conversing asindividuals, but removing the restrictions upon thepress by which they lose far more than they gain,both in security and fortune, to say nothing ofintelligence. Of the many families in which I enjoyedintercourse, there was, I believe, none whereI was not told of some one slave of unusual value,for talent or goodness, either in the present or aformer generation. A collection of these alone, asthey stand in my journal, would form no mean testimonyto the intellectual and moral capabilities ofnegroes : and if to these were added the tales whichI could tell, if I also were not bound under the lawsof mystery of which I have been complaining, manyhearts would beat with the desire to restore to theirhuman rights those whose fellow-sufferers havegiven ample proof of their worthiness to enjoythem. The consideration which binds me to silenceupon a rich collection of facts, full of moral beautyand promise, is regard to the safety of many whoseheroic obedience to the laws of God has broughtthem into jeopardy under the laws of slave-ruralLABOUR. 121holders, and the allies of slave-holders. Nor wouldI, by any careless revelations, throw the slightestobstacle in the way of the escape of any one of theslaves who may be about to shirk their masters, bymethods with which I happen to be acquainted.It can, however, do nothing but good to proclaimthe truth that slaves do run away in much greaternumbers than is supposed by any but those wholose them, and those who help them. By which' Imean many others besides the abolitionists parexcellence. Perhaps I might confine the knowledgeto these last ; for I believe no means exist by whichthe yearly amount of loss of this kind may be verifiedand published in the south. Everybody whohas been in America is familiar with the little newspaperpicture of a black man, hiding with his stickand bundle, which is prefixed to the advertisementsof runaways. Every traveller has probably beenstruck with the number of these which meets hiseye ; but unless he has more private means of information,he will remain unaware of the streams offugitives continually passing out of the States. Thereis much reserve about this in the south, from pride;and among those elsewhere who could tell, from farother considerations. The time will come when thewhole story, in its wonder and beauty, may be toldby some who, like myself, have seen more of thematter, from all sides, than it is easy for a native toVOL. II. G122 RURAL LABOUR.do. Suffice it, that the loss by runaways, and thegenerally useless attempts to recover them, is aheavy item in the accounts of the cotton andsugar growers of the south ; and one which is sureto become heavier till there shall be no more bondageto escape from. It is obvious that the slaveswho run away are among the best : an escape beingusually the achievement of a project early formed ;concealed, pertinaciously adhered to, and endearedby much toil and sacrifice undergone for its sake,for a long course of years. A weak mind is incapableof such a series of acts, with a unity of purpose.They are the choicest slaves who run away.Of the cases known to me, the greater number ofthe men, and some of the women, have actedthroughout upon an idea ; (called by their ownersa fancy," a very different thing ;) while somefew of the men have started off upon some suddeninfliction of cruelty; and many women onaccount of intolerable outrage, of the grossest kind.Several masters told me of leave given to theirslaves to go away, and^of the slaves refusing to availthemselves of it. If this was meant to tell in favourof slavery, it failed of its effect. The argument wastoo shallow to impose upon a child. Of course,they were the least valuable slaves to whom thispermission was given : and their declining to departproved nothing so much as the utter degradation ofRURAL LABOUR. 123human beings who could prefer receiving food andshelter from the hand of an owner to the possessionof themselves.Amidst the mass of materials which accumulatedon my hands during the process of learning from allparties their views on this question, I hardly knowwhere to turn, and what to select, that will mostbriefly and strongly show that the times have outgrownslavery. This is the point at which every factand argument issue, whatever may be the intentionof those who adduce it. The most striking, perhaps,is the treatment of the Abolitionists : a subjectto be adverted to hereafter. The insane furywhich vents itself upon the few who act upon theprinciples which the many profess, is a sign of thetimes not to be mistaken. It is always the precursorof beneficial change. Society in Americaseems to be already passing out of this stage intoone even more advanced. The cause of abolitionis spreading so rapidly through the heart of the nation; the sound part of the body politic is embracingit so actively, that no disinterested observer canfail to be persuaded that even the question of timeis brought within narrow limits. The elections will,ere long, show the will of the people that slavery beabolished in the District of Columbia. Then suchtruckling politicians, mercenary traders, cowardlyclergy, and profligate newspaper corps, as are newG 2124 RURAL LABOUR.too blind to see the coming change, will have tochoose their part ; whether to shrink out of sight, orto boast patriotically of the righteous revolutionwhich they have striven to retard, even by the applicationof the torture to both the bodies and theminds of their more clear-eyed fellow-citizens.After giving one or two testimonies to the necessityof a speedy change of system, I will confinemyself to relating a few signs of the times which Iencountered in my travels through the south.In 1782, Virginia repealed the law against manumission; and in nine years, there were ten thousandslaves freed in that State. Alarmed for theinstitution, her legislature re-enacted the law. Whathas been the consequence? Let us take the testimonyof the two leading newspapers of the capitalof Virginia, given at a time when the Virginian legislaturewas debating the subject of slavery; andwhen there was, for once, an exposure of the truthfrom those best qualified to reveal it. In 1832,the following remarks appeared in the " RichmondEnquirer."It is probable, from what we hear, that thecommittee on the coloured population will reportsome plan for getting rid of the free people of colour.But is this all that can be done ? Are wefor ever to suffer the greatest evil which canscourge our land not only to remain, but to in-RURAL LABOUR. 125crease in its dimensions ? ' We may shut our eyesand avert our faces, if we please,' (writes an eloquentSouth Carolinian, on his return from thenorth a few weeks ago,) ' but there it is, the darkand growing evil, at our doors : and meet the questionwe must at no distant day. God only knowswhat it is the part of wise men to do on that momentousand appalling subject. Of this I am verysure, that the difference nothing short of frightfulbetween all that exists on one side of the Potomac,and all on the other, is owing to that causealone. The disease is deep seated; it is at theheart's core; it is consuming, and has all alongbeen consuming, our vitals ; and I could laugh, ifI could laugh on such a subject, at the ignoranceand folly of the politician who ascribes that to anact of the government, which is the inevitable effectof the eternal laws of nature. What is to bedone ? O my God, I don't know ; but somethingmust be done.'Yes, something must be done; and it is the partof no honest man to deny it ; of no free press toaffect to conceal it When this dark population isgrowing upon us ; when every new census is butgathering its appalling numbers upon us; whenwithin a period equal to that in which this federalconstitution has been in existence, those numbers126 RURAL LABOUR,will increase to more than two millions within Virginia; when our sister States are closing theirdoors upon our blacks for sale ; and when ourwhites are moving westwardly in greater numbersthan we like to hear of; when this, the fairest landon all this continent, for soil and climate and situationcombined, might become a sort of gardenspot if it were worked by the hands of white menalone, can we, ought we to sit quietly down, foldour arms, and say to each other, well, well, thisthing will not come to the worst in our day ? Wewill leave it to our children and our grand-childrenand great-grandchildren to take care of themselves,and to brave the storm. Is this to act like wisemen? Heaven knows we are no fanatics, We detestthe madness which actuated the Amis desNoirs. But something ought to be done. Means,sure but gradual, systematic but discreet, ought tobe adopted for reducing the mass of evil which ispressing upon the south, and will still more pressupon her the longer it is put off. We ought not toshut our eyes, nor avert our faces. And though wespeak almost without a hope that the committee orthe legislature will do anything, at the present session,to meet this question, yet we say now, in theutmost sincerity of our hearts, that our wisest mencannot give too much of their attention to this subject,nor can they give it too soon."RURAL LABOUR. 127The other paper, the Richmond Whig," hadthe same time, the following :We affirm that the great mass of Virginia herselftriumphs that the slavery question has beenagitated, and reckons it glorious that the spirit ofher sons did not shrink from grappling with themonster. We affirm that, in the heaviest slave districtsof the State, thousands have hailed the discussionwith delight, and contemplate the distant,but ardently desired result, as the supreme goodwhich Providence could vouchsafe to their country."This is doubtless true. One of the signs of thetimes which struck me was the clandestine encouragementreceived by the abolitionists of the northfrom certain timid slave-holders of the south, whosend money for the support of abolition publications,and an earnest blessing. They write, " ForGod's sake go on ! We cannot take your publications; we dare not countenance you ; but we wishyou God speed ! You are our only hope." Thereis nothing to be said for the moral courage of thosewho feel and write thus, and dare not express theiropinions in the elections. Much excuse may bemade for them by those who know the horrorswhich await the expression of anti-slavery sentimentsin many parts of the south. But, on theother hand, the abolitionists are not to be blamedfor considering all slave-holders under the same128 RURAL LABOUR.point of view, as long as no improved state of opinionis manifested in the representation ; the naturalmirror of the minds of the represented.Chief Justice Marshall, a Virginian, a slave-holder,and a member of the Colonisation Society,(though regarding this society as being merely apalliative, and slavery incurable but by convulsion,)observed to a friend of mine, in the winter of 1834,that he was surprised at the British for supposingthat they could abolish slavery in their colonies byact of parliament. His friend believed it would bedone. The Chief Justice could not think thatsuch economical institutions could be done awayby legislative enactment. His friend pleaded thefact that the members of the British House ofCommons were pledged, in great numbers, to theirconstituents on the question. When it was done,the Chief Justice remarked on his having beenmistaken ; and that he rejoiced in it. He now sawhope for his beloved Virginia, which he had seensinking lower and lower among the States. Thecause, he said, was that work is disreputable in acountry where a degraded class is held to enforcedlabour.* He had seen all the young, the flowerGovernor M'Duffie's message to the legislature of South Carolinacontains the proposition that freedom can be preservedonly in societies where either work is disreputable, or there is anhereditary aristocracy, or a military despotism. He prefers thefirst, as being the most republican.RURAL LABOUR. 129of the State, who were not rich enough to remainat home in idleness, betaking themselves to otherregions, where they might work without disgrace.Now there was hope; for he considered that inthis act of the British, the decree had gone forthagainst American slavery, and its doom was sealed.There was but one sign of the times which wasamusing to me ; and that was the tumult of opinionsand prophecies offered to me on the subjectof the duration of slavery, and the mode in whichit would be at last got rid of; for I never heard ofany one but Governor M'Duffie who supposed thatit can last for ever. He declared last year, in hismessage to the legislature of South Carolina, thathe considers slavery as the corner-stone of theirrepublican liberties : and that, if he were dying,his latest prayer should be that his children's childrenshould live nowhere but amidst the institutionsof slavery. This message might have beentaken as a freak of eccentricity merely, if it hadstood alone. But a committee of the legislature,with Governor Hamilton in the chair, thought properto endorse every sentiment in it. This convertsit into an indication of the perversion ofmind commonly prevalent in a class when its distinctivepecuniary interest is in imminent peril. Iwas told, a few months prior to the appearance ofthis singular production, that though GovernorG 5130 RURAL LABOUR.M'Duffie was a great ornament to the State ofSouth Carolina, his opinions on the subject of slaverywere tiltra, and that he was left pretty nearlyalone in them. Within a year, those who told meso went, in public, all lengths with GovernorM'Duffie.I believe I might very safely and honourablygive the names of those who prophesied to me inthe way I have mentioned ; for they rather courtpublicity for their opinions, as it is natural andright that they should, as long as they are sure ofthem. But it may suffice to mention that they areall eminent men, whose attention has been stronglyfixed, for a length of years, upon the institution inquestion.A. believes that slavery is a necessary and desirablestage in civilisation : not on the score ofthe difficulty of cultivating new lands without it,but on the ground of the cultivation of the negromind and manners. He believes the Haytians tohave deteriorated since they became free. He believesthe white population destined to absorb theblack, though holding that the two races will notunite after the third mixture. His expectationis that the black and mulatto races will have disappearedin a hundred and fifty years. He has nodoubt that cotton and tobacco may be well andeasily grown by whites.RURAL LABOUR. 131B. is confident that the condition of slaves ismaterially improved, yet believes that they will dieout, and that there will be no earlier catastrophe.He looks to colonisation, however, as a means oflessening the number. This same gentleman toldme of a recent visit he had paid to a connexion ofhis own, who had a large " force," consisting chieflyof young men and women : not one child had beenborn on the estate for three years. This looks verylike dying out ; but does it go to confirm the materiallyimproved condition of the slaves ?C. allows slavery to be a great evil ; and, if itwere now non-existent, would not ordain it, if hecould. But he thinks the slaves far happier thanthey would have been at home in Africa, and considersthat the system works perfectly. He pronouncesthe slaves " the most contented, happy,industrious peasantry in the world." He believesthis virtue and content would disappear if they weretaught anything whatever ; and that if they werefree, they would be, naturally and inevitably, themost vicious and wretched population ever seen.His expectation is that they will increase to sucha degree as to make free labour, " which alwayssupersedes slave labour, " necessary in its stead ;that the coloured race will wander off to new regions,and be ultimately " absorbed " by the white.He contemplates no other than this natural change,13'2 RURAL LABOUR.which he thinks cannot take place in less than acentury and a half. A year later, this gentlemantold a friend of mine that slavery cannot last abovetwenty years. They must be stringent reasonswhich have induced so great a change of opinion intwelve months.D. thinks slavery an enormous evil, but doubtswhether something as bad would notaries in its stead.He is a colonisationist, and desires that the generalgovernment should purchase the slaves, by annualappropriations, and ship them off to Africa, so asto clear the country of the coloured people in fortyor fifty years. If this is not done, a servile war,the most horrible that the world has seen, is inevitable.Yet he believes that the institution,though infinitely bad for the masters, is better forthe slaves than those of any country in Europe forits working classes. He is convinced that thetillage of all the crops could be better carried onby whites, with the assistance of cattle and implements,than by negroes.E. writes, (October 1835,) " Certain it is that ifmen of property and intelligence* in the north havethat legitimate influence which that class has here,nothing will come of this abolition excitement. Allwe have to say to them is, * Hands off!' Ourpolitical rights* are clear, and shall not be invaded.The dispute between the abolitionists and their adversaries isRURAL LABOUR. 133We know too much about slavery to be slaves ourselves.But I repeat, nothing will come of thepresent, or rather recent excitement, for alreadyit is in a great degree passed. And the time iscoming when a struggle between pauperism andproperty, or, if you choose, between labour andcapital in the north, stimulated by the spirit ofJacksonism, will occupy the people of that quarterto the exclusion of our affairs. If any external influenceis ever to affect the institution of slaveryin the south, it will not be the vulgar and ignorantalways made to turn on the point of distinction between freedomof discussion and political interference. With the views now entertainedby the south, she can never be satisfied on this head.She requires nothing short of a dead silence upon the subject ofhuman rights. This demand is made by her state governors ofthe state governors of the north. It will, of course, never begranted. The course of the abolitionists seems to themselvesclear enough ; and they act accordingly. They labour politicallyonly with regard to the District of Columbia, over which Congressholds exclusive jurisdiction. Their other endeavour is to promotethe discussion of the moral question throughout the freeStates. They use no direct means to this end in the slave States ;in the first place, because they have no power to do so ; and inthe next, because the requisite movement there is sure to followupon that in the north. It is wholly untrue that they insinuatetheir publications into the south. Their only political transgression(and who will call it a moral one?) is, helping fugitiveslaves. The line between free discussion and political interferencehas never yet been drawn to the satisfaction of both parties,and never will be.134 RURAL LABOUR.fanaticism of the northern States, intent upon acheap charity which is to be done at our expense;but that influence will be found in English literature,and the gradual operation of public opinion.Slavery, so to speak, may be evaporated ; it cannotbe drawn off. If it were, the whole land wouldbe poisoned and desolated."The best reply to this letter will be found inthe memorable speech of Mr. Preston, one of theSouth Carolina senators, delivered in Congress,last spring. It may be mentioned, by the way,that the writer of the above is mistaken in supposingthat there is at present, or impending, anyunhappy struggle in the north between pauperismand property, or labour and capital. It is all propertythere, and no pauperism, (except the verylittle that is superinduced ; ) and labour and capitalwere, perhaps, never before seen to jog on so lovinglytogether. The "cheap charity" he speaksof is the cheap charity of the first Christians, withthe addition of an equal ability and will to paydown money for the abolition of the slaves, forwhose sake the abolitionists have already shownthemselves able to bear, some, hanging ; some,scourging, and tarring and feathering ; some, privationof the means of living ; and all, the beingincessantly and deeply wounded in their social relationsand tenderest affections. Martyrdom isRURAL LABOUR. 135ever accounted a " cheap devotion," or cheapcharity," to God or man, by those who exact it ofeither religious or philanthropic principle.Mr. Preston's speech describes the spread ofabolition opinions as being rapid and inevitable.He proves the rapidity by citing the number ofrecently-formed abolition societies in the north;and the inevitableness, by exhibiting the coursewhich such convictions had run in England andFrance. He represents the case as desperate.He advises, not yielding, but the absolute exclusionof opinion on the subject, exclusion fromCongress, and exclusion from the slave States.This is well. The matter may be considered tobe given up, unless this is merely the opinion of anindividual. The proposal is about as hopeful asit would be to draw a cordon round the Capitol tokeep out the four winds ; or to build a wall up tothe pole-star to exclude the sunshine.One more sample of opinions. A gentlemanwho edits a highly-esteemed southern newspaper,expresses himself thus, " There is a wild fanaticismat work to effect the overthrow of the system,although in its fall would go down the fortunesof the south, and to a great extent those ofthe north and east ; in a word, the whole fabric ofour Union, in one awful ruin. What then oughtto be done ? What measures ought to be taken to136 RURAL LABOUR.secure the safety of our property and our lives?We answer, let us be vigilant and watchful to thelast degree over all the movements of our enemiesboth at home and abroad. Let us declare throughthe public journals of our country, that the questionof slavery is not, and shall not be open to discussion;that the system is deep-rooted amongstus, and must remain for ever ; that the very momentany private individual attempts to lectureus upon its evils and immorality, and the necessityof putting measures into operation to secure usfrom them, in the same moment his tongue shallbe cut out and cast upon the dung-hill. We arefreemen, sprung from a noble stock of freemen,able to boast as noble a line of ancestry as evergraced this earth ; we have burning in our bosomsthe spirit of freemen live in an age of enlightenedfreedom, and in a country blessed with its privilegesunder a government that has pledged itselfto protect us in the enjoyment of our peculiardomestic institutions in peace, and undisturbed.We hope for a long continuance of these high privileges,and have now to love, cherish, and defend,property, liberty, wives and children, the right tomanage our own matters in our own way, and, whatis equally dear with all the rest, the inestimableright of dying upon our own soil, around our ownfiresides, in struggling to put down all those whoRURAL LABOUR. 137may attempt to infringe, attack, or violate any ofthese sacred and inestimable privileges."If these opinions of well-prepared persons, dispersedthrough the slave States, and entrustedwith the public advocacy of their interests, do notbetoken that slavery is tottering to its fall, thereare no such things as signs of the times.The prohibition of books containing anythingagainst slavery, has proceeded to a great length.Last year, Mrs. Barbauld's works were sent backinto the north by the southern booksellers, becausethe " Evenings at Home" contain a " Dialogue betweenMaster and Slave." Miss Sedgwick's lastnovel, " The Linwoods," was treated in the sameway, on account of a single sentence about slavery.The " Tales of the Woods and Fields," and otherEnglish books, have shared the same fate. I hada letter from a southern lady, containing someregrets upon the necessity of such an exclusion ofliterature, but urging that it was a matter of principleto guard from attacks " an institution ordainedby the favour of God for the happiness of man :"and assuring me that the literary resources ofSouth Carolina were rapidly improving. So theyhad need ; for almost all the books already in existencewill have to be prohibited, if nothing condemnatoryof slavery is to be circulated. Thisattempt to nullify literature was followed up by a138 Rural LABOUR.threat to refuse permission to the mails to passthrough South Carolina: an arrangement whichwould afflict its inhabitants more than it could injureany one else.The object of all this is to keep the children inthe dark about how the institution is regardedabroad. This was evident to me at every step :and I received an express caution not to communicatemy disapprobation of slavery to the childrenof one family, who could not, their parents declare,even feel the force of my objections. One of themwas " employed, the whole afternoon, in dressingout little Nancy for an evening party ; and shesees the slaves much freer than herself." Ofcourse, the blindness of this policy will be itsspeedy destruction. It is found that the effect ofpublic opinion on the subject upon young men whovisit the northern States, is tremendous, when theybecome aware of it : as every student in the collegesof the north can bear witness. I know ofone, an heir of slaves, who declared, on readingDr. Channing's "Slavery," that if it could beproved that negroes are more than a link betweenman and brute, the rest follows of course, and hemust liberate all his. Happily, he is in the wayof evidence that negroes are actually and altogetherhuman.The students of Lane Seminary, near MincingLABOUR. 139nati, of which Dr. Beecher is the 'president, becameinterested in the subject, three or four years ago,and formed themselves into an Abolition Society,debating the question, and taking in newspapers.This was prohibited by the tutors, but perseveredin by the young men, who conceived that this wasa matter with which the professors had no right tomeddle. Banishment was decreed; and all submittedto expulsion but fourteen. Of course, eachof the dispersed young men became the nucleus ofan Abolition Society, and gained influence by persecution.It was necessary for them to providemeans to finish their education. One of them,Amos Dresser, itinerated, (as is usual in thesparsely-peopled west,) travelling in a gig, andselling Scott's Bible, to raise money for his educationalpurposes. He reached Nashville, in Tennessee; and there fell under suspicion of abolitiontreason ; his baggage being searched, and a wholeabolition newspaper, and a part of another beingfound among the packing-stuff of his stock of bibles.There was also an unsubstantiated rumour of hishaving been seen conversing with slaves. He wasbrought to trial by the Committee of Vigilance;seven elders of the presbyterian church at Nashvillebeing among his judges. After much debateas to whether he should be hanged, or flogged withmore or fewer lashes, he was condemned to receive140 RURAL LABOUR.twenty lashes, with a cow-hide, in the marketplaceof Nashville. He was immediately conductedthere, made to kneel down on the flint pavement,and punished according to his sentence ; the mayorof Nashville presiding, and the public executionerbeing the agent. He was warned to leave the citywithin twenty-four hours: but was told, by somecharitable person who had the bravery to take himin, wash his stripes, and furnish him with a disguise,that it would not be safe to remain so long.He stole away immediately, in his dreadful condition,on foot; and when his story was authenticated,had heard nothing of his horse, gig, andbibles, which he values at three hundred dollars.Let no one, on this, tremble for republican freedom.Outrages upon it, like the above, are butextremely transient signs of the times. They nomore betoken the permanent condition of the republic,than the shivering of one hour of ague exhibitsthe usual state of the human body.The other young men found educational andother assistance immediately; and a set of nobleinstitutions has grown out of their persecution.There were professors ready to help them ; and agentleman gave them a farm in Ohio, on which tobegin a manual labour college, called the OberlinInstitute. It is on a most liberal plan ; youngwomen who wish to become qualified for " ChristianRURAL LABOUR. 141teaching" being admitted; and there being noprejudice of colour. They have a sprinkling bothof Indians and of negroes. They do all the farmand house work, and as much study besides as isgood for them. Some of the young women arealready fair Hebrew and Greek scholars. In alittle while, the estate was so crowded, and thenew applications were so overpowering, that theywere glad to accept the gift of another farm. WhenI left the country, within three years from theircommencement, they had either four or five flourishinginstitutions in Ohio and Michigan, whilethe Lane Seminary drags on feebly with its arrayof tutors, and dearth of pupils. A fact so full ofvitality as this will overbear a hundred less cheeringsigns of the times. A very safe repose may befound in the will of the majority, wherever it actsamidst light and freedom.Just before I reached Mobile, two men wereburned alive there, in a slow fire, in the open air,in the presence of the gentlemen of the city generally.No word was breathed of the transaction inthe newspapers : and this is the special reason whyI cite it as a sign of the times ; of the suppressionof fact and repression of opinion which, from theimpossibility of their being long maintained, arefound immediately to precede the changes they aremeant to obviate. Some months afterwards, an142 RURAL LABOUR.obscure intimation of something of the kind havinghappened appeared in a northern newspaper; butadead silence was at the time preserved upon whatwas, in fact, the deed of a multitude. The waythat I came to know it was this. A lady of Mobilewas opening her noble and true heart to me on thehorrors and vices of the system under which she andher family were suffering in mind, body, and estate.In speaking of her duties as head of a family, she hadoccasion to mention the trouble caused by the licentiousnessof the whites, among the negro women. Itwas dreadful to hear the facts which had occurredin her own household ; and the bare imaginationof what is inflicted on the negro husbands andfathers was almost too much to be borne. I askedthe question, "Does it never enter the heads ofnegro husbands and fathers to retaliate ?" " Yes,it does." " What follows ?" " They are murdered,burned alive." And then followed the story ofwhat had lately happened. A little girl, and herstill younger brother, one day failed to return fromschool, and never were seen again. It was not tillafter all search had been relinquished, that thesevered head of the little girl was found in a brook,on the borders of a plantation. Circumstanceswere discovered that left no doubt that the murderswere committed to conceal violence which had beenoffered to the girl. Soon after, two young ladiesRURAL LABOUR. 143of the city rode in that direction, and got off theirhorses to amuse themselves. They were seizedupon by two slaves of the neighbouring plantation ;but effected their escape in safety, though withgreat difficulty. Their agitation prevented theirconcealing the fact ; and the conclusion was immediatelydrawn that these men were the murderersof the children. The gentlemen of Mobile turnedout ; seized the men ; heaped up faggots on themargin of the brook, and slowly burned them todeath. No prudish excuses for the suppression ofthis story will serve any purpose with those whohave been on the spot, any more than the outcryabout " amalgamation," raised against the abolitionistsby those who live in the deepest sinksof a licentiousness of which the foes of slavery donot dream. No deprecatory plea regarding proprietyor decency will pass for anything but hypocrisywith those who know what the laws againstthe press are in the south-west, and what are themorals of slavery in its palmy state. I charge thesilence of Mobile about this murder on its fears ;as confidently as I charge the brutality of the victimsupon its crimes.Notwithstanding the many symptoms of an unmanlyand anti-republican fear which met my observationin these regions, it was long before Icould comprehend the extent of it; especially as I144 RURAL LABOUR.heard daily that the true enthusiastic love of freedomcould exist in a republic, only in the presenceof a servile class, I am persuaded that thesoutherners verily believe this ; that they actuallyimagine their northern brethren living in an exceedinglyhumdrum way, for fear of losing theirequality. It is true that there is far too muchsubservience to opinion in the northern States :particularly in New England. There is there aself-imposed bondage w ? which must be outgrown.But this is no more like the fear which prevails inthe south than the apprehensiveness of a court-physicianis like the terrors of Tiberius Caesar.I was at the French theatre at New Orleans. Theparty with whom I went determined to stay for theafter-piece. The first scene of the after-piece wasdumb-show ; so much noise was made by one singlewhistle in the pit. The curtain was dropped, andthe piece re-commenced. The whistling continued ;and, at one movement, the whole audience rose andwent home. I was certain that there was somethingmore in this than was apparent to the observationof a stranger. I resolved to find it out, and succeeded.The band was wanted from the orchestra,to serenade a United States senator who was thenin the city; and one or two young men were resolvedto break up our amusement for the purposeof releasing the band. But why were they allowedRURAL LABOUR. 145to do this ? Why was the whole audience to submitto the pleasure of one whistler ? Why, in NewOrleans it is thought best to run no risk of anydisturbance. People there always hie home directlywhen things do not go off quite quietly.It is the same, wherever the blacks outnumberthe whites, or their bondage is particularly severe.At Charleston, when a fire breaks out, the gentlemenall go home on the ringing of the alarm-bell ;the ladies rise and dress themselves and their children.It may be the signal of insurrection : andthe fire burns on, for any help the citizens give, tilla battalion of soldiers marches down to put it out.When we were going to church, at Augusta,Georgia, one Sunday afternoon, there was smokein the street, and a cry of fire. When we cameout of church, we were told that it had been verytrifling, and easily extinguished. The next day, Iheard the whole. A negro girl of sixteen, theproperty of a lady from New England, had set hermistress's house on fire in two places, by very in-artificially lighting heaps of combustible stuff piledagainst the partitions. There were no witnesses,and all that was known came from her own lips.She was desperately ignorant; laws having beenfully enforced to prevent the negroes of Georgiabeing instructed in any way whatever. The girl'saccount was, that she was " tired of living there,"VOL. II. H146 RURAL LABOUR.and had therefore intended to burn the house in themorning, but was prevented by her mistress havinglocked her up for some offence : so she did it inthe afternoon. She was totally ignorant of thegravity of the deed, and was in a state of greathorror when told that she was to be hanged for it.I asked whether it was possible that, after herbeing prevented by law from being taught, she wasto be hanged for her ignorance, and merely on herown confession ? The clergyman with whom I wasconversing sighed, and said it was a hard case ; butwhat else could be done, considering that Augustawas built of wood ? He told me that there wasgreat excitement among the negroes in Augusta ;and that many had been saying that " a mean whiteperson" (a white labourer) would not have beenhanged ; and that the girl could not help it, as itmust have been severity which drove her to it. Inboth these sayings, the slaves were partly wrong.A white would have been hanged; but a whitewould have known that she was committing crime.It did not appear that the girl's mistress was harsh.But what does not the observation convey ? I havenever learned, nor ever shall, whether the hangingtook place or not. The newspapers do not insertsuch things.This burning would be a fearful art for theblacks to learn. There were four tremendous firesRURAL LABOUR. 147in Charleston, during the summer of 1835 ; anddivers residents reported to the north that thesewere supposed to be the work of slaves.Wherever I went, in the south, in whatever townor other settlement I made any stay, some startlingcircumstance connected with slavery occurred,which I was assured was unprecedented. Nosuch thing had ever occurred before, or was likelyto happen again. The repetition of this assurancebecame, at last, quite ludicrous.The fear of which I have spoken as prevalent,does not extend to the discussion of the questionof slavery with strangers. My opinions of slaverywere known, through the press, before I wentabroad : the hospitality which was freely extendedto me was offered under a full knowledge of mydetestation of the system. This was a great advantage,in as much as it divested me entirely of thecharacter of a spy, and promoted the freest discussion,wherever I went. There was a warm sympathybetween myself and very many, whose sufferingsunder the system caused me continual and deepsorrow, though no surprise. Neither was I surprisedat their differing from me as widely as theydo about the necessity of immediate action, eitherby resistance or flight, while often agreeing, nearlyto the full, in my estimate of the evils of the presentstate of things. They have been brought upH2148 RURAL LABOUR.in the system. To them, the moral deformity ofthe whole is much obscured by its nearness;while the small advantages, and slight prettinesswhich it is very easy to attach to it, are prominent,and always in view. These circumstancesprevented my being surprised at the candour withwhich they not only discussed the question, butshowed me all that was to be seen of the economicalmanagement of plantations ; the worst aswell as the best. Whatever I learned of the system,by express showing, it must be remembered,was from the hands of the slave-holders themselves.Whatever I learned, that lies deepest down in myheart, of the moral evils, the unspeakable vicesand woes of slavery, was from the lips of those whoare suffering under them on the spot.It was there that I heard of the massacre inSouthampton county, which has been little spokenof abroad. It happened a few years ago; beforethe abolition movement began ; for it is remarkablethat no insurrections have taken place since thefriends of the slave have been busy afar off. Thisis one of the most eloquent signs of the times,that, whereas rebellions broke out as often as oncea month before, there have been none since. Ofthis hereafter. In the Southampton massacre, upwardsof seventy whites, chiefly women and children,were butchered bv slaves who fancied them-ruralLABOUR. 149selves called, like the Jews of old, to " slay andspare not."While they were in full career, a Virginian gentleman,who had a friend from the north stayingwith him, observed upon its being a mistaken opinionthat planters were afraid of their slaves ; andoffered the example of his own household as a refutation.He summoned his confidential negro,the head of the house establishment of slaves, andbade him shut the door.You hear," said he, " that the negroes haverisen in Southampton."Yes, massa."You hear that they have killed several families,and that they are coming this way."Yes, massa."You know that, if they come here, I shallhave to depend upon you all to protect my family.11The slave was silent.If I give you arms, you will protect me andmy family, will you not ?"No, massa."Do you mean, that if the Southampton negroescome this way, you will join them ?"Yes, massa."When he went out of the room, his master weptwithout restraint. He owned that all his hope, all150 RURAL LABOUR.his confidence was gone. Yet, who ever deservedconfidence more than the man who spoke that lastNo" and " Yes ?" The more confidence in theman, the less in the system. This is the philosophyof the story.I have mentioned the fact that no insurrectionshave for a long time taken place. In some partsof the slave regions, the effect has been to relaxthe laws relating to slaves; and such relaxationwas always pointed out to me as an indicationthat slavery would go out of itself, if it were letalone. In other parts, new and very severe lawswere being passed against the slaves ; and this waspointed out to me as a sign that the condition ofthe negro was aggravated by the interference ofhis friends ; and that his best chance lay in slaverybeing let alone. Thus the opposite facts were madeto yield the same conclusion. A friend of mine,a slave-holder, observed to me, that both the relaxationand the aggravation of restrictions uponslaves were an indication of the tendency of publicopinion : the first being done in sympathy with it,the other in fear of it.There was an outcry, very vehement, and verygeneral among the friends of slavery, in both northand south, against the cruelty of abolitionists inbecoming the occasion of the laws against slavesbeing made more severe. In my opinion, thisRURAL LABOUR. 151affords no argument against abolition, even if thecondition of the slaves of to-day were aggravatedby the stir of opinion. The negroes of the nextgeneration are not to be doomed to slavery for fearof somewhat more being inflicted on their parents :and, severe as the laws already are, the consequenceof straining them tighter still would bethat they would burst. But the fact is, that so farfrom the condition of the slave being made worseby the efforts of his distant friends, it has beensubstantially improved. I could speak confidentlyof this as a necessary consequence of the value setupon opinion by the masters ; but I know it alsofrom what I myself saw; and from the lips ofmany slave-holders. The slaves of South Carolina,Georgia, Alabama, and Louisiana, have lessliberty of communication with each other; theyare deprived of the few means of instruction thatthey had ; they are shut in earlier in the evening,and precluded from supping and dancing for halt'the night, as they used to do ; but they are substantiallybetter treated ; they are less worked byhard masters ; less flogged ; better fed and clothed.The eyes of the world are now upon the Americanslave and his master : the kind master goes on ashedid before : the hard master dares not be sounkind as formerly. He hates his slave more thanever, for slavery is more troublesome than ever;152 RURAL LABOUR.but he is kept in order, by the opinion of theworld abroad and the neighbours around ; and hedares not vent his hatred on his human property,as he once could. A slave-holder declared inCongress, that the slaves of the south knew thatDr. Channing had written a book on their behalf.No doubt. The tidings of the far-off movementin their favour come to them on every wind thatblows, calming their desperation, breathing hopeinto their souls ; making the best of their mastersthoughtful and sad, and the worst, desperate andcruel, though kept within bounds by fear.The word ' hatred' is not too strong for the feelingof a large proportion of slave-holders towardsparticular slaves ; or, as they would call them, (theword ' slave' never being heard in the south,) theirforce,' their ' hands,' their ' negroes,' theirpeople.' I was frequently told of the ' endearingrelation' subsisting between master and slaves ;but, at the best, it appeared to me the same * endearingrelation' which subsists between a manand his horse, between a lady and her dog. Aslong as the slave remains ignorant, docile, and contented,he is taken good care of, humoured, andspoken of with a contemptuous, compassionate kindness.But, from the moment he exhibits the attributesof a rational being, from the moment hisintellect seems likely to come into the most dis-ruralLABOUR. 153tant competition with that of whites, the mostdeadly hatred springs up ; not in the black, butinhis oppressors. It is a very old truth that wehate those whom we have injured. Never was itmore clear than in this case. I had, from time totime in my life, witnessed something of human malice;I had seen some of the worst aspects of domesticservice in England ; of village scandal ; ofpolitical rivalship ; and other circumstances provocativeof the worst passions; but pure, unmitigatedhatred, the expression of which in eye andvoice makes one's blood run cold, I never witnessedtill I became acquainted with the blacks ofAmerica, their friends and oppressors : the blacksand their friends the objects; their oppressors thefar more unhappy subjects. It so happens that themost remarkable instances of this that I met withwere clergymen and ladies. The cold livid hatredwhich deformed, like a mask, the faces of a few,while deliberately slandering, now the colouredrace, and now the abolitionists, could never beforgotten by me, as a fearful revelation, if the wholecountry were to be absolutely christianized tomorrow.Mr. Madison told me, that if he couldwork a miracle, he knew what it should be. Hewould make all the blacks white ; and then hecould do away with slavery in twenty-four hours.So true it is that all the torturing associations ofH 5154 RURAL LABOUR.injury have become so connected with colour, thatan institution which hurts everybody and benefitsnone, which all rational people who understand itdislike, despise, and suffer under, can with difficultybe abolished, because of the hatred which is borneto an irrecoverable badge.This hatred is a sign of the times ; and so arethe alleged causes of it ; both are from their natureso manifestly temporary. The principal causealleged is the impossibility of giving people ofcolour any idea of duty, from their want of naturalaffection. I was told in the same breath of theirattachment to their masters, and devotion to themin sickness ; and of their utter want of all affectionto their parents and children, husbands and wives.For " people of colour," read " slaves," and theaccount is often correct. It is true that slaves willoften leave their infants to perish, rather than takeany trouble about them ; that they will utterlyneglect a sick parent or husband ; while they willnurse a white mistress with much ostentation. Thereason is obvious. Such beings are degraded sofarbelow humanity that they will take trouble, forthe sake of praise or more solid reward, after theyhave become dead to all but grossly selfish inducements.Circumstances will fully account for agreat number of cases of this sort: but to setagainst these, there are perhaps yet more instancesRURAL LABOUR. 155of domestic devotion, not to be surpassed in theannals of humanity. Of these I know more thanI can here set down ; partly from their number,and partly from the fear of exposing to injury theindividuals alluded to.A friend of mine was well acquainted at Washingtonwith a woman who had been a slave ; andwho, after gaining her liberty, worked incessantlyfor many years, denying herself all but absolutenecessaries, in order to redeem her husband andchildren. She was a sick-nurse, when my friendknew her ; and, by her merits, obtained good pay.She had first bought herself; having earned, byextra toil, three or four hundred dollars. Shethen earned the same sum, and redeemed heihusband ; and had bought three, out of her five,children when my friend last saw her. She madeno boast of her industry and self-denial. Herstory was extracted from her by questions ; and sheobviously felt that she was doing what was merelyunavoidable. It is impossible to help instituting acomparison between this woman and the gentlemenwho, by their own licentiousness, increase the numberof slave children whom they sell in the market.My friend formerly carried an annual present froma distant part of the country to this poor woman :but it is not known what has become of her, andwhether she died before she had completed her object,of freeing all her family.156 RURAL LABOUR.There is a woman now living with a lady inBoston, requiring high wages, which her superiorservices, as well as her story, enable her tocommand. This woman was a slave, and wasmarried to a slave, by whom she had two children.The husband and wife were much attached.One day, her husband was suddenly sold away toa distance ; and her master, whose object was toincrease his stock as fast as possible, immediatelyrequired her to take another husband. She stoutlyrefused. Her master thought her so far worthyof being humoured, that he gave her his son,forced him upon her, as her present feelings show.She had two more children, of much lighter complexionthan the former. When the son left theestate, her master tried again to force a negro husbandupon her. In desperation, she fled, carrying oneof her first children with her. She is now working toredeem the other, a girl ; and she has not given upall hope of recovering her husband. She was askedwhether she thought of doing anything for her twomulatto children. She replied that, to be sure,they were her children ; but that she did not thinkshe ever could tell her husband that she had hadthose two children. If this be not chastity, whatis ? Where are all the fairest natural affections, ifnot in these women ?At a very disorderly hotel in South Carolina, wewere waited upon by a beautiful mulatto womanRURAL LABOUR. 157and her child, a pretty girl of about eight. Thewoman entreated that we would buy her child.On her being questioned, it appeared that it wasa bad place" in which she was : that she had gother two older children sold away, to a better place ;and now, her only wish was for this child to besaved. On being asked whether she really desiredto be parted from her only remaining child, so asnever to see her again, she replied that " it wouldbe hard to part," but for the child's sake she didwish that we would buy her.A kind-hearted gentleman in the south, findingthat the laws of his State precluded his teachinghis legacy of slaves according to the usual methodsof education, bethought himself, at length, of themoral training of task-work. It succeeded admirably.His negroes soon began to work as slavesare never, under any other arrangement, seen towork. Their day's task was finished by eleveno'clock. Next, they began to care for one another :the strong began to help the weak: first, husbandshelped their wives ; then parents helped theirchildren ; and, at length, the young began to helpthe old. Here was seen the awakening of naturalaffections which had lain in a dark sleep.Of the few methods of education which havebeen tried, none have succeeded so well as thistask work. As its general adoption might havethe effect of enabling slavery to subsist longer than158 RURAL LABOUR.it otherwise could, perhaps it is well that it canbe employed only to a very small extent. Muchof the work on the plantations cannot be dividedinto tasks. Where it can, it is wise in the mastersto avail themselves of this means of enlisting thewill of the slave in behalf of his work.No other mode of teaching serves this purposein any degree. The shutting up of the schools,when I was in the south, struck me as a sign ofthe times, a favourable sign, in as far as it showedthe crisis to be near ; and it gave me little regreton account of the slave children. Reading andwriting even (which are never allowed) would beof no use to beings without minds, as slaves areprior to experience of life ; and religious teaching isworse than useless to beings who, having no rights,can have no duties. Their whole notion of religionis of power and show, as regards God ; of subjectionto a new sort of reward and punishment,as regards themselves ; and invisible reward andpunishment have no effect on them. A negro, conductingworship, was heard to pray thus ; and broadas the expressions are, they are better than an abssect, unintelligent adoption of the devote oral languageof whites. " Come down, O Lord, come down,on your great white horse, a kicking' and snortingAn ordinary negro's highest idea of majesty isof riding a prancing white horse. As for theirown concern in religion, I know of a " force"RURAL LABOUR. 159where a preacher had just made a strong impression.The slaves had given up dancing, and sangnothing but psalms : they exhibited the most ludicrousspiritual pride, and discharged their businessmore lazily than ever, taunting their mistress with,You no holy. We be holy. You no in state o'salvation." Such was the effect upon the majority.Here is the effect upon a stronger head.Harry," said his master, " you do as badly asever. You steal and tell lies. Don't you knowyou will be punished in hell ? "Ah, massa, I been thinking 'bout that I beenthinking when Harry's head is in the ground,there'll be no more Harry, no more Harry."But the clergyman, and other people whoknow better than you, tell you that if you stealyou will go to hell, and be punished there."Been thinking 'bout that too. Gentlemen bewise, and so they tell us 'bout being punished,that we may not steal their things here: and thenwe go and find out afterwards how it is."Such is the effect of religion upon those whohave no rights, and therefore no duties. Greatefforts are being now made by the clergy of fourdenominations* to obtain converts in the south.The fact, pointed out to me by Mr. Madison, thatthe " chivalrous" south is growing strict, while thePresbyterians, Episcopalians, Methodists and Baptists.160 RURAL LABOUR.puritanic north is growing genial, is a very remarkablesign of the times, as it regards slavery. Allsanctions of the institution being now wanted, religioussanctions are invoked among others. Thescene has been acted before, often enough to makethe catastrophe clearly discernible. There are notrue religious sanctions of slavery. There will beno lack of Harris to detect the forgeries put forthas such : and, under the most corrupt presentmentsof religion, there lives something of its genuinespirit, enough to expand, sooner or later,and explode the institution with which it can nevercombine. Though I found that the divines of thefour denominations were teaching a compromisingChristianity, to propitiate the masters, and grosssuperstitions to beguile the slaves, vying witheach other in the latter respect, that they mightoutstrip one another in the number of their converts,I rejoiced in their work. Anything is betterfor the slaves than apathetic subjection ; and,under all this falsification, enough Christian truthhas already come in to blow slavery to atoms.The testimony of slave-holders was most explicitas to no moral improvement having takenplace, in consequence of the introduction of religion.There was less singing and dancing ; but asmuch lying, drinking, and stealing as ever : less docility,and a vanity even transcending the commonvanity of slaves, to whom the opinion of others isRURAL LABOUR. 161all which they have to gain or lose. The housesare as dirty as ever, (and I never saw a clean roomorhed but once, within the boundaries of the slaveStates ;) .the family are still contented with theirclean linen, as long as it does not smell badly."A new set of images has been presented to theslaves; but there still remains but one idea, byand for which any of them live ; the idea of freedom.Not for this, however, is the present zeal forreligion a less remarkable sign of the times.Another is, a proposition lately made in Charlestonto remove the slave-market further from publicobservation. This acknowledgment, in such aplace, that there is something distasteful, or otherwiseuncomfortable, in the sale of human beings,is portentous. I was in that Charleston slave-market; and saw the sale of a woman with herchildren. A person present voluntarily assuredme that there was nothing whatever painful in thesight. It appears, however, that the rest of Charlestonthinks differently.I was witness to the occasional discussion ofthe question whether Congress has power to prohibitthe internal slave trade ; and found that somevery eminent men had no doubt whatever of suchpower being possessed by Congress, through theclause which authorizes it to " regulate commerceamong the several States." Among those162 RURAL LABOUR.who held this opinion were Mr. Madison and Mr.Webster.The rapid increase of the suffrage in the north,compared with the south, affords an indication ofsome speedy change of circumstances. Threefifths of the slave population is represented ; butthis basis of representation is so narrow in contrastwith that of the populous States where every manhas the suffrage, that the south must decrease andthe north increase, in a way which cannot long beborne by the former. The south has no remedybut in abolishing the institution by which her prosperityis injured, and her population comparativelyconfined. She sees how it is in the two contiguousStates of Missouri and Illinois: that newsettlers examine Illinois, pass on into Missouri,where land is much cheaper, and return to Illinoisto settle, because there is no slavery there : so thatthe population is advancing incalculably faster inIllinois than in Missouri. Missouri will soon andeasily find her remedy, in abolishing slavery ; whenthe whites will rush in, as they now do into theneighbouring States. In the south, the case ismore difficult. It will be long before white labour becomesso reputable there as elsewhere ; and the presentwhite residents cannot endure the idea of thesuffrage being freely given, within any assignabletime, to those who are now their slaves, or to theirRURAL LABOUR. 163dusky descendants. Yet this is what must bedone, sooner or later, with more or fewer precautions,if the south means to hold an important rankinCongress. It is in contemplation of this difficultythat the loudest threats are heard of secessionfrom the Union ; a movement which, as Ihave before said, would be immediately prevented,or signally punished. The abolition of slavery isthe only resource.Upon the most remarkable of all the signs ofthe times relating to slavery, it is not necessaryto say much. Those which I have mentionedare surely enough to show, as plainly asif a ghost had come from the grave to tell us, thatthe time is at hand for the destruction of this monstrousanomaly. What the issue of the comingchange will be is, to my mind, decided by a considerationon which almost every man is vociferatinghis opinion, the character of the abolitionists.It is obvious enough why this point is discussed sowidely and so constantly, that I think I may say Iheard more upon it, while I was in America, thanupon all other American matters together. It isclearly convenient to throw so weighty a questionas that of abolition back upon the aggregate charactersof those who propose it; convenient toslave-holders, convenient to those in the northwhose sympathies are with slave-holders, or who164 RURAL LABOUR.dread change, or who want an excuse to themselvesfor not acting upon the principles which allprofess. The character of the abolitionists of theUnited States has been the object of attack forsome years, of daily and hourly attack ; and, asfar as I know, there has been no defence; forthe plain reason that this is a question on whichthere can be no middle party. All who are notwith the abolitionists are against them ; for silenceand inaction are public acquiescence in things asthey are. The case is, then, that everybody isagainst them but their own body, whose testimonywould, of course, go for nothing, if it were offered;which it never is. I know many of them well;as every stranger in the country ought to take painsto do. I first heard everything that could besaid against them : and afterwards became well acquaintedwith a great number of them.I think the abolitionists of the United Statesthe most reasonable set of people that I everknew to be united together for one object.Among them may be enjoyed the high and rareluxury of having a reason rendered for every actperformed, and every opinion maintained. Thetreatment they have met with compels them tobe more thoroughly informed, and more completelyassured on every point on which theycommit themselves, than is commonly consideredRURAL LABOUR. 165necessary on the right side of a question, wherethere is the strength of a mighty principle torepose upon. The commonest charge against themisthat they are fanatical. I think them, generallyspeaking, the most clear-headed, right-mindedclass I ever had intercourse with. Their accuracyabout dates, numbers, and all such mattersof fact, is as remarkable as their clear perceptionof the principles on which they proceed.They are, however, remarkably deficient in policy,in party address. They are artless to a fault;and probably, no party, religious, political, or benevolent,in their country, ever was formed andconducted with so little dexterity, shrewdness, andconcert. Noble and imperishable as their objectis, it would probably, from this cause, have slippedthrough their fingers for the present, if it hadnot been for some other qualities common amongthem. It is needless to say much of their heroism ;of the strength of soul with which they awaitand endure the inflictions with which they are visited,day by day. Their position indicates allthis. Animating as it is to witness, it is lesstouching than the qualities to which they owe thesuccess which would otherwise have been forfeitedthrough their want of address and party organisation.A spirit of meekness, of mutual forbearsRURAL LABOUR.once, of mutual reverence, runs through thewhole body ; and by this are selfish considerationsput aside, differences composed, and distrusts obviated,to a degree which I never hoped to witnessamong a society as various as the sects, parties andopinions which are the elements of the whole community.With the gaiety of heart belonging tothose who have cast aside every weight ; with thestrength of soul proper to those who walk by faith ;with the child-like unconsciousness of the innocent; living from hour to hour in the light of thatgreatest of all purposes, to achieve a distant objectby the fulfilment of the nearest duty, andtherefore rooting out from among themselves allaristocratic tendencies and usages, rarely speakingof their own sufferings and sacrifices, but in honourpreferring one another, how can they fail towin over the heart of society, that great heart,sympathising with all that is lofty and true?*It may, at the first glance, appear improbable that such a characteras this should belong to any collection of individuals. Butlet it be remembered what the object is ; an object which selectsfor its first supporters the choicest spirits of society. Thesechoice spirits, again, are disciplined by what they have to undergofor their object, till they come out such as I have described them.Their's is not a common charitable institution, whose committeesmeet, and do creditable business, and depart homewards in peace.They are the confessors of the martyr-age of America. As a mat-ruralLABOUR. 167As was said to me, " the Searcher of hearts ispassing through the land, and every one mustcome forth to the ordeal." This Searcher ofhearts comes now in the form of the mighty principleof human freedom. If a glance is cast overthe assemblage called to the ordeal, how mean andtrivial are the vociferations in defence of property,the threats of revenge for light, the boast of physicalforce, the appeal to the compromises whichconstitute the defects of human law ! How low andhow sad appear the mercenary interests, the socialfears, the clerical blindness or cowardice, the morbidfastidiousness of those who, professing thesame principles with the abolitionists, are bentupon keeping those principles for ever an abstraction! How inspiring is it to see that the communityis, notwithstanding all this, sound at the core, andthat the soundness is spreading so fast that the healthof the whole community may be ultimately lookedfor ! When a glance shows us all this, and that theabolitionists are no more elated by their presentsuccess than they were depressed by their almosthopeless degradation, we may fairly consider thecharacter of the abolitionists a decisive sign of theter of course, their character will be less distinctive as their numbersincrease. Many are coming in, and more will come in, whohad not strength, or light, or warmth enough to join them in thedays of their insignificance.168 RURAL LABOUR.-times, a peculiarly distinct prophecy that the colouredrace will soon pass from under the yoke.The Searcher of hearts brings prophecies in hishand, which those who will may read.*I cannot give much space to the theories whichare current as to what the issue will be if the abolitionof slavery should not take place. To me itseems pretty clear, when the great amount of themulatto population is considered. Within an almostcalculable time, the population would bewholly mulatto ; and the southern States would bein a condition so far inferior to the northern, thatthey would probably separate, and live under adifferent form of government. A military despotismmight probably be established when the mixtureof colours had become inconvenient, withoutbeing universal: slavery would afterwards die out,While I write, confirmation comes in the shape of GovernorM'Duffie's message to the legislature of South Carolina, in whichhe speaks of the vast and accelerated spread of abolition principles; of the probability that slavery in the District of Columbiawill be soon abolished ; and of the pressing occasion that thencearises for South Carolina to resolve what she shall do, rather thanpart with her domestic institutions. He recommends her to declareher intention of peaceably withdrawing from the Union, insuch a case. Time will show whether the majority of her citizenswill prefer sacrificing their connexion with the Union, ortheir slavery ; whether the separation will be allowed by the otherStates to take place ; or, if it be, whether South Carolina will notspeedily desire a readmission.RURAL LABOUR. 169through the general degradation of society; andthen the community would begin again to rise,from a very low point. But it will be seen that Ido not anticipate that there will be room or timefor this set of circumstances to take place. I saythis in the knowledge of the fact that a very perceptibletinge of negro blood is visible in some ofthe first families of Louisiana ; a fact learned fromresidents of high quality on the spot.How stands the case, finally ? A large proportionof the labour of the United States is held onprinciples wholly irreconcilable with the principlesof the constitution : whatever may be true aboutits origin, it is now inefficient, wasteful, destructive,to a degree which must soon cause a changeof plan: some who see the necessity of such achange, are in favour of reversing the original policy; slavery having once been begun in order totill the land, they are now for usurping a new territoryin order to employ their slaves : others arefor banishing the labour which is the one thingmost needful to their country, in every way. Whileall this confusion and mismanagement exist, hereis the labour, actually on the land, ready to beemployed to better purpose ; and in the treasuryare the funds by which the transmutation of slaveinto free labour might be effected, at once in theDistrict of Columbia; and by subsequent arrange -VOL. II. I170 RURAL LABOUR.ments in the slave States. Many matters of detailwould have to be settled : the distribution would bedifficult ; but it is not impossible. Virginia, whoserevenue is derived from the rearing of slaves for thesouth, whose property is the beings themselves,and not their labour, must, in justice, receive alarger compensation than such States as Alabamaand Louisiana, where the labour is the wealth, andwhich would be therefore immediately enriched bythe improvement in the quality of the labour whichwould follow upon emancipation. Such arrangementsmay be difficult to make ; but " when there'sa will there's a way ;" and when it is generally perceivedthat the abolition of slavery must takeplace, the great principle will not long be allowedto lie in fetters of detail. The Americans havedone more difficult things than this ; though assuredlynone greater. The restoration of two millionsand a half of people to their human rightswill be as great a deed as the history of the worldwill probably ever have to exhibit. In none of itspages are there names more lustrous than those ofthe clear-eyed and fiery-hearted few who beganand are achieving the virtuous revolution.CHAPTER II.TRANSPORT AND MARKETSScience and Art urge on the useful toil ;New mould a climate, and create the soil.On yielding Nature urge their new demands,And ask not gifts, but tribute, at her hands."Barbara.NATURE has done so much for the United States inthis article of their economy, and has indicated soclearly what remained for human hands to do, thatit is very comprehensible to the traveller why thisnew country so far transcends others of the sameage in markets and means of transport. The portsof the United States are, singularly enough, scatteredround the whole of their boundaries. Besidesthose on the seaboard, there are many in the interior;on the northern lakes, and on thousands ofi 2172 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.miles of deep rivers. No nook in the country is ata despairing distance from a market ; and where theusual incentives to enterprise exist, the means oftransport are sure to be provided, in the proportionin which they are wanted.Even in the south, where, the element of wagesbeing lost, and the will of the labourer being lostwith them, there are no adequate means of executingeven the best-conceived enterprises,* more hasbeen done than could have been expected underthe circumstances. The mail roads are still extremelybad. I found, in travelling through theCarolinas and Georgia, that the drivers considerthemselves entitled to get on by any means theycan devise : that nobody helps and nobody hindersthem. It was constantly happening that the stagecame to a stop on the brink of a wide and a deeppuddle, extending all across the road. The driverhelped himself, without scruple, to as many rails ofthe nearest fence as might serve to fill up the boteThe income of the public works of the State" (South Carolina)" is very small, not exceeding 15,000 dollars per annum,over the cost of management, although the State has incurred adebt of 2,000,000 in constructing them. In many parts of theState, canals have been constructed-which do not yield sufficientto pay their current expenses ; and, with the exception of the Stateroad, and the Columbia canal, there is hardly a public work in theState, which, put up at public auction, would find a purchaser."1833. American Annual Register, p. 285.TRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 173torn of the hole, or break our descent into it. Oninquiry, I found it was not probable that eitherroad or fence would be mended till both had goneto absolute destruction.The traffic on these roads is so small, that thestranger feels himself almost lost in the wilderness.In the course of several days' journey, we saw, (withthe exception of the wagons of a few encampments,)only one vehicle besides our own. It was a stagereturning from Charleston. Our meeting in theforest was like the meeting of ships at sea. Weasked the passengers from the south for news fromCharleston and Europe ; and they questioned usabout the state of politics at Washington. Theeager vociferation of drivers and passengers wassuch as is very unusual, out of exile. We weredesired to give up all thoughts of going by theeastern road to Charleston. The road might becalled impassable ; and there was nothing to eat bythe way. So we described a circuit, by Camdenand Columbia.An account of an actual day's journey will givethe best idea of what travelling is in such places.We had travelled from Richmond, Virginia, the daybefore, (March 2nd, 1835,) and had not had anyrest, when, at midnight, we came to a river whichhad no bridge. The " scow" had gone over withanother stage, and we stood under the stars for a174 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.long time ; hardly less than an hour. The scowwas only just large enough to hold the coach andourselves ; so that it was thought safest for the passengersto alight, and go on board on foot. In thisprocess, I found myself over the ankles in mud. Afew minutes after we had driven on again, on theopposite side of the river, we had to get out tochange coaches ; after which we proceeded, withoutaccident, though very slowly, till daylight. Thenthe stage sank down into a deep rut, and the horsesstruggled in vain. We were informed that we weremired," and must all get out. I stood for sometimeto witness what is very pretty for once ; butwearisome when it occurs ten times a day. Thedriver carries an axe, as a part of the stage apparatus.He cuts down a young tree, for a lever, whichis introduced under the nave of the sunken wheel ;a log serving for a block. The gentleman passengersall help ; shouting to the horses, which tugand scramble as vigorously as the gentlemen. Weladies sometimes gave our humble assistance byblowing the driver's horn. Sometimes a cluster ofnegroes would assemble from a neighbouring plantation; and in extreme cases, they would bring ahorse, to add to our team. The rescue from therut was effected in any time from a quarter of anhour to two hours. This particular 3rd of March,two hours were lost by this first mishap. It wasTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 175very cold, and I walked on alone, sure of not missingmy road in a region where there was noother. When I had proceeded two miles, I stoppedand looked around me. I was on a rising ground,with no object whatever visible but the wild, blackforest, extending on all sides as far as I could see,and the red road cut through it, as straight as anarrow, till it was lost behind a rising ground ateither extremity. I know nothing like it, exceptaSalvator Rosa I once saw. The stage soon aftertook me up, and we proceeded fourteen miles tobreakfast. We were faint with hunger ; but therewas no refreshment for us. The family breakfasthad been long over, and there was not a scrap offood in the house. We proceeded, till at oneo'clock we reached a private dwelling, where thegood woman was kind enough to provide dinnerfor us, though the family had dined. She gave usacomfortable meal, and charged only a quarterdollar each. She stands in all the party's booksas a hospitable dame.We had no sooner left her house than we had toget out to pass on foot a bridge too crazy for us toventure over it in the carriage. Half a mile beforereaching the place where we were to have tea, thethorough-brace broke, and we had to walk througha snow shower to the inn. We had not proceededabove a quarter of a mile from this place when the176 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.traces broke. After this, we were allowed to sitstill in the carriage till near seven in the morning,when we were approaching Raleigh, North Carolina.We then saw a carriage " mired 1 ' and desertedby driver and horses, but tenanted by sometravellers who had been waiting there since eightthe evening before. While we were pitying theirfate, our vehicle once more sank into a rut. Itwas, however, extricated in a short time, and wereached Raleigh in safety.It was worth undergoing a few travelling disastersto witness the skill and temper of the drivers,and the inexhaustible good-nature of the passengers.Men of business in any other part of theworld would be visibly annoyed by such delays asI have described ; but in America I never saw anygentleman's temper give way under these accidents.Every one jumps out in a moment, andsets to work to help the driver ; every one has hisjoke, and, when it is over, the ladies are sure tohave the whole represented to them in its mostamusing light. One driver on this journey seemedto be a novice, or in some way inferior in confidenceto the rest. A gentleman of our party choseto sit beside him on the box ; and he declared thatthe driver shut his eyes when we were coming to ahole; and that when he called piteously on thepassengers for help, it was because we were takingTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 177aim at a deep rut. Usually, the confidence andskill of the drivers were equally remarkable. Ifthey thought the stage more full than was convenient,they would sometimes try to alarm the passengers,so as to induce some of them to remainfor the next stage ; and it happened two or threetimes that a fat passenger or two fell into the trap,and declined proceeding ; but it was easy for theexperienced to see that the alarm was feigned.In such cases, after a splash into water, in thedark, news would be heard from the box that wewere in the middle of a creek, and could not go astep, back or forward, without being overturnedinto the water. Though the assertion was disprovedthe next minute, it produced its effect.Again, when the moon was going down early, andthe lamps were found to be, of course, out oforder, and the gentlemen insisted on buying candlesby the road-side, and walking on in bad places,each with a tallow light in his hand, the driverwould let drop that, as we had to be overturnedbefore dawn, it did not much matter whether it wasnow or later. After this, the stoutest of the companywere naturally left behind at the next ,and the driver chuckled at the lighteningof his load.At the close of a troublesome journey in thesouth, we drew up, with some noise, before a hotel,i5178 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.at three in the morning. The driver blew a blastupon an execrable horn. Nobody seemed stirring.Slaves are the most slow-moving people in theworld, except upon occasion.What sleepy folks they are here !" exclaimedthe driver.Another blast on the horn, long and screeching.Never saw such people for sleeping. Musichas no effect on 'em at all. I shall have to tryfire-arms."Another blast.We've waked the watchman, however. That'ssomething done."Another blast.Never knew such people. Why, Lazarus wasfar easier to raise."The best testimony that I can bear to the skillwith which travelling is conducted on such roadsas these, and also in steam-boats, is the fact thatI travelled upwards of ten thousand miles in theUnited States, by land and water, without accidentI was twice nearly overturned ; but neverquite.It has been seen what the mail routes are likein the south ; and I have mentioned that greaterprogress has been made in other means of transportthan might have been expected. I referred to thenew rail-roads which are being opened in variousTRANSPORT AMD MARKETS. 179directions. I saw few circumstances in the southwith which I was so well pleased. By the freecommunication which will thus be opened, muchsectional prejudice will be dispelled: the inferiorityof slave to free labour will be the more speedilybrought home to every man's convictions ; and newsettlers, abhorring slavery, will come in and mixwith the present population ; be the laws regardinglabour what they may.The only rail-roads completed in the south, whenI was there, were the Charleston and Augusta one,two short ones in the States of Alabama and Mississippi,and one of five miles from Lake Pontchartrainto New Orleans. There is likely to besoon a magnificent line from Charleston to Cincinnati; and the line from Norfolk, Virginia, to NewYork, is now almost uninterrupted.The quarter of an hour employed in reachingNew Orleans from Lake Pontchartrain was oneof the most delightful seasons in all my travels.My notion of a swamp was corrected for ever. Itwas the end of April ; and the flowering reeds andtropical shrubs made the whole scene one gay garden.It was odd to be passing through a gaygarden on a rail-road. Green cypress grew outof the clear water everywhere ; and there wereacres of blue and white iris ; and a thousand rich,unknown blossoms waving over the pools. A negro180 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.here and there emerged from a flowery thicket,pushing himself on a raft, or in a canoe, throughthe reeds. The sluggish bayou was on one side ;and here and there, a group of old French houseson the other. It was like skimming, as one doesin dreams, over the meadows of Sicily, or theplains of Ceylon.That which may be seen on either hand of theCharleston and Augusta rail-road is scarcely lessbeautiful ; but my journeys on it were by far themost fatiguing of any I underwent in the country.The motion and the noise are distracting. Whetherthis is owing to its being built on piles, in manyplaces ; whether the fault is in the ground or theconstruction, I do not know. Almost all the railroadtravelling in America is very fatiguing andnoisy. I was told that this was chiefly owing tothe roads being put to use as soon as finished, insteadof the work being left to settle for somemonths. How far this is true, I do not pretend tosay. The rail-roads which I saw in progress werelaid on wood instead of stone. The patentee discoveredthat wood settles after frost more evenlythan stone. The original cost, in the State ofNew York, is about two thousand dollars per mile.One great inconvenience of the American railroadsis that, from wood being used for fuel, thereis an incessant shower of large sparks, destructiveTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 181to dress and comfort, unless all the windows areshut ; which is impossible in warm weather. Someserious accidents from fire have happened in thisway ; and, during my last trip on the Columbia andPhiladelphia rail road, a lady in the car had ashawl burned to destruction on her shoulders ;and I found that my own gown had thirteen holesin it ; and my veil, with which I saved my eyes,more than could be counted.My first trip on the Charleston rail-road wasmore amusing than prosperous. The arrangementswere scarcely completed, and the apparatuswas then in a raw state. Our party left Columbiaat seven in the evening of the 9th of March, bystage, hoping to meet the rail-road train at Branch-ville,sixty miles from Columbia, at eleven the nextmorning, and to reach Charleston, sixty-two more,to dinner. Towards morning, when the moon hadset, the stage bumped against something; and thedriver declared that he must wait for the day-spring,before he could proceed another step. When thedawn brightened, we found that we had, as we supposed,missed our passage by the train, for the sakeof a stump about two inches above the ground,We hastened breakfast at Orangery ; and whenwe got to Granville, found we need have been inno hurry. The train had not arrived ; and, some182 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.little accident having happened, we waited for ittill near two o'clock.I never saw an economical work of art harmoniseso well with the vastness of a natural scene, ashere. From the piazza of the house at Branch-ville,the forest fills the whole scene, with the railroadstretching through it, in a perfectly straightline, to the vanishing point. The approachingtrain cannot be seen so far off as this. When itappears, a black dot, marked by its wreath ofsmoke, it is impossible to avoid watching it, growingand self-moving, till it stops before the door.I cannot draw ; but I could not help trying to makea sketch of this, the largest and longest perspectiveI ever saw. We were well employed for two hoursin basking in the sun, noting the before the house, the turkeys strutting, therobins (twice as large as the English) hopping andflitting; and the house, apparently just piled up ofwood just cut from the forest. Everything was asnew as the rail-road. As it turned out, we shouldhave been better employed in dining ; but we hadno other idea than of reaching Charleston in threeor four hours.For the first thirty-five miles, which we accomplishedby half-past four, we called it the most interestingrail-road we had ever been on. TheTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 183whole sixty-two miles was almost a dead level, thedescent being only two feet. Where pools, creeks,and gullies had to be passed, the road was elevatedon piles, and thence the look down on an expanseof evergreens was beautiful. This is, probably,the reason why three gentlemen went, a few daysafterwards, to walk, of all places, on the rail-road.When they were in the middle of one of these elevatedportions, where there is a width of only aboutthree inches on either side the tracks, they heard ashout, and looking back, saw a train coming uponthem with such speed as to leave no hope that itcould be stopped before it reached them. Therewas no alternative ; all three leaped down, upwardsof twenty feet, into the swamp, and escaped with awetting, and with looking exceedingly foolish intheir own eyes.At half-past four, our boiler sprang a leak, andthere was an end of our prosperity. In two hours,we hungry passengers were consoled with the newsthat it was mended. But the same thing happened,again and again ; and always in the middle of aswamp, where we could do nothing but sit still.The gentlemen tried to amuse themselves withfrog-hunting: but it was a poor resource. Oncewe stopped before a comfortable-looking house,where a hot supper was actually on the table ; butwe were not allowed to stop, even so long as to get184 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.out. The gentlemen made a rush into the houseto see what they could get. One carried off achicken entire, for his party ; another seized partof a turkey. Our gentlemen were not alert enough.The old lady's table was cleared too quickly forthem, and quite to her own consternation. Allthat we, a party of five, had to support us, wassome strips of ham, pieces of dry bread, and threesweet potatoes, all jumbled together in a handkerchief.Our thoughts wandered back to this supper-table,an hour after, when we were again stickingin the middle of a swamp. I had fallen asleep,(for it was now the middle of a second night oftravelling,) and was awakened by such a din as Ihad never heard. I could not recollect where Iwas ; I looked out of the window, and saw, by thelight of the moon, white houses on the bank of theswamp, and the waving shrubs of the forest ; butthe distracting din was like nothing earthly. Itpresently struck me that we were being treatedwith a frog-concert. It is worth hearing, for once,anything so unparalleled as the knocking, ticking,creaking, and rattling, in every variety of key.The swamp was as thick of noises as the forest isof leaves: but, five minutes of the concert areenough ; while a hundred years are not enough ofthe forest. After many times stopping and proceeding,we arrived at Charleston between four andTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 185five in the morning ; and, it being too early to disturbour friends, crept cold and weary to bed, atthe Planters' Hotel. It was well that all this happenedin the month of March. Three monthslater, such detention in the swamps by night mighthave been the death of three-fourths of the passengers.I have not heard of any mismanagementsince the concern has been put fairly in operation.There are many rail-roads in Virginia, and aline to New York, through Maryland and Delaware.There is in Kentucky a line from Louisvilleto Lexington. But it is in Pennsylvania,New York, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts, thatthey abound. All have succeeded so admirably,that there is no doubt of the establishment of thismeans of communication over nearly the whole ofthe United States, within a few years, as by-waysto the great high-ways which Nature has made torun through this vast country. The evil of a superabundanceof land in proportion to labour will thusbe lessened so far, that there will be an economy oftime, and a facility of intercourse, which will improvethe intelligence of the country population.There will, also, be a facility of finding out wherenew supplies of labour are most wanted, and ofsupplying them. By advantageous employmentfor small capitals being thus offered within bounds,it may also be hoped that many will be prevented186 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.from straying into the wilderness. The best friendsof the moral as well as economical interests of theAmericans, will afford all possible encouragementto wise schemes for the promotion of intercourse,especially between the north and south.I believe the best-constructed railroad in theStates is the Boston and Lowell, Massachusetts :length, twenty-five miles. Its importance, from theamount of traffic upon it, may be estimated from thefact that some thousands of dollars were spent, thewinter after it was opened, in clearing away a fall ofsnow from it. It was again covered, the next night.Another line from Boston is to Providence,Rhode Island, forty three miles long. This opensa very speedy communication with New York ; thedistance, two hundred and twenty-seven miles, beingperformed in twenty hours, by rail-road andsteam-boat.There is a good line from Boston to Worcester ;forty-five miles in length. Its estimated cost is8a3,904 dollars. This road is to be carried onacross the entire State, to the Connecticut ; fromwhence a line is now in course of construction tothe Hudson, to issue opposite Albany. Thereare proposals for a tunnel under the Hudson atAlbany ; and from Albany, there is already canaland rail-road communication to Lake Erie. Thereis now an uninterrupted communication from theTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 187Atlantic to the far end of Lake Michigan. It onlyremains to extend a line thence to the Mississippi,and the circle is complete.The great Erie canal, intersecting the wholeState of New York, is too celebrated to need muchnotice here. Its entire length is three hundredand sixty three miles. It is forty feet wide at top,twenty-eight at bottom, and four feet deep. Thereare eighty-four locks on the main canal. Thetotal rise and fall is six hundred and ninety-twofeet. The cost was 9,500,000 dollars. Thoughthis canal has been opened only since 1825,it is found already insufficient for the immensecommerce carried on between the European worldand the great West, through the eastern ports.There is a rail-road now running across the entireState, which is expected to exhibit muchmore traffic than the canal, without at all interferingwith its business.I traversed the valley of the Mohawk twice ; thefirst time by the canal, the next by stage, which Imuch preferred, both on account of the views beingbetter from the high road, and from the discomfortof the canal boats. I had also the opportunity ofobserving the courses of the canal and the newrail-road throughout.I was amused, the first time, at hearing some188 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.gentlemen plan how the bed of the shoaly Mohawkmight be deepened, so as to admit the passage ofsteam-boats. It would be nearly as easy to dig ariver at once for the purpose, and pump it full ; inother words, to make another canal, twice as wonderfulas the present. The rail-road is a betterscheme by far. In winter the traffic is continuedby sleighs on the canal ice : and a pretty sight itmust be.The aspect of the valley was really beautiful lastJune. It must have made the Mohawk Indiansheart-sore to part with it in its former quiet state ;but now there is more beauty, as well as more life.There are farms, in every stage of advancement,with all the stir of life about them ; and the still,green graveyard belonging to each, showing itswhite palings and tombstones on the hill-side,near at hand. Sometimes a small space in theorchard is railed in for this purpose. In a shallowreach of the river there was a line of cowswading through, to bury themselves in the luxuriantpasture of the islands in the midst of theMohawk. In a deeper part, the chain ferry-boatslowly conveyed its passengers across. The soilof the valley is remarkably rich, and the treesand verdure unusually fine. The hanging oak-woodson the ridge were beautiful; and theTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 189knolls, tilled or untilled ; and the little waterfallstrickling or leaping down, to join the rushing river.Little knots of houses were clustered about thelocks and bridges of the canal ; and here and therea village, with its white church conspicuous,spread away into the middle of the narrow valley.The green and white canal boats might be seenstealing along under the opposite ridge, or issuingfrom behind a clump of elms or birches, or girdingalong a graceful aqueduct, with the diminishedfigures of the walking passengers seen movingalong the bank. On the other hand, the rail-roadskirted the base of the ridge, and the shanties ofthe Irish labourers, roofed with turf, and the smokeissuing from a barrel at one corner, were so groupedas to look picturesque, however little comfortable.In some of the narrowest passes of the valley, thehigh road, the rail-road, the canal, and the river,are all brought close together, and look as if theywere trying which could escape first into a largerspace. The scene at Little Falls is magnificent,viewed from the road, in the light of a summer'smorning. The carrying the canal and rail-roadthrough this pass was a grand idea ; and the solidityand beauty of the works are worthy of it.The canal was commenced in 1817 ; and the firstboat from the inland lakes arrived at New York190 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.on the 4th of November 1825. The first year'srevenue amounted to 566,221 dollars In 1836,the tolls amounted to 1,294,649 dollars.The incorporated rail-road companies in theState of New York in 1836 were fifty; their capitalsvarying from fifteen thousand to ten milliondollars.When I first crossed the Alleghanies, in November1834, I caught a glimpse of the stupendousPortage rail-road, running between the two canalswhich reach the opposite bases of the mountains.The stage in which I travelled was on one side ofa deep ravine, bristling with pines ; while on theother side was the lofty embankment, such a wallas I had never imagined could be built, on thesummit of which ran the rail-road, its line traceablefor some miles, with frequent stations andtrains of baggage-cars. One track of this road hadnot long been opened ; and the work was a splendidnovelty. I had afterwards the pleasure of travellingon it, from end to end.This road is upwards of thirty six miles in length,and at one point reaches an elevation of 2,491 feetabove the sea. It consists of eleven levels, and teninclined planes. About three hundred feet of theroad, at the head and foot of each plane, is madeexactly level. The embankments were made twen-TRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 191ty-five feet wide at the top, and the bed of theroad in excavations is twenty-five feet, with wideside ditches. Much care in drainage was necessary,as the road passes chiefly along the steepslopes of hills, of clayey soil, and over innumerablesmall streams. Sixty-eight culverts of masonrypass under the road, and eighty-five drains.There are four viaducts of hammer-dressed sandstone,to carry the line over streams. The mostsplendid of these is over the Conemaugh, eightmiles from Johnstown. It has a semi-circular archof eighty feet span ; the top of whose masonry isseventy feet above the water. There is a tunnelthrough a spur of the Allegheny, nine hundredand one feet long, by twenty feet wide, and nineteenhigh. The foundations of this road are partlystone and partly wood. Each station has twosteam-engines ; one being used at a time, and theother provided to prevent delay, in case of accident.Four cars, each loaded with 7000 Ribs. canbe drawn up, and four such let down at a time ;and from six to ten such trips can be accomplishedin an hour. A safety-car is attachedto the train, both in ascending and descending ;and though not an absolute safeguard, it much increasesthe security. This little machine, whenpressed upon from behind, grounds its point, andmaterially checks the velocity of the otherwise192 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.flying train. The iron rails, and some other of themetal portions of the work, were imported fromGreat Britain.The cost of constructing this rail-road at thecontract prices was 1,634,357 dollars; but thisdoes not include office expenses, or engineering, oraccidental extra allowances to contractors. Duringthe first year of the two tracks being opened, fiftythousand tons of freight, and twenty thousand passengers,passed over the road.Five years before, this line of passage was anuntrodden wilderness. The act authorising thecommencement of the work passed the Pennsylvanialegislature on the 21st of March, 1831. Onthe 12th of the next month, the tents of the firstworking party were pitched at the head of themountain-branch of the Conemaugh. The partyconsisted of two engineers, a surveyor, twelve assistantsand axemen, and a cook. A track, onehundred and twenty feet wide, overgrown withheavy spruce and hemlock timber, had to becleared, for a distance of thirty miles. The amountof labour was increased as the work proceeded:and, at one time, as many as two thousand menwere employed upon the road. On the 26th ofNovember, 1833, the first car traversed the wholelength on the single track that was finished. Thecanals were then closed for the season ; but, duringTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 193the next March the road was opened for a publichighway. In another year the enterprise was completed:and in May 1835, the State furnished thewhole motive power. The stupendous work wasthen in full operation.Our party (of four, one a child) traversed theentire State from Pittsburg to Philadelphia bycanal and rail-road, in four days, at an expense ofonly forty two dollars, not including provisions.There was then great competition between thelines of canal-boats. We went by the new line,whose boats were extraordinarily clean, and thetable really luxurious. An omnibus, sent fromthe canal, conveyed us from our hotel at Pittsburghto the boat, at nine in the evening; andwe immediately set off. Berths were put up forthe ladies of the party in the ladies' dressing-room,and removed during the day. We were calledearly, and breakfast dispatched before the heatgrew oppressive; but, though it was now themiddle of July, I could not remain in the shadeof the cabin : the scenery, during our whole course,was so beautiful. Umbrella and fan made theheat endurable on deck, except for the two hoursnearest to noon. The only great inconveniencewas the having to remember perpetually to avoidthe low bridges, which we passed, on an average,every quarter of an hour. When we were all to-vol.II. K194 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.gether, this was little of an annoyance ; for one oranother was sure to remember to give warning ;but a solitary person, reading or in reverie, isreally in danger. We heard of two cases of youngladies, reading, who had been crushed to death :and we prohibited books upon deck. Charleythought the commotion caused on our approach toa bridge the best part of our amusement ; and hewas heard to complain sometimes that it was very-longsince we had had any bridges, or when onechanced to be so lofty that we might pass under itwithout stooping. The best of all in his eyes were thehorizontal ones, which compelled us to lie down flat.The valley of the Kiskiminites is like one noble,fruitful park. Here and there were harvest fieldsof small grain,"and of the tasselled Indian corn: anda few coal and salt works, some forsaken, somebusy, showed themselves on reaches of the river ;but we were usually enclosed by a circle of woodedhills, reposing in the brightest lights and shadows.The canal commonly ran along the base of one ofthese hills; but it often let us slip into the broadlucid stream of the river itself.After having left the Kiskiminites behindus, we crossed the Conemaugh by a fine aqueduct,which continued its course through a longdark tunnel, piercing the heart of the mountain.The reflection of the blue light behind us on theTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 195straight line of water in this cavern made a beautifulpicture. The paths which human hands havepiled upon one another here form a singular combination: the river below, the aqueduct over it ;and higher still, the mountain road, winding steeperand steeper to the summit. A settler lives on thismountain, the bottom of whose well was dug outin making the tunnel. In the evening there wasevery combination of rock, hill, wood, river, andluxuriant vegetation that could furnish forth a successionof noble pictures. Charley was as wellamused as the rest of us. He understood the constructionand management of the locks, and wasnever tired of our rising and falling in them ; andthey afforded, besides, an opportunity of steppingashore with his father, to get us flowers, and runalong the bank to the next lock. Of these locksthere are a hundred and ninety-two betweenPittsburg and Philadelphia, averaging eight feet indepth.We were called up before four on the secondmorning, and had barely time to dress, step ashore,and take our places in the car, before the train setoff. We understood that the utmost possible advantageis taken of the daylight, as the trains donot travel after dark ; it being made a point of, thatthe ropes should be examined before each trip.K 2196 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.After having breakfasted by the way, we reachedthe summit of the Portage rail-road between nineand ten. There were fine views all the way ; themountains opening and receding, and disclosingthe distant clearings and nestling villages. Allaround us were plots of wild flowers, of many hues.We were carried on chiefly by steam power,partly by horse, partly by descending weight, and,at the last, down a long reach, of the slightest possibleinclination, by our own weight. The motionwas then tremendously rapid, and it subsided onlyon our reaching the canal at the foot of the mountains.There was again so much hurry there beingdanger of either of two rival boats getting first possessionof the next locks, that we of the last car hadscarcely time to step on board before the team ofthree horses began cantering and raising a dust onthe towing path, and tugging us through the waterat such a rate as to make the waves lash the canalbank. Our boat won the race, and we bolted witha victorious force into the chamber of the first lock.We had occasionally to cross broad rivers. Todaywe crossed the Juniatta by a rope ferry, movedby water-power; and afterwards we crossed theSusquehanna (at the junction of two branches ofthe Juniatta, the Susquehanna, and two canals)TRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 197by means of the towing-path being carried alongthe outside of the great covered bridge whichspans the river at Duncan's Island.The next morning we had to leave the broad,clear, but shallow Susquehanna, the " river ofrocks," as its name imports. I had before travelledalmost its whole length along its banks ; and, likeevery one who has done so, loved its tranquilbeauty.The last stage of this remarkable journey wasfrom Columbia to Philadelphia, by rail-road,eighty-one miles, which we were seven hours inperforming, as the stoppages were frequent andlong. This work, which was opened in 1834, includesthirty-one viaducts, seventy-three stone culverts,five hundred stone drains, and eighteenbridges. Its cost was about 1,600,000 dollars.The length of this passage from Philadelphia toPittsburg is 394 miles.Where, I again ask, would have been these greatworks, but for the immigration so seriously complainedof by some ?The number of considerable canals, varying inlength from fourteen to three hundred and sixty-threemiles, was, in 1835, twenty-five. Of railroads,from fifteen to a hundred and thirty-twcmiles long, there were fourteen. The cost of these198 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.canals was 64,573,099 dollars. The cost ofthese rail-roads was nearly thirty millions ofdollars.The Dutch are the best people to apply to forcapital when any canal work is projected. I heardit said that the word " canal" was enough forthem.The steam-boats of the United States are renowned,as they deserve to be. There is no occasionto describe their size and beauty here ; buttheir number is astonishing. I understand thatthree hundred were navigating the great westernrivers some time ago : and the number is probablymuch increased.Among so many, and where the navigation is sodangerous as on the Mississippi, it is no wonderthat the accidents are numerous. I was rathersurprised at the cautions I received throughout thesouth about choosing wisely among the Mississippisteam-boats ; and at the question gravely asked, asI was going on board, whether I had a life-preserverwith me. I found that all my acquaintanceon board had furnished themselves with life-preservers; and my surprise ceased when we passedboat after boat on the river, delayed or desertedon account of some accident. We were on boardthe " Henry Clay," a noble boat, of high reputeAND MARKETS. 199tion; the present being the ninety-seventh tripaccomplished without accident. Our yawl wassnagged one day; and we encountered a squall andhail storm, one night, which blew both the pilotsaway from the helm, and made them look " to seethehurricane deck blown clear off;" but no mischiefensued.Notwithstanding the increase of steam-boats in theMississippi, flat boats are still much in use. These arelarge boats, of rude construction, made just strongenough to hold together, and keep their cargo offlour, or other articles, dry, from some high pointon the great rivers, to New Orleans. They arefurnished with two enormous oars, fixed on whatis, 1 suppose, called their deck ; to be used wherethe current is sluggish, or when it is desirable tochange the direction of the boat. The cumbrousmachine is propelled by the stream ; her proprietorsonly occasionally helping her progress, now bypulling at the branches of overhanging trees, nowby turning her into the more rapid of two currents.She is seen sometimes floating down the very middleof the river; sometimes gliding under thebanks. At noon, a bower of green leaves iswaving on her deck, for shade to her masters ; atnight, a pine brand is waved, flaming, to givewarning to the steam-boats not to run her down.The voyage from the upper parts of the Ohio to200 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.New Orleans, is thus performed in from three tofive weeks. The cargo being disposed of at NewOrleans, the boat is broken up, and the materialssold ; and her masters work their way home again,as deck passengers on board a steam-boat, by bringingin wood at all the wooding places. TheHenry Clay" had a larger company of this kindof passengers than the captain liked. He declaredthat the deck was giving way under their number.It was a pretty sight to see them twice aday, very early in the morning, and about sunset,pour from the boat, when she drew underthe shore, form two lines between the boat andthe wood pile, and bring in their loads. Most ofthem were tall Kentuckians, who really do lookunlike all other people. I felt a strong inclinationfor a flat-boat voyage down the vast and beautifulMississippi ; beautiful with islands and bluffs, andthe eternal forest ; but I have lost the opportunity.If I should ever visit that beloved country again,this picturesque kind of craft will have disappeared,as the yet more barbarous raft is now disappearing; and one more characteristic feature of westernscenery will be effaced.It seems probable that there will be a more rapidincrease of ships and schooners than of steamboatson the northern lakes. These lakes are sosubject to gusts and storms that steam-boats can-transportAND MARKETS. 201not be considered safe, and ought to make no promisesof punctuality. The captains declare theiroffice to be too anxious a one. A squall comesfrom any quarter, without notice ; and the boat nosooner seems to be proceeding prosperously on herway, than she has to run in somewhere for safetyfrom a sudden storm.Of all the water-craft I ever saw, I know noneso graceful as the sloops on the Hudson ; unless itbe the New York pilot-boats. The North-Riversloops are an altogether peculiar race of boats.They are low, and can carry a great press of sail,from the smoothness of the water on which theyperform their voyages. A sloop of a hundred andfifty tons will carry a mast of ninety feet high. Icould watch these boats on the Hudson, a wholesummer through ; moored beside a pebbly strand,in a recess of the shore ; or lying dark in a trailof glittering sunshine ; or turning the whitest ofsails to the sun, startling the fish-hawk with thesudden gleam, so that he quits his prey, and makesfor the hanging woods. I saw their graceful formsdisclosed by lightning, while I was watching, fromthe piazza of the West Point Hotel, the progress ofa tremendous storm. I saw them as suddenly disclosedat another time ; and still more strikingly.From the terrace of Pine Orchard House, on thesummit of the Catskill Mountain, I watched, oneK 5202 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.July morning, at four o'clock, the breaking of thedawn over the entire valley of the Hudson. Thedifference between mountain, forest, and meadow,first appeared. Then the grey river seemed togrow into sight, for the whole length of its windings.It was twelve miles off, and looked little morethan a thread. The sun came up, like a goldenstar resting on the mountain-top ; and, on the instant,the river was seen to be peopled with thesesloops. Their white sails came in one instant intoview, together with the churches in the hamlets,and the bright gables of the farm-houses in themeadows. The whole scene was made alive byone ray.There will be no want of markets for produce ofall kinds, in the United States, within any time thatcan be foreseen. If slavery were to be abolishedtomorrow, and, in consequence, more corn grownand cattle reared in the slave States, the demandfor both from the north-western States would stillgo on to increase ; so vast and progressive wouldbe the improvement in the south. The great citiesare even yet ill supplied from the country. Provisions. are very dear ; and the butcher's meatthroughout the country is far inferior to what itwill be when an increased amount of labour, andmeans of transport, shall encourage improvement inthe pasturage and care of stock. While, as weTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 203have seen, fowls, butter, and eggs, are still sentfrom Vermont into Boston, there is no such thingto be had there as a joint of tender meat. In onehouse at Boston, where a very numerous familylives in handsome style, and where I several timesmet large dinner parties, I never saw an ounce ofmeat, except ham. The table was covered withbirds, in great variety, and well cooked ; but allwinged creatures. The only tender, juicy meat Isaw in the country, was a sirloin of beef at Charleston,and the w f hole provision of a gentleman's tablein Kentucky. At one country place, there wasnothing but veal on the table for a month ; in atown where I staid ten days, nothing was to behad but beef: and throughout the south the travellermeets little else than pork, under all mannerof disguises, and fowls.Much is said in England about the cheapness ofliving in the United States, without its being understoodwhat need there is of equalising, (or whatappears so to the inhabitants of an old country,)by means of markets. In places where beef andveal are twopence per pound, and venison a penny,(English,) tea may be twenty shillings per pound,and gloves seven shillings a pair. At Charlottes-villeUniversity, fowls were provided to the professors'families at a dollar a dozen. In the townsof Kentucky, meat is fourpence per pound ; in therural parts of Pennsylvania a penny or twopence;204 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.and butter sixpence. At Ebensburg, on the top ofthe Alleghanies, we staid twenty-five hours. Two ofus were well taken care of, had attendance, goodbeds, two dinners each, supper, breakfast, and a supplyof buns to carry away with us ; and all for onedollar ; the dollar at that time being four shillingsand twopence English. The next week, I paid sixdollars for the making of a gown at Philadelphia ;and all the ladies of a country town, not very faroff, were wearing gloves too bad to be mended, ornone at all, because none had come up by thecanal for many weeks.At Washington, I wanted some ribbon for mystraw bonnet ; and, in the whole place, in the season,I could find only six pieces of ribbon to choosefrom.Throughout the entire country, (out of the cities)I was struck with the discomfort of brokenwindows which appeared on every side. Largefarm-houses, flourishing in every other respect, haddismal-looking windows. I was possessed withthe idea that the business of a travelling glazierwould be a highly profitable one. Persons whohappen to live near a canal, or other quiet wateryroad, have baskets of glass of various sizes sent tothem from the towns, and glaze their own windows.But there is no bringing glass over a corduroy,or mud, or rough limestone road ; and thosewho have no other highways must " get along"TRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 205with such windows as it may please the weatherand the children to leave them.The following laconic dialogue shows, not unfairly,even if it be a mere jest, how acceptablemeans of transport would be to western settlers.Whose land was this that you bought ?"Mong's.""What's the soil?"Bogs."What's the climate?"Fogs."What do you get to eat ?"Hogs."What did you build your house of?"Logs'Have you any neighbours ?"Frogs."There are only two methods (besides rare accidents)by which dwellers in such places can gettheir wants supplied. When a few other neighboursbesides frogs, gather round the settler, someoneopens a grocery store. I went shopping nearthe Falls of Niagara ; about a quarter of a milefrom which place, there is a store on the bordersof the forest. I saw there glass and bacon ; stay-laces,prints, drugs, rugs, and crockery; bomba-teensand tin cans ; books, boots, and moist sugar,&c. &c.206 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.Pedlars are the other agents of supply. It hasbeen mentioned how bibles and other books aresold by youths who adopt this method of speedilyraising money. The Yankee pedlars, with theirwooden clocks, are renowned. One of these gentrylately retired with a fortune of a hundred thousanddollars, made by the sale of wooden clocksalone. These men are great benefactors to society:for, be their clocks what they may, theymake the country people as well off as the inhabitantsof towns, in the matter of knowing the time ;and what more would they have ? One would thinkthere was no sun in the United States, so veryimaginative are most of the population in respectof the hour. Even in New York I found awide difference between the upper and lower partsof the city : and between Canandaigua and Buffalothere was the slight variation of half an hour. Insome parts of the south, we were at the mercy ofwhatever clock the last pedlar might have happenedto bring, for the appearance of meals : but itappeared as if the clocks themselves had somethingof the Yankee spirit in them ; for, while theywere usually too fast, I rarely knew one too slow.The perplexity about time took a curious formin one instance, in the south. The lady of the governorof the State had never had sufficient energyto learn the clock. With both clock and watch inTRANSPORT AND MARKETS. 207the house, she was incessantly sending her slaveVenus, (lazy, ignorant, awkward, and ugly,) into aneighbour's house to ask the hour. Three timesin one morning did Venus loll against the door, her chin in her hands, drawling,What's the time ?"Nine, Venus."Venus went home, and told her mistress it wasone. Dinner was hastened ; but it soon appearingfrom some symptom that it could not be so late,Venus appeared again, with her chin reposing asbefore."What's the time?"Between ten and eleven, Venus."Venus carries word that it is eight. And so on.The race of pedlars will decrease, year by year.There will be fewer carts, nicely packed with boxesand baskets. There will be fewer youths in homespun,with grave faces and somewhat prim deportment,in well-laden gigs. There will be fewerhorsemen, with saddle-bags, and compact woodencases. There will be fewer pedestrians, withpouches strung before and behind, an umbrella inone hand, and an open book in the other. Thesame men, or their sons, will gain in fortune, andlose perhaps somewhat in mind and manners, bybeing stationary, or the frequenters of some establishedmarket.208 TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.The conveying 'of vast quantities of cotton andother produce towards the southern ports is alreadya matter of pride to the residents, who boast thatthey employ the industry of persons a thousandmiles off to provide food for themselves and theirdependents. The bustle of the great northernmarkets is also very striking to the stranger whosees to what distance in the interior, the produceof Europe and Asia is to be conveyed. But, a fewyears hence, the spread of comfort and luxury willbe as great as that of industry is now. By a vastaugmentation of the means of transport, marketswill be opened wherever the soil is peculiarly rich,the mines remarkably productive, or the localityespecially inviting.The object is an all-important one. As it istoo late to restrict the territory on which the Americanpeople are dispersed, it is most serviceablethat they should be brought together again, forpurposes of intercourse, mutual education and discipline,and wise co-operation in the work of self-government,by such means as exist for practicallyannihilating time and space. The certain increaseof wealth by these means is a good. The certainincrease of people is an incalculably greater. Thecertain increase of knowledge and civilisation isthe greatest of all.INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS. 209SECTION I.INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS.ONE of the most important constitutional questionsthat has arisen in the United States is one,regarding Internal Improvements, which has grownout of a failure of foresight in the makers of theconstitution. No set of men could be expected toforesee every great question which must arise duringthe advancement of a young country ; and thereis no evidence of its having occurred to any one,in the early days of the republic, to inquire whetherthe general government should have power toinstitute and carry on public works, all over theStates ; and under what limitations. Many inconsistentand contradictory proceedings have takenplace in Congress, since the question was firstraised ; and it remains unsettled.For some years after the Revolution, the treasuryhad enough to do to pay the debts of thewar, and defray the expenses attendant upon theorganisation of the new system. As soon as asurplus was found to be in hand, suggestions wereheard about improving the country. In 1796, Mr.Madison proposed a resolution to cause a survey210 INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS.to be made for a road from north to south, throughall the Atlantic States. No appropriation wasmade for the purpose : but no objection was offeredon the ground of the general government not havingpower to make such appropriation. The difficultyof access to the great western wildernesswas represented to Congress under Mr. Jefferson'sadministration, in 1802; and a law was passed,making appropriations for opening roads in thenorth-west territory. This was the first appropriationmade by Congress for purposes of internalimprovement. Many similar acts followed ;and road-making and surveying the coast went onexpeditiously, and to a great extent. In 1807, Mr.Gallatin prepared the celebrated Report to theSenate, which contains a systematic plan for theimprovement of the whole country. In 1812, duringMr. Madison's administration, a survey wasauthorised of the main post road from Maine toGeorgia. Improvement under the sanction ofCongress went on with increased activity into theadministration of Mr. Monroe, by whom the firstcheck was given. Mr. Monroe vetoed the bill authorisingthe collection of tolls for the repair ofthe Cumberland road. The reason assigned for theveto was that it was one thing to make appropriationsfor public works, and another thing to assumejurisdiction and sovereignty over the soil onINTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS. 211which such works were erected; and PresidentMonroe did not believe that Congress could assumepower to levy toll.* By his adoption of asubsequent act, involving the same principles, however,it seemed that he had changed his opinion, orresolved to yield the question.Mr. J. Q. Adams's advocacy of internal improvementsremoved some lingering difficulties; and,while he was President, the public works werecarried on with great activity. The southern membersof Congress, however, were generally opposedto the exercise of this power by the general government: and it has ever since been a strongly-debatedquestion.President Jackson's course on the subject hasnot been very consistent. Before his election, healways voted for internal improvements, going sofaras to advocate subscriptions by government tothe stock of private canal companies, and the formationof roads beginning and ending within thelimits of particular States. In his message at theopening of the first Congress after his accession,he proposed the division of the surplus revenuePresident Jackson is of opinion that no toll should be levieden ways provided by the public revenue. It should be a completeand final outlay, and none of the people compelled to payfor works effected by the people's money. This seems clearlyright.212 INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS.among the States, as a substitute for the promotionof internal improvements by the general government.He attempted a limitation and distinctiontoo difficult and important to be settled and actedupon on the judgment and knowledge of one man ;a distinction between general and local objects.It is manifestly impossible to draw the line withany precision. The whole Union is benefited bythe Erie canal, though it lies wholly within thelimits of the State of New York ; and a thousandpositions of circumstances may be imagined bywhich local advantages may become general, andgeneral local, so as to confound the limitation altogether.At any rate, the judgment and knowledgeof any individual, or any cabinet, are obviously unequalto the maintenance of such a distinction.In 1829 and 1030, the President advocated suchan amendment of the constitution as would authoriseCongress to apply the surplus revenue tocertain specified objects, involving the generalgood; and he strongly objected to the generalgovernment exercising a power, considered by himunconstitutional, merely because there was a quantityof money in the treasury which must be disposedof. He has since changed his opinion, andbelieves that less evil would be incurred by evensuddenly reducing the revenue to the amount ofthe wants of the government, than by conferringINTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS. 213on the general government immense means of patronage,and opportunity for corrupt and wastefulexpenditure.These changes of opinion in President Jacksonprove nothing so clearly as the great difficulty ofthe subject. It is, however, so pressing and soimportant that, notwithstanding its difficulty, itmust be settled before long.The opposing arguments seem to me to bethese.The advocates of a concession to Congress ofthe power of conducting internal improvementsplead, with regard to the constitutionally of thepower, that it is conferred by the clauses whichauthorise Congress to make post-roads : to regulatecommerce between the States : to make and carryon war ; (and therefore to have roads by which totransport troops ;) to lay taxes, to pay the debts,and provide for the general welfare of the UnitedStates : and to pass all laws necessary to carry intoeffect its constitutional powers.The answer is, that to derive from these clausesany countenance of the practice of spending withoutlimit the public funds, for objects which anypresent government may declare to be for the generalwelfare, is an obvious straining of the instrument: that, by such methods, the constitution maybemade to authorise the spending of any amount214 INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS.whatever, for any purpose whatever : that it is thecharacteristic of the constitution to specify thepowers given to Congress with a nicety which iswholly inconsistent with such a boundless conveyanceof power as is here presumed: and that,accordingly, the permission to lay taxes, to pay thedebts, and provide for the general welfare of theUnited States, is limited as to its objects by thepreceding specifications : and that, finally, thepowers allotted to the State governments excludethe supposition that Congress is authorised to assumesuch territorial jurisdiction as it has beenallowed to practise within the limits of the severalStates.This last set of opinions appears to disinterestedobservers so obviously reasonable, that the wonderis how so weak a stand on the provisions of theconstitution can have been maintained for anylength of time. The reason is, that the pleas ofexpediency are so strong as to counterbalance theweakness of the constitutional argument. But,this being the case, the truly honest and patrioticmode of proceeding would be to add to the constitutionby the means therein provided ; instead ofstraining the instrument to accomplish an objectwhich was not present to the minds of its framers.The pleas of the advocates of Internal Improvementsare these : that very extensive public works,INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS. 215designed for the benefit of the whole Union, andcarried through vast portions of its area, must beaccomplished : that an object so essential oughtnot to be left at the mercy of such an accident asthe cordial agreement of the requisite number ofStates, to carry such works forward to their completion; that the surplus funds accruing from thewhole nation cannot be so well employed as inpromoting works by which the whole nation willbe benefited : and that, as the interests of the majorityhave hitherto upheld Congress in the use ofthis power, it may be assumed to be the will of themajority that Congress should continue to exerciseit.The answer is, that it is inexpedient to put avast and increasing patronage into the hands of thegeneral government : that only a very superficialknowledge can be looked for in members of Congressas to the necessity or value of works proposedto be instituted in any parts of the Statesbut those in which they are respectively interested :that endless jealousies would arise between thevarious States,* from the impossibility or unde-southCarolina was in favour of Internal Improvements, tillit was found bow much larger a share of the benefit would be appropriatedby the active and prosperous northern States than bythose which are depressed by slavery. Since that discovery,South Carolina's sectional jealousy has been unbounded, and her216 INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS.suitableness of equalising the amount of appropriationmade to each : that useless works would beproposed from the spirit of competition, or individualinterest : * and that corruption, co-extensivewith the increase of power, would deprave thefunctions of the general governmentThere is much truth on both sides here. In thefirst set of pleas there is so much force that theyhave ceased to be, what they were once supposed,the distinctive doctrines of the federal party. Mr.Webster is still considered the head of the InternalImprovements party ; and Mr. Calhoun was forsome time the leader of its opponents. Jefferson'slatest opinions were strong against the powerclaimed and exercised by Congress. Yet largenumbers of the democratic party are as strenuousopposition to the exercise of the power very fierce. In her periodicalpublications, as well as through other channels, she hasdeclared herself neglected, or likely to be neglected, on account ofher being southern. The enterprise of the North and depressionof the South are, as usual, looked upon as favour and neglect,shown by the general government.When I was ascending the Mississippi, I observed a lighthouseperched on a bluff, in a ridiculous situation. On askingthe meaning of the phenomenon, I was told that a senator fromthe State of Mississippi, wishing to make a flourish about his zealfor the improvement of his State, had obtained an appropriationfrom Congress to build this light-house, which is of no earthlyuse.INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS. 217for internal improvements as Adams and Websterthemselves; the interests of the majority beingclearly on that side.To an impartial observer it appears that Congresshas no constitutional right to devote thepublic funds to internal improvements, at its ownunrestricted will and pleasure : that the permittedusurpation of the power for so long a time indicatesthat some degree of such power in the handsof the general government is desirable and necessary: that such power should be granted throughan amendment of the constitution, by the methodstherein provided : that, in the mean time, it isperilous that the instrument should be strained forthe support of any function, however desirable itsexercise may be.In case of the proposed addition being made tothe constitution, arrangements will, of course, beentered into for determining the principles bywhich general are to be distinguished from localobjects, or whether such distinction can, on anyprinciple, be fixed ; for testing the utility of proposedobjects ; for checking extravagant expenditure,jobbing, and corrupt patronage : in short,the powers of Congress will be specified, here, asin other matters, by express permission and prohibition.These details, difficult or unmanageableamidst the questionable exercise of a great power,VOL. II. L218 INTERNAL Improvements.will, doubtless, be arranged so as to work withprecision, when the will of the majority is broughtto bear directly upon them.It is time that this great question should be settled.Congress goes on making appropriations foraroad here, a canal there, a harbour or a lighthousesomewhere else. All these may or may notbe necessary. Meantime, those who have law ontheir side, exclaim against extravagance, jobbing,and encroachment on popular rights. Those whohave expediency on their side plead necessity, thepopular will, and the increasing surplus revenue.If the constitution provides means by which law,expediency, and the prevention of abuse, can bereconciled to the satisfaction of all, surely thesooner it is done the better. Thus the matter appearsto a passing stranger.CHAPTER III.MANUFACTURES.The crude treasures, perpetually exposed before our eyes,contain within them other and more valuable principles. Allthese, likewise, in their numberless combinations, which ages oflabour and research can never exhaust, may be destined to furnish,in perpetual succession, new sources of our wealth and ofour happiness."Bandage.THE whole American people suffered, during therevolutionary war, from the want of the comfortsand some of the necessaries of life, now so called.Their commerce with the world abroad being almostwholly intercepted, they had nothing wherewithto console themselves but the stocks whichmight be left in their warehouses, and the produceof their soil. It is amazing, at this day, to hear ofthe wants of the commonest articles of clothingL 2220 MANUFACTURES.and domestic use, undergone in those days by someof the first families in the republic.The experience of these troubles suggested tomany persons the expediency of establishing manufacturesin the United States : but there was analmost universal prejudice against this mode of employment.It is amusing now to read Hamilton'scelebrated Report on Manufactures, presented in1790, and to see how elaborately the popularobjections to manufactures are answered. Thepersuasion of the nation was that America wasdesigned to be an agricultural country ; that agriculturewas wholly productive, and manufacturesnot productive at all ; and that agriculture was themore honourable occupation. The two formerprejudices have been put to flight by happy experience.The last still lingers. It is not five yearssince the President's message declared that " thewealth and strength of a country are its population ;and the best part of that population are the cultivatorsof the soil."Such prepossessions may be left to die out.They arise mainly from a very good notion, notvery clearly defined; that the more intercoursemen have with Nature, the better for the men.This is true ; but Nature is present in all placeswhere the hands of men work, if the workmen canbut see her. If Nature is supposed present onlyMANUFACTURES. 221where there is a blue sky overhead, and grass andtrees around, this shows only the narrowness ofmind of him who thus supposes. Her forces areat work wherever there is mechanism; and manonly directs them to his particular purpose. InAmerica, it may be said that her beauty is presentwherever her forces are at work; for men havethere set up their mechanism in some of thechoicest spots in the land. There is a good andan evil aspect belonging to all things. If touristsare exasperated at fine scenery being deformed bythe erection of mills, (which in many instances aremore of an ornament than a deformity,) let othersbe awake to the advantage that it is to the work-peopleto have their dwellings and their occupationfixed in spots where the hills are heaped together,and the waters leap and whirl among rocks, ratherthan in dull suburbs where they and their employmentsmay not annoy the eye of the lover of thepicturesque. It always gave me pleasure to seetheartisans at work about such places as Glen'sFalls, the Falls of the Tennessee, and on the banksof some of the whirling streams in the New Englandvalleys. I felt that they caught, or mightcatch, as beautiful glimpses of Nature's face as thewestern settler. If the internal circumstanceswere favourable, there was little in the outward tochoose between. If they had the open mind's222 MANUFACTURES.eye to see beauty, and the soul to feel wonder, itmattered little whether it was the forest or thewaterfall (even though it were called the " water-privilege")that they had to look upon; whetherit was by the agency of vegetation or of steam thatthey had to work. It is deplorable enough, in thisview, to be a poor artisan in the heart of ourEnglish Manchester : but . to be a thriving one inthe most beautiful outskirts of Sheffield is, perhaps,as favourable a lot for the lover of nature as to bealabourer on any soil : and the privileges of theAmerican artisans are like this.As to the old objection to American manufactures,that America was designed to be an agriculturalcountry, it seems to me, as I said before,that America was meant to be everything. Hergroup of republics is merged in one, in the eyes ofthe world ; and, for some purposes, in reality : butthis involves no obligation to make them all alikein their produce and occupations ; but rather thecontrary. Here, as everywhere else, let the lawsof nature be followed, and the procedure will bewise. Nature has nothing to do with artificialboundaries and arbitrary inclosures. There aremany soils and many climates included within theboundary line of the United States ; many countries; and one rule cannot be laid down for all.If there be any one or more of these where the re-MANUFACTURES. 223requisites for manufactures are present, and thosefor agriculture deficient, there let manufacturesarise. If there is poor land, and good mill-seats ;abundant material, animal and mineral, on thespot, and vegetable easily to be procured ; a sufficiencyof hands, and talent for the constructionand use of machinery, there should manufacturesspring up. This is eminently the case with NewEngland, and some other parts of the UnitedStates. It was perceived to be so, even in thedays when the growth of cotton in the south wasspoken of as a small experiment, not likely to producegreat consequences.New England formerly depended chiefly on thecarrying trade. When that resource was diminished,after the war, it is difficult to see how her peoplewere to be prevented setting up manufactures, orwhy they needed any particular exhortation orassistance to do it. They had the opportunity ofobtaining foreign capital ; their previous foreign in-watercourses having pointed out to them where it hadaccumulated, and might therefore be obtained withadvantage. They had a vast material, left fromtheir fisheries, of skins, oil, and the bones of marineanimals ; they had bark, hides, wood, flax, hemp,iron, and clay. They had also the requisite skill ;as may be seen by the following list of domesticmanufactures, carried on in private houses, only, in224 MANUFACTURES.1 790. " Great quantities of coarse cloths, coatings,serges and flannels, linsey-wolsey, hosiery ofwool, cotton, and thread, coarse fustians, jeans, andmuslins, coverlets and counterpanes, tow linens,coarse shillings, meetings, dwellings, and table-linen,and various mixtures of wool and cotton, andof cotton and flax, are made in the household way ;and, in many instances, to an extent not only sufficientfor the supply of the family in which theyare made, but for sale, and even in some cases forexportation. It is computed, in a number of districts,that two-thirds, three-fourths, and even four-fifthsof all the clothing of the inhabitants, are madeby themselves"* If all this was done without theadvantage of division of labour, of masses of capital,or of other machinery than might be set up in a farmhouseparlour, it is clear that this region was fullyprepared, five-and-forty years ago, for the introductionof manufactures on a large scale; and thereappears every reason to believe that they mighthave been left to their natural growth.The same Report mentions seventeen classes ofmanufacture going on as distinct trades, at the sametime, in the northern States.The only plausible objection to the establishmentof manufactures was the scarcity and dearnessHamilton's Report on Manufactures. 1790.MANUFACTURES. 225of labour, in comparison with that of the old countriesof Europe. But, if the exportation of somearticles actually took place, while the labour whichproduced them was scattered about in farm-houses,what might not be expected if the same labourcould be called forth and concentrated, and aidedby the introduction of machinery? A great immigrationof artisans might also be looked for, whenonce any temptation was held out to the poor ofEurope to come over to a young and thriving country.Moreover, improvements in machinery are theinvariable consequence of a deficiency of manufacturinglabour; for the obvious reason that men'swits are urged to supply the want under whichtheir interests suffer. Again : manufactures cantoa considerable degree, be carried on by the labourof women; and there is a great number ofunemployed women in New England, from the circumstancethat the young men of that region wanderaway in search of a settlement on the land ;and, after being settled, find wives in the south andwest.Thus much of the case might have been, andwas by some, foreseen. What has been the event ?In 1825, the amount of manufactures exportedfrom the United States, was 5,729,797 dollars. Ofthese about one-fourth were cotton-piece goods, inthe sale of which the American merchants were226 MANUFACTURES.now able to compete with the English, in someforeign markets. The manufacture of cottons inthe United States afforded a market for one hundredand seventy-five thousand bales of cotton annually;and the printed cottons manufactured athome amounted annually to fourteen millions ofyards. The importation of cotton goods into thecountry in 1825 was in value between twelve andthirteen millions of dollars ; and in 1826, betweennine and ten millions. The woollen manufacturehas never flourished like the cotton ; the bad effectsof the tariff being more immediately visible in regardto articles of manufacture whose raw materialmust be chiefly derived from abroad.In 1828, the legislature of Massachusetts passedresolutions deploring the increasing depression ofthe woollen manufacture, and praying for increasedprotection from Congress. The exportation of cottongoods that year amounted to upwards of a millionof dollars ; and the next year to nearly a millionand a half. The importation of cotton goodswas all but prohibited by the tariff of 1824: andthe consequence was an immense investment ofcapital in the cotton manufacture, almost on theinstant; and some perilous fluctuations since, toonearly resembling the agitations of older countries,where the pernicious policy of ages has accumulateddifficulties on the present generation.MANUFACTURES. 227At Lowell, in Massachusetts, there was in 1818,a small satinet mill, employing about twenty hands;the place itself containing two hundred inhabitants.In 1825, the Merrimack Manufacturing Companywas formed ; it was joined by others ; and in 1832,the capital invested was above six millions of dollars.The whole number of operatives employed was fivethousand ; of whom three thousand eight hundredwere women and girls. The quantity of raw cottonused was upwards of twenty thousand bales. Thequantity of pure cotton goods manufactured wastwenty-five millions of yards. The woollen fabricmanufactured in these establishments was, atthe same time, one hundred and fifty thousandyards. Sixty-eight carpet-looms were at workalso. The workmen employed in all these operationsreceived for wages about 1,200,000 dollarsper annum. About two hundred mechanics, ofa high order of ability, are constantly employed.The fuel consumed in a year is five thousandtons of anthracite coal, besides charcoal andwood.The same protective system which caused thesudden growth of such an establishment as this,tempted numerous capitalists to seek their share ofthe supposed benefits of the tariff. The manufacturinginterest was well nigh ruined by the protectionit had asked for. The competition and consentsMANUFACTURES,quest over-manufacture were tremendous. Failureafter failure took place, till forty-five thousandspindles were standing idle, and thousands of operativeswere thrown into a state of poverty unnaturalenough in such a country as theirs. A cry wasraised by many for a repeal of the tariff: this createda panic among those who, on the strength of thetariff, had withdrawn their capital from commerce,and invested it in manufactures. The stock of allthe manufacturing companies was offered in vain,at prices ruinously low. Thus stood matters in1829.The history of the quarrel between the north andsouth about the tariff, and the nature of the CompromiseBill, is already known. The mischief donewill be repaired, as far as reparation is possible, bythe reduction of the import duties, year by year,till 1842. If the demands of the country and offoreign customers should not rise to the limit of theover-manufacture which has taken place, time isthus allowed for the gradual withdrawing of thecapital and industry which have been seduced intothis method of employment. Meantime, the manufacturesof the northern States are permanentlyestablished, though not in the wisest way. If theyhad been left to themselves, they would have beenan unmixed good to the community. As it is, societyhas suffered the inevitable consequences of an irra-MANUFACTURES. 229national policy, a policy indefensible in a republic.It is well that the experiment wrought out its consequencesso speedily and so plainly that any repetitionis unlikely, little as the natural laws whichregulate commerce are yet understood.In 1831, the total number of looms employed inthe cotton manufacture of the United States was33,433. Of these, 21,336 were in New England;3, 653 in New York State; 6,301 in Pennsylvania;and the rest in Maryland, Delaware,New Jersey, and Virginia.Next to the cotton and woollen manufactures,the most valuable are manufactures from flax andhemp ; from tobacco and grain ; sugar, soap, andcandles, gunpowder, gold and silver coin, iron, copperand brass, hats, medicinal drugs, and shoes.The shoe manufacture is one of the most remarkablein the States, from the suddenness and extentof its spread. It has been mentioned that the shoetrade of New York State is more valuable than thetotal commerce of Georgia. The extent to whichthe manufacture is carried on in one village inMassachusetts, with which I am acquainted, showsthe prosperity of the business.In order to speaking, there must be tanning.There are many and large tanneries in Conversantthe outskirts of Salem, for. the supply of the Lynn230 MANUFACTURES.shoe-manufacture. The largest tannery in theUnited States is at Salem. The hides are partlyimported. The bark is brought from Maine. Thesetanneries were in a state of temporary adversitywhen I saw them. Some kinds of skins are twoor three years in tanning; and capital is thus lockedup in such amounts as render fluctuation dangerous.It had lately been discovered that oak barkcould be had cheaper, and tanning consequentlycarried on to a greater advantage up the Hudsonthan on the Massachusetts coast : so that the tannersand carriers of Salem and Dangers were descendingsomewhat from their high prosperity. Butnothing could exceed the flourishing aspect of Lynn,the sanctum of St. Crispin.In 1831, the value of boots and shoes, (very fewboots, and chiefly ladies' shoes,) made at Lynn wasnearly a million of dollars a year. The totalnumber made was above a million and a half pairs :the number of people employed, three thousand fivehundred ; being about seven-eighths of the populationof the place, partially employed ; and somehundreds from other places, wholly employed. Lastyear, the place was much on the increase. A green,with a piece of water in the middle, and trees, wasbeing laid out in the centre of the town. Newhouses were rising in all directions, and fresh handsTHE TARIFF. 231were welcomed from any quarter ; for the orderssent could not be executed. Besides the domesticsupply, two million pairs of ladies' shoes a-yearwere sent off to the remotest corners of the States ;and, as they have once penetrated there, it seemsdifficult to imagine where the demand will stop ; forthose remote corners are all being more thicklypeopled every day. Their united demand will beenough to make the fortune of a whole State.It seems probable that a few more manufacturesmay be added to those which are sure to flourish inthe United States : as silk and wine. If the governmentfirmly refuses to interfere again in the wayof protection, it will be easily and safely discoverablewhat resources the country really possesses ; andwhat direction her improving industry may naturallyand profitably take.SECTION I.THE TARIFF.IF I were to go into anything like a detailed accountof what I heard about the tariff, during my232 THE TARIFF.travels, no room would be left for more interestingaffairs. The recrimination on the subject is endless.With all this we have nothing to do, now thatit is over. The philosophy and fact of the transaction,and not the changes of opinion and inconsistencyof conduct of public men, are now of importance.It would be well now to leave the persons,and look at the thing.Almost the only fact in relation to the tariff thatI never heard disputed is that it was, under oneaspect, a measure of retaliation. Rendering evil forevil answers no better in economical than in moralaffairs ; even if it take the name of self-defence.Because the British are foolish and wrongin refusing to admit American corn, the Americansexcluded British cottons and woollens. More wassaid, and I believe sincerely, about self-defence thanabout retaliation : but it is very remarkable thatmen so clear-headed, inquiring, and sagacious asthe authors of the American system, should not haveseen further into the condition of their own country,and learned more from the unhappy experience ofEurope, than to imagine that they could neutralisethe effects of the bad policy of England by adoptingthe same bad policy themselves. It is strangethat they did not see that if British cottons andwoollens found easy entrance into their country, itmust have been in exchange for something, thoughTHE TARIFF. 233that something was not corn. It was strange thatthey did not see that if the apparent facilities formanufactures in the northern States were reallygreat enough to justify manufactures, individualenterprise would be sure to find it out ; and all themore readily for the deficiency in the resources ofNew England, which is assigned as the reason foroffering her legislative protection. There was noteven the excuse for interference which exists inold countries; that by intricate complexities ofmismanagement, economical affairs have beenperverted from their natural course. Here, inAmerica, a new branch of industry was to be instituted.The skill was ready; the material wasready ; the capital was procurable, if the object wasgood ; and ought not to be, if the object was unsound.The interests of the people might havebeen trusted in their own hands. They would ofthemselves have taken less of British cotton goods,and more of something else which they could notget at home, if cotton goods could be made betterand cheaper at home than in England ; which it isproved that, for the most part, they can be. It isanticipated that when the Compromise method expires,the home manufacture of some kinds of finecotton goods will diminish ; but that the bulk of themanufacture is beyond the reach of accident. Theeffect of the tariff has been to over-stimulate a THE TARIFF.tural process, and thus to cause over-manufacture,panic, and ruin to many. It is said, and with truth,that America can afford to try experiments ; thatAmerica is the very country that should learn byexperience; and so forth. But it should be rememberedthat those who suffer are not alwaysthose who should be the learners. In New England,there is a large class of very poor women,ladies ; some working ; some unable to work. Iknew many of these ; and was struck with the greatnumber of them who assigned as the cause of theirpoverty the depreciation of factory stock, or thefailure in other ways of factory schemes, in whichtheir parents or other friends had, beguiled by thepromises of the tariff, invested what should havebeen their maintenance.No more need be said on the policy of the tariff.The truth is now very extensively acknowledged ;and though some of those who are answerable forthe American system continue to assume that manufacturescould not have been instituted withoutits assistance, I believe it is pretty generally understoodthat no more infant manufactures will be burdenedwith this cruel kind of protection.A far more important, question than that of thepolicy is that of the principle of a protective systemin the United States.It is known that the strongest resistance wasTHE TARIFF. 235made to the American .system on the ground of itsbeing unconstitutional. Its advocates relied, forthe necessary sanction, on the clauses which providethat " Congress shall have power to lay andcollect taxes, and duties, imposts, and excises;"and " to regulate commerce with foreign nations."With regard to the first of these clauses, both partiesseem, more or less, in the right. By the tariff,Congress proposed " to lay and collect duties andimposts," as the constitution gives it express leaveto do. Yet it is clear to those who view the constitutionin the light of the sun of the revolution, thatsuch permission was given solely with a view to thecollection of the revenue. No one of the framersof the constitution could have foreseen that any proposalwould be made to lay duties for the protectionof the productive interests of a section of the Union.Such a use of the clause is forbidden in spirit,though not in the letter, by the clause which ordains," but all duties, imposts, and excises shallbe uniform throughout the United States." Thisclause is, in its spirit, wholly condemnatory of partiallegislation by Congress.Remarks somewhat analogous may be maderespecting the other clause, which empowers Congress" to regulate commerce with foreign nations."By the letter of this clause, Congress may appearto a superficial observer authorised so to regulate its236 THE TARIFF.commerce with Great Britain as to cause an arbitrarydistribution of property and industry withinher own boundaries; but such a double action couldnever have been in contemplation of the framers ofthe instrument. What they had in view was obviouslythe guardianship of the national commercialrights, and the promotion of the national commercial,not sectional manufacturing, interests.Where the letter and the spirit of the constitutionare made, by lapse of time and change of circumstance,to bear out opposite modes of conduct,there is an appeal which every man must make, forhis individual satisfaction and conviction. He mustappeal to the fundamental republican principles, outof which grew both the spirit and the letter of theconstitution.By these the tariff is hopelessly condemned. Itis contrary to all sound republican principle thatthe general government of a nation, widely spreadover regions, and separated into sections diversifiedin their productions, occupations, and interests,should use its power of legislating for the whole toprovide for the particular interests of a part. Theprinciple of perfect political and social equality isviolated when the general government takes cognisanceof local objects so far as to do a deed whichmust materially affect the distribution of privateproperty ; so far as to lay a tax on the whole of theTHE TARIFF. 237nation for the avowed object of benefiting a part.The government of a republic has no business withdistinctions among its subjects. It is to have norespect of classes, more than of individuals. Itsfunctions are to be discharged for the common interest; and it is to entertain no fancies as to whatnew institutions or arrangements will be beneficialor the contrary to the nation.All such institutions and arrangements must bemade within the several States, or by an agreementof States; subject, of course, to the permissionsand prohibitions of the constitution. If one State,or several States, should be pleased to decreebounties on their own manufactures, let them do so.Whether the measure were wise or unwise, no oneout of the limits of such State or States would havea right to complain. This could not be said underthe tariff. It was a just complaint which was urgedby many States, that the federal representation wasmade useless to the minority, from the moment thatthe federal government applied itself to favour localand particular interests. The case is not alteredby the possible result being highly beneficial to thewhole country ; which is the plea industriously advancedby the advocates of the tariff. Whateverdirection and application of industry and capitalmay be ultimately most beneficial, Congress has, onprinciple, no more business with it than with the238 THE TARIFF.support of what may prove in the end to be thepurest religious doctrine.A. If America had been as free, from the beginning,in all respects, as a young country ought tobe, free to run her natural course of prosperity,subject only to the faithful laws which regulate theeconomy of society as beneficially as another setof laws regulates the seasons, we might never haveheard of the American system. The poisonousanomaly which has caused almost all the diseasesthat have afflicted the republic, appears to be theoriginal infection here also. If labour in the southernStates had been free long ago, the deteriorationof southern property would riot have causedthe southern planters to clamour for legislativeprotection. The arbitrary tenure of labour madethem desire an arbitrary distribution of capital.They desired it for the north, as eagerly as forthemselves, expecting the result to be that thecotton-growers would be protected by heavy importduties on cotton ; and that the prosperity ofthe north, depending, as they supposed, wholly onits commerce, would be crippled by the samemeans ; and thus, something like an equality betweennorth and south be restored. The effectwas different from what had been anticipated.The deterioration of the south went on ; and manufacturesfirst replaced, and then renovated, theTHE TARIFF. 239commerce of the north. The next consequencewas natural enough. The south became infuriatedagainst the tariff, not only on the reasonable groundof its badness of principle, but on the allegationthat it was the cause of all the woes of the south,*The following sketch of the aspect of the south-eastern Statesis a very faithful one. The error of the writer is in supposing thatsuch a condition could be brought about by the tariff, rather thanby the necessary operation of the slavery system, Jby which thechildren of the third and fourth generations are always reduced tosigh for the comparative prosperity of their fathers.These views of the degradation of the southern States receivea melancholy and impressive confirmation from the general aspectand condition of the country, viewed in contrast with its formerprosperity. If the ancestors of this generation could rise from thegrave, and revisit the scenes of their former usefulness, theywould not hesitate to pronounce that the hand of oppression hadfallen heavily upon the inheritance of their children. They wouldbe utterly at a loss to account for the change everywhere exhibited,upon any other supposition.With natural advantages more bountiful than were ever dispensedby a kind Providence to any other people upon the face ofthe globe, they would behold, from the mountains of the sea-coast,one unbroken scene of cheerless stagnation and premature decay.With one of the most valuable staples that ever blessed the laboursof the husbandman, and swelled the sails of a prosperous and enrichingcommerce, they would find that our estates are, with asteady and fatal proclivity, depreciating in value, our fields becomingwaste, and our cities desolate. With habits of industry andeconomy which have no example in our former history, they wouldfind the heirs of the largest inheritances generally involved in embarrassments,and many of them irretrievably ruined. Wherever240 THE TARIFF.and all the prosperity, diversified Math woes, ofthe north. It has always been the method ofslaveholders to lay the blame of their sufferingsupon everything but the real cause. Any onewho reads the history of slavery in the book ofevents, will find slave-holders of every countrycomplaining bitterly and incessantly of the want oflegislative protection to themselves, or of its beinggranted to others. In the present instance, it wasa device of the slave-holders, to renovate their fallingfortunes, turned against themselves.The true dignity of America would have been,had circumstances allowed of it, to have followedout her own republican principles, instead of adoptingthe false principles and injurious policy ofolder and less favoured nations. If she had leftlabour and commerce, and capital free ; disdaininginterference at home and retaliation abroad ; showingher faith in the natural laws of social economy>v calmly committing to them the external intermight cast their eyes, they would find melancholy evidencesthat the withering blasts of an unsparing despotism had passedover the land, blighting the choicest bounties of Providence, andleaving scarcely a solitary memorial of our former prosperity.They would look in vain for the animating scenes of successfulindustry, for the wealth and comforts of a thriving population, andfor those mansions of hospitality which were once the seats of elegance,and the abodes of cheerfulness." Southern Review, Nov.1828. p. 613.-;;THE TARIFF. 241rests of her people, she would by this time havebeen the pattern and instructress of the civilisedworld, in the philosophy of production and commerce.But she had not the knowledge nor therequisite faith; nor was it to be reasonably expectedthat she should. Her doctrine was, and Ifear still is, that she need not study political economywhile she is so prosperous as at present : thatpolitical economy is for those who are under adversity.If in other cases she allows that prevention isbetter than cure, avoidance than reparation, whynot in this ? It may not yet be too late for her tobe in the van of all the world in economical as inpolitical philosophy. The old world will still be longin getting above its bad institutions. If Americawould free her servile class by the time the provisionsof the Compromise Bill expire, and start afreshin pure economical freedom, she might yet be thefirst to show, by her transcendent peace and prosperity,that democratic principles are the true foundationof economical, as well as political, welfare.VOL. II.242 MANUFACTURING LABOUR.SECTION II.MANUFACTURING LABOUR.So much is said in Europe of the scarcity of agriculturallabour in the United States, that it is amatter of surprise that manufactures should havesucceeded as they have done. It is even supposedby some that the tariff was rendered necessary by adeficiency of labour: that by offering a premium onmanufacturing industry, the requisite amount wassought to be drawn away from other employments,and concentrated upon this. This is a mistake.There is every reason to suppose that the requisiteamount of labour would have been forthcoming,if affairs had been left to take their natural course.It has been shown that domestic manufactureswere carried on to a great extent, so far back as1 790. From that time to this, they have never altogetherceased in the farm-houses, as the homespun,still so frequently to be seen all over thecountry, and the agricultural meetings of New England,(where there is usually a display of domesticmanufactures,) will testify. The hands by whichthese products are wrought come to the factories,when the demand for labour renders it worth while;MANUFACTURING LABOUR. 243and drop back into the farm-houses when the demandslackens.It is not the custom in America for women (exceptslaves) to work out of doors. It has beenmentioned that the young men of New Englandmigrate in large numbers to the west, leaving anover-proportion of female population, the amount ofwhich I could never learn. Statements were madeto me ; but so incredible that I withhold them. Sufficeit that there are many more women than meninfrom six to nine States of the Union. There isreason to believe that there was much silent sufferingfrom poverty before the institution of factories ;that they afford a most welcome resource to somethousands of young women, unwilling to give themselvesto domestic service, and precluded, by thecustoms of the country, from rural labour. We haveseen how large a proportion of the labour in theLowell factories is supplied by women.Much of the rest is furnished by immigrants. Isaw English, Irish, and Scotch operatives. I heardbut a poor character of the English operatives ; andthe Scotch were pronounced " ten times better."The English are jealous of their ' bargain,' and onthe watch lest they should be asked to do more thanthey stipulated for : their habits are not so sober asthose of the Scotch, and they are incapable of goingM 2244 MANUFACTURING LABOUR.beyond the single operation they profess. Such isthe testimony of their employers.The demand for labour is, however, sufficientlyimperious in all the mechanical departments tomake it surprising that prison labour is regardedwith such jealousy as I have witnessed. When itis considered how small a class the convicts of theUnited States are, and are likely to remain, howessential labour is to their reformation, how few arethe kinds of manufacture which they can practise,and that it is of some importance that prison establishmentsshould maintain themselves, it seems whollyunworthy of the intelligent mechanics of Americathat they should be so afraid of convict labour asactually to obtain pledges from some candidates foroffice, to propose the abolition of prison manufactures.I believe that the Sing-Sing and Auburn prisons,in the State of New York, turn out a greatervariety and amount of products than any others ;and they have yet done very little more than maintainthemselves. The Sing Sing convicts quarry anddress granite : the Auburn prisoners make clocks,combs, shoes, carpets, and machinery. They arecabinet and chair-makers, weavers, and tailors.There were 650 prisoners when J was there ; and ofthese many were inexperienced workmen ; and allwere not employed in manufactures. Jealousy ofMANUFACTURING LABOUR. 245such a set of craftsmen is absurd, in the presentstate of the American labour-market.I saw specimens of each of these kinds of labour.A few days after I entered the country, Iwas taken to an agricultural meeting, held annuallyat Pittsfield, Massachusetts. We were too late to seethebest part of it, the dispensing of prizes for thebest agricultural skill, and for the choicest domesticmanufactures. But there were specimens leftwhich surprised me by the excellence of their quality;table and bed-linen, diapers, blankets, andknitted wares. There was an ingenious model ofa bed for invalids, combining many sorts of facilitiesfor change of posture. There were nearlyas many women as men at this meeting ; all werewell dressed, and going to and fro in the householdvehicle, the country-wagon, with the invariablebear-skin covering the seat, and peeping out on allsides. A comfortable display, from the remainsof the dinner, was set out for us by smart mulattogirls, with snow-berries in their hair. The mechanics'houses in this beautiful village would beenough, if they could be exhibited in England, totempt over half her operatives to the new world.The first cotton-mill that I saw was at Paterson,New Jersey. It was set up at first with nine hundredspindles, which were afterwards increasedto fifteen hundred ; then to six thousand. MANUFACTURING Labouringwas still going on when I was there. Thegirls were all well-dressed. Their hair was arrangedaccording to the latest fashions which hadarrived, via New York, and they wore clashes ingoing to and fro between their dwellings and themill. I saw some of the children barefooted, butcarrying umbrellas, under a slight sprinkling ofrain. I asked whether those who could afford umbrellaswent barefoot for coolness, or other convenience.The proprietor told me that there hadprobably been an economical calculation in thecase. Stockings and shoes would defend onlythe feet; while the umbrella would preserve thegloss of the whole of the rest of the costume.There seems, however, to be a strong predilectionfor umbrellas in the United States. A convict,in solitary confinement in the Philadelphiaprison, gave me the history of all his burglaries.The proximate cause of his capture after the lastwas an umbrella. He had broken into a good-lookinghouse, and traversed it in vain in searchof something worth the risk of carrying away. Onleaving the house, he found it rained. He wentback, and took a new cotton umbrella. It dawnedas he entered the city, and he was afraid of beingseen with the umbrella; but thought suspicionwould be excited if he "heaved it away." Hemet an acquaintance who was further from homeMANUFACTURING LABOUR. 247than himself, and insisted on his accepting theloan of the umbrella. The acquaintance, of course,was caught, and told from whom he had had theumbrella ; and the burglar was, in consequence,lodged in jail. What English burglar would havethought of minding rain ? If, however, there everwas a case of amateur burglary, this was one.I visited the corporate factory-establishment atWaltham, within a few miles of Boston. TheWaltham Mills were at work before those ofLowell were set up. The establishment is for thespinning and weaving of cotton alone, and theconstruction of the requisite machinery. Fivehundred persons were employed at the time of myvisit. The girls, earn two, and some three, dollarsa-week, besides their board. The little childrenearn one dollar a-week. Most of the girls livein the houses provided by the corporation, whichaccommodate from six to eight each. When sisterscome to the mill, it is a common practice for themto bring their mother to keep house for them andsome of their companions, in a dwelling built bytheir own earnings. In this case, they save enoughout of their board to clothe themselves, and havetheir two or three dollars a-week to spare. Somehave thus cleared off mortgages from their fathers'farms; others have educated the hope of thefamily at college; and many are rapidly accusesMANUFACTURING LABOUR.emulating an independence. I saw a whole street ofhouses built with the earnings of the girls ;some with piazzas, and green Venetian blinds;and all neat and sufficiently spacious.The factory people built the church, which standsconspicuous on the green in the midst of the place.The minister's salary (eight hundred dollars lastyear) is raised by a tax on the pews. The corporationgave them a building for a lyceum, whichthey have furnished with a good library, and wherethey have lectures every winter, the best thatmoney can procure. The girls have, in many instances,private libraries of some merit and value.The managers of the various factory establishmentskeep the wages as nearly equal as possible,and then let the girls freely shift about from oneto another. When a girl comes to the overseer toinform him of her intention of working at the mill,he welcomes her, and asks how long she means tostay. It may be six months, or a year, or fiveyears, or for life. She declares what she considersherself fit for, and sets to work accordingly. Ifshe finds that she cannot work so as to keep upwith the companion appointed to her, or to pleaseher employer or herself, she comes to the overseer,and volunteers to pick cotton, or sweep therooms, or undertake some other service that shecan perform.MANUFACTURING LABOUR. 249The people work about seventy hours per week,on the average. The time of work varies with thelength of the days, the wages continuing the same.All look like well-dressed young ladies. Thehealth is good ; or rather, (as this is too much tobe said about health any where in the UnitedStates,) it is no worse than it is elsewhere.These facts speak for themselves. There is noneed to enlarge on the pleasure of an acquaintancewith the operative classes of the UnitedStates.The shoe-making at Lynn is carried on almostentirely in private dwellings, from the circumstancethat the people who do it are almost all farmers orfishermen likewise. A stranger who has not beenenlightened upon the ways of the place would beastonished at the number of small square erections,like miniature school houses, standing each as anappendage to a dwelling-house. These are theshoe shops," where the father of the family andhis boys work, while the women within are employedin binding and trimming. Thirty or moreof these shoe-shops may be counted in a walk ofhalf-a-mile. When a Lynn shoe manufacturer receivesan order, he issues the tidings. The leatheris cut out by men on his premises ; and then thework is given to those who apply for it ; if possible,in small quantities, for the sake of dispatch.M 5250 MANUFACTURING LABOUR.The shoes are brought home on Friday night, packedoff on Saturday, and in a fortnight or three weeksare on the feet of dwellers in all parts of theUnion. The whole family works upon shoes duringthe winter ; and in the summer, the fatherand sons turn out into the fields, or go fishing. Iknew of an instance where a little boy and girlmaintained the whole family, while the earnings ofthe rest went to build a house. I saw very few shabbyhouses. Quakers are numerous in Lynn. Theplace is unboundedly prosperous, through the temperanceand industry of the people. The depositsin the Lynn Savings' Bank in 1834, were about34,000 dollars, the population of the town lengthen4,000. Since that time, both the population andthe prosperity have much increased. It must beremembered, too, that the mechanics of Americahave more uses for their money than are opento the operatives of England. They build houses,buy land, and educate their sons and daughters.*It is probably true that the pleasures and painsof life are pretty equally distributed among itsvarious vocations and positions : but it is difficultto keep clear of the impression which outwardcircumstances occasion, that some are eminentlydesirable. The mechanics of these northern StatesThe deposits in the Lowell Savings' Bank for 1834, wereupwards of 114,000 dollars.MANUFACTURING LABOUR. 251appear to me the most favoured class I have everknown. In England, I believe the highest orderof mechanics to be, as a class, the wisest and bestmen of the community. They have the fewestbase and narrow interests : they are brought intosufficient contact with the realities of existence,without being hardened by excess of toil and care;and the knowledge they have the opportunity ofgaining is of the best kind for the health of themind. To them, if to any, we may look for publicand private virtue. The mechanics of Americahave nearly all the same advantages, andsome others. They have better means of living :their labours are perhaps more honoured ; and theyare republicans, enjoying the powers and prospectsof perfectly equal citizenship, The only respectin which their condition falls below that of Englishartisans of the highest order is that theknowledge which they have commonly the meansof obtaining is not of equal value. The facilitiesare great : schools, lyceums, libraries, are opento them : but the instruction imparted there is notso good as they deserve. Whenever they havethis, it will be difficult to imagine a mode of lifemore favourable to virtue and happiness thantheirs.There seems to be no doubt among those whoknow both England and America, that the mechanics252 MANUFACTURING LABOUR.of the New World work harder than those of theOld. They have much to do besides their dailyhandicraft business. They are up and at workearly about this ; and when it is done, they readtill late, or attend lectures ; or perhaps have theirhouses to build or repair, or other care to take oftheir property. They live in a state and period ofsociety where every man is answerable for his ownfortunes ; and where there is therefore stimulus tothe exercise of every power.What a state of society it is when a dozen artisansof one town, Salem, are seen rearing eacha comfortable one-story (or, as the Americanswould say, two-story) house, in the place withwhich they have grown up ! when a man whobegan with laying bricks criticises, and sometimescorrects, his lawyer's composition ; when a poor becomes the proprietor of a flourishingstore, before he is thirty; pays off the capital advancedby his friends at the rate of 2,000 dollars permonth ; and bids fair to be one of the most substantialcitizens of the place !Such are the outward fortunes of the mechanicsof America. Of their welfare in more importantrespects, to which these are but a part of themeans, I shall have to speak in another connexion.There are troubles between employers and theirworkmen in the United States, as elsewhere : butMANUFACTURING LABOUR. 253the case of the men is so much more in their ownhands there than where labour super abounds, thatstrikes are of a very short duration. The only remedythe employers have, the only safeguardagainst encroachments from their men," is theirpower of obtaining the services of foreigners, forashort time. The difficulty of stopping businessthere is very great ; the injury of delay very heavy:but the wages of labour are so good that there isless cause for discontent on the part of the workmenthan elsewhere. All the strikes I heard ofwere on the question of hours, not of wages.The employers are, of course, casting about tosee how they can help themselves ; and, as all arenot wise and experienced, it is natural that someshould talk of laws to prohibit Trades Unions.There is no harm in their talking of such ; for thematter will never get beyond talk; unless, indeed,the combinations of operatives should assumeany forms, or comprehend any principles inconsistentwith the republican spirit. The majoritywill not vote for any law which shall restrainany number of artisans from agreeing for whatprice they will sell their labour ; though I heardseveral learned gentlemen agreeing, at dinner oneday, that there ought to be such laws. On myobjecting that the interest of the parties concernedwould, especially in a free and rising country, MANUFACTURING LABOUR.tie all questions between labour and capital withmore precision, fairness, and peace, than any law,it was pleaded that intimidation and outrage werepractised by those who combined against those whowould not join them. I found, on inquiry, thatthere is an ample provision of laws against intimidationand outrage ; but that it is difficult toget them executed. If so, it would be also difficultto execute laws against combinations of workmen,supposing them obtained : and the grievancedoes not lie in the combination complained of,but somewhere else. The remedy is, (if therebe indeed intimidation and outrage,) not in passingmore laws, to be in like manner defied, while sufficientalready exist ; but in enlightening the partieson the subjects of law and social obligation.One day, in going down Broadway, New York,the carriage in which I was, stopped for some time,in consequence of an immense procession on theside-walk having attracted the attention of all thedrivers within sight The marching gentlemenproceeded on their way, with an easy air of gentility.Banners were interposed at intervals ; and,on examining these, I could scarcely believe myeyes. They told me that this was a procession ofthe journeymen mechanics of New York. Surelynever were such dandy mechanics seen ; with sleekcoats, glossy hats, gay watch-guards, and doe-skingloves !MANUFACTURING LABOUR. 255I rejoice to have seen this sight. I had otheropportunities of witnessing the prosperity of theiremployers ; so that I could be fairly pleased attheirs. There need be no fear for the interests ofeither, while the natural laws of demand and supplymust protect each from any serious encroachmentby the other. If they will only respect thelaw, their temporary disagreement, and apparentopposition of interests will end in being mere re-adjustments of the terms on which they are to pursuetheir common welfare.CHAPTER IV.COMMERCE.He hath an argosy hound to Tripolis, another to the Indies :I understand moreover upon the Rialto, he hath a third at Mexico,a fourth for England : and other ventures he hath."Merchant of Venice.THERE is no need to say much about the extent ofthe Commerce of the United States, since it isalready the admiration of Europe, and its historyis before every one in the shape of figures. Thereturns of exports and imports annually publishedare sufficiently eloquent.Dollars.The Imports, for the year 1825, were in value, 96,340,0751830, 70,876,9201835, 126,521,332COMMERCE. 257Dollars.The Exports of domestic produce, for 1825 were, 66,944,745of foreign produce - - - 32,590,643Total 99,535,388The Exports of domestic produce for 1830 were, 59,462,029of foreign 14,387,47973,849,508The Exports of domestic produce for 1835, were, 81,024,162of foreign 23,312,811104,336,973It will be seen, from these returns, how great areduction in the commerce of the United Stateswas occasioned by the tariff, which attracted alarge amount of capital from commerce, to be investedin manufactures. The balance has beennearly restored by the prospect of the expiration ofthe protective system; and both commerce andmanufactures are again rapidly on the increase.The foreign tonnage of Massachusetts has increasedfifty-three per cent within the last five years,though, owing to a new mode of ship-construction,twice the quantity is stowed in the same nominaltonnage.The commerce of the south-west was in highprosperity when I was there. When I was at MossCOMMERCE.bile, in April 1835, 1 was informed that 183,000bales of cotton had been brought down intoMobile since the beginning of the year.* Afriend of mine, engaged in commerce there, toldme of the enormous interest on money then obtainable.Eight per cent, is the legal interest;but double is easily to be had. Another, awealthy gentleman of New Orleans, speculateslargely every season, for the sake of somethingto do, and makes a fortune each time, by lendingout at high interest. He declares that heThe value of the cargoes which arrived at Mobile in 1830,By American vesselsBritishIn 1834, by American vesselsBritish388,811The value of the cargoes which departed from Mobilein 1830, was, by American vessels . 1,517,663British '".''- . 476,702In 1834, by American vesselsBritish6,270,197COMMERCE. 259never loses, and never fails to gain largely ; thecommerce is so flourishing, and the demand for capitalso intense. This is the region in which towitness the full absurdity of usury laws. They areevaded, as often as convenient, and serve no otherpurpose than to annex a kind of disgrace to a deedwhich must of necessity be done, loaning outmoney at higher than the legal interest. Thesame evasion takes place in Massachusetts, wherethe legal interest is six per cent. The interestthere, as elsewhere, rises just as high as the demandfor money must naturally bring it.I was acquainted with a gentleman who had lostseventy-five thousand dollars in an unfortunatespeculation, and who expected to retrieve thewhole the next season. The price of everythingwas rising. For my own share, I had to pay twelvedollars for my passage from Mobile to New Orleans: and twenty-five per cent, higher for myvoyage up the Mississippi than if I had gone thepreceding year. The fare I paid was fifty dollars.These two fares were the only exceptions to theremarkable cheapness of travelling in the UnitedStates and these would not be considered highanywhere else.The Cumberland river, on which stands Nashville,the capital of Tennessee, and which emptiesitself into the Ohio, has scarcely been heard of in260 COMMERCE.England ; yet, of all the tobacco consumed in theworld, one-seventh goes down this river. I ascendedit in a very small steam-boat, one of twelve,six large and six small, then perpetually navigatingit, and carrying cotton, tobacco, and passengers.Of these boats, one had carried, the preceding year,three hundred and sixty bales of cotton, of thevalue of three hundred and sixty thousand dollars.When we look at the northern ports, and observethe variety, as well as the extent of theircommerce, there seems good ground for the expectationexpressed to me by many American merchants,that the English language will finally becomefamiliar, not only over all the east, but overallthe globe.Salem, Massachusetts, is a remarkable place.This " city of peace" will be better known hereafterfor its commerce than for its witch-tragedy.It has a population of 14,000; and more wealthin proportion to its population than perhaps anytown in the world. Its commerce is speculative,but vast and successful. It is a frequent circumstancethat a ship goes out without a cargo, for avoyage round the world. In such a case, the captainputs his elder children to school, takes hiswife and younger children, and starts for somesemi-barbarous place, where he procures some oddkind of cargo, which he exchanges with advan-COMMERCE. 261take for another, somewhere else; and so goestrafficking round the world, bringing home a freightof the highest value.The enterprising merchants of Salem are hopingto appropriate a large share of the whale fishery ;and their ships are penetrating the northern ice.They are favourite customers in the Russian ports,and are familiar with the Swedish and Norwegiancoasts. They have nearly as much commerce withBremen as with Liverpool. They speak of Fayal andthe other Azores as if they were close at hand. Thefruits of the Mediterranean countries are on everytable. They have a large acquaintance at Cairo.They know Napoleon's grave at St. Helena, andhave wild tales to tell of Mozambique and Madagascar,and store of ivory to show from thence.They speak of the power of the king of Muscat,and are sensible of the riches of the south-eastcoast of Arabia. It entered some wise person'shead, a few seasons ago, to export ice to India. Theloss, by melting, of the first cargo, was one fourth.The rest was sold at six cents per Ib. When thevalue of this new import became kriown, it was ingreat request ; and the latter sales have been almostinstantaneous, at ten cents per pound : so thatit is now a good speculation to send ice 12,000miles to supersede salt-pere in cooling sherbet.The young ladies of America have rare shells from262 COMMERCE.Ceylon in their cabinets ; and their drawing-roomsare decked with Chinese copies of English prints.I was amused with two : the scene of Hero swooningin the church, from Much Ado about Nothing;'and Shakspeare between Tragedy and Comedy.The faces of Comedy and of Beatrice from thehands of Chinese ! I should not have found outthe place of their second birth but for a piece ofunfortunate foreshortening in each. I observed to afriend, one day, upon the beauty of all the new cordagethat met my eye, silky and bright. He told methat it was made of Manilla hemp, of the value ofwhich the British seem to be unaware ; though ithas been introduced into England. He mentionedthat he had been the first importer of it. Eightyears before, 600 bales per annum were imported :now, 20,000. The merchants doubt whether Australiawill be able to surmount the disadvantage ofa deficiency of navigable rivers. They have hopesof Van Diemen's Land, think well of Singapore,and acknowledge great expectations from NewZealand. Any body will give you anecdotes fromCanton, and descriptions of the Society and SandwichIslands. They often slip up the westerncoasts of their two continents ; bring furs from theback regions of their own wide land ; glance up atthe Andes on their return ; double Cape Horn ;touch at the ports of Brazil and Guiana; lookCOMMERCE. 263about them in the West Indies, feeling there almostat home ; and land, some fair morning, at Salem,and walk home as if they had done nothing veryremarkable.Such is the commerce of Salem, in its mostmeagre outline. Some illustration of it may beseen in the famous Salem Museum. In regard tothis institution, a very harmless kind of monopolyexists. No one is admitted of the museum proprietarybody who has not doubled, the Capes Hornand Good Hope. Everybody is freely admitted tovisit the institution ; and any one may contribute,either curiosities or the means of procuring them ;but the doubling of the Capes is an unalterable conditionof the honour of being a member. This hasthe effect of preserving a salutary interest amongthe members of the society, and respect amongthose who cannot be admitted. The society havelaid by 20,000 dollars, after having built a handsomehall for the reception of their curiosities ; but afar more important benefit is that it has now becomediscreditable to return from a long voyage withoutsome novel contribution to the Museum. This setspeople inquiring what is already there, and ensuresa perpetual and valuable accretion. I am glad tohave seen there some Oriental curiosities, whichmight never otherwise have blessed my sight : especiallysome wonderful figures, made of an unknownmixed metal, dug up in Java, being caricatures of264 COMMERCE.the old Dutch soldiers sent to guard the first colonies.A reasonably grave person might standlaughing before these for half a day. I had noidea there had been so much humour in the Javapeople.The stability of the commercial interest in theUnited States was put to the test by the great fireat New York. All the circumstances regardingthis fire were remarkable ; no one more so thanthat not a single failure took place in consequence.For many days preceding this fire, the weatherhad been intensely cold, the thermometer standingat Boston 17 degrees below zero. On the Sundaybefore, (13th of December 1835,) I went to hearthe Seamen's friend, Father Taylor, as he is called,preach at the Sailors' Chapel, in Boston. His eloquenceis of a peculiar kind, especially in hisprayers, which are absolutely importunate with regardto even external objects of desire. Part of hisprayer this day was, " Give us water, water I Thebrooks refuse to murmur, and the streams are dead.Break up the fountains: open the secret springsthat thy hand knoweth, and give us water, water !Let us not perish by a famine of water, or a delugeof conflagration; for we dread the careless wanderingspark." I was never before aware of thefear of fire entertained during these intense frosts.It is a reasonable fear. A gentleman, bent upondaily bathing, was seen one morning disconso-COMMERCE. 265lately returning from the river side ; he had employedthree men to break the ice, and they couldnot get at a drop of water. What hope was thereincase of fire ?The New York fire broke out at eight in theevening of Wednesday, the 16th of December.Every one knows the leading facts, that 52 or 54acres were laid waste ; many public buildings destroyed,and property to the amount of 18,000,000of dollars.Several particulars were given to me on thespot, three months afterwards, by some observersand some sufferers. At a boarding-house in Broadway,where some friends of mine were residing,there were several merchants, some with theirwives, who dined that day in good spirits, and, asthey afterwards believed, perfectly content withtheir worldly condition and prospects. At eighto'clock there was an alarm of fire. It was thoughtnothing of ; alarms of fire being as frequent as dayand night in New York. After a while, a merchantof the company was sent for, and somelittle anxiety was expressed. Two or three personslooked out of the upper windows, but it wasa night of such still, deep frost, that the reflectionin the atmosphere was much less glaring thanmight have been expected. Another and then anothergentleman was sent for. News came of theVOL. II. N266 COMMERCE.absolute lack of water, and that there was no gunpowderin the city none nearer than Brooklyn.The gentlemen all rushed out ; the anxious ladieswent from the windows to the fire-side ; from thefire-side to the windows. One gentleman and ladyin the house, a young German couple, just arrived,and knowing scarcely a word of English, were unawareof all this. None of their chattels, not eventhe lady's clothes, had been removed from theirstore in Pearl Street, where lay her books, music,wardrobe, and property of every sort. Pretty earlyin the morning the poor gentleman was rousedfrom his slumbers, could not comprehend the cause,went down to Pearl Street, and, amidst the amazementand desolation, just contrived to save his ,and nothing else. In the morning,the lady was destitute of even a change of raiment,in a foreign country, of whose language she couldnot speak one word. There were kind hearts allaround her, however, and she was quite cheerfulwhen I saw her, a few weeks afterwards.The lady of the house was so worn, weary, andcold, by three in the" morning, that she retired toher room ; desiring her domestics to call her if thefire should catch Broad Street ; in which case, itwould be time to be packing up plate, and movingfurniture. In a little while, there was a tap at herdoor. Broad Street was not on fire, however;COMMERCE. 267but some of the gentlemen had come home, smokedand frost-bitten, and eager for help and warm water.One gentleman, who had nothing more at stakethan three chests of Scotch linen, (valuable becausehome-woven,) of which he saved one, losing asuperb Spanish cloak in the process, was desirousthat his wife should see the spectacle of the conflagration.She walked down to the scene of thefire with him, after midnight. They took theirstand in a square, in the centre of which an immensequantity of costly goods was heaped up. Itwas strange and vexatious to see the havoc thatwas made among beautiful things; cashmereshawls strewing the ground ; horses' feet swathedin lace veils ; French silks getting entangled andtorn in the wheels of the carts. The lady pickedup shawls and veils ; and when her husband askedher where she proposed to put them, could onlythrow them down again. After she had left theplace, the houses caught fire, all round the square,fell in, and burned the costly goods in one grandbonfire.There had been occasional quarrels between themerchants and the carmen. The carmen conceivedthemselves injured by certain merchants. Whetherthey had reason for this belief or not, I cannotpretend to say. They thought this a time forrevenge. Some crossed their arms, as they leanedN 2268 COMMERCE.against their carts, and refused to stir a step, unlesstwenty dollars a load were paid them on thespot. Some few refused to help at all. This musthave been a far more deadly sorrow to the sufferersthan the ruin the fire was working. Onecarman was very provoking when a French gentlemanhad not a moment to lose in saving hisstock. The gentleman said coolly at last, takingout his money, " For what sum will you sell yourhorse and cart ?" The temptation was irresistibleto the carman. He named 500 dollars for hissorry hack and small vehicle, and was paid on theinstant. The French gentleman saved goods tothe amount of 100,000 dollars. It was a goodbargain for both.At six in the morning, when the necessary explosionshad checked the fire, the gentlemen of thehousehold I have mentioned, being completelyruined, for anything they knew to the contrary,came home ; and the ladies went to bed. Some ofthe least interested consulted what should be doneat dinner-time ; whether the company in generalcould bear the subject; whether it was best to talkor be silent. It was a languid, sorrowful meal:the gentlemen looking haggard; their ladies anxious.The next day, they were able to talk, to describe,to relate anecdotes, and speculate on consequences.The third day, all were nearly as cheerful as if no-commerce.269thing had happened: though some had lost all,and others, they knew not how much.The report of the fire spread as news throughthe upper part of the city, the next morning. Somefriends of mine had walked home from a visit, upwardsof a mile, at eleven o'clock, and neitherheard nor seen anything of the fire.The larger proportion of the New York merchantswere thus deprived at a stroke of theirbuildings, stocks, in many cases of all books andpapers, and, lastly, of the benefit of insurance.The insurance companies were plunged in almosta general insolvency. The only relief proposed,or that could be offered, was an extension of time,without interest, to the debtors of the governmentfor payment of bonds given to secure the dutiesupon goods recently imported : and this small reliefcould not be obtained till too late to be ofmuch use.Happily, the fire occurred at one of the leastbusy seasons of the year. The merchants couldconcert together for the saving of their credit : andthey did it to some purpose. Their credit sustainedthe shock of all this confusion, uncertainty,and dismay. The conduct of the merchants whohad not directly suffered, and of the banks, wasadmirable. They threw aside all their usual caution,and dispensed help and accommodation with the270 COMMERCE.last degree of liberality. The consequence was,that not one house failed. It seems now as if thecommercial credit of New York could stand anyshock short of an earthquake, like that of Lisbon.Some merchants had the unexpected pleasureof finding themselves richer than they were before.One was travelling in Europe with his lady,when the news overtook him that the hundred andfifty stores in which he had property were allburned down. He wrote that he and his lady werehastening to Havre, on their way home, where theymust live in the most economical and laboriousmanner, to repair their fortunes. With such intentionsthey crossed the Atlantic ; and on landingwere met by the intelligence that they had becomevery wealthy, from their ground lots havingsold for more than ground, stores, and stock, wereworth before.I saw the fifty-two acres of ruins in the followingApril. We traversed what had been streets, andclimbed the ruins of the Exchange. The pedestalof Hamilton's statue was standing, strewed roundwith fragments of burnt calicoes, which peoplewere disinterring. There was a litter of stonepannels, broken columns, and cornices. Bushels ofcoffee paved our way. A boy presented me witha half-fused watch-key from the cellar of what hadbeen a jeweller's store. The blackened ruins ofCOMMERCE. 271a church frowned over all. The most singularspectacle was a store, standing alone and unharmed,amidst the desolation. It belonged to a Jew, wasfire-proof, and contained hay, not a blade of whichwas singed. This square-fronted, elongated, uglybuilding, standing obliquely, and as clean as ifsmoke had never touched it, had a most saucy appearance:and so it might, so many erections,equally called fire-proof, having disappeared, whileit alone remained.By the next July, the entire area was coveredwith new erections ; and long before this, doubtless,all is to the outward eye, as if no fire hadhappened.But for the testimony afforded by this event, ofthe substantial credit in New York, the enormousprices given for land, the above-mentioned groundlots, for instance, might cause a suspicion thatthere was much wild speculation. I trust it is notso. The eagerness for land is, however, extraordinary.A lady sold an estate in the neighbourhoodof New York, for what she and her friendsconsidered a large sum; and a few weeks aftershe had concluded the bargain, and soon after thedestruction of eighteen millions of the wealth ofthe city, she found she might have obtained threetimes the amount for which she had sold her estate.The whole south end of the city is being rapidlyturned into stores ; and it is obvious that the COMMERCE.cantle princes of this emporium have no idea oftheir conquests being bounded by any circumstanceshort of the limits of the globe.Is there anything to be learned here, as well asto admire ? any inference to be drawn for the benefitof other nations ?An English member of parliament wrote to afriend residing in one of the American ports, inquiringwhether this friend could suggest anycoarse of parliamentary action by which the commerceof England, or of both countries, could bebenefited. The American replied by urging hisfriend to work incessantly at a repeal of the cornlaws, and in any way which may keep the UnitedStates continually before the eyes of the commercialrulers of Great Britain. " You talk," saidhe, " of your commercial arrangements with Portugal.Well and good! but what is Portugal?She has two millions of priests and beggars ; andat the end of the century she will have twomillions of priests and beggars stilL Whatwill the wealth and productions of the UnitedStates be then ?' If the United States have now18,000,000 of people, and their population is increasingat an unexampled rate, a free and anopulent population, the interest of Great Britainis plain ; to have a primary regard to the UnitedStates in the arrangement of her commercialpolicy.THE CURRENCY. 273SECTION I.THE CURRENCY.The fundamental difficulty of this great question,now, one of the most prominent in the UnitedStates, is indicated by the fact that, while thepractice of banking is essential to a manufacturingand commercial nation, a perfect system of bankingremains to be discovered.When it is remembered that the question of theCurrency has never yet been practically masteredin the countries of the Old World ; that in Americait has fallen into the hands of a young and inexperiencedpeople ; that it is implicated with constitutionalquestions, and has to be reconciled withdemocratic principles, it will not be expected thata passing stranger will be able to present a veryclear view of its present aspect, or any decidedopinion upon difficulties which perplex the wisestheads in the country. The mere history of bankingin the United States would fill more than avolume : and the speculations which arise out of italibrary.It is well known that there was an early splitinto parties on the subject of the constitutionallyN 5274 THE CURRENCY.of a national bank. Washington requested theopinions of his cabinet upon it in writing; andHamilton gave his in favour of the constitutionallyof a national bank : Edmund Randolph and Jeffersonagainst it. The question has been stirredfrom time to time since ; while Hamilton's opinionshave been acted upon.The ground of objection is a very strong one. Itlies in the provision that " all powers not delegatedto the United States by the constitution, nor prohibitedby it to the States, are reserved to theStates or to the people." No power to establishcorporations is, in any case, delegated by the constitutionto the United States ; nor does it appearto be countenanced by any fair construction of thepermissions under which its transaction of the generalbusiness is carried on.The answer to this is, that the supreme law ofthe country may give a legal or artificial capacity,(distinct from the natural,) to one or more persons,in relation to the objects committed to the managementof the government : in other words, that thegovernment has sovereign power with regard tothe objects confided to it ; all the limitations of theconstitution having relation to the number of thoseobjects. This was Hamilton's ground ; and this is,I believe, the ground which has been taken sinceby those who shared his opinions on the mainTHE CURRENCY. 275question. To me it appears as unsatisfactory asany other mode of begging the question. If thepower of making corporations is to be assumed bythe general government, on the ground of its beingimplied, the whole country might be covered withcorporations, to which should be entrusted thedischarge of any function exercised by the generalgovernment.In countries differently governed from the UnitedStates, it appears as if it would be most reasonableeither to have the currency made a nationalaffair, transacted wholly by the government, ondetermined principles, or to leave banking entirelyfree. In neither case, probably, would the evils beso great as those which have happened under themixture of the two systems. But in the UnitedStates, the committing the management of thecurrency to the general government is now whollyout of the question. Free banking will be themethod, some time or other ; but not yet. Thereis not yet knowledge enough ; nor freedom enoughof production and commerce to render such apolicy safe. Meantime, various doctrines areafloat. Some persons are for no banking whatsoever:but mere money-lending by individuals.Some are for the abolition of paper-money, andthe establishment of one public bank of depositand transfer in each State. Some are for private276 THE CURRENCY.banking only, with or without paper money. Someare for State incorporations, with no central bank.Others are for restoring the United States Bank.No objections against banking arid paper-moneyaltogether will avail anything, while commerce isconducted on its present principles. It answers nopractical purpose to object to any useful thing onthe ground of its abuse : and while the commerceof the United States is daily on the increase, andthe only check on its prosperity is the want ofcapital, there is no possibility of a return to theuse of private money-lending and rouleaus.The use of small notes may well and easily bediscontinued. The experiment has been triedwith success in Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania.The prohibition, might, perhaps, be carriedas high as to notes of twenty dollars. There seemsno adequate reason for the public being, furtherthan this, deprived of the convenience of a representativeof cash ; a convenience so great thatthere is much more probability that the ingeniousAmericans will devise some method of practicallyinsuring its convertibility, than that they will surrenderits use. It has often occurred to me thatout of the currency troubles of the United States,might arise such a discovery of the true principle(which yet lies hidden) of insuring the convertibility,or other limitation, of a paper currency, asTHE CURRENCY. 277may be a blessing to the whole commercial world.This is an enterprise worthy of their ingenuity;and one which seems of probable achievement,when we remember how the American merchantsare pressed for capital, and how all-important tothem is the soundness of their credit. The principlelies somewhere, if it could but be found : andnone are more likely to discover it than they.Private banking is, in the present state of affairs,necessary and inevitable ; so that there is little usein arguments for or against it. Capital is grievouslywanted, in all the commercial cities. Theremust be some place of resort for small amounts,and for foreign capital, whence money may issue tosupply the need of commercial men. There must,in other words, be money stores ; and, in the absenceof others, private banks must serve the purpose.The amount of good or harm which, in thepresent state of things, they are able to do, dependsmainly on the discretion or indiscretion of theircustomers; who, in common prudence, must lookwell whom they trust.As for State incorporations, it cannot be saidthat they are absolutely necessary ; though the argumentsin favour of their expediency are verystrong. More and more money is perpetually requiredfor the transaction of commercial business ;and in a different ratio from that required by the278 THE CURRENCY.affairs of farmers and planters ; since the latterreceive their returns quickly ; while the merchantsof the sea-board have theirs delayed for longperiods, and consequently require a much largeramount of capital. These larger amounts mustcome mainly from abroad, whence money can behad at four and five per cent, interest; while athome, from six to twelve per cent, is paid, evenwhile foreign capital is flowing in. It is obviousthat this foreign capital will enter much moreabundantly through the credit of a State bank thanthrough private banks. Small amounts of capital,dispersed and comparatively unproductive, willalso be more readily brought together, to be appliedwhere most needed, in a State bank, than amongmany small firms. The States of New York andPennsylvania have carried on their improvements,their canals and rail-roads, as well as much of theircommerce, by means of foreign capital ; and thesurpassing prosperity of those States may be consideredowing, in a great degree, to this practice.The incorporation of a bank is not always to beconsidered* in the light of a monopoly; it may bethereverse. It may enable a number of individuals,by no means the most wealthy in the community,to compete, by an union of forces, with themost wealthy. Corporations may be multiplied, asoccasion arises, and, by competition, give the publicTHE CURRENCY. 279the benefit of the greatest possible amount of servicedone at the least cost.Such are the leading arguments in favour ofState Banks. The objections to them are in partapplicable to faulty methods of incorporation, andnot to the principle itself. The special exemptionfrom liabilities to which individuals are subject;the imposing of such inhibitions elsewhere as renderthe affair a monopoly ; the making responsibilitya mere abstraction, are great, but perhapsavoidable evils. So are the methods by whichcharters have been obtained and renewed; themethod of " log-rolling " bills through the legislature; and other such corruption.*An objection less easily disposed of is, that bythe creation of any great moneyed power, meansare afforded of controlling the fortunes of individuals,and of influencing the press and the politicalconstituency. If these objections cannot be obviated,they are fatal to banking corporations. If,however, any means can be devised, either bycausing a sufficient publicity of proceedings, or by" Log-rolling" means co-operation for a point which must becarried : on a new settlement in the wilds, by neighbours devotinga day to fell, roll and build logs, to make a house before night : inalegislature, by a coterie of members urging on a bill in whichthey are interested, and getting it passed in defiance of inquiryand delay.280 THE CURRENCY.granting charters for a short term, renewable onstrict conditions, or by any other plan for establishinga true responsibility, of uniting the benefits ofincorporated banks with republican principles, itseems as if it would be a great benefit to all partiesin the community.The difference of opinion which has made themost noise in the world 4 is about a National Bank.It appears to have been contemplated, in thefirst instance, to place the currency of the UnitedStates under the control of the general government;according to the spirit of the provisions ofthe constitution, that Congress should have power"to coin money, regulate the value thereof, andof foreign coin :" but without affording to Congressany power to control the fortunes of individuals,as may be done by certain banking operations.The state of the colonial currency had been deplorable.*The object now was to substitute aI have before me a collection of specimens of the colonial, andearly west continental paper currency; such as brought ruin to allwho trusted it. The colonial notes are such as any common printermight forge. For instance, here is one, on common paper, witha border of stars, and within it,Georgia, 1776.These are to certify, That the sum of SIXPENCE sterling, is duefrom this Province to the bearer hereof, the same being part ofTwelve Thousand Five Hundred and Seventy-two Pounds Nine-theCURRENCY. 281uniform and substantial currency, instead of thefalse representatives which had been in use : andto put it out of the power of the States to alterthe terms of contracts by taking advantage of thefaults of the currency. Nobody would take thecontinental bills; and gold and silver were deficient.A national bank was the resource; andthe old United States Bank was chartered in 1791 ;it being ascertained that its issues were based onreal capital, and a strict watch being kept over itsoperations.This bank was believed to be wanted for anotherpurpose; to watch over and control the StateBanks. It was not the first institution of the kindin the United States. The Bank of North Americahad been chartered in 1781, under the authorityof the Continental Congress : but by soon acceptinga charter from the Legislature of Pennsylvania,it ceased to be a national, and afforded the precedentof a State Bank. New York and Massa-teenShillings Sterling, voted by Provincial Congress, for takingup and sinking that Sum already issued.6d."Those of the early days of the war have on the back emblems,varying with the promissory amount, exhibiting bows, arrows,leaves of the oak, orange, &c.It would be absurd to argue against all use of a paper currencyfrom such specimens as these.282 THE CURRENCY.chusetts had soon State Banks also. They wereprudently conducted; and their notes presentlybanished the coin. The power of Congress overthe currency was gone. All that could be donenow was for the National Bank to control the StateBanks, and keep their issues within bounds, aswell as it could.Occasional disorders happened from the misconductof country banks, prior to 181 1 . The renewalof the charter of the United States Bank was thenrefused. The government was pressed by the evilsof war ; and the check of the superintendence ofthe Bank being withdrawn, the local banks, out ofNew England, came to the agreement, (too senselessto be ever repeated,) to suspend specie payments.All issued what kind and quantity ofpaper pleased themselves, till above twice theamount of money needed was abroad; and thenotes were in some States five, in others ten, inothers twenty, below par. The New England people,meantime, used convertible paper only; andunder the law which provides that all duties, imposts,and excises should be uniform throughoutthe States, were thus compelled to pay one tenthmore to the revenue officers than the people ofNew York, who used the depreciated currency :and one-fifth more than the Baltimore merchants.This state of things could not last. A nationalTHE CURRENCY. 283bank was again established, in 1816, for the purposeof controlling the local banks. Its charterwas for twenty years, with a capital of 35,000,000dollars, to which the federal government subscribedone fifth. Its notes were made receivable for anydebt due to the United States.Its purpose was presently answered. The localbanks had, in three years, resumed cash payments.The management of the United States Bank, duringthe rest of its term, has been, upon the whole,prudent and moderate. That a power has notbeen abused is not, however, a reason for its continuedexercise, if it be really unconstitutional.President Jackson thinks, and the majority thinkswith him, that it is contrary to the spirit of theconstitution, (as it is certainly unauthorised by itsletter,) that any institution should have the power,unchecked for a long term of years, of affecting theaffairs of individuals, from the further corners ofMaine or Missouri, down to the shores of the Gulfof Mexico ; of influencing elections ; of biassing thepress ; and of acting strongly either with or againstthe administration. The majority considers, thatif the United States Bank has great power forgood, it has also great power for harm ; and thatthe general government cannot be secure of workingnaturally in its limited functions, while thisgreat power subsists, to be either its enemy or itsally.284 THE CURRENCY.This seems to be proved by the charges broughtagainst the late Bank by President Jackson. Whetherthey are true or false, (and the gravest of themdo not appear to have been substantiated,) theyindicate that power is in the hands of a central institution,which no federal establishment ought tohave, otherwise than by the express permission ofthe constitution.As for President Jackson's mode of proceedingagainst the Bank, it is an affair of merely temporaryinterest, unless he should be found to haveexceeded the authority conferred on him by hisoffice. He does seem to have done so, in one particular,at least. His first declaration against therenewal of the charter, was honest and manly.His re-election, after having made this avowal,was a sufficient evidence of the desire of themajority to extinguish the Bank. It was, nodoubt, in reliance on the will of the majority, thusindicated, that the President removed the depositsin a peculiarly high-handed manner ; and also exercisedthe veto, when the two Houses had passeda bill to renew the charter of the United StatesBank.With the last of these measures, no one has anyright to quarrel. He exercised a constitutionalpower, according to his long-declared convictions.His sudden removal of the deposits is not to be soeasily justified.THE CURRENCY. 285The President has the power of removing hisSecretaries from office, and of appointing others,whose appointment must be sanctioned by theSenate. The Secretaries of State are enjoined bylawto execute such orders as shall be imposed onthem by the President of the United States : allthe Secretaries but the Secretary of the Treasury.In his case, no such specification is made; obviouslybecause it would not be wise to put thewhole power of the Treasury into the hands of thePresident. President Jackson, however, contrivedto obtain this power by using with adroitness hisother power of removal from office. Mr. Duanewas appointed Secretary of the Treasury on the29th of May, 1833; his predecessor having beenoffered a higher office. It is known that the predecessorhad given his opinion in the cabinetagainst removing the Treasury deposits from theBank ; and that Mr. Duane was an acknowledgedenemy of the Bank. On the 3rd of June, the Presidentopened to the new Secretary his scheme ofremoving the deposits. Mr. Duane was opposedto the act, as being a violation of the governmentcontract with the Bank. He refused to sign thenecessary order. While he was still in office, onthe 20th of September, the intended removal of thedeposits was announced in the government newspaper.On the 23rd, Mr. Duane was dismissed286 THE CURRENCY.from office ; and Mr. Taney, who had previouslypromised to sign the order, was installed in theoffice. On the 26th, the official order for the removalof the deposits was given. No plea of impendingdanger to the national funds, if such couldhave been substantiated, could justify so high-handeda deed as this. No such plea has beensubstantiated ; and the act remains open to strongcensure.Just before the expiration of its charter, theUnited States Bank accepted a charter from theLegislature of Pennsylvania. It remains to beseen what effects will arise from the operation ofthe most powerful State Bank which has yet existed.The problem now is to keep a sound currency,in the absence of an institution, believed to be unconstitutional,but hitherto found the only meansof establishing order and safety in this most importantbranch of economy. Here is a deficiency,which cannot but be the cause of much evil andperplexity. It must be supplied, either by increasedknowledge and improved philosophy and practiceamong the people, or by an amendment of theConstitution. Meanwhile, it is only time andenergy lost to insist upon the return to a meremetallic currency. Society cannot be set back toa condition which could dispense with so great anTHE CURRENCY. 287improvement as paper-money, with all its abuses,undoubtedly is.The singular order which last year emanatedfrom the Treasury, compelling the payments forthe public lands to be made in specie, will not havethe effect of making the people in love with a metalliccurrency. If this measure is intended to beanobstacle to the purchase of large quantities ofland, or virtually to raise the price, these areaffairs with which the Treasury has nothing to do.If it is intended merely to compel cash payments,as far as the administration has power to do so, itseems a pity that those who undertake to meddlewith the currency should not know better whatthey are about. The scarcity of money in theeastern States has been well nigh ruinous ; whilelarge amounts of specie have been accumulated inthe west, where they are not wanted.The mischief thus caused has been much increasedby the injudicious method in which thedeposits have been distributed among the States,according to the Deposit Bill of the session of 1836.The details of the extraordinary state of the money-marketin America, last year, are too well knownon both sides of the water, to need to be repeatedhere.One principle stands out conspicuously from thehistory of the last few years : that no President or288 REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.Secretary should be allowed the opportunity oftaking the responsibility" of meddling with thecurrency of the country : in other words, the taxationshould be reduced, as soon as in equity andconvenience it can be done, so as to bring down therevenue to a proportion with the wants of the government.If the general government is to haveanything to do with the currency at all, it shouldbe by such business being made a separate constitutionalfunction. To let the Treasury overflow,and leave its overflowing to be managed at the discretionof one public servant, removable by oneother, is a policy as absurd as dangerous. The mostobvious security lies, not in multiplying checks uponthe officers, but in reducing the overflowing of theTreasury to the smallest possible amount. Thisis President Jackson's last recorded opinion on thesubject It appears worthy to be kept on record.SECTION II.REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.There is less to be said on this head than wouldbe possible in any other country. When it isREVENUE AND EXPENDITURE. 289known that the United States are troubled with thelarge surplus revenue accruing from the sale of thepublic lands, the whole story is told. The strangerwill hear much lamentation in the Senate about theincrease of the public expenses, and will see Hon.Members looking as solemn as if the nation weresinking into a gulf of debt : but the fear and complaintare, not of the expenditure of money, but ofthe increase of executive patronage.The Customs are the chief source of the revenueof the general government. They are in course ofreduction, year by year. The next great resourceis the sale of the public lands. This may be calledinexhaustible ; so large is the area yet unoccupied,and so increasing the influx of settlers.This happy country is free from the infliction ofan excise system ; an exemption which goes fartowards making it the most desirable of all placesof residence for manufacturers who value practicalfreedom in the management of their private concerns,and honesty among their work-people. Thebrewer and glass-manufacturer see the tax-gatherer'sface no oftener than other men. The Postofficeestablishment in America is for the advantageof the people, and not for purposes of taxation ;and every one is satisfied if it pays its own expenses.A small sum is yielded by patent fees ; and also bythe mint. Lighthouse-tolls constitute another item.290 REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.But all these united are trifling in comparison withthe revenue yielded from the two great sources, theCustoms and the Public Lands.*The expenditures of the general government arefor salaries, pensions, (three or four hundredpounds,) territorial governments, the mint, surveys,and improvements, the census and other publicdocuments, and the military and naval establishments.The largest item in the civil list is the paymentto Members of Congress, who receive eightdollars per day, for the session, and their travellingexpenses. The President's salary is 25,000 dollars.The Vice-president's 5,000. Each of the Secretariesof State, and the Postmaster-general's, 6,000.The Attorney-general's, 4,000.The seven Judges of the Supreme Court aresalaried with the same moderation as other membersof the federal government. The Chief Justicehas 5,000 dollars ; the six Associate Judges 4,500each.The Commissioned Officers of the United Statesarmy were, in 1835, 674. Non-commissioned Officersand Privates, 7,547. Total of the UnitedStates army, 8,221.In the navy, there were, in 1835, 37 Captainsand 40 Masters-commandant. The navy consistedSee Appendix 13.REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE, 291of 12 ships of the line; 14 first-class frigates; 3second-class; 15 sloops of war; 8 schooners andother small vessels of war.The revenue and expenditure of most of theStates are so small as to make the annual financialstatement resemble the account-books of a privatefamily. The land tax, the proportion of whichvaries in every State, is the chief source of revenue.Licenses, fines, and tolls, yield other sums. InSouth Carolina, there is a tax on free people ofcolour !The highest salary that I find paid to the governmentof a State is 4,000 dollars, (New York andPennsylvania;) the lowest, 400 dollars, (RhodeIsland.) The other expenses, besides those ofgovernment, are for the defence of the State, (inPennsylvania, about forty pounds !) for education,(two thousand pounds, in Pennsylvania, the sameyear,) prisons, pensions, and state improvements.*Such is the financial condition of a people ofwhom few are individually very wealthy or verypoor ; who all work ; and who govern themselves,appointing one another to manage their commonaffairs. They have had every advantage that natureand circumstances could give them; and nothingto combat but their own necessary inexpe-See Appendix B.o 2292 REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.hence. As long as the State expenditure for defencebears the proportion to education of 407. to 2,000/.,and on to 80,000/., (the amount of the school-tax,now, in Massachusetts,) all is safe and promising.There is great virtue in figures, dull as they are toall but the few who love statistics for the sake ofwhat they indicate. Those which are cited abovedisclose a condition and a prospect in the presenceof which all fears for the peace and virtue of theStates are shamed. Men who govern themselvesand each other with such moderate means, and forsuch unimpeachable objects, are no more likely tolapse into disorder than to submit to despotism.CHAPTER V.MORALS OF ECONOMY.Andyet of your strength there is and can be no clear feeling, saveby what you have prospered in, by what you have done. Betweenvague, wavering capability, and fixed, indubitable performance,what a difference ! A certain inarticulate self-consciousness dwellsdimly in us ; which only our works can render articulate, and decisivelydiscernible. Our works are the mirror wherein the spiritfirst sees its natural lineaments. Hence, too, the folly of that impossibleprecept ' know thyself,' till it be translated into this partiallypossible one, ' know what thou canst work at.' "Sartor Resorts, p. 166. Boston Edition.THE glory of the world passeth away. One kindof worldly glory passes away, and another comes.Like a series of clouds sailing by the moon, andgrowing dim and dimmer as they go down the sky,are the transitory glories which are only brightenedfor an age by man's smile : dark vapours, which294 MORALS OF ECONOMY.carry no light within themselves. How many suchhave floated across the expanse of history, and meltedaway ! It was once a glory to have a power of lifeand death over a patriarchal family : and how meandoes this now appear, in comparison with the powerof life and death which every man has over his ownintellect ! It was once a glory to be feared : howmuch better is it now esteemed to be loved ! It wasonce a glory to lay down life to escape from one'spersonal woes : how far higher is it now seen to beto accept those woes as a boon, and to lay down lifeonly for truth ; for God and not for self ! Theheroes of mankind were once its kings and warriors :we look again now, and find its truest heroes itsmartyrs, its poets, its artisans; men not buriedunder pyramids or in cathedrals, but whose sepulchreno man knoweth unto this day. To them theLord showed the land of promise, and then buriedthem on the confines. There are two aspects underwhich every individual man may be regarded : as asolitary being, with inherent powers, and an omnipotentwill; a creator, a king, an inscrutable mystery:and again, as a being infinitely connectedwith all other beings, with none but derived powers,with a heavenly-directed will ; a creature, a subject,a transparent medium through which the workingsof principles are to be eternally revealed. Boththese aspects are true, and therefore reconcilable.MORALS OF ECONOMY. 295The Old World dwelt almost exclusively on the firstand meaner aspect : as men rise to inhabit the newheavens and the new earth, they will more andmore contemplate the other and sublimer. The oldglory of a self-originating power and will is passingaway : and it is becoming more and more plain thata man's highest honour lies in becoming as clear amedium as possible for the revelations which are tobe made through him : in wiping out every stain,in correcting every flaw by which the light that isin him may be made dimness or deception. It wasonce a glory to defy or evade the laws of man's physicaland moral being ; and, in so doing, to encroachupon the rights of others : it is now beginning to beshown that there is a higher honour in recognisingand obeying the laws of outward and inward life,and in reverencing instead of appropriating the privilegesof other wards of Providence.In other words, it was once a glory to be idle,and a shame to work, at least with any memberor organ but one, the brain. Yet it is a law ofevery man's physical nature that he should workwith the limbs : of every man's moral nature, thathe should know : and knowledge is to be had onlyby one method ; by bringing the ideal and the actualworld into contact, and proving each by the other,with one's own brain and hands for instruments, andnot another's. There is no actual knowledge even296 MORALS OF ECONOMY.of one's own life, to be had in any other way. Yetthis is the way which men have perversely refusedto acknowledge, while every one is more or lesscompelled to practise it. Those who have beenable to get through life with the least possible workhave been treated as the happiest : those who havehad the largest share imposed upon them have beenpassively pitied as the most miserable. If the experienceof the two could have been visibly or tangiblybrought into comparison, the false estimatewould have been long ago banished for ever fromhuman calculations. If princes and nobles, whohave not worked either in war or in council, mensunk in satiety ; if women, shut out of the world ofreality, and compelled by usage to endure the corrosionof unoccupied thought, and the decay ofunemployed powers, were able to speak fully andtruly as they sink into their unearned graves, itwould be found that their lives had been one hollowmisery, redeemed solely by that degree of actionthat had been permitted to them, in order that theymight, in any wise, live. If the half-starved artisan,if the negro slave, could, when lying down at lengthto rest, see and exhibit the full vision of their ownlives, they would complain far less of too much workthan of too little freedom, too little knowledge, toomany wounds through their affections to their children,their brethren, their race. They would com-MORALS OF ECONOMY. 297plain that their work had been of too exclusive akind ; too much in the actual, while it had beenattempted to close the ideal from them. Nor aretheir cases alike. The artisan works too much inone way, while too little in another. The negroslave suffers too much by infliction, and yet moreby privation; but he rarely or never works toomuch, even with the limbs. He knows the evil oftoil, the reluctance, the lassitude ; but with it heknows also the evil of idleness; the vacuity, thehopelessness. He has neither the privilege of thebrute, to exercise himself vigorously upon instinct,for an immediate object, to be gained and forgotten;nor the privilege of the man, to toil, by moralnecessity, with some pain, for results which yieldan overgrown pleasure. It is not work which isthe curse of the slave : he is rarely so blessed as toknow what it is.If, again, the happiest man who has ever livedon earth, (excepting the Man of Sorrows, whosedepth of peace no one will attempt to fathom,)could, in passing into the busier life to come, (towhich the present is only the nursery mimicking ofhuman affairs,) communicate to us what has beenthe true blessedness of his brief passage, it wouldbe found to lie in what he had been enabled to do :not so much blessed in regard to others as to himself;not so much because he had made inventions,o 5298 MORALS OF ECONOMY.(even such a one as printing:) not so much becausethrough him countries will be better governed,men better educated, and some light from theupper world let down into the lower ; (for greatthings as these are, they are sure to be done, if notby him, by another;) but because his actual doing,his joint head and hand-work have revealed to himthe truth which lies about him ; and so far, and bythe only appointed method, invested him with heavenwhile he was upon earth. Such a one mightnot be conscious of this as the chief blessedness ofhis life, (as men are ever least conscious of whatis highest and best in themselves :) he might put itin another form, saying that mankind were growingwiser and happier, or that goodness and mercyhad followed him all the days of his life, or that hehad found that all evil is only an aspect of ultimategood: in some such words of faith or hope hewould communicate his inward peace : but the realmeaning of the true workman, if spoken for himby a divine voice, (as spoken by the divine voice ofhis life,) is, as has been said, that his complete toilhas enriched him with truth which can be nootherwise obtained, and which neither the world,nor any one in it, except himself, could give,nor any power in heaven or earth could takeaway.Mankind becomes more clear-sighted to thisMORALS OF ECONOMY. 299fact about honour and blessedness, as time unfoldsthe sequence of his hieroglyphic scroll ; and atransition in the morals and manners of nationsis an inevitable consequence, slow as men are indeciphering the picture-writing of the old teacher ;unapt as men are in connecting picture with picture,so as to draw thence a truth, and in thetruth, a prophecy. We must look to new or renovatedcommunities to see how much has beenreally learned.The savage chief, who has never heard thesaying " he that-would be chief among you, lethim be your servant," feels himself covered withglory when he paces along in his saddle, gorgeouswith wampum and feathers, while his squaw followsin the dust, bending under the weight ofhis shelter, his food, and his children. Wise menlook upon him with all pity and no envy. Higherand higher in society, the right of the strongestis supposed to involve honour : and physicalis placed at>ove moral strength. The work ofthe limbs, wholly repulsive when separated fromthat of the head, is devolved upon the weaker,who cannot resist ; and hence arises the disgraceof work, and the honour of being able to keep souland body together, more or less luxuriously, withoutit. The barbaric conqueror makes his captiveswork for him. His descendants, who have no300 MORALS OF ECONOMY.prisoners of war to make slaves of, carry off captivesof a helpless nation, inferior even to themselvesin civilisation. The servile class rises, byalmost imperceptible degrees, as the dawn of reasonbrightens towards day. The classes by whomthe hand-work of society is done, arrive at beingcared for by those who do the head-work, or nowork at all : then they are legislated for, but stillas a common or inferior class, favoured, out of purebounty, with laws, as with soup, which are pronounced" excellent for the poor : " then they beginto open their minds upon legislation for themselves; and a certain lip-honour is paid themwhich would be rejected as insult if offered to thosewho nevertheless think themselves highly meritoriousin vouchsafing it.This is the critical period out of which mustarise a new organisation of society. When itcomes to this, a new promise blossoms under thefeet of the lovers of truth. There are many of thehand-workers now who are on the very borders ofthe domain of head-work : and, as the encroachmentsof those who work not at all have, by thistime, become seriously injurious to the rights ofothers, there are many thinkers and persons oflearning who are driven over the line, and becomehand-workers ; for which they, as they usually afterwardsdeclare, can never be sufficiently thankful.MORALS OF ECONOMY. 301There is no drowning the epithalamium with whichthese two classes celebrate the union of thought andhandicraft. Multitudes press in, or are carried in tothe marriage feast, and a new era of society has begun.The temporary glory of ease and disgrace of labourpass away like mountain mists, and the clearsublimity of toil grows upon men's sight.If, in such an era, a new nation begins its career,what should be expected from it ?If the organisation of its society were a matterof will ; if it had a disposable moral force, applicableto controllable circumstances, it is probablethat the new nation would take after all old nations,and not dare to make, perhaps not dream ofmaking, the explicit avowal, that that which hadever hitherto been a disgrace, except in the eyes ofa very few prophets, had now come out to be aclear honour. This would be more, perhaps, thaneven a company of ten or fifteen millions of menand women would venture to declare, while suchwords as Quixotic, Revolutionary, Utopian, remainon the tongues which wag the most industriouslyin the old world. But, it so happens it is neverin the power of a whole nation to meet in convention,and agree what their moral condition shall be.They may agree upon laws for the furtherance ofwhat is settled to be honourable, and for the exclusionof some of the law-bred disgraces of the oldworld : but it is not in their power to dispense at302 MORALS OF ECONOMY.will the subtle radiance of moral glory, any morethan to dye their scenery with rainbow hues becausethey have got hold of a prism. Moral persuasionsgrow out of preceding circumstances, asinstitutions do ; and conviction is not communicablewhere the evidence is not of a communicablekind. The advantage of the new nation overthe old will be no more than that its individualmembers are more open to conviction, from beingmore accessible to evidence, less burdened withantique forms and institutions, and partial privileges,so called. The result will probably be thatsome members of the new society will follow theancient fashion of considering work a humiliation ;while, upon the whole, labour will be more honouredthan it has ever been before.America is in the singular position of beingnearly equally divided between a low degree of theancient barbarism in relation to labour, and a highdegree of the modern enlightenment. Whereverthere is a servile class, work is considered a disgrace,unless it bears some other name, and is ofan exclusive character. In the free States, labouris more really and heartily honoured than, perhaps,in any other part of the civilised world. Themost extraordinary, and least pleasant circumstancein the case is that, while the south ridicules anddespises the north for what is its very highest honour,the north feels somewhat uneasy and soreMORALS OF ECONOMY. 303under the contempt. It is true that it is from necessitythat every man there works ; but, whateverbe the cause, the fact is a noble one, worthy ofall rejoicing : and it were to be wished that thenorth could readily and serenely, at all times, andin disregard of all jibes, admit the fact, as matter forthankfulness, that there every man works for hisbread with his own head and hands.How do the two parties in reality spend theirdays ?In the north, the children all go to school, andwork there, more or less. Ashley grow up, they partoff into the greatest variety of employments. Theyouths must, without exception, work hard ; or theyhad better drown themselves. Whether they areto be lawyers, or otherwise professional ; or merchants,manufacturers, farmers, or citizens, theyhave everything to do for themselves. A very largeproportion of them have, while learning their futurebusiness, to earn the means of learning. Thereis much manual labour in the country colleges ;much teaching in the vacations done by students.Many a great man in Congress was seen in hisboyhood leading his father's horses to water; and,in his youth, guiding the plough in his father'sfield. There is probably hardly a man in NewEngland who cannot ride, drive, and tend his ownhorse ; scarcely a clergyman, lawyer, or physician,304 MO HALS OF ECONOMY.who, if deprived of his profession, could not supporthimself by manual labour. Nor, on the otherhand, is there any farmer or citizen who is not,more or less, a student and thinker. Not only areall capable of discharging their political duty ofself-government ; but all have somewhat idealisedtheir life. All have looked abroad, at least so faras to understand the foreign relations of their owncountry : most, I believe, have gone further, andcan contemplate the foreign relations of their ownbeing. Some one great mind, at least, has almostevery individual entered into sympathy with ;some divine, or politician, or poet, who has carriedthe spirit out beyond the circle of home, State, andcountry, into the ideal world. It is even possibleto trace, in the conversation of some who have theleast leisure for reading, the influence of some oneof the rich sayings, the diamonds and pearls whichhave dropped from the lips of genius, to shine inthe hearts of all humanity. Some one such sayingmay be perceived to have moulded the thoughts,and shaped the aims, and become the under-currentof the whole life of a thinking and labouringman. Such sayings being hackneyed signifiesnothing, while the individuals blessed by them donot k-now it, and hold them in their inmost hearts,unvexed by hearing them echoed by carelesstongues. " Am I not a man and a brother?"MORALS OF ECONOMY. 305Happy the man whose wish and care," &c. " Thebreaking waves dashed high," &c. (Mrs. Hemans'sLanding of the Pilgrims,) " What shadows we are,and what shadows we pursue," (Burke) these aresome of the words which, sinking deep into thehearts of busy men, spring up in a harvest ofthoughts and acts.There are a few young men, esteemed the leasthappy members of the community, who inheritwealth. The time will come, when the society issomewhat older, when it will be understood thatwealth need not preclude work: but at present,there are no individuals so forlorn, in the northernStates, as young men of fortune. Men who haveshown energy and skill in working their way insociety are preferred for political representatives :there is no scientific or literary class, for suchindividuals to fall into: all the world is busyaround them, and they are reduced to the predicament,unhappily the most dreaded of all in theUnited States, of standing alone. Their method,therefore, is to spend their money as fast as possible,and begin the world like other men. Iam stating this as matter of fact ; not as beingreasonable and right..^ As for the women of the northern States, mosthave the blessing of work, though not of the extentand variety which will hereafter be seen to be306 MORALS OF ECONOMY.necessary for the happiness of their lives. Allmarried women, except the ladies of rich merchantsand others, are liable to have their handsfull of household occupation, from the uncertaintyof domestic service; a topic to be referred tohereafter. Women who do not marry have, inmany instances, to work for their support ; and, aswill be shown in another connexion, under peculiardisadvantages. Work, on the whole, may be consideredthe rule, and vacuity the exception.*In testimony of the fact that the working people of this regionare thinkers too, I subjoin a note written by the wife of avillage mechanic, who is a fair specimen of her class.SIR, Nothing but a consciousness of my own incompetencyto form a just opinion on a question of such magnitude, and onetoo which involves consequences as remote from my personal observation,as the immediate, or gradual emancipation of the slaves,has, for some time, prevented my being an acknowledged abolitionist.With the Divine precepts before me, which require usto love our neighbour as ourselves, and ' whatsoever we wouldthat others should do to us,' etc. etc., instructed and admonishedtoo by the feelings of common humanity, I cannot hesitate to pronouncethe system of slavery an outrageous violation of the requirementsof God, and a lawless and cruel invasion of the rightsof our fellow men. In this view of it, I am not able to understandhow it can be persisted in, without setting at defiance thedictates of reason and conscience, and what is of more importance,the uncompromising authority of Scripture, the arguments of wiseand talented men to the contrary, notwithstanding. The mostsuperficial observer cannot fail to discern, in the universal interestand agitation, which prevail on this subject, a prelude to someMORALS OF ECONOMY. 307What is life in the slave States, in respect ofwork?There are two classes, the servile and the imperious,between whom there is a great gulf fixed.The servile class has not even the benefit of heartytoil. No solemn truths sink down into them, tocheer their hearts, stimulate their minds, and nervetheir hands. Their wretched lives are passed betweenan utter debasement of the will, and a conflictof the will with external force.The other class is in circumstances as unfavourableas the least happy order of persons in theold world. The means of educating children areso meagre* that young people begin life undergreat disadvantages. The vicious fundamentalprinciple of morals in a slave country, that labouris disgraceful, taints the infant mind with a stainwhich is as fatal in the world of spirits as the negrotinge is at present in the world of society. Itmade my heart ache to hear the little children un-mightyrevolution. If this ' war of words' is the worst that willprecede or accompany it, I shall be happily disappointed. Withthese feelings, sir, you will readily believe the assurance, that Ihave been greatly interested, and instructed, in reading the mild,comprehensive, intelligent ' lecture,' of your lamented brother."See Appendix C : an admirable sketch by a resident ofCharleston, of the interior of a planter's family. It unconsciouslybears out all that can be said of the educational evils of the existingstate of society in the south.308 MORALS OF ECONOMY.consciously uttering thoughts with which no truereligion, no true philosophy can coexist. " Do youthink / shall work ?" " O, you must not touch thepoker here." " You must not do this or that foryourself: the negroes will be offended, and it won'tdo for a lady to do so." " Poor thing ! she has toteach : if she had come here, she might have marrieda rich man, perhaps." " Mamma has so mucha-year now, so we have not to do our work athome, or any trouble. 'Tis such a comfort !"When children at school call everything that pleasesthem " gentlemanly," and pity all (but slaves) whohave to work, and talk of marrying early for anestablishment, it is all over with them. A morehopeless state of degradation can hardly be conceivedof, however they may ride, and play theharp, and sing Italian, and teach their slaves whatthey call religion.Poor things !" may be said of such, in return.They know little, with their horror of work, ofwhat awaits them. Theirs is destined to be, iftheir wish of an establishment is fulfilled, a life oftoil, irksome and unhonoured. They escape thename ; but they are doomed to undergo the worstof the reality. Their husbands are not to be envied,though they do ride on white horses, (the slave'shighest conception of bliss,) lie down to repose inhot weather, and spend their hours between theMORALS OF ECONOMY. 309discharge of hospitality and the superintendenceof their estates; and the highly honourable andlaborious charge of public affairs. But the wivesof slave-holders are, as they and their husbandsdeclare, as much slaves as their negroes. If theywill not have everything go to rack and ruin aroundthem, they must superintend every household operation,from the cellar to the garrets : for there isnothing that slaves can do well. While the slavesare perpetually at one's heels, lolling against thebed-posts before one rises in the morning, standingbehind the chairs, leaning on the sofa, officiouslyundertaking, and invariably spoiling everythingthat one had rather do for one's-self, the smallestpossible amount of real service is performed. Thelady of the house carries her huge bunch of keys,(for every consumable thing must be locked up,)and has to give out, on incessant requests, whateveris wanted for the household. She is for eversuperintending, and trying to keep things straight,without the slightest hope of attaining anythinglike leisure and comfort. What is there in retinue,in the reputation of ease and luxury, whichcan compensate for toils and cares of this nature ?How much happier must be the lot of a villagemilliner, or of the artisan's wife who sweeps herown floors, and cooks her husband's dinner, thanthat of the planter's lady with twenty slaves to wait310 MORALS OF ECONOMY.upon her ; her sons migrating because work is outof the question, and they have not the means tobuy estates; and her daughters with no betterprospect than marrying, as she has done, to toil asshe does !Some few of these ladies are among the strongest-mindedand most remarkable women I have everknown. There are great draw-backs, (as will beseen hereafter,) but their mental vigour is occasionallyproportioned to their responsibility. Womenwho have to rule over a barbarous society, (smallthough it be,) to make and enforce laws, providefor all the physical wants, and regulate the entirehabits of a number of persons who can in no respecttake care of themselves, must be strong andstrongly disciplined, if they in any degree dischargethis duty. Those who shrink from it become perhapsthe weakest women I have anywhere seen :selfishly timid, humbling dependent, languid inbody, and with minds of no reach at all. Thesetwo extremes are found in the slave States, in themost striking opposition. It is worthy of note,that I never found there a woman strong enoughvoluntarily to brave the woes of life in the presenceof slavery ; nor any woman weak enough toextenuate the vices of the system; each knowing,prior to experience, what those woes and vicesare.MORALS OF ECONOMY. 311There are a few unhappy persons in the slaveStates, too few, I believe, to be called a class, whostrongly exemplify the consequences of .such aprinciple of morals as that work is a disgrace.There are a few, called by the slaves " meanwhites ;" signifying whites who work with thehands. Where there is a coloured servile class,whose colour has become a disgrace through theirservitude, two results are inevitable: that thosewho have the colour without the servitude aredisgraced among the whites ; and those who havethe servitude without the colour are as deeply disgracedamong the coloured. More intensely thanwhite work-people are looked down upon at ,are the " mean whites" despised by theslaves of the Carolinas. They make the most, ofcourse, of the only opportunity they can ever haveof doing what they see their superiors do, despisingtheir fellow-creatures. No inducement wouldbe sufficient to bring honest, independent men intothe constant presence of double-distilled hatred andcontempt like this ; and the general character ofthe " mean whites" may therefore be anticipated.They are usually men who have no prospect, nochance elsewhere ; the lowest of the low.When I say that no inducement would be sufficient,I mean no politic inducement. There areinducements of the same force as those which drew312 MORALS OF SLAVERY.martyrs of old into the presence of savage beastsin the amphitheatre, which guided Howard throughthe gloom of prisons, and strengthened Guyon ofMarseilles to offer himself a certain victim to theplague, there are inducements of such force asthis which carry down families to dwell in the midstof contempt and danger, where everything is lostbut, the one object which carries them there.Mean whites" these friends of the oppressedfugitive may be in the eyes of all around them ;but how they stand in the eye of One whose thoughtsare not as our thoughts, may some day be revealed.To themselves it is enough that their object isgained. They do not want praise; they are aboveit: and they have shown that they can do withoutsympathy. It is enough to commend them to theirown peace of heart.SECTION I.MORALS OF SLAVERY.This title is not written down in a spirit ofmockery ; though there appears to be a mockerysomewhere, when we contrast slavery with theMORALS OF SLAVERY. 313principles and the rule which are the test of allAmerican institutions : the principles that all menare born free and equal ; that rulers derive theirjust powers from the consent of the governed; andthe rule of reciprocal justice. This discrepancybetween principles and practice needs no morewords. But the institution of slavery exists ; andwhat we have to see is what the morals are of thesociety which is subject to it.What social virtues are possible in a society ofwhich injustice is the primary characteristic? in asociety which is divided into two classes, the servileand the imperious ?The most obvious is Mercy. Nowhere, perhaps,can more touching exercises of mercy be seen thanhere. It must be remembered that the greaternumber of slave-holders have no other idea than ofholding slaves, Their fathers did it : they themselveshave never known the coloured race treatedotherwise than as inferior beings, born to work forand to teaze the whites; helpless, improvident,open to no higher inducements than indulgenceand praise ; capable of nothing but entire dependence.The good affections of slave-holderslike these show themselves in the form of mercy ;which is as beautiful to witness as mercy, made asubstitute for justice, can ever be. I saw endlessmanifestations of mercy, as well as of its opposite.314 MORALS OF SLAVERY.The thoughtfulness of masters, mistresses, and theirchildren about, not only the comforts, but the indulgencesof their slaves, was a frequent subject ofadmiration with me. Kind masters are liberal inthe expenditure of money, and (what is better) ofthought, in gratifying the whims and fancies oftheir negroes. They make large sacrifices occasionallyfor the social or domestic advantage oftheir people; and use great forbearance in theexercise of the power conferred upon them by lawand custom.At the time when the cholera was ravaging SouthCarolina, a wealthy slave-holder there refused toleave the State, as most of his neighbours weredoing. He would not consent to take any furthercare of himself than riding to a distance from hisplantation (then overrun by the disease) to sleep.All day he was among his slaves : nursing themwith his own hands ; putting them into the bath,giving them medicine himself, and cheering theirspirits by his presence and his care. He savedthem almost all. No one will suppose this one ofthe ordinary cases where a master has his slavestaken care of as property, not as men. Sordidconsiderations of that kind must have given waybefore the terrors of the plague. A far higherstrength than that of self-interest was necessary tocarry this gentleman through such a work as this ;and it was no other than mercy.MORALS OF SLAVERY. 315Again : a young man, full of the southern pride,one of whose aims is to have as great a display ofnegroes as possible, married a young lady who,soon after her marriage, showed an imperious andcruel temper towards her slaves. Her husbandgently remonstrated. She did not mend. Hewarned her, that he would not allow beings, forwhose comfort he was responsible, to be oppressed;and that, if she compelled him to it, he would depriveher of the power she misused. Still she didnot mend. He one day came and told her that hehad sold all his domestic slaves, for their own sakes.He told her that he would always give her moneyenough to hire free service, when it was to be had;and that when it was not, he would cheerfully bear,and help her to bear, the domestic inconvenienceswhich must arise from their having no servants.He kept his word. It rarely happens that freeservice can be hired ; and this proud gentlemanassists his wife's labours with his own hands ; arid(what is more) endures with all cheerfulness theignominy of having no slaves.Nothing struck me more than the patience ofslave-owners. In this virtue they probably surpassthe whole Christian world ; I mean in their patiencewith their slaves ; for one cannot much praise theirpatience with the abolitionists, or with the tariff;or in some other cases of political vexation. Whenp 2316 MORALS OF SLAVERY.I considered how they love to be called " fierysoutherners," I could not but marvel at their mildforbearance under the hourly provocations to whichthey are liable in their homes.* It is found thatsuch a degree of this virtue can be obtained onlyby long habit. Persons from New England,France, or England, becoming slave-holders, arefound to be the most severe masters and mistresses,however good their tempers may always have appearedpreviously. They cannot, like the nativeproprietor, sit waiting half an hour for the secondcourse, or see everything done in the worst possiblemanner; their rooms dirty, their propertywasted, their plans frustrated, their infants slighted,themselves deluded by artifices, they cannot, likethe native proprietor, endure all this unruffled. It\ seems to me that every slave-holder's temper isj subjected to a discipline which must either ruin or1 perfect it. While we know that many tempers areI went with a lady in whose house I was staying to dine, oneSunday, on a neighbouring estate. Her husband happened not tobe with us, as he had to ride in another direction. The carriagewas ordered for eight in the evening. It drew up to the door atsix ; and the driver, a slave, said his master had sent him, andbegged we would go home directly. We did so, and found myhost very much surprised to see us home so early. The messagewas a fiction of the slave's, who wanted to get his horses put up,that he might enjoy his Sunday evening. His master and mistresslaughed, and took no further notice.MORALS OF SLAVERY. 317thus ruined, and must mourn for the unhappycreatures who cannot escape from their tyranny, itis evident, on the other hand, that many tempersare to be met with which should shame down andsilence for ever the irritability of some whose dailylife is passed under circumstances of comparativeease.This mercy, indulgence, patience, was oftenpleaded to me in defence of the system, or in aggravationof the faults of intractable slaves. Thefallacy of this is so gross as not to need exposureanywhere but on the spot. I was heart-sick ofbeing told of the ingratitude of slaves, and weary ofexplaining that indulgence can never atone for injury: that the extremest pampering, for a life-time,is no equivalent for rights withheld, no reparationfor irreparable injustice. What are the greatestpossible amounts of finery, sweetmeats, dances,gratuities, and kind words and looks, in exchangefor political, social, and domestic existence ? forbody and spirit ? Is it not true that the life .ismore than meat, and the body than raiment?This fallacious plea was urged upon me by threedifferent persons, esteemed enlightened and religious,in relation to one case. The case was this.A lady of fortune carried into her husband's establishment,when she married, several slaves, andamong them a girl two years younger than herself,318 MORALS OF SLAVERY.who had been brought up under her, and who wasemployed as her own maid. The little slaves are accustomedto play freely with the children of the familya practice which was lauded to me, but whichnever had any beauty in my eyes, seeing, as I did,the injury to the white children from unrestrictedintercourse with the degraded race, and looking forwardas I did to the time when they must separateinto the servile and imperious. Mrs. had beenunusually indulgent to this girl, having allowedher time and opportunity for religious and otherinstruction, and favoured her in every way. Onenight, when the girl was undressing her, the ladyexpressed her fondness for her, and said, amongf other things : " When I die you shall be free ;" adangerous thing to say to a slave only two yearsyounger than herself. In a short time the ladywas taken ill, with a strange, mysterious illness,which no doctor could alleviate. One of her friends,who suspected foul play, took the sufferer entirelyunder her own charge, when she seemed to bedying. She revived ; and as soon as she was wellenough to have a will of her own again, would bewaited on by no one but her favourite slave. Shegrew worse. She alternated thus, for some time,according as she was under the care of this slaveor of her friend. At last, the friend excluded fromI her chamber every one but the physicians : took inMORALS OF SLAVERY. 319the medicines at the room door from the hands!of the slave, and locked them up. They wereall analysed by a physician, and arsenic found jin every one of them. The lady partially recovered; but I was shocked at the traces of sufferingin her whole appearance. The girl's guilt wasbrought clearly home to her. There never was acase of more cruel, deliberate intention to murder.If ever slave deserved the gallows, (which ought tobe questionable to the most decided minds,) thisgirl did. What was done ? The lady was tenderhearted,and could not bear to have her hanged.This was natural enough ; but what did she thereforedo ? keep her under her own eye, that shemight at least poison nobody else, and perhaps betouched and reclaimed by the clemency of the personshe would have murdered ? No. The ladysold her.I was actually called upon to admire the lady'sconduct ; and was asked whether the ingratitude ofthe girl was not inconceivable, and her hypocrisytoo ; for she used to lecture her mistress and hermistress's friends for being so irreligious as to gotoparties on Saturday nights, when they shouldhave been preparing their minds for Sunday. Wasnot-the hypocrisy of the girl inconceivable? andher ingratitude for her mistress's favours ? No. Thegirl had no other idea of religion, could have no320 MORALS OF SLAVERY.other than that it consists in observances, and,wicked as she was, her wickedness could not becalled ingratitude, for she was more injured thanfavoured, after all. All indulgences that could beheaped upon her were still less than her due, andher mistress remained infinitely her debtor.Little can be said of the purity of manners of thewhites of the south ; but there is purity. Somefew examples of domestic fidelity may be found :few enough, by the confession of residents on thespot ; but those individuals who have resisted thecontagion of the vice amidst which they dwell arepure. Every man who resides on his plantationmay have his harem, and has every inducement ofcustom, and of pecuniary gain,* to tempt him tothe common practice. Those who, notwithstanding,keep their homes undefiled may be considered ass^ of incorruptible purity.Here, alas ! ends my catalogue of the virtueswhich are of possible exercise by slave-holders towardstheir labourers. The inherent injustice ofthe system extinguishes all others, and nourishesa whole harvest of false morals towards the rest ofsociety.The personal oppression of the negroes is theThe law declares that the children of slaves are to follow thefortunes of the mother. Hence the practice of planters sellingand bequeathing their own children.MORALS OF SLAVERY. 321grossest vice which strikes a stranger in the country.It can never be otherwise when human beingsare wholly subjected to the will of other humanbeings, who are under no other external controlthan the law which forbids killing and maiming ;a law which it is difficult to enforce in individualcases. A fine slave was walking about in Columbia,South Carolina, when I was there, nearly helplessand useless from the following causes. Hismaster was fond of him, and the slave enjoyed therare distinction of never having been flogged. Oneday, his master's child, supposed to be under hiscare at the time, fell down and hurt itself. Themaster flew into a passion, ordered the slave to beinstantly flogged, and would not hear a single word .the man had to say. As soon as the flogging wasover, the slave went into the back yard, where therewas an axe and a block, and struck off the upperhalf of his right hand He went and held up thebleeding hand before his master, saying, " Youhave mortified me, so I have made myself useless.Now you must maintain me as long as I live." Itcame out that the child had been under the chargeof another person.There are, as is well known throughout thecountry, houses in the free States which are opento fugitive slaves, and where they are concealedtill the search for them is over. I know some ofp 5322 MORALS OF SLAVERY.the secrets of such places ; and can mention twocases, among many, of runaways, which show howhorrible is the tyranny which the slave system authorisesmen to inflict on each other. A negro hadfound his way to one of these friendly houses ; andhad been so skilfully concealed, that repeatedsearches by his master, (who had followed for thepurpose of recovering him,) and by constables, hadbeen in vain. After three weeks of this seclusion,the negro became weary, and entreated ofhis host to be permitted to look out of the window.His host strongly advised him to keep quiet, as itwas pretty certain that his master had not givenhim up. When the host had left him, however, thenegro came out of his hiding-place, and went to thewindow. He met the eye of his master, who waslooking up from the street. The poor slave wasobliged to return to his bondage.A young negress had escaped in like manner ;was in like manner concealed ; and was alarmed byconstables, under the direction of her master, enteringthe house in pursuit of her, when she hadhad reason to believe that the search was over. Sheflew up stairs to her chamber in the third story, anddrove a heavy article of furniture against the door.The constables pushed in, notwithstanding, and thegirl leaped from the window into the paved street.Her master looked at her as she lay, declared sheMORALS OF SLAVERY. . 323would never be good for anything again, and wentback into the south. The poor creature, her bodybruised, and her limbs fractured, was taken up, andkindly nursed ; and she is now maintained in Boston,in her maimed condition, by the charity ofsome ladies there.The following story has found its way into thenorthern States (as few such stories do) from thecircumstance that a New Hampshire family areconcerned in it. It has excited due horror whereverit is known ; and it is to be hoped that it willlead to the exposure of more facts of the samekind, since it is but too certain that they arecommon.A New Hampshire gentleman went down intoLouisiana, many years ago, to take a plantation.He pursued the usual method ; borrowing moneylargely to begin with, paying high interest, andclearing off his debt, year by year, as his cropwere sold. He followed another custom there;taking a Quadroon wife : a mistress, in the eye ofthe law, since there can be no legal marriage betweenwhites and persons of any degree of colour :but, in nature and in reason, the woman he tookhome was his wife. She was a well-principled,amiable, well-educated woman ; and they livedhappily together for twenty years. She had onlythe slightest possible tinge of colour. Knowing324 MORALS OF SLAVERY.the law that the children of slaves are to followthe fortunes of the mother, she warned her husbandthat she was not free, an ancestress havingbeen a slave, and the legal act of manumissionhaving never been performed. The husband promisedto look to it : but neglected it. At the endof twenty years, one died, and the other shortlyfollowed, leaving daughters ; whether two or three,I have not been able to ascertain with positivecertainty; but I have reason to believe three, ofthe ages of fifteen, seventeen, and eighteen : beautifulgirls, with no perceptible mulatto tinge. Thebrother of their father came down from NewHampshire to settle the affairs; and he supposed,as every one else did, that the deceased had beenwealthy. He was pleased with his nieces, andpromised to carry them back with him into NewHampshire, and (as they were to all appearanceperfectly white) to introduce them into the societywhich by education they were fitted for. It appeared,however, that their father had died insolvent.The deficiency was very small : but it wasnecessary to make an inventory of the effects, todeliver to the creditors. This, was done by thebrother, the executor. Some of the creditorscalled on him, and complained that he had not deliveredin a faithful inventory. He declared hehad. No : the number of slaves was not accuratelyMORALS OF SLAVERY. 325set down: he had omitted the daughters. Theexecutor was overwhelmed with horror, and askedtime for thought. He went round among the creditors,appealing to their mercy : but they answeredthat these young ladies were " a first-rate article,"too valuable to be relinquished. He next offered,(though he had himself six children, and very littlemoney,) all he had for the redemption of hisnieces ; alleging that it was more than they wouldbring in the market for house or field labour.This was refused with scorn. It was said thatthere were other purposes for which the girls wouldbring more than for field or house labour. Theuncle was in despair, and felt strongly tempted towish their death rather than their surrender tosuch a fate as w r as before them. He told them,abruptly, what was their prospect He declaresthat he never before beheld human grief; neverbefore heard the voice of anguish. They neverate, nor slept, nor separated from each other, tillthe day when they were taken into the New Orleansslave-market. There they were sold, separately,at high prices, for the vilest of purposes:and where each is gone, no one knows. They are,for the present, lost. But they will arise to thelight in the day of retribution.It is a common boast in the south that there isless vice in their cities than in those of the north.This can never, as a matter of fact, have been MORALS OF SLAVERY.certaine; as the proceedings of slave householdsare, or may be, a secret : and in the north, whatlicentiousness there is may be detected. But suchcomparisons are bad. Let any one look at thepositive licentiousness of the south, and declare if,in such a state of society, there can be any securityfor domestic purity and peace. The Quadroonconnexions in New Orleans are all but universal,as I was assured on the spot by ladies who cannotbe mistaken. The history of such connexions is amelancholy one : but it ought to be made knownwhile there are any who boast of the superior moralsof New Orleans, on account of the decentquietness of the streets and theatres.The Quadroon girls of New Orleans are brought/ up by their mothers to be what they have been ;the mistresses of white gentlemen. The boys aresome of them sent to France ; some placed on landin the back of the State ; and some are sold in theslave-market. They marry women of a somewhatdarker colour than their own ; the women of theirown colour objecting to them, " ils sont si disputants!" The girls are highly educated, externally,and are, probably, as beautiful and accomplished aset of women as can be found. Every young manearly selects one, and establishes her in one ofthose pretty and peculiar houses, whole rows ofwhich may be seen in the Remparts. Theconnexion now and then lasts for life: usuallyMORALS OF SLAVERY. 327for several years. In the latter case, when thetime comes for the gentleman to take a white wife,the dreadful news reaches his Quadroon partner,either by a letter entitling her to call the houseand furniture her own, or by the newspaper whichannounces his marriage. The Quadroon ladiesare rarely or never known to form a second connexion.Many commit suicide : more die brokenhearted.Some men continue the connexion aftermarriage. Every Quadroon woman believes thather partner will prove an exception to the rule ofdesertion. Every white lady believes that her husbandhas been an exception to the rule of seduction.What security for domestic purity and peacethere can be where every man has had two connexions,one of which must be concealed ; and twofamilies, whose existence must not be known toeach other ; where the conjugal relation begins intreachery, and must be carried on with a heavysecret in the husband's breast, no words are neededto explain. If this is the system which is boastedof as a purer than ordinary state of morals, what isto be thought of the ordinary state ? It can onlybe hoped that the boast is an empty one.There is no occasion to explain the managementof the female slaves on estates where the object is torear as many as possible, like stock, for the southernmarket : nor to point out the boundless licensesMORALS OF SLAVERY.tediousness caused by the practice : a practice whichwrung from the wife of a planter, in the bitternessof her heart, the declaration that a planter's wifewas only "the chief slave of the harem." Mr.Madison avowed that the licentiousness of Virginianplantations stopped just short of destruction ;and that it was understood that the female slaveswere to become mothers at fifteen.A gentleman of the highest character, a southernplanter, observed, in conversation with a friend,that little was known, out of bounds, of the reasonsof the new laws by which emancipation was made sodifficult as it is. He said that the very general connexionof white gentlemen with their female slavesintroduced a mulatto race whose numbers wouldbecome dangerous, if the affections of their whiteparents were permitted to render them free. Theliberty of emancipating them was therefore abolished,while that of selling them remained. Thereare persons who weakly trust to the force of theparental affection for putting an end to slavery,when the amalgamation of the races shall havegone so far as to involve a sufficient number ! Iactually heard this from the lips of a clergyman inthe south. Yet these planters, who sell their ownoffspring to fill their purses, who shave such offspringfor the sake of filling their, purses, dare toraise the cry of "amalgamation" against the abo-moralsOF SLAVERY. 329unionists of the north, not one of whom has, as faras evidence can show, conceived the idea of a mixtureof the races. It is from the south, where thismixture is hourly encouraged, that the canting andgroundless reproach has come. I met with nocandid southerner who was not full of shame at themonstrous hypocrisy.It is well known that the most savage violencesthat are now heard of in the world take place inthe southern and western States of America.Burning alive, cutting the heart out, and stickingit on the point of a knife, and other such diabolicaldeeds, the result of the deepest hatred of whichthe human heart is capable, are heard of only there.The frequency of such deeds is a matter of dispute,which time will settle.* The existence of suchdeeds is a matter of no dispute. Whether two ortwenty such deeds take place in a year, their perpetrationtestifies to the existence of such hatredas alone could prompt them. There is no doubtin my mind as to the immediate causes of suchoutrages. They arise out of the licentiousness ofmanners. The negro is exasperated by being deprivedof his wife, by being sent out of the waythat his master may take possession of his home.He stabs his master ; or, if he cannot fulfil his desknew of the death of four men by summary burning alive,within thirteen months of my residence in the United States.330 MORALS OF SLAVERY.sire of vengeance, he is a dangerous person, anobject of vengeance in return, and destined to somecruel fate. If the negro attempts to retaliate, anddefile the master's home, the faggots are set alightabout him. Much that is dreadful ensues fromthe negro being subject to toil and the lash :but I am confident that the licentiousness of themasters is the proximate cause of society in thesouth and south-west being in such a state that soothingelse is to be looked for than its being dissolvedinto its elements, if man does not soon cease to becalled the property of man. This dissolution willnever take place through the insurrection of thenegroes; but by the natural operation of vice.But the process of demoralisation will be stopped,no doubt, before it reaches that point.There is no reason to apprehend serious insurrection; for the negroes are too degraded to act inconcert, or to stand firm before the terrible face ofthe white man. Like all deeply-injured classes ofpersons, they are desperate and cruel, on occasion,kindly as their nature is ; but as a class, they haveno courage. The voice of a white, even of a lady,if it were authoritative, would make a whole regimentof rebellious slaves throw down their armsand flee. Poison is the weapon that suits thembest : then the knife, in moments of exasperation.They will never take the field, unless led on byMORALS OF SLAVERY. 331free blacks. Desperate as the state of society is,it will be rectified, probably, without bloodshed.It may be said that it is doing an injustice tocite extreme cases of vice as indications of the stateof society. I do not think so, as long as suchcases are so common as to strike the observation ofa mere passing stranger; to say nothing of theirincompatibility with a decent and orderly fulfilmentof the social relations. Let us, however, see whatis the very best state of things. Let us take thewords and deeds of some of the most religious, refined,and amiable members of society. It wasthis aspect of affairs which grieved me more, ifpossible, than the stormier one which I have presented.The careening and hardening of mindand manners among the best ; the blunting of themoral sense among the most conscientious, gaveme more pain than the stabbing, poisoning, andburning. A few examples which will need nocomment, will suffice.Two ladies, the distinguishing ornaments of avery superior society in the south, are truly unhappyabout slavery, and opened their hearts freelyto me upon the grief which it caused them, theperfect curse which they found it. They need noenlightening on this, nor any stimulus to acquitthemselves as well as their unhappy circumstancesallow. They one day pressed me for a declaration332 MORALS OF SLAVERY.of what I should do in their situation. I repliedthat I would give up everything, go away with myslaves, settle them, and stay by them in some freeplace. I had said, among other things, that I darenot stay there, on my own account, from moralconsiderations. " What, not if you had no slaves ?'"No." "Why?" "I could not trust myself tolive where I must constantly witness the exerciseof irresponsible power." They made no reply atthe moment : but each found occasion to tell me,some days afterwards, that she had been struck tothe heart by these words: the consideration Imentioned having never occurred to her before !Madame Laurie, the person who was mobbedat New Orleans, on account of her fiendish crueltyto her slaves, a cruelty so excessive as to compelthe belief that she was mentally deranged, thoughher derangement could have taken such a directionnowhere but in a slave country ; this person wasdescribed to me as having been " very pleasant towhites."A common question put to me by amiable ladieswas, "Do not you find the slaves generally veryhappy ?" They never seemed to have been asked,or to have asked themselves, the question withwhich I replied : " Would you be happy" withtheir means ?"One sultry morning, I was sitting with a friend,MORALS OF SLAVERY. 333who was giving me all manner of information abouther husband's slaves, both in the field and house ;how she fed and clothed them ; what indulgencesthey were allowed ; what their respective capabilitieswere ; and so forth. While we were talking,one of the house-slaves passed us. I observed thatshe appeared superior to all the rest ; to which myfriend assented. " She is A.'s wife? 1 ' said I. "Wecall her A.'s wife, but she has never been marriedto him. A. and she came to my husband, five yearsago, and asked him to let them marry : but hecould not allow it, because he had not made up hismind whether to sell A. ; and he hates parting husbandand wife." " How many children have they ?"Four." " And they are not married yet ?" " No ;my husband has never been able to let themmarry. He certainly will not sell her : and hehas not determined yet whether be shall sell A."Another friend told me the following story. B.was the best slave in her husband's possession. B.fell in love with C., a pretty girl, on a neighbouringestate, who was purchased to be B.'s wife. C.'stemper was jealous and violent; and she was alwaysfancying that B. showed attention to other girls.Her master warned her to keep her temper, or sheshould be sent away. One day, when the masterwas dining out, B. came to him, trembling, and relatedthat C. had, in a fit of jealousy, aimed a blow334 MORALS OF SLAVERY.at his head with an axe, and nearly struck him.The master went home, and told C. that her tempercould no longer be borne with, and she mustgo. He offered her the choice of being sold to atrader, and carried to New Orleans, or of being sentto field labour on a distant plantation. She preferredbeing sold to the trader ; who broke his promise oftaking her to New Orleans, and disposed of her toa neighbouring proprietor. C. kept watch over herhusband, declaring that she would be the death ofany girl whom B. might take to wife. " And so,"said my informant, " poor B. was obliged to walkabout in single blessedness for some time ; till, lastsummer, happily, C. died." " Is it possible," said I,that you pair and part these people like brutes ?"The lady looked surprised, and asked what elsecould be done.One day at dinner, when two slaves were standingbehind our chairs, the lady of the house wastelling me a ludicrous story, in which a former slaveof hers was one of the personages, serving as a buttonthe question of complexion. She seemed to recollectthat slaves were listening ; for she put in, " D.was an excellent boy," (the term for male slaves ofevery age.) " We respected him very highly as anexcellent boy. We respected him almost as muchas if he had been a white. But, &c. "A southern lady, of fair reputation for refine-moralsOF SLAVERY. 335ment and cultivation, told the following story in thehearing of a company, among whom were somefriends of mine. She spoke with obvious unconsciousnessthat she was saying anything remarkable: indeed such unconsciousness was proved byher telling the story at all. She had possessed avery pretty mulatto girl, of whom she declared herselffond. A young man came to stay at her house,and fell in love with the girl. " She came to me,"said the lady, " for protection ; which I gave her."The young man went away, but after some weeks,returned, saying he was so much in love with thegirl that he could not live without her. " I pitiedthe young man," concluded the lady ; " so I sold thegirl to him for 1,500 dollars."I repeatedly heard the preaching of a remarkablyliberal man, of a free and kindly spirit, in the south.His last sermon, extempore, was from the textCast all your care upon him, for He caret foryou." The preacher told us, among other things,that God cares for all, for the meanest as well asthe mightiest. " He cares for that coloured person,"said he, pointing to the gallery where the peopleof colour sit, " he cares for that colouredperson as well as for the wisest and best of youwhites." This was the most wanton insult I hadever seen offered to a human being ; and it was withdifficulty that I refrained from walking out of the336 MORALS OF SLAVERY.church. Yet no one present to whom I afterwardsspoke of it seemed able to comprehend the wrong.Well !" said they : " does not God care for thecoloured people ?"Of course, in a society where things like theseare said and done by its choicest members, there isa prevalent unconsciousness of the existing wrong.The daily and hourly plea is of good intentions towardsthe slaves ; of innocence under the aspersionsof foreigners, They are as sincere in the belief thatthey are injured as their visitors are cordial in theirdetestation of the morals of slavery. Such unconsciousnessof the milder degrees of impurity andinjustice as enables ladies and clergymen of thehighest character to speak and act as I have related,is a sufficient evidence of the prevalent grossnessof morals. One remarkable indication of suchblindness was the almost universal mention ofthe state of the Irish to me, as a worse case thanAmerican slavery. I never attempted, of course, tovindicate the state of Ireland : but 1 was surprisedto find no one able, till put in the way, to see thedistinction between political misgovernment andpersonal slavery : between exasperating a peopleby political insult, and possessing them, like brutes,for pecuniary profit. The unconsciousness of guiltis the worst of symptoms, where there are means oflight to be had. I shall have to speak hereafter ofMORALS OF SLAVERY. 337the state of religion throughout the country. It isenough here to say that if, with the law of libertyand the gospel of peace and purity within theirhands, the inhabitants of the south are unconsciousof the low state of the morals of society, such blindnessproves nothing so much as how far thatwhich is highest and purest may be confounded withwhat is lowest and foulest, when once the fatal attempthas been entered upon to make them co-exist.From their co-existence, one further step may betaken; and in the south has been taken ; the makingthe high and pure a sanction for the low andfoul, Of this, more hereafter.The degradation of the women is so obvious aconsequence of the evils disclosed above, that thepainful subject need not be enlarged on. By thedegradation of women, I do not mean to imply anydoubt of the purity of their manners. There arereasons, plain enough to the observer, why theirmanners should be even peculiarly pure. They areall married young, from their being out-numberedby the other sex : and there is ever present an unfortunateservile class of their own sex to serve thepurposes of licentiousness, so as to leave them untempted.Their degradation arises, not from theirown conduct, but from that of all other parties aboutthem. Where the generality of men carry secretswhich their wives must be the last to know ; whereVOL. II. Q338 MORALS OF SLAVERY.the busiest and more engrossing concerns of lifemust wear one aspect to the one sex, and another tothe other, there is an end to all wholesome confidenceand sympathy, and woman sinks to be theornament of her husband's house, the domesticmanager of his establishment, instead of being hisall-sufficient friend. I am speaking not only ofwhat I suppose must necessarily be ; but of what Ihave actually seen. I have seen, with heart-sorrow,the kind politeness, the gallantry, so insufficient tothe loving heart, with which the wives of the southare treated by their husbands. I have seen thehorror of a woman's having to work, to exert thefaculties which her Maker gave her; the eagernessto ensure her unearned ease and rest ; thedeepest insult which can be offered to an intelligentand conscientious woman. I know the tone of conversationwhich is adopted towards women ; differentin its topics and its style from that which any manwould dream of offering to any other man. I haveheard the boast of the chivalrous consideration inwhich women are held throughout their woman'sparadise; and seen something of the anguish ofcrushed pride, of the conflict of bitter feelings withwhich such boasts have been listened to by thosewhose aspirations teach them the hollowness of thesystem. The gentlemen are all the while unawarethat women are not treated in the best possibleMORALS OF SLAVERY. 339manner among them: and they will remain thusblind as long as licentious intercourse with thelowest of the sex unfits them for appreciating thehighest. Whenever their society shall take rankaccording to moral rather than physical considerations";"when ever they shall rise to crave sympathyin the real objects of existence : whenever they shallbegin to inquire what human life is, and wherefore,and to reverence it accordingly, they will humblethemselves in shame for their abuse of the right ofthe strongest ; for those very arrangements and observanceswhich now constitute their boast. A ladywho, brought up elsewhere to use her own faculties,and employ them on such objects as she thinks proper,and who has more knowledge and more wisdomthan perhaps any gentleman of her acquaintance,told me of the disgust with which she submits tothe conversation which is addressed to her, underthe idea of being fit for her ; and how she solacesherself at home, after such provocation, with thesilent sympathy of books. A father of promisingyoung daughters, whom he sees likely to be crushedby the system, told me in a tone of voice which Ishall never forget, that women there might as wellbe turned into the street, for anything they are fitfor. There are reasonable hopes that his childrenmay prove an exception. One gentleman who declareshimself much interested in the whole subject,Q 2340 MORALS OF SLAVERY.expresses his horror of the employment of women inthe northern States, for useful purposes. He toldme that the same force of circumstances which, inthe region he inhabits, makes men independent, increasesthe dependence of women, and will go on toincrease it. Society is there, he declared, " alwaysadvancing towards orientalism." " There are buttwo ways in which woman can be exercised to theextent of her powers ; by genius and by calamity,either of which may strengthen her to burst her conventionalrestraints. The first is too rare a circumstanceto afford any basis for speculation : and mayHeaven avert the last !" O, may Heaven hastenit ! would be the cry of many hearts, if these be indeedthe conditions of woman's fulfilling the purposesof her being. There are, I believe, somewho would scarcely tremble to see their houses inflames,to hear the coming tornado, to feel thethreatening earthquake, if these be indeed the messengerswho must open their prison doors, and givetheir heaven-born spirits the range of the universe.God has given to them the universe, as to others :man has caged them in one corner of it, and dreads;heir escape from their cage, while nan does thativhich he would not have woman hear of. Pie putsgenius out of sight, and deprecates calamity. lielas not, however, calculated all the forces in nature,^f he had, he would hardly venture to hold eitherMORALS OF SLAVERY. 341negroes or women as property, or to trust to theabsence-of-genius and calamity.One remarkable warning has been vouchsafed tohim. A woman of strong mind, whose strenuousendeavours to soften the woes of slavery to herown dependents, failed to satisfy her conscienceand relieve her human affections, has shaken theblood-slaked dust from her feet, and gone to livewhere every man can call himself his own : andnot only to live, but to work there, and to pledgeherself to death, if necessary, for the overthrow ofthe system which she abhors in proportion to herfamiliarity with it. Whether we are to call herGenius or Calamity, or by her own honoured nameof Angelina Grime, certain it is that she is rousinginto life and energy many women who wereunconscious of genius, and unvisited by calamity,but who carry honest and strong human hearts.This lady may ere long be found to have materiallychecked the " advance towards orientalism."Of course, the children suffer, perhaps the mostfatally of all, under the slave system. What canbe expected from little boys who are brought up toconsider physical courage the highest attribute olmanhood ; pride of section and of caste its loftiestgrace; the slavery of a part of society essential tothe freedom of the rest ; justice of less account than342 MORALS OF SLAVERY.generosity ; and humiliation in the eyes of men themost intolerable of evils ? What is to be expectedof little girls who boast of having got a negroflogged for being impertinent to them, and who aresurprised at the " ungentlemanly" conduct of amaster who maims his slave? Such lessons arenot always taught expressly. Sometimes the reverseis expressly taught But this is what thechildren in a slave country necessarily learn fromwhat passes around them ; just as the plainest girlsin a school grow up to think personal beauty themost important of all endowments, in spite of dailyassurances that the charms of the mind are all thatare worth regarding.The children of slave countries learn more andworse still. It is nearly impossible to keep themfrom close intercourse with the slaves ; and theattempt is rarely made. The generality of slavesare as gross as the total absence of domestic sanctitymight be expected to render them. They donot dream of any reserves with children. Theconsequences are inevitable. The woes of mothersfrom this cause are such that, if this " peculiar domesticinstitution"" were confided to their charge,I believe they would accomplish its overthrow withan energy and wisdom that would look more likeinspiration than orientalism. Among the incalculableforces in nature is the grief of mothersweeping for the corruption of their children.MORALS OF Slavery. 343One ^theabsolutely inevitable results of slaveryis a disregard of human rights : an inability evento comprehend them. Probably the southerngentry, who declare ~ that the presence of slaveryenhances the love of freedom; that freedom canbe duly estimated only where a particular class canappropriate all social privileges ; that, to use thewords of one of them, " they know too much ofslavery to be slaves themselves," are sincere enoughin such declarations ; and if so, it follows that theydo not know what freedom is. They may have thebenefit of the alternative, of not knowing whatfreedom is, and being sincere ; or of knowing whatfreedom is, and not being sincere. I am disposedto think that the first is the more common case.One reason for my thinking so is, that I usuallyfound in conversation in the south, that the ideaof human rights was sufficient subsistence in returnfor labour. This was assumed as the definitionof human rights on which we were to arguethe case of the slave. When I tried the definitionby the golden rule, I found that even that straight,simple rule had become singularly bent in thehands of those who profess to acknowledge andapply it. A clergyman preached from the pulpitthe following application of it, which is echoed unhesitatinglyby the most religious of the slaveholders: " Treat your slaves as you would wish to'344 MORALS OF SLAVERY.be treated if you were a slave yourself." I verilybelieve that hundreds, or thousands, do not seethat this is not an honest application of the rule ;so blinded are they by custom to the fact that thenegro is a man and a brother.Another of my reasons for supposing that thegentry of the south do not know what freedom isisthat many seem unconscious of the state of coercionin which they themselves are living ; coercion,not only from the incessant fear of which Ihave before spoken, a fear which haunts theirhomes, their business, and their recreations ; coercion,not only from their fear, and from their beingdependent for their hourly comforts upon the extinguishedor estranged will of those whom theyhave injured ; but coercion also from their ownlaws. The laws against the press are as peremptoryas in the most despotic countries of Europe :* asmay be seen in the small number and size, and poorquality, of the newspapers of the south. I never saw,No notice is taken of any occurrence, however remarkable, inwhich a person of colour, free or enslaved, has any share, for fearof the Acts which denounce death or imprisonment for life againstthose who shall write, print, publish, or distribute anythinghaving a tendency to excite discontent or insubordination, &c. ;or which doom to heavy fines those who shall use or issue languagewhich may disturb " the security of masters with theirslaves, or diminish that respect which is commanded to freepeople of colour for the whites."MORALS OF SLAVERY. 345in the rawest villages of the youngest States, newspapersso empty and poor as those of New Orleans.It is curious that, while the subject of the abolitionof slavery in the British colonies was necessarily avery interesting one throughout the southern States,I met with planters who did not know that anycompensation had been paid by the British nationto the West India proprietors. The miserablequality of the southern newspapers, and the omissionfrom them of the subjects on which the peoplemost require information, will go far to account forthe people's delusions on their own affairs, ascompared with those of the rest of the world, andfor their boasts of freedom, which probably arisefrom their knowing of none which is superior.They see how much more free they are than theirown slaves; but are not generally aware whatliberty is where all are free. In 1834, the numberof newspapers was, in the State of New York,267; in Louisiana, 31; in Massachusetts, 108;in South Carolina, 19; in Pennsylvania, 220; inGeorgia, 29.What is to be thought of the freedom of gentlemensubject to the following law ? " Anyperson or persons who shall attempt to teach anyfree person of colour, or slave, to spell, read, orwrite, shall, upon conviction thereof by indictment,Q5346 MORALS OF SLAVERY.be fined in a sum not less than two hundred andfifty dollars, nor more than five hundred dollars"*What is to be thought of the freedom of gentlemenwho cannot emancipate their own slaves, exceptby the consent of the legislature ; and then onlyunder very strict conditions, which make the deedalmost impracticable ? It has been mentioned thatduring a temporary suspension of the laws againstemancipation in Virginia, 10,000 slaves were freed innine years; and that, as the institution seemed inperil, the masters were again coerced. It is pleadedthat the masters themselves were the repealers andre-enactors of these laws. True : and thus itappears that they thought it necessary to depriveeach other of a liberty which a great number seemto have made use of themselves, while they could.No high degree of liberty, or of the love of it, isto be seen here. The laws which forbid emancipationare felt to be cruelly galling, throughout theAlabama Digest. In the same section occurs the following :That no cruel or unusual punishment shall be inflicted on anyslave within this territory. And any owner of slaves authorisingor permitting the same, shall, on conviction thereof, before anycourt having cognizance, be fined according to the nature of theoffence, and at the discretion of the court, in any sum not exceedingtwo hundred dollars."Two hundred dollars' fine for torturing a slave : and five hundredfor teaching him to read !MORALS OF SLAVERY. .'347south, I heard frequent bitter complaints of them.They are the invariable plea urged by individualsto excuse their continuing to hold slaves. Suchindividuals are either sincere in these complaints,or they are not If they are not, they must beunder some deplorable coercion which compels solarge a multitude to hypocrisy. If they are sincere,they possess the common republican meansof getting tyrannical laws repealed : and why dothey not use them ? If these laws are felt to beoppressive, why is no voice heard denouncingthem in the legislatures ? If men complainingly,but voluntarily, submit to laws which bind theconscience, little can be said of their love of liberty.If they submit involuntarily, nothing can be saidfor their possession of it.What, again, is to be thought of the freedom ofcitizens who are liable to lose caste because theyfollow conscience in a case where the perversity ofthe laws places interest on the side of conscience,and public opinion against it? I will explain. Inasouthern city, I saw a gentleman who appearedto have all the outward requisites for commandingrespect. He was very weal thy 5 had been governorof the State, and was an eminent and peculiar benefactorto the city. I found he did not stand well.As some pains were taken to impress me with this,I inquired the cause. His character was declared348 MORALS OF SLAVERY.to be generally good. I soon got at the particularexception, which I was anxious to do only becauseI saw that it was somehow of public concern.While this gentleman was governor, there was aninsurrection of slaves. His own slaves were accused.He did not believe them guilty, and refusedto hang them. This was imputed to an unwillingnessto sacrifice his property. He wasthus in a predicament which no one can be placedin, except where man is held as property. Hemust either hang his slaves, believing them innocent,and keep his character; or he must, bysaving their lives, lose his own character. Howthe case stood with this gentleman, is fully knownonly to his own heart. His conduct claims themost candid construction. But, this being accordedas his due, what can be thought of the freedom ofa republican thus circumstanced ?Passing over the perils, physical and moral, inwhich those are involved who live in a societywhere recklessness of life is treated with leniency,and physical courage stands high in the list ofvirtues and graces, perils which abridge a man'sliberty of action and of speech in a way whichwould be felt to be intolerable if the restraint werenot adorned by the false name of Honours isonly necessary to look at the treatment of the abolitionistsby the south, by both legislatures and in-MORALS OF SLAVERY. 349individuals, to see that no practical understanding ofliberty exists there.Upon a mere vague report, or bare suspicion,persons travelling through the south have beenarrested, imprisoned, and, in some cases, floggedor otherwise tortured, on pretence that such personsdesired to cause insurrection among the slaves.More than one innocent person has been hanged ;and the device of terrorism has been so practisedas to deprive the total number of persons whoavowedly hold a certain set of opinions, of their constitutionalliberty of traversing the whole country.It was declared by some liberal-minded gentlemenof South Carolina, after the publication ofDr. Channing's work on .Slavery, that if Dr.Channing were to enter South Carolina with abody-guard of 20,000 men, he could not come outalive. I have seen the lithographic prints, transmittedin letters to abolitionists, representing theindividual to whom the letter was sent hanging ona gallows. I have seen the hand-bills, purportingto be issued by Committees of Vigilance, offeringenormous rewards for the heads, or for the ears,of prominent abolitionists.If it be said that these acts are attributable tothe ignorant wrath of individuals only, it may beasked whence arose the Committees of Vigilance,which were last year sitting throughout the south350 MORALS OF SLAVERY.and west, on the watch for any incautious personwho might venture near them, with anti-slaveryopinions in his mind?' How came it that highofficial persons sat on these committees ? How isit that some governors of southern States madeformal application to governors of the northernStates to procure the dispersion of anti-slavery societies,the repression of discussion, and thepunishment cf the promulgators of abolition opinions?How is it that the governor of SouthCarolina last year recommended the summary execution,without benefit of clergy, of all personscaught within the limits of the State, holdingavowed anti-slavery opinions ; and that every sentimentof the governor's was endorsed by a selectcommittee of the legislature ?All this proceeds from an ignorance of the firstprinciples of liberty. It cannot be from a merehypocritical disregard of such principles ; forproud men, who boast a peculiar love of libertyand aptitude for it, would not voluntarily makethemselves so ridiculous as they appear by theseoutrageous proceedings. Such blustering is sohopeless, and, if not sincere, so purposeless, thatno other supposition is left than that they havelost sight of the fundamental principles of boththeir federal and State constitutions, and do nowactually suppose that their own freedom lies inMORALS OF SLAVERY. 351crushing all opposition to their own will. No pretenceof evidence has been offered of any furtheroffence against them than the expression of obnoxiousopinions. There is no plea that any oftheir laws have been violated, except those recentlyenacted to annihilate freedom of speech and thepress : laws which can in no case be binding uponpersons out of the limits of the States for whichthese new laws are made.The amended constitution of Virginia, of 1830,provides that the legislature shall not pass " anylaw abridging the freedom of speech or of thepress." North and South Carolina and Georgiadecree that the freedom of the press shall be preservedinviolate ; the press being the grand bulwarkof liberty. The constitution of Louisiana declaresthat " the free communication of thoughts andopinions is one of the invaluable rights of man ;and every citizen may freely speak, write, andprint, on any subject, being responsible for theabuse of that liberty." The Declaration of Rightsof Mississippi declares that " no law shall everbe passed to curtail or restrain the liberty ofspeech, and of the press." The constitutions ofall the slave States contain declarations and provisionslike these. How fearfully have the descendantsof those who framed them degeneratedin their comprehension and practice of liberty, violMORALS OF MANUFACTURES.hating both the spirit and the letter of their originalBill of Rights ! They are not yet fullyaware of this. In the calmer times which are tocome, they will perceive it, and look back withamazement upon the period of desperation, whennot a voice was heard, even in the legislatures, toplead for human rights ; when, for the sake of onedoomed institution, they forgot what their fathershad done, fettered their own presses, tied their ownhands, robbed their fellow-citizens of their right offree travelling, and did all they could to deprivethose same fellow-citizens of liberty and life, forthe avowal and promulgation of opinions.Meantime, it would be but decent to forbear allboasts of a superior knowledge and love of freedom.Here I gladly break off my dark chapter on theMorals of Slavery.SECTION II.MORALS OF MANUFACTURES.One remarkable effect of democratic institutionsis the excellence of the work turned out by thoseMORALS OF MANUFACTURES. 353who live under them. In a country where thewhole course is open to every one; where, intheory, everything may be obtained by merit, menhave the strongest stimulus to exert their powers,and try what they can achieve. I found master-workmen,who employ operatives of various nations,very sensible of this. Elsewhere, no artisancan possibly rise higher than to a certain point ofdexterity, and amount of wages. In America, anartisan may attain to be governor of the State;member of Congress ; even President. Instead ofthis possibility having the effect of turning hishead, and making him unfit for business, (as somesuppose, who seem to consider these opportunities asresembling the chances of a lottery,) it attacheshim to his business and his master, to sober habits,and to intellectual cultivation.The only apparent excess to which it leads is ill-consideredenterprise. This is an evil sometimesto the individual, but not to society. A man whomakes haste to be famous or rich by means of newinventions, may injure his own fortune or credit,but is usually a benefactor to society, by furnishinga new idea on which another may work withmore success. Some of the most important improvementsin the manufactures of the UnitedStates have been made by men who afterwards becameinsolvent. Where there is hasty enterprise,354 MORALS OF MANUFACTURES.there is usually much conceit. The very hasteseems to show that the man is thinking more ofhimself than of the subject on which he is employed.It naturally happens that the conceitedoriginator breaks down in the middle of his scheme ;and that some more patient, modest thinker takesit up where he leaves off, and completes the invention.I was shown, at the Paterson mills, aninvention completed by two men on the spot, whosediscovery has been extensively adopted in England.A workman fancied he had discovered a method bywhich he could twist roving, fastened at both ends,quicker than had ever been done before. Asa morethoughtful person would have foreseen, half thetwisting came undone, as soon as the ends wereunfastened. The projector threw his work aside :but a quiet observer among his brother workmenoffered him a partnership and a new idea, in returnfor the primary suggestion. The quiet mansaw how quickly the thread might be prepared, ifthe roving could be condensed fast enough forthe twisting. He added his discovery to what thefirst had really achieved ; and the success wascomplete.The factories are found to afford a safe and usefulemployment for much energy which wouldotherwise be wasted and misdirected. I found thatin some places very bad morals had prevailed be-moralsOF MANUFACTURES. 355fore the introduction of manufactures ; while nowthe same society is eminently orderly. The greatevil still is drunkenness : but of this there is lessthan there used to be ; and other disorders havealmost entirely disappeared. A steady employerhas it in his power to do more for the morals ofthe society about him than the clergy themselves.The experiment has been tried, with entire success,of dismissing from the mills any who havebeen guilty of open vice. This is submitted to,because it is obviously reasonable that the soberworkmen who remain should be protected fromassociation with vicious persons who must be offensiveor dangerous to them. If any employerhas the firmness to dismiss unquestionable offenders,however valuable their services may be tohim, he may confidently look for a cessation ofsuch offences, and for a great purification of thesociety in which they have occurred.The morals of the female factory population maybeexpected to be good when it is considered ofwhat class it is composed. Many of the girls arein the factories because they have too much pridefor domestic service. Girls who are too proud fordomestic service as it is in America, can hardly belowenough for any gross immorality ; or to needwatching ; or not to be trusted to avoid the contagionof evil example. To a stranger, their pride356 MORALS OF MANUFACTURES.seems to take a mistaken direction, and they appearto deprive themselves of a respectable homeand station, and many benefits, by their dislike ofservice: but this is altogether their own affair.They must choose for themselves their way of life.But the reasons of their choice indicate a state ofmind superior to the grossest dangers of their position.I saw a bill fixed up in the Waltham mill whichbore a warning that no young lady who attendeddancing-school that winter should be employed :and that the corporation had given directions tothe overseer to dismiss any one who should befound to dance at the school. I asked the meaningof this ; and the overseer's answer was, " Why,we had some trouble last winter about the dancing-school.It must, of course, be held in the evening,as the young folks are in the mill all day. Theyare very young, many of them ; and they forgetthe time, and everything but the amusement, anddance away till two or three in the morning.Then they are unfit for their work the next day ;or, if they get properly through their work, it is atthe expense of their health. So we have forbiddenthe dancing-school ; but, to make up for it, Ihave promised them that, as soon as the great newroom at the hotel is finished, we will have a danceonce a-fortnight. We shall meet and break upMORALS OF MANUFACTURES. 357early ; and my wife and I will dance ; and we willall dance together."I was sorry to see one bad and very unnecessaryarrangement, in all the manufacturing establishments.In England, the best friends of the poorare accustomed to think it the crowning hardshipof their condition that solitude is wholly forbiddento them. It is impossible that any human beingshould pass his life as well as he might do who isnever alone, who is not frequently alone. Thisis a weighty truth which can never be explainedaway. The silence, freedom and collectedness ofsolitude are absolutely essential to the health ofthe mind ; and no substitute for this repose (orchange of activity) is possible. In the dwellingsof the English poor, parents and children arecrowded into one room, for want of space and offurniture. All wise parents above the rank ofpoor, make it a primary consideration so to arrangetheir families as that each member may, atsome hour, have some place where he may enterin, and shut his door, and feel himself alone. Ifpossible, the sleeping places are so ordered. InAmerica, where space is of far less consequence,where the houses are large, where the factory girlscan build churches, and buy libraries, and educatebrothers for learned professions, these same girls358 Morals OF MANUFACTURES.have no private apartments, and sometimes sleepsix or eight in a room, and even three in a bed.This is very bad. It shows a want of inclinationfor solitude ; an absence of that need of itwhich every healthy mind must feel, in a greateror less degree.Now are the days when these gregarious habitsshould be broken through. New houses are beingdaily built : more parents are bringing their childrento the factories. If the practice be nowadopted, by the corporations, or by the parents whopreside over separate establishments, of partitioningoff the large sleeping apartments into smallones which shall hold each one occupant, theexpense of partitions and windows and troublewill not be worth a moment's consideration incomparison with the improvement in intelligence,morals, and manners, which will be found to resultfrom such an arrangement. If the change benot soon made, the American factory population,with all its advantages of education and of pecuniarysufficiency, will be found, as its numbersincrease, to have been irreparably injured by itssubjection to a grievance which is considered thevery heaviest to which poverty exposes artisans inold countries. Man's own silent thoughts are hisbest safeguard and highest privilege. Of the fullMORALS OF COMMERCE.advantage of this safeguard, of the full enjoymentof this privilege, the innocent and industriousyouth of a new country ought, by no mismanagement,to he deprived. *SECTION III.MORALS OF COMMERCE.It is said in the United States that Commerceand the Navy are patronised by the federal party ;as agriculture is, and the army would be, if therewas one, by the democratic party. This is trueenough. The greater necessity for co-operation,and therefore for the partial sacrifice of independence,imposed by commercial pursuits, is moreagreeable to the aristocratic portion of societythan to its opposite. Yet, while commerce hasbeen spreading and improving, federalism hasdwindled away ; and most remarkably where commerceis carried on in its utmost activity : in Massachusetts.The democracy are probably findingout that more is gained by the concentration ofthe popular will than is lost in the way of individualindependence, by men being brought togetherfor objects which require concession and mutual360 MORALS OF COMMERCE.subordination. However this may be, the spiritof commerce in the United States is, on the whole,honourable to the people.I shall have to speak hereafter of the regard towealth, as the most important object in life, whichextensively corrupts Americans as it does all othersociety. Here, I have to speak only of the spiritin which one method of procuring wealth is prosecuted.The activity of the commercial spirit in Americais represented abroad, and too often at home,as indicative of nothing but sordid love of gain : amaking haste to be rich, a directly selfish desire ofaggrandisement. This view of the case seems tomenarrow and injurious. I believe that many desires,various energies, some nobler and somemeaner, find in commerce a centre for their activity.I have studied with some care the minds and mannersof a variety of merchants, and other personsengaged in commerce, and have certainly found aregard to money a more superficial and intermittinginfluence than various others,The spirit of enterprise is very remarkable inthe American merchants. Beginning life, as allAmericans do, with the world all open before them,and only a head and a pair of hands wherewith togain it, a passionate desire to overcome difficultiesarises in them. Being, (as I have before declaredMORALS OF COMMERCE. 361my opinion,) the most imaginative people in theworld, the whole world rises fair before them, andthey, not believing in impossibilities, bug to conquerit.Then, there is the meaner love of distinction ;meaner than the love of enterprise, but higherthan the desire of gain. The distinction sought isnot always that which attends on superior wealthonly ; but on worlds wide intercourse, on extensiveaffairs, on hospitality to a large variety of foreigners.Again ; there is the love of Art. Weak, immature,ignorant, perhaps, as this taste at present is,it exists : and indications of it which merit all respect,are to be found in many abodes. There areother, though not perhaps such lofty ways ofpursuing art, than by embodying conceptions inpictures, statues, operas, and buildings. The loveof Beauty and of the ways of Humanity may indicateand gratify itself by other and simpler methodsthan those which the high artists of the oldworld have sanctified. If any one can witness themeeting of one kind of American merchant withhis supercargo, after a long, distant voyage, hearthe questioning and answering, and witness thedelight with which new curiosities are examined,and new theories of beauty and civilisation are putforth upon the impulse of the moment, and stilldoubt the existence of a love of art, still supposeVOL. II. R362 MORALS OF COMMERCE.the desire of gain the moving spring of that man'smind, may Heaven preserve the community frombeing pronounced upon by such an observer !The critic with the stop-watch is magnanimous incomparison.Again; there is the human eagerness after anobject once adopted. In this case, it may be moneysas in other cases it may be Queen Anne'sfarthings, the knockers of doors, ancient books,(for their editions and not their contents,) pet animals,autographs, or any other merely outward objectwhose charm lies in the pursuit. Several menof business, whose activity has made them verywealthy, have told me that, though they would notopenly declare what would look like a boast, andwould not be believed, the truth was that theyshould not care if they lost every dollar they had.They knew themselves well enough to perceivethat the pleasure was in the pursuit, and not inthe dollars : and I thought I knew some of themwell enough to perceive that it would be rather arelief to have their money swept away, that theymight again be as busy as ever in a mode whichhad become pleasant to them by habit and success.Of course, I am not speaking of such asof a very high and happy order ; as to be for amoment compared with the few whose pursuitsare of an unfailing but perpetually satisfying kind ;MORALS OF COMMERCE. 363with those whose recompense is incessant, butnever fulfilled. I am only declaring that the eagerpursuit of wealth does not necessarily indicate alove of wealth for its own sake.What are the facts ? What are the manifestationsof the character of the American merchants?After their eager money-getting, how do they spendit ? How much do they prize it ?Their benevolence is known throughout theworld : not only that benevolence which founds andendows charities, and repairs to sufferers the mischiefof accidents ; but that which establishesschools of a higher order than common, and bringsforward in life the most meritorious of those whoare educated there ; the benevolence which watchesover the condition of seamen on the ocean, andtheir safety at home ; the benevolence which busiesitself, with much expense of dollars and trouble, toprovide for the improved civilisation of the wholeof society. If the most liberal institutions in thenorthern States were examined into, it would befound how active the merchant class has been, beyondall others, in their establishment.Again : their eager money-getting is not for purposesof accumulation. Some many, are deplorablyostentatious ; but it seemed to me that theostentation was an after-thought ; though it mightlead to renewed money-getting. Money was first364 MORALS OF COMMERCE.gained. What was to be done with it? Onemight as well outshine one's neighbours, especiallyas this would be a fresh stimulus to get more stillThis is bad ; but it is not sordidness. Instances ofaccumulation are extremely rare. The miser is withthem an antique, classical kind of personage, picturedforth as having on a high cap, a long gown, and sittingin a vaulted chamber, amidst money-chests.It would, I believe, be difficult there to find a pairof eyes that have looked upon a real living andbreathing miser. My account of the doings of amiser whom I used wondering to watch in the daysof my childhood never failed to excite amazement,very like incredulity, in those I was conversing with.The best proof that the money-getting of the eminentlysuccessful merchants of America is not formoney's sake, lies in the fact, that in New England,peopled by more than 2,000,000 of inhabitants,there are not more than 500, probably notmore than 400 individuals, who can be. called affluentmen; possessing, that is, 100,000 dollarsand upwards. A prosperous community, in whicha sordid pursuit of wealth was common, would bein a very different state from this.The bankruptcies in the United States are remarkablyfrequent and disgraceful, disgraceful intheir nature, though not sufficiently so in the eyes ofsociety. A clergyman in a commercial city declaresMORALS OF COMMERCE. 365that almost every head of a family in his congregationhas been a bankrupt since his settlement. InPhiladelphia, from six to eight hundred personsannually take the benefit of the insolvent laws ; andnumerous compromises take place which are notheard of further than the parties concerned inthem. On seeing the fine house of a man who wasa bankrupt four years before, and who was thenworth 100,000 dollars, I asked whether such caseswere common, and was grieved to find they were.Some insolvent pay their old debts when they riseagain ; but the greater number do not. This laxityof morals is favoured by the circumstances of thecommunity, which require the industry of all itsmembers, and can employ the resources of all,first, of men of character, and then of speculators.But, few things are more disgraceful to Americansociety than the carelessness with which speculatorsare allowed to game with other people's funds,and, after ruining those who put trust in them, tolift up their heads in all places, just as if theyhad, during their whole lives, rendered unto alltheir dues. Whatever may be the causes or thepalliations of speculation ; whatever may be pleadedabout currency mistakes, and the temptations toyoung men to make fortunes by the public lands,one thing is clear ; that no man, who, having failed,and afterwards having the means to pay his debts.R 3366 MORALS OF COMMERCE.in full, does not pay them, can be regarded as anhonest man, and ought to be received upon thesame footing with honest men, whatever may behis accomplishments, or his subsequent fortune.What would be thought of any society which shouldcherish an escaped (not reformed) thief, becausea large legacy had enabled him to set up his carriage?Yet how much difference is there in thetwo cases ? It is very rarely a duty, more rarelythan is generally supposed, to mark and shun theguilty. Jt is usually more right to seek and helphim. But, in the case of a spreading vice, whichis viewed with increasing levity, the reprobation ofthe honest portion of society ought to be very distinctand emphatic. Those who would not associatewith escaped thieves should avoid prosperousbankrupts who are not thinking of paying theirdebts.The gravest sin chargeable upon the merchantsof the United States is their conduct on the abolitionquestion. This charge is by no means general.There are instances of a manly declaration of opinionon the side of freedom, and also of a spirit ofself-sacrifice in the cause, which can hardly be surpassedfor nobleness. There are merchants whohave thrown up their commerce with the southwhen there was reason to believe that its gainswere wrung from the slave; and there are manyMORALS OF COMMERCE. 367who have freely poured out their money, and riskedtheir reputation, in defence of the abolition cause,and of liberty of speech and the press. But thereproach of the persecution of the abolitionists, andof tampering with the fundamental liberties of thepeople, rests mainly with the merchants of thenorthern States.It is worthy of remembrance that the Abolitionmovement originated from the sordid act of a merchant.While Garrison was at Baltimore, studyingthe Colonisation scheme, a ship belonging to a merchantof Newburyport, Massachusetts, arrived atBaltimore to take freight for New Orleans. Therewas some difficulty about the expected cargo. Thecaptain was offered a freight of slaves, wrote to themerchant for leave, and received orders to carrythese slaves to New Orleans. Garrison pouredout, in a libel, (so called,) his indignation againstthis deed, committed by a man who, as a citizen ofMassachusetts, thanks God every ThanksgivingDay that the soil of his State is untrod by the footof a slave. Garrison was fined and imprisoned ;and after his release, was warmly received in NewYork, where he lectured upon Abolition; fromwhich time, the cause has gained strength so as tohave now become unconquerable.The spirit of this Newburyport merchant hasdwelt in too many of the same vocation. The368 MORALS OF COMMERCE.Faneuil Hall meeting was convened chiefly bymerchants ; and they have been conspicuous in allthe mobs. They have kept the clergy dumb : theyhave overawed the colleges, given their cue to thenewspapers, and shown a spirit of contempt andviolence, equalling even that of the slave-holders,towards those who, in acting upon their honestconvictions, have appeared likely to affect theirsources of profit. At Cincinnati, they were chieflymerchants who met to destroy the right of discussion; and passed a resolution directly recommendatoryof violence for this purpose. They weremerchants who waited in deputation on the editorof the anti-slavery newspaper there, to intimidate himfrom the use of his constitutional liberty, and whomade themselves by these acts answerable for theviolences which followed. This was so clear, thatthey were actually taunted by their slave-holdingneighbours, on the other side of the river, with theirsordidness in attempting to extinguish the libertiesof the republic for the sake of their own pecuniarygains.The day will come when their eyes will becleansed from the gold-dust which blinds them.Meanwhile, as long as they continue active againstthe most precious rights of the community ; as longas they may be fairly considered more guilty onthis tremendous question of Human Wrongs thanMORALS OF COMMERCE. 369even the slave-holders of the south, more guiltythan any class whatever, except the clergy, letthem not boast of their liberality and their benevolence.Generosity loses half its grace when itdoes not co-exist with justice. Those can ill beesteemed benefactors to the community in one direction,who are unfaithful to their citizenship inanother. Till such can be roused from their delusion,and can see their conduct as others see it,the esteem of the world must rest on those of theirclass who, to the graces of enterprise, liberality,and taste, add the higher merit of intrepid, self-sacrificingfidelity to the cause of Human Rights.END OF VOL. II.LONDON :PRINTED BY IBOTSON AND PALMER, SAVOY STREET.