THEANGLER IN WALES,DAYS AND NIGHTS OF SPORTSMEN,By THOMAS Edwin, Esq.LATE OP THE FIRST LIFE GUARDS,AUTHOR OF "THE CONVERSATIONS OF LORD BYRON.SI QUID EST IV LTBBI.LIS Mess QUOD Placet, Dictate AUDITA.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,l^xiWifitv in (ordinary to m^M {Ba)titv.1834.LONDON :PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.CONTENTSOFTHE SECOND VOLUME.EIGHTEENTH DAY.Metaphysical Discussions — Vision at Cawnpore. — Appearanceafter death. — Baptism. — Poetry of the Welsh Bards.Translation. Page 1EIGHTEENTH DAY.(continued.)Singular Adventures. — Rescue from drowning in the Ganges.Drowning of Officers at St. Helena. — Escape from aShark at the Isle of France The Laccadives. — TheDranz. — Cataract. — Passage from Lucretius — Scene inthe Gauts. — Killing a Tigress. — Escape from NeapolitanBrigands. — Cawnpore. — Fortunate Escape. . • 14NINETEENTH DAY.Ants devouring a Beetle. — Their Instinct. — Preparationsfor Departure A Story, — Theory as to Coincidences.IV CONTENTS.Gillespie's Exploit — Boy ladyship. I will endeavour tomake note" of their tenets, though many ofthem escaped me through their mysticism.VOL. II. B2 METAPHYSICAL DISCUSSIONS.Julian expressed himself in substance thus :The soul is an intermediate agent betweenspirit and matter, and establishes a communicationwith the two. The knowledge of intelligences*separated from clay, is different indeedfrom that they possessed during their imprisonmentin it, and may be contrasted with the superiorsight of a man to that of an insect : thusspirits have as distinct a view of the future aswe have of the present and the past ; no longersee objects * as through a glass darkly,' but witheyes cleared of the film of our discretion.Why their agency should be permitted inhumanaffairs we cannot know. But what doBumet seems to have entertained a belief not verydissimilar, as to the existence of these intelligences : —*' Facile credo, plumes esse natural invisible quam visiblein rerum university. Sed horus omnium familiar quisnobis enarrabit ? et gradus et cognitions et discriminate etsingular funera ? Quid agent ? Quae local habitant ?Harum rerum notitia semper ambient ingenium humanum,nunquam attigit. Juvat, interea, non diffiteor, quandoquein animo tanquam in tabula majoris et melior mundi imaginecontemplate : ne mens assuefacta hodiernae vitae minutesse contrast nimis, et tota subsist in pusillas cogitations.Sed veritatis interea invigilandum est, mosqueservants, ut certe ab inserts, diem a note distinguamus."—ArcJuBol. Phil p. 68.~E.METAPHYSICAL DISCUSSIONS. 3we know ? In the researches of physical science,the most vigorous minds have always felt theirinsufficiency to account for the wonders of nature.In what course have we penetrated, wherewe can say that there is nothing more to disclose?— in what direction have we looked, andfound nothing left to wonder at, nothing appallingto our imperfect conceptions? The nebulousstars and clouds we see stud the heavens,may easily be conceived to be systems as beautifulas ours, and as extensive, and there maybemyriads of such systems. How insignificantappear the discoveries of a Newton and a Laplace,in the immensity of such conceptions !and what have they even taught us of our ownlittle system — of our own little ball or speck ofa world ? We have been able to scan a few ofthe secondary causes which produce the phenomenaof nature, and think we are thus preparedto form some feeble notion of the First GreatCause ; but because we cannot scan them all, becauseour bounded faculties cannot fathom whatwe call nature's secrets, not hid from us but fromthe weakness of our conceptions, are we presumptuouslyto say there is nothing beyond ?*' Again, it is not in the wonders of infiniteB 24 METAPHYSICAL DISCUSSIONS.space that we are to contemplate the Deity,for what is space in the ken of Omnipotence ?May not all that geology teaches of our earthbe compared to the dust on the egg-shell? —Have the researches of the naturalist reachedtheir ultimatum ? Sir Humphrey Davy has developeda few of what appear to be the elementsof matter, and yet the metals may be hydrates,and their bases may not be conjectured. Everymaterial substance we see or touch seems, as itwere, a combination of particles, a collection oflaminae emanating from some first material principle.Thus we have caecum, a metal whichitself may be a hydrate ; we have lime, an oxideof that metal, and the sulphate of the earth,which is a stone called gypsum; but can ouranalysis or combination go further ?Swammerdam, Butler, and Huber havesearched into the economy of bees and ants.All is order and beauty. There are symptomsof intelligence in the latter beyond the instinctwe ascribe to all animals but ourselves.We do not understand the phenomena of ourown faculties. We know not the organic constructionof our own brain, appearing to us aconfused mass of matter, (whatever the phreno-METAPHYSICAL DISCUSSIONS. 5hoist may say) : can we dissect the brain of theant, or trace the cause of its animal and intellectualfaculties ? Can we yet enter into theoutward and aggregate economy of minute insects? The microscope enables us to discernworlds of living animalcule, yet notwithstandingall its oxyhydrogen improvements, there aresome which we can only contemplate en masse.Can we suppose that they are destitute ofplan or design, because they are apparently so ?Are they not the nebulae, as it were, thatbound our conceptions of minuteness, and fill upasit were, the minimum of space ? — Are theseseveral orders of existence but confusion ? Thecommonwealth of ants may seem so to ordinaryeyes, but not to those of M. Huber, and it isthe bold presumption of impotent vanity thatleads to the denial of what surpasses our powersof perception and analysis. — Spirits thus""all hail to Belie, and Swedenborg, andSt. Martin,' and their world of spirits," I ejaculated." I anticipate that you are about to raiseone ! "To deny that they exist, one might as welldeny that the soul is immortal. The eye is soorganised that it can only see itself in a mirror.6 VISION AT CAW N PORE.No more can our soul see itself but by reflection.The feeling of our existence is onlydeveloped in like manner by means of theexternal phenomena and appearances that presentthemselves to it. It is only by a similaranalogy that we can argue respecting spirits andtheir qualities. I contend that the soul, whenseparated from the body, must have ideas —thought being the very essence of the soul ;for, in ceasing to think, it would cease to exist.It thus retains consciousness, and the memory offormer events, and at least a portion of its affections,and these are shown by its occasionallyentering into communication with those it hasleft and loves below. All tradition is in favourof such communication. It has been believed inby all nations, and found a place in all religions.Socrates's monitor ; Brutus's ghost ; the visionsthat appeared to Nicolai ; those of the Arabianprophet ; the phantom that visited Alvarez theSpanish minister; Shelley's spectre of his owndouble,' that preceded and was prophetic ofhis death ; Cardan's remarkable dream of hisson's execution — are irreconcilable by any argumentsdeduced from reason."Ferrara, in his admirable treatise on ApparelAFTER DEATH. 7tons," I remarked, " attributes some of these tothe fears or irritable nerves of such visionaries,and it was probably his work that suggested toSir Walter Scott his Essay on Daemonology. Ithink he quotes that author, as he ought, withdue respect."Ferrara was a physician, and it is evident,though he set out by affecting to disbelieve in aspiritual world, that he was forced by the staggeringnature of facts, to give credence to itagainst his will. For myself, I firmly believethat spirits do enter into relation with us, andwill recount to you a vision that made an impressionon me, that can never wear away.I was orderly officer at Cawnpore during thehot winds of 18 — , and lying at midnight onmy couch, panting with the suffocating heat ofan atmosphere almost unfit to breathe, when atrain of sombre ideas led me without any clueby which I could detect the thread of them, toEngland, of which I had scarcely thought forsome years. The moon was shining brightly onthe wall by my bedside, and my eyes were fixedon it, as it were, magnetically. I can comparethe state I was in only to a sort of trance, or whatfor want of a better word is termed somnambu-8 APPEARANCE AFTER DEATH.list ; and my mind was so completely absorbedin itself, that the body seemed an inert mass ofmatter. How long I lay thus, I know not ; butall at once a shadow passed between me and themoonlight. It was at first indistinct, but grewthicker by degrees, and at last assumed a shape,and the proportions of a man. My whole beingwas riveted on the figure ; it seemed to gaze onme with an unearthly gaze, and a melancholyexpression. Could it be ? — yes. Those features— that brow fill of intelligence — that hairgrown thin and grey — years could not erasethem from my memory ; it was my father stoodbefore me. I started up and endeavoured topress him in my arms; he disappeared, but thedream haunted me for months, and brought withit a presage of evil. This was too soon confirmed,for a vessel brought intelligence thathe, to whom I owed my being, was no more.The hour of his death tallied exactly with thevision, and I do not doubt that the spirit appearedto me at the very moment of his dissolution."*Such apparitions raised under violent commotions ofthe mind are at once false and true — delusive and real. Notindeed the appendages of the dead, but the attendants ofthe living in peculiar states of the animal system. ShadowyAPPEARANCE AFTER DEATH. 9Did not Taliessin," observed Humphrey,** (as, you told me, Plato relates of Pamphlet,a Pierian, and as happened to Eumenidesthe Cretan, who lay in a state of deliriumfor seventy-five years,) appear to several personsafter his death, and reveal not only heavenlybut earthly things ? Are not his writingsalone sufficient proof of their celestialorigin ? were not spirits themselves once obedientto his spells ? have they not been transmitted byoral tradition from Druid to Druid ? Souls arein eternal circulation from this world to thenext, and from the next to this ; that is to say,what we call death is an entrance into the one,and life is an issuing from thence to return tothe other."*' * Sueno e Sueno,' I laughingly exclaimed ;dreams are but the dreams of other dreams,'as Caldron says."Death and life," rejoined Julian, " are likespace and time, mere names, and have no otherindeed and visionary, but still true and natural productsattached to mind and matter acting under unnatural combinations.So says Walter Whiter, who wrote a treatise to provedeath a disease, and curable like any other. — Ed.10 Baptism.identity than what our limited senses and facultiesgive them, being mere creations of the brain, ascolours are of the eye. Listen to what a celebratedGerman metaphysician says. Look at theflower — how it hastens into blossom ; it draws toitself sap and light, and all the elements which itprepares, in order to assist its growth, to furnishthe vital juices and produce blossom. Blossomsucceeds and disappears. It has now spent all itspower, its love and life, in order to become amother, and leave behind images of itself and topropagate its kind ; its energies are now exhaustedand consumed in the restless service ofNature, and it may be said that from the commencementof life it has been working its owndestruction.But what else is destroyed than a form it canno longer retain, and which, after it has reachedthe highest degree of beauty and perfection ofwhich it is susceptible, again hastens to decay?But it does not undergo this change in order, asan already dead being, that it may make way forvigorous healthful successors ; no ! this would beagloomy reflection ; but rather, as a living beingin the full enjoyment of the pleasures of existence.It was the author of this being, and propagatedit under a form of the most perfect beauty in theBaptism. 11ever-blooming garden of Time in which itselflikewise flourishes ; for it does not die with theform in which it appears, — the power of the rootcontinues ; it will awake from the sleep of Winter,and again shoot forth in renewed vernal andyouthful beauty, with the daughters of its existence,now friends and sisters by its virgin side.There is no such thing as death in the creation; it is a hastening away of that which cannotremain ; that is, the operation of an ever-youthful,inextinguishable, imperishable power, whichfrom its very nature cannot remain a momentinactive, but is always co-operating in the mostadmirable manner in its own existence, and thatof as many others as it is capable of producing.Can a more beautiful law of wisdom and goodnessbe imagined, than this system of transformation,by which everything hastens with quickcareer to renewed youthful vigour, and is consequentlysubject to progressive alteration fromone moment to another."Julian, shortly after this dreamy elucidationof his dreams, left us, and I will confess thatHumphrey rather contrived to change my opinionas to the Welsh poetry, by his quotationsfrom the works of their old bards. David apGwyllim is certainly a divine poet. He flourishesPOETRY OF THE WELSH BARDS.ed in the thirteenth century, and leaves a regretthat so few of his remains have come downto us. One of his odes on a Sky-lark is steepedin inspiration. I have endeavoured to give aversion of it, but find that much of its spirit hasevaporated in the crucible. The figurative natureof this language cannot be better explainedthan by a dissection, of one of the lines :Emyn rhwng gwawn a gwyll,'Rhwng means between ; gwawn is the brightsunny down of plants, or what is soft and beautifulin nature ; gwyll, gloom or darkness. Gwawnstands for a fairy or nymph of the lawn, and isso taken from her gentle and delicate nature.Gwyll means the reverse, a gloomy else of theshade ; thus, ' rhwng gwawn a gwyll,' is a dialoguebetween a Dryads or nymph of the forests,and one of the Miltiades nymphae, a nymph of thecultivated fields. It is almost as fine an idea asManzoni's, when speaking of Napoleon, he says,due secoli,L'un contra 1' alto armato,Softness a lui si volsci,Come aspettando il fate ;Or Byron's,When nature makes a melancholy pause,Her breathing moment on the bridge, where TimeOf light and darkness makes an arch sublime.TRANSLATION. 13Some idea of the difficulty of conqueringWelsh poetry may thus suggest itself to myreaders.« I'r Ehedydd."To the Sky-lark.Hail thou ! who finest at Heaven's gate !Blest chorister of May !Before the throne of God elate,Who lov'st on joyous wings to soar and playWith homeless clouds and winds ; forerunner of the day !Would I, as thou, up yon steep heightCould climb, as blithe and free ;View the first blush of morning light,Make the pale westering moon my love, and be,'Twixt darkness and the dawn — a link of melody.No lover of the woods thou art,Thou dreads no archer's war ;Thou dwell'st as Seraphs do, apart ;Fill with thy warbling earth and sea, and air.And float, the stars among, a spirit and a star.14 SINGULAR ADVENTURES.EIGHTEENTH DAY.(continued.)Singular Adventures. — Rescue from drowning in the Ganges-drowningof two Officers at St. Helena. — Escape froma Shark. — Escape from a Cataract. — An Inundation. —The Dranz. — Scene in the Gauts. — Killing a Tigress. —Escape from Neapolitan Brigands. — Hair-breadth 'scapeat Cawnpore.Our conversation after dinner turned uponseveral singular adventures that had happened toeach of us, and which, if they had found a placein the pages of a novel, would have been thoughtneither to belong to the ' vrai,' nor the ' vraisemblable.*If human life," observed Julian, " be, accordingto Shelley, the great miracle, not much lessmiraculous is the preservation from childhood toage of the complicated and fragile machinery itputs in action. Is there one of us, in lookingback on the past, who might not recall numerousSINGULAR ADVENTURES. 16hair-breadth 'scapes, which can only be attributedto an overruling and guardian Providence.The dogma that God takes no thought of individuals,is a blasphemous one, and proves thatthe Epicurean had no just notions of a Divinity ;for there is nothing little in the eyes of Himwho sees all things as distinctly in the sum asin the detail," who at once hears, perceives, andunderstands all creatures, and embraces all existences.In recounting to you some of my accidentsby flood and field,' you must at least say inyour minds, ' si non son vere, son ben private.'But I anticipate your judgment. I had not beenin India many weeks when I nearly lost my lifein the Ganges. I have spoken of that journey.It is performed in the least fatiguing, thoughperhaps the most uninteresting mode of travellingever engaged in. We sail through the finestprovinces of India, without having it in ourpower to judge of their productions, or to makeany observation on the manners and customs ofthe people. Although we do not, however, knowmuch of the country, the expedition is not withoutits pleasures. We see the manner in whichthe natives navigate the river — 'the veneration16 RESCUE FROM DROWNINGthey pay to its waters, and, however you may disapproveof this worship, I never could refrainfrom admiring that simplicity, which at leastdoes honour to one of the noblest sentiments ofman, gratitude for the blessings dispensed. Butto the point."What a moralist you are become, Julian !"Having sailed for many des through aperfect sea, we came, after passing the Rajh-mal Hills, to some high ground, through whichthe troubled stream now flowed ' intra prescription.'Our sailors had been dragging and towingday after day, with the wind in their teeth,against a current of seven or eight knots. Tiredof the monotony and tedium of the voyage, I wasin the habit of taking my gun, and beatingthough the jow jungle that lined the banks, insearch of hares and black partridges. One evening,a nullah, broader and swifter than usual, cutoffmy communication with the hedgerow. Nothaving duly considered the nature of the rivulet,I began to ford it, as I frequently had others,but was soon up to my neck. With my guntherefore raised in my left hand, and makingan oar of my right, I endeavoured to cross overa la nage, but such was the rapidity of theIN THE GANGES. 17current, that I was unable to stem it. Suffice itto say, it carried me into the Derreau,* sweptfurther and further from the land, and hurriedand hurried me along like a wisp of straw inan eddy. I had, as I said, only one arm free, for1 was unwilling to lose my gun, a valuable JoeWanton ; and though I was conscious of mydanger, I firmly believe I should rather have sacrificedmy life than have dropped it. Such athought indeed never entered my mind, thoughit well might, for it was not without a thrill ofhorror that I perceived a naked, swollen, humanbody floating past me (no uncommon spectacle),with a dog and two vultures on the top disputingover their prey, and I could not helpimaging for myself a similar destiny. At thiscritical juncture, my 'dandies fortunately observedme, and two of them, without losing aninstant, ran rapidly along the bank till they cameopposite to where I was struggling with the wildbeast of an element. They soon came to myassistance, and taking me under each arm withthe facility an infant is lifted between a nurseThe name given to the Ganges, meaning " GreatWaters." — Ed.t Sailors. — Ed.VOL. II. C18 DROWNING OF OFFICERSand its mother, brought me safely, though muchexhausted, and with my gun still grasped in myhand, to terra firma. I owed them my life. Oneis apt to be very generous on such occasions.I did not forget my deliverers, who remarkedthat it was not my * nuseeb'* to be drowned,which we hold a very ambiguous compliment."It seems then that the Ganges was very nearproving anything but a saviour stream to you."It was not the last time I narrowly escaped awatery grave, as you shall hear. A circumstanceoccurred when I was at St. Helena, that threw agloom over the whole colony ; but it was evenmore distressing to me, and I might add, with anoble disdain of grammar, and somewhat of abull—Quaeque ipse miser rima vidiEt quorum pars magna fui.'*' The event to which I allude happened the dayafter my landing. Napoleon had not then beenlong under editorship ; and, speaking of that modernPrometheus, chained to his lone rock by thesea-shore, one anecdote I can vouch for. Duringmy stay I was a pensionnaire at a shopkeeper's,who showed me some of the plate the Ex-emperorhad sold him to defray the expense of theFate.— Ed.AT ST. HELENA. 19funeral of his cuisinier ! This par parentage. Ihad been long acquainted with the officers of oneof the regiments in that odious place, employedin a still more odious service, and, dining atthe mess, was invited by two brother subs toaccompany them the next day on a fishing excursion.They called for me at an early hour inaboat, and we were rowed to an isolated rock atthe back of the island.You have heard of rolling down from theCape to St. Helena ; almost at all seasons of theyear, it blows from the same quarter very nearlya gale of wind, by which Napoleon's delightfulabode was swept, whilst the government-house,which ought to have been given up to him, has theadvantage of being completely abritt. The morningwas unusually calm, scarcely a ripple brokeagainst the base of the desolate crag — a fit foregroundto the still more desolate prospect that theland presented ; where — appropriate figure forsuch a landscape! — we could perceive the illustriousExile, with his arms folded, taking hisaccustomed walk among the stunted shrubs dignifiedby the name of an avenue. Being soon tiredof the dull sport, and animated with the desireof getting a nearer view of the great man, I soonc 220 DROWNING OF OFFICERStook leave of the anglers, who gave orders to theboatmen to fetch them before parade-time.** On my return to James Town I procured apassport, and mounting a horse, proceeded onmy projected tour. I made the best of my wayto Logwood, and esteemed myself fortunatein catching a glimpse of the General's profile,as he was entering the door of his crazyhut. I then thought of my late angling companions,and turned my eyes in the directionof the rock. But to my surprise the scene hadcompletely changed ; the sea was white withfoam, and vast waves were breaking over thespot where I had lately stood, and had expectedto see them standing. I had strange misgivingsas to their fate, and, anxious to be relieved fromthem, hastened back to the port. Enquiryproved that my presentiment was too wellfounded : a violent squall had suddenly sprungup, the boat could not get round the point totheir assistance ; — inch after inch they perceivedthe billows encroaching on the rock ;death, a cruel death, stared them in the face,and the remorseless sea made them its prey.Their bodies were washed on shore, and I waspresent at their funeral.AT ST. HELENA. '2lNothing can be more dreary and desolatethan St. Helena in the distance : what, then, is itwhen the eye can examine in detail its savage,harmless, volcanic rocks piled above rocks ? Tothe weather-beaten mariner the sight of almostany land is agreeable ; but this waif of the sea,this wreck of nature, this fragment of a demolishedworld, cannot be viewed with any sensationimparting pleasure, with any desire to setfoot there : what, then, must have been the horrorof Napoleon when he first descried it ? I amtold that for many hours he did not speak, overcomewith the horror of the scene, and witha presentiment that his prison was fated to behis sepulchre. As a light breeze wafted usslowly away, and the island appeared a dimcloud in the horizon, I sat down on the deck,and, ruminating on his approaching death,blushed to be an Englishman, and penned forhim the following epitaph, imitated from Simonides's*prize-inscription at Therm opylse : —^Q, ^siv' ayysXKov Aaxg8a</*ovio«j or* riseKg»j«,£9«, This xsivoov g^ftacri 7rgi9oj«.svo»Stranger ! this message to the Spartan bear !His orders are obey'd — and we lie there.22 ESCAPE FROM A SHARKStranger ! this message to the Briton bear !I trusted in his honour — and lie there.A very short time afterwards, I was nearfalling a victim, not to the sea, but to one of itsmonsters. When at the Mauritius, I chummedwith a young Engineer officer in a cottage a shortdistance from Port Louis, romantically situatedon the edge of the harbour. The isle of Francewould have seemed a paradise, but for the sightsand sounds of horror every day brought undermy observation — slaves, the finest men I eversaw, yoked to carts and driven like oxen — thestreets echoing with the lashes of those punishedat the caprice of their masters for offences, or nooffences. — All the beauty of the Jardin — thePamplemousses, the Habitations (country-houses)in the interior, where the air is ever temperateand refreshed by the never-failing sea-breeze,and redolent with the choicest tropical plants,springing spontaneously or growing with slightcultivation, could not compensate for scenes atthe recollection of which the mind still recoilswith horrorOur great amusements were swimming andsailing : nothing can be more delightful thancoasting along that beautiful island ; a completeAT THE ISLE OF FRANCE. 23contrast to the one I have been describing. Myeye dwelt with deep interest on the spots sographically depicted by St. Pierre in his pathetictale, and I was never tired (when I leaned over thegunnel of the boat) in watching the fish, as, likebirds among the boughs of trees, they dartedthrough and about the coral woods that completelycover the bottom of the sea, and seemat the depth of many fathoms close to thesurface. As the weather was exceedingly hot,we passed most of our time on or in the water,and Jones, (for that was my friend's name,)was, (though drowned, poor fellow! shortly aftermy departure,) one of the strongest swimmersI ever remember. Under his instructions Ibecame an adept also in that pleasing art, andwe put it in practice in the following daringway. We had made acquaintance with theofficers of a brig of war, and when we tiffedwith them, (which we often did,) sent away ourboat; and having got plenty of grog on board,as the tars say, used to swim to our quarters, adistance probably of half a mile. Some onehad told us sharks were occasionally met with inthe port, but we did not believe or heed the circumstance,and frequent escapes gave us confideESCAPE FROM A SHARK.hence. One day we had scarcely got fifty yardsfrom the vessel, when one of our hosts, who waswatching us from the deck, cried out, ' A shark !a shark!' — words more sobering I never heard.I will tell you to what we owed our safety. Ihad a little spaniel, that used to be of this swimmingparty ; as good fortune would have it,(though I regretted his loss,) he was following inour wake ; a loud howl, soon stifled, told us thathe had been seized by the rapacious foe. Tillthat occasion, I never had known what terrorreally was, and struck so quick that I soon becameexhausted, and, but for the assistance ofmy intrepid friend, should never have reachedland. We did not venture on a similar expedition.Our captain, when he heard of our rashness,said we might as well have been swimming offthe Laccadives."Are the sharks there so numerous ?"** I touched at one of those islands ; they arelow, and at a distance look like groves of palmsand cocoa-nut trees. The natives are perfectichthyophagi, most fishy-looking creatures. Theyare of a jet black, and almost naked, and aredecrepit and old before Europeans arrive atTHE LACCADIVES. 25maturity, their wrinkled skins hanging likescales, or the folds of a rhinoceros's hide, overtheir emaciated limbs. When we were goingon shore, and the gig moving rapidly, the waterwas alive with sharks of the blue species, that,like a shoal of walruses in a gale of wind, followedthe wake of the boat, their fins and backsout of the sea, attracted by the effluvia of ourbodies ; at one time, I thought they would havedashed over the low stern, so fierce and starveddid they seem. Wo to any living thing, man orbeast, overboard !But you, Stanley, who have been so great atraveller, must have many stories to relate, wherelife has hung upon a thread, which the Fates,though they have forborne to cut, have woven allblack for me."One occurs to me at this moment, whichyou shall hear.Many years ago I was making a Swiss tour,and had crossed the Tete Noir from Chamounyto Martin, meaning to proceed the next morningto Sion. But the relation of a natural phenomenonthat had occurred at Bagne inducedme to deviate from the route I had laid down formyself I accordingly dismissed my guide, took26 THE Drank.another mule, and performed the six leagues inas many hours. On my arrival at the village, Ihad soon an opportunity of observing the phenomenonof which I had heard spoken. Itwas this : the winter preceding had been unusuallysevere, the accumulation of snow unprecedentedlygreat, and the fall of an avalanche inthe month of April had completely obstructedthe waters of the Dranz, a small stream descendingfrom the snowy Alps, and wont todebauch into the Rhone.The inundation caused by this impedimenthad completely filled up a valley of severalmiles in length, and from a hundred to seventyfeet in width, and in many places two hundredin depth. The inhabitants, with the usual torpidityand blindness of the Swiss, had neglectedto cut an arch for carrying off this flood, tillit was become too perilous to make the attempt.It was evident that the embankmentof ice, though of great thickness, could not muchlonger resist the super-incumbent weight ofwater, and the consequences of its bursting thebarrier were dreadful to contemplate. Havingsatisfied my curiosity, I set out to return whenceI had started. The road followed the deep-cataract.27worn, rocky, now dry channel of the Dranz, andlay between two lofty ranges of mountainscovered with brushwood below, and crownedwith pines, that lifted their spires into the clearblue sky.I had not proceeded more than seven oreight miles, when my mule put back his ears,and turned round, as if listening. I applied thewhip and spur, knowing the natural perversenessof these animals, but had scarcely urged him ona dozen paces, when he stopped short, andneither force nor persuasion could induce him tostir another step. He then reared so high thatI had some difficulty in keeping my seat. Thereappeared something more than restiveness in hisconduct, and it was evident, from the convulsivetremulousness of all his limbs, that terror was thepredominant feeling which agitated him — whenmethought I heard a sound as of distant thunder,in the direction of Bagne. It could not bethunder, for it was a cloudless day in June orJuly, and the thought of the inundation suddenlyflashed on my mind.The noise increased, and rolled on in reverberatedechoes from alp to alp, a fresh echorepeated before the last had time to die away.28 CATARACT.I threw myself off the back of the mule, andwith great toil and difficulty clambered up thesteep side of the precipice that overhung the bedof the river, now clinging to the stunted shrubs,and now crawling on hands and knees over therocks, till a projecting crag effectually defied allmy efforts to advance another step. In the meantimea deafening crash, such as I had neverheard, momently increasing in diapason, rang inmy ears, and on turning round my head, I perceiveda mist — a cloud — a shower, shuttingout the distant gorge of the valley ; it was,indeed, the dis imprisoned Dranz. It rushedwith glad impetuosity through the long vistaof the chasm, which it seemed to fill up as itapproached.How shall I paint my horror, as I eyed thewatery wall, and calculated from its ever-growingheight that it must carry me with it in itsfurious course ! Every instant was an eternityof agony. The suspense was, indeed, of no longduration in point of time, for, charged withhuman bodies, fragments of houses, cattle, trees,and rocks, classically mingled, foaming, boiling,eddying, the resistless cataract came ! Itpassed within six feet of where I was crouch-passageFROM LUCRETIUS. 29ing, panic-struck, and with it carried, and ofcourse engulphed, my mule, of whom I saw nomore. You may form some idea of the birdlikevelocity of the torrent, when it reachedMartin, a distance of eighteen miles, in lessthan an hour !" *Your's was an occurrence that prevented theblood from stagnating. But there is somethingstill more animating in meeting danger face toface, in bearding it.'Tis not safe for oneWhose brain whirls dizzily, and whose knees tremble,To run along the narrow mountain's edge ;But he who makes a god of his own soul,Defies the danger, and o'ercomes it !' — New Play.There is a magnificent passage in Lucretius, thus describinga somewhat similar catastrophe :Ac quoi mollis aquae fertur natura repentFamine abundanti ; quem harris imbibes aughtMontis ex artis magnus decorous aquae,Fragment conditions syl verum, arbustaque tota:Nee valde posset pontes venientis aquaeVim surinam tolerate ; ita, magna turdus cimbri,Morbus incurred, validity cum various, amnis ;Dat sonitu magna strange ; volvitque sub undidGrandis sara ; ruin qua quisquam fluctibus obstat.Lucre. — Ed.50 SCENE IN THE Gauls.You have been speaking of the delights of aSwiss tour, of one of the finest parts in Switzerland.I will give you an idea of our IndianPyrenees, and of an event that cannot also becontemplated without somewhat affecting thenervous system. You shall have the landscape,and then the figures.Accounts have reached you of the Gauts.They cannot, perhaps, be compared with thesnow-capped majesty of the Alps, the solemngrandeur of the giant Andes, or the still morestupendous sublimity of the Himalayas, but, inwild picturesqueness and beauty, are surpassedby neither of the three. I remember, as thoughit were yesterday, crossing them from the Dukin,in my way to Bombay. One while their inaccessiblesummits were covered with a vast expanseof vapour ; now slowly sailing away, itrendered their fantastic heights distinct in thefiiU blaze of a tropical sun, whilst between theiropenings the eye caught an occasional glimpseof the sparkling ocean. The long sinuous valleyof the Conan, watered by innumerable streams,and rich in pasture and cultivation, was inanother direction contrasted with rugged anddeep ravines, apparently formed by the subsidingSCENE IN THE Gauls. 31of the waters of some vast deluge. In one placea roaring torrent crossed the road ; in anotheryou might count no less than ten cascades,flashing from rock to rock in a continuation ofsilver falls, or tumbling headlong several hundredfeet, into an abyss, where they were stillhalf hid in a sombre precipice of wood.The luxuriance of verdure from the tropicalproductions, with which the Gauts are clothed,heightens the effect of the picture. The longwaving tresses of the wild plantain — the darkergreen of the umbrageous mango — the elegantand plume-like gracefulness of the different kindsof palms — the lofty cocoa-nut — the slender andtapering hill bamboo — the broad and fibrousleaves of the teak — the pensile foliage of thesissoo, together with the variety of tints displayedby the flowers of a multitude of creepers,amongst which 1 noticed the sweet-pea, clamberingamong the rocks, or hanging in festoonsfrom the branches, combined to make the scenea sort of enchantment. Nature there puts on adifferent creation, vests the surface of the soilwith a new * Flora,' a world of plants, many ofwhich I identified with those of England, andwas particularly struck with the appearance of32 SCENE IN THE Gauls.fern, with which every declivity abounded.Most travellers confine themselves to the Passby Bore Gaunt; few, like myself, have beentempted to quit the common track, to explorethe higher ranges.'* I had deviated from the road in order tovisit a fortress, that had once frowned the defianceof Savage to the Great Aurungzebe. Tillof late years, it had even scorned our power, andhad not fallen without a gallant resistance, thatproved fatal to one of my oldest friends. I wastravelling, as the day was just breaking, in mypalanquin. The easy and monotonous motion,and the coolness of the atmosphere, had lulledme into a sweet and profound sleep, such as Ihad not enjoyed for many weeks ; for I was justrecovering from a severe attack of the liver,or, as Leyden says, " My frame had borne thelightning shock (though not ' tipped with death,'as in his case) of the sunbeams," when on asudden I was rudely awaked by the droppingof the litter.On jumping out in all haste to discover thecause of the shock, I perceived a native infront, lying flat in the road, and the bearershuddled together some fifty yards in the rear.SCENE IN THE Gauls. 33One of them, on seeing me, came forward,and, in words ill articulated from terror, toldme that the peon had been struck down bya tiger, and that the approach of the palanquinhad scared him away: which confirmed myidea that they are naturally cowardly animals.We found the peon senseless, and the blood wasfast oozing from several wounds in his shouldersinflicted by the claws. On raising up, andsprinkling him with water, he half recoveredfrom his fainting fit, but he was light-headed,and could not be persuaded but that he was stillin the grasp of the wild beast.*' As we were endeavouring to bring him tohimself, and argue him out of this belief, some ofthe bangs-wallers came up, accompanied by myhircai^a, and at the top of one of the bangles wasmy double-barrelled gun. Rash as the enterprisewas, I determined to endeavour to destroy thetiger.The hircara of whom I spoke, was an oldand favourite servant. He was a Rajhpoot,and, like most of that military caste, one of thebravest men I had ever known. He, withouthesitation, consented to share the danger of theenterprise ; and three of the carriers who hadVOL. II. DS4 SCENE IN THE Gauls.brought me from Bengal, partly under the influenceof shame, and partly from a knowledgeof my being a crack shot, and an opinion ofmy determined coolness and self-possession, volunteeredto join us in search of the savage.The spot is still before me. It was a glen ofa few hundred yards in width, that sloped graduallydown to an impetuous torrent ragingamong the rocks. The sides of this romanticgorge were interspersed with huge teak trees,loaded with their glorious scarlet flowers, andstanding at wide intervals from each other, asthough they had been artificially planted. Beneath,the ground was carpeted with a shortclosely-woven ' tube ' grass, enamelled by aninfinite diversity of the tare and convolvulusspecies. Here and there were patches of tall,luxuriant fern, and of dwarf acacias, armed withlong white thorns presenting an impenetrablebarrier, and matted over by a web of intricatetexture from intersecting creepers.** From the nature of the place, it was morethan probable that we should discover the tiger.Having formed a line of about thirty feet inwidth, in the centre of which I placed myself,we proceeded cautiously, and in profound silence.KILLING A TIGRESS. 35to peep into every biish large enough to affordhim a hiding-place.Our search was not long. We had scarcelyproceeded five hundred yards, when, on the edgeof the rapid that had proved a barrier to hisretreat, my hircara discovered and pointed outthe object of our pursuit. He was within fortyfiveyards of us, his body hid by the pendentroof of the parasite commonly called the passionflower.He was crouching on the ground in actto spring, his head towards us. He perceivedand was watching our congress. Some onespeaks of the disagreeable sound the snappingof a pistol makes when presented within a fewpaces of a man's breast. Not much less terrificwas the sight of that gigantic head protrudedfrom the covert. Such at least was its effecton me, who was immediately in a line withhim. I must confess that at that moment asort of panic, a sensation such as I had neverbefore experienced, came over me ; and myheart throbbed audibly as my eyes met andwere fascinated by those of the savage. Icocked my gun, however, instinctively, with anintention of suddenly firing. But as he didnot take any notice of the clicks, I returned himD 236 SCENE IN THE Gauls.scowl for scowl, and waving my hand to my comradesto remain behind, advanced, step by step,till I came within fifteen paces of where he lay.I then took a deliberate aim — my sight was unblenched—my arm nerved with the desperationof one who sets his life on the hazard of a die.Bang — bang — at the interval only with whichthe words could be pronounced. Both ballstook effect, he made a blind spring into the air,and in an instant was outstretched a lifelesscarcass at my feet.My servants' fears had, however, much exaggeratedthe size of the animal. It was a female,and, as all the mountain race are, a merecheval' in comparison with the Behaudars* ofthe jungles of Bengal ; small, however, as shewas, the stroke and weight of her paws had, Iafterwards found, fractured the skull of the Peon,who, lingering for two days, died before wereached our destination.This tigress had been the terror of the country,having long infested the Gaunt, and almostdaily carried off a man, so that we were hailedon the remainder of our journey by crowds ofBehaudar means a great personage — Highness, or RoyalHighness. — Ed.ESCAPE FROM NEAPOLITAN BRIGANDS. 37the natives, who assembled to behold the trophy,and our march to Panels was a sort of triumph'*I think Lucretius says it is delightful to lookon past dangers. The great Roman poet knewmuch more of the human heart than the littleEnglish bard; for what can the memory of pleasurebe but pain? I envy you the souvenir of theexploit, and one of the most pleasant of mineduring my travels is, that I was within tenminutes of falling into the claws of wild beastsin the shape of men.I passed the spring, I believe, of 1821 atNaples. My sejour there would have been agreeableenough had it not been clouded by the triumphalentry of the King of the Pulcinelle intothat capital — triumphant in the modern sense ofthe word — when a monarch, after breaking themost solemn engagements to his people, is thrustdown their throats by foreign bayonets.Ages of misgovernment under that * malastirpe,' as Dante calls the Kings of France, (andFerdinand was a Bourbon,) had reduced to destitutionand misery half the population ; and thelate persecutions for liberty's sake, and exile,and confiscation, which, (like Strength and Forcein the Prometheus, are the never-failing compassESCAPE FROMnions of such Loves,) had so infested the roadswith brigands, that daily accounts reached ourears of some horrible murders, (or worse crimes,)that (like your tigress, when she had once tastedof human blood) these savages committed. Sickof the sight of those white-livered and liveriedTedeschi,* and under the influence of my usuallocomotive mania, I (as indeed my compatriotswere daily doing) resolved to return to Rome.'* A naval officer proposed to bear me company,and having hired a courier, we put ourselvesinto a caleche and started, meaning to performthe journey without making any other stoppagethan to change horses.The trajet from Forti to Mole di Gretawas made under the escort of a dragoon. Wefelicitated ourselves on having passed that mostdangerous mountain tract; and the next stagebrought us to the Marsh. Very erroneous ideasare entertained about it, and what Corne saysrespecting malaria is absurd. No one was everattacked in simply crossing it. I had expected(for I had gone to Naples by sea) to have foundthe scene widely different. The road is a perfectflat, and one of the best in Europe ; and thewild horses, some of which had never beforeNEAPOLITAN BRIGANDS. 39been in harness, carried us the first twentymiles in less than two hours.I have seen people at home shudder asthough they had an ague-fit at the mention ofthe Pontine Marshes ; judge if there-is anyoccasion. To the right, a range of picturesquemountains, with villages here and there, servesas a frame-work to the picture, between whichand the raised causeway lie the richest meadowsperhaps in Europe, covered with cattle. Tothe left runs a rapid stream, clear as crystal,artificially formed by drainage, and a truly Romanwork it is. The sides of the canal areplanted with trees, and through their trunks isseen to stretch a vast extent of pasture, recoveredfrom the morass ; beyond it, bounded bythe Mediterranean, the morass itself and at itsextremity a picturesque mountain, called theCirce Promontory.In fact, the scene would make an excellentsubject for Poussin. What makes the beauty ofall his campagna landscapes, but line beyond line,till they melt into infinite space ? Charters says,the worst subjects always make the best pictures.It seems a paradox, but is not. Nature isalways beautiful.40 ESCAPE FROMWe were now in the last ten of the thirtymiles, and in sight of the frontier, when weobserved our courier galloping back at fullspeed.Before reaching the carriage he beckonedwith his whip to the boy to stop, and was somuch out of breath with hard riding and frightwhen he came up, that he could not speakfor some seconds, but at last related, that abouta mile a-head he had been fired at by two out ofa band of ruffians, who had suddenly risen upa short distance from the road, from behindsome logs of wood, which had been omitted tobe removed when the trees were cut down thatthey might not give shelter to the bandits.'* The question was, how to act. To go forward,in the teeth of the gang, with so unequala force, would have been the extreme ofmadness, and to pass the night at the wretchedpost-house in our rear, was a scarcely preferablealternative. My friend proposed returning toMole di Greta, but this course was speedily rejected.Whilst still doubtful what steps to pursue,Pietro suggested that we had better drive tothe nearest military station, about two miles inthe rear ; and this counsel was finally adopted.NEAPOLITAN BRIGANDS. 41On arriving at the guard-house, we summonedthe commandant, who speedily musteredhis men, consisting of ten or twelve poor,emaciated, yellow, half-starved, fever-strickenwretches, who had not been relieved for severalmonths, and proved what the effect of breathinglong the pestilential air of those marshes mustbe. By dint of persuasion, in the shape of afew ducats, we overcame his scruples aboutquitting the post ; and putting ourselves at thehead of these Falstaff men, commenced ourmarch towards Cisterna, the carriage following.The sun was sinking fast, and, to save thelight, it was necessary to move on at double-quick.With a pair of pistols, one in eachhand, I gave the step, and the courier brandishedfirmly his stiletto, which was the onlyweapon he possessed. A tremendous show ofwar we made ! Show only it was ; for I feltconvinced that our allies would have ,to a man, at the first click of amusket. Armed, however, they were to theteeth, that chattered, one of them told me, fromthe ague. In about half an hour we came nearthe spot where the courier had been attacked ;and I counselled the general-in-chief to throw42 ESCAPE FROM NEAPOLITAN BRIGANDS.out vignettes on the side of the forest ; but being,of course, more experienced in strategies, he declinedthe proposition. Perhaps his Jack-Strawsoldiers thought of the fable of ' The Bundle ofSticks,' for they stuck close together, and theirvisages reminded me of the assassins in theCenci,' one of whom reproached the other withbeing pallid; to which his comrade replied —Then it is the reflection of your fear !'At this moment I clearly distinguished,winding among the columns of the trees, aboutfour hundred yards to our right, the party ofbrigands, easily distinguished as such by theirfantastic costumes and their hats ornamentedwith flowers and lofty plumes.Whether it was that they did not like ourmartial appearance, or that they thought thepromise of plunder did not warrant the riskof an engagement, they gradually disappeared,when our troops were loud in their ' per Baccos,'and other equally energetic displays of courage ;and just as the night was closing in, we foundourselves in the unlighted square of Cisterna.Pietro here ordered fresh horses, but neitherbribes nor entreaties could induce the postmasterto give them, and we were forced to pass theCAWNPORE. — FORTUNATE ESCAPE. 43night at the execrable alberto in that most miserableof miserable Italian * paesi', where no Englishtraveller had ever slept, except ourselves.You may judge of our fare ; it being Friday,nothing could be got to eat but ' Buccal,' andthen the beds — ' Dio mi guard !' I almostwished we had fallen into the hands of the brigands,which but for the circumstance of ourhaving a courier, we most inevitably should."Lord Wellington is said to have wished fornight, and Ajax is made by Homer to pray for day.Superstition apart ; indistinctness of objects, asense of danger, accompanied by an ignoranceof its extent or in what shape it may come, haspower to unnerve the bravest. This may be, asBurke says, very sublime; as doubtless poets arewhen they envelope in obscurity their want ofmeaning, but is anything rather than agreeable.I mean this by way of prelude to a * situation' inwhich I was once placed, and the recital of itshall close our notes,In that desert in dust, and wilderness insize, Cawnpore,' I had been dining one eveningwith the fourteenth — King's, and did not leavethe table till a late, or rather an early hour.The mess-room was four miles from our lines.44 CAWNPORE. — FORTUNATE ESCAPE.and for expedition's sake I made use of mybuggy. The horse I drove at that time hadbeen originally in the ranks, a powerful northernanimal he was, with a crest that would havealmost covered his rider, but full of such tricksas troopers purposely teach their chargers.He had been cast solely for a sand-crack, ofwhich I soon cured him. He was the fastesttrotter in the cantonment, but a restive devil;always started at a rear, and once off, had amouth so callous that a Chimney bit might havebroken his jaw, but I defy it to have stoppedhim. You will think all this preliminary historyof my grey superfluous, perhaps not. The nightwas tempestuous, and the road only visible bylightning that rendered the darkness more blackduring the absence of its glare. There were somany windings and turnings that I was soon outof my latitude, and thinking the horse knew theway to the stables better than I did, gave himhis head. On he went for some time at his ownspanking pace, at least twelve miles an hour,when I felt from the roughness of the vehiclethat we were out of the track. Well was it formethat he had been well inanege'd, for on asudden he made a halt as though he had heardCAWNPORE.— FORTUNATE ESCAPE. 45the word of command, and trembled so convulsivelythat I felt the whole machine shake overhim. I imagine I shook too, and well I might,instinctively, for a vivid flash revealed my realsituation. He was standing suspended over theedge of a ravine sixty or eighty feet in depth ;one step more would have plunged me into eternity!— And why not into eternity? what is lifethat I should cling to it ? — why have I escapedall these snares of death, that have been so oftenlaid for me ?— To die ingloriously — alone; withouta friend to close my eyes, to shed a tear overmy remains."NINETEENTH DAY.Red Ants devouring a Beetle. — Their Instinct. — Preparationsfor Departure. — Julian's Nocturnal Wanderings.Our Notes. — Julian's strange notions. — A Story. —Theory as to Coincidences. — Gillespie. — Bonaparte —Lord Byron. — Doctrine of Fatalism. — Death of Bruce, theTraveller. — Occurrences at Aurungabad. — Alla Rooks.doctrines of the Vedass. — Julian's depression of spirits;its cause.Tal y Llyn, June 16th.I FOUND much amusement to-day in watchingthe operations of some red ants, with which thesurface of the ground appears to be covered, andwhose bite I have often found troublesome andannoying. A wounded beetle of about an inchANTS DEVOURING A BEETLE. 47and a half long was lying on his back on the bankof the lake, when the ants attacked and devouredhim while yet alive. The process which those onout-post duty adopted to give universal informationwas singularly amusing, and convinced me ofthe wonderful sagacity of these social little animals.I attentively observed all their motions, from thefirst discovery of the dying beetle by a single ant,till the assembly of the myriads collected to devourhim ; and this scene convinced me that theykeep a party of foragers constantly on the lookout.The individual who first discovered the beetle,after a careful reconnaissance, went in search ofthe nearest sentry, who returned with him to thespot, as if to certify himself of the truth of theintelligence. They again set off, and brought athird and fourth sentinel, who also departed a secondtime on the same errand, till about a dozenhad convened, when the beetle being somewhatrestless, they pinioned down his horns (antennae)to the ground, which seemed to answer the purposeof quieting him, and as soon as he lay perfectlystill, again proceeded to give further information.They next fixed upon a spot a few48 THEIR INSTINCT.inches distant from their prey, and hurried backwardsand forwards very often, as if to mark outa road, either with the effluvia from their ownbodies, or by impregnating their feet in that ofthe beetle. And now two or three went a littlein advance, constantly returning with new companions.In this way they continued for sometime,always increasing in number, and extendingthe road further and further from their prey,which they still kept an eye upon, by retracingtheir footsteps, till they at length reached thestump of an old tree, that must have led to headquarters,for from thence a regular march almostimmediately commenced, all sallying forth by oneaperture, and keeping the military road, so thatin a short time the beetle was completely coveredwith thousands, who began to devour him withone accord ; and as if they had been only waitingfor a signal to inform them that the communicationwith the rendezvous, or seat of government,had been fully established. To prevent accidentsfrom too much crowding, a certain number onlyremained around the beetle at a time, and then,after finishing their meal, returned to head-quarters.How wonderful are the ways of God,PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE. 49when such wisdom is discernible in the minutestof the animal creation.We are making preparations for our departure.Calculating on having a few days to spare, I wishedto pass another here, but Charters is imperative,and will start tomorrow. He is determinedto go round by Aberystwith — and I, to make adirect course to ' The Devil's-Bridge,' (the Pontde Monach). Why he chooses this circuitousroute, I think I can guess. — It is like bidding adieuto an old friend to quit this place. — Height !Julian seems even more loth than ourselves topart with Tal y Llyn, for, instead of going to bed,he spent the remainder of the night on the bordersof the lake, (so at least Roger told us, but, as hedid not mention it himself, we know him too wellto have made any allusion to his planetary adoration.)I think he has been moonstruck, forhe has been all day, like Socrates, in the clouds,and seems to prove that that luminary has othereffect than upon fish — of which his face is aboutthe colour. If our Endymion had been Diani-zing, I should not have been surprised.VOL. II.50 A STORY.Our * Notes' were, as usual, kept up to a late,or rather an early hour. We sate down to table,the old trio.Julian is, I find, a downright fatalist — a goodfaith enough for a soldier — and was full of storiesproving it to his own satisfaction. It is a difficultquestion, and, like a many-sided mirror, bearsmany reflections. Among other strange notions,he has one, (as marriages are made in heaven, Iwish to my soul they would manage terrestrialmatters there a little better,) that, by an odd concatenationof circumstances, persons assist andbring about each other's destinies. He told us tothis point the following story, in his usual desultoryway of chapter and verse.In my way up the Ganges, I fell in with anofficer of the name of Macdonald, like myselfbound for Cawnpore. We were alike cornets, andhad never yet joined our regiments, and havingboth eighteen-oared * hedgerows,' with two cabinsin each, thought we might make the voyagemore agreeable by humming together, and lessexpensive by discharging one of our vessels. Ihave him still before me.He was a Highlander, and his limbs showedthe robustihood of the mountaineer, and in theA STORY. 51freedom of their motions the early unrestraint ofthe kilt and tartan. His figure, though not tall,was the most manly and symmetrical I haveever seen : his features, much marked with thesmall pox, regular, and his large blue eye likea hawk's in keenness. In fact, nature had markedhim out for a dragoon, and his pride was to bethebest sword, as well as the best horseman, in theservice. He was not a very pleasant travellingcompanion in that double dungeon, for, as henever read, (he had no book but his Duncan.) hewas in the daily habit, after breakfast, of betakinghimself to his cabin, and there for several hourshammering out on a crazy kit two * clan' tunes,which by dint of immense labour, (for he did notknow a note of music,) he had contrived to get up.One was, I remember, * The Blue Bonnets overthe Border.' But he was a noble fellow, and Isoon listened to the air almost without hearing it.This by the by. I will tell you how he got hiscommission in the King's, that brought about hisfate. The general in command, at some cantonmenton the Madras coast, where the native cavalrycorps to which Mac then belonged was stationed,was Gillespie. One day he was reviewingthe regiment, and took it into his head (after theE 252 A STORY.(lust had cleared away), in some change of position,that our cornet (who had the charge of atroop) was either too late, or too soon, in takingup his new ground ; and being very impetuous inhis temper, and wrongfully attributing the inaccuracyof the movement to my friend, he rode uptohim, and gave him a severe reprimand, in termsnot very measured. — Such things will happen.Well ! after the men were dismissed, and Gillespie,separated from his staff, was riding leisurelytowards his quarters, he was surprised at seeinga cavalry officer, sword in hand, galloping hischarger up to him, as though he intended to rideor cut him down. That officer was no other thanMacdonald. * General,' said he, with all the furyof his Highland blood inflamed, * you have degradedme in the eyes of my men and brotherofficers unjustly, and held language to me that nogentleman can brook from another. You havethe character of possessing a generous and chivalrousspirit. Prove it, by granting me that satisfactionwhich the injured pride of a soldier and gentlemanentitles him to. — We are alone. Youhave your sabre. — Draw, sir ! 'General Gillespie was remarkable (as you willfind before I have done) for personal courage, and,A STORY. 53if report does not belie him, had been engaged,right or wrong, in several affairs of honour, whichhad ended fatally to more than one of his antagonists.He looked for some moments at this newand unexpected sort of challenger — struck withadmiration at the ease with which he sat his horse,at his noble figure, and animated address ; and atlast said calmly —Cornet Macdonald ! — you are not ignorant, andhave no doubt considered, that you set at stake,by the step you have taken, all your future prospectsin life. Were I to send in charges againstyou, the loss of your commission is inevitable.But, sir, you run no risk from me. There is onlyone consideration which prevents me from answeringyour appeal to arms — you are a soldier.What is the first quality of a soldier ? 'Macdonald made no reply.The interests, sir, of the service imperiouslydemand of your commanding officer at least, thatin him should be found no dereliction of that mostimperative duty, that greatest and most sacredprinciple among soldiers, and without which noarmy can exist — subordination ! 'At that word Macdonald started. But Gillespieafter a pause (as if he were reflecting deeply)54 THEORY AS TO COINCIDENCES.continued: *I learned from my aide-de-camp,after the drill, that you were not the cause of theconfusion in the echellon movement : I did youwrong, and am sorry for it. Here is my hand,and with it, take my heart. I will soon prove tothe eyes of all present on the ground this day, thatI can redress as well as acknowledge an injury.'Macdonald clasped his proffered hand —sheathed his sword, and slowly walked his horsetowards the stables, keeping profoundly shut upin his own breast what had passed. A very fewweeks only had transpired, when (I need not saythrough whose patronage) he found himself ingeneral orders removed to a vacant cornetcy inthe 8th Dragoons.But this is a long prelude to my argument.This commission had been the unhoped ambitionof Mac's life, and he lost no time in proceeding tojoin the regiment. The Goorkha war now brokeout, and his patron was appointed to one of thedivisions of the army in the field, and took thecommand at IMeerut, where the new cornet hadalready arrived."The commencement of that campaign wasa gloomy one. Those hardy mountaineers weremade of different stuff from the effeminate Ben-gillespieEXPLOIT. 55gales, and the Tartar blood that filled their veins,and muscles case-hardened by severe and constantgymnastics, proved them in many an encountera match, single-handed, for the sturdiest of ourcountrymen. Nothing could be more harassingthan that service. Driven from one stockade,they entrenched themselves behind another, andwhen they were surrounded, and their retreatcut off, fought with the desperation of freemenfighting for their lives and liberties, or, like scorpionsringed with fire, destroyed themselves, ratherthan fall into the power of their enemies.Such was the warfare long carried on.There was a hill fort, called Kalungua, thatoffered an obstinate and protracted resistance. Ourheavy guns had been playing on it for some time,and yet produced little effect. Those who have notbeen in India form an erroneous impression as tothe strength or weakness of these fortifications,forgetting that the balls bury themselves in themud bastions, and render a breach nearly impracticable.Such was the case here.The inefficiency of the operations gave courageto the besieged, who day after day cut off some ofour outposts. Gillespie was naturally impatient atbeing detained so long before such an insignificant56 GILLESPIE'S EXPLOIT.place, and having learned from a spy that therewas a wicket, whence the Goorkhas passed to andfro, always open, resolved at the very next sortiethey made, to pursue, and endeavour (whilst thebatteries were throwing shells within the walls) toget with the pell-mell into the fort, and thustake it by a coup de main. (It was a rash resolution,as it turned out.) With this intent he tookmeans accordingly,, and directed a strong stormingparty to be always kept under arms. As heanticipated, a sortie was again made, and driven inwith much bloodshed on both sides ; but when thepursuers, close at the heels of the fugitives, cameto the wicket, they found it shut, and havingno means of forcing the gate, were exposed defencelessto the arrows, slings, and matchlocksdirected against them through the loop-holes ofthe skreen, and from the parapets of the walls,h6riss6' by the garrison, and were finally obligedto fall back on their lines with great loss.Gillespie not being perhaps fully acquaintedwith the cause of this precipitate retreat, andyielding to the impetuosity of his character, orderedout a second detachment, stronger than the first,and dismounted a squadron of the * Royal Irish ;'and as fatality would have it (or, as you would say.BONAPARTE. 57chance) Macdonald belonged to one of the troopsabout to be engaged in this affair, or rather, Imight say, * forlorn hope.' The general, chivalrouslybrave as he was, immediately put himselfat their head.The result of this gallant exploit is well known.He fell dead by a * fingal' ball, whilst wavinghis hat in advance of the men ; and at the samemoment, Macdonald, who went by the name ofthe lion-heart, received an arrow through the thickpart of the thigh, and was carried off the field.The wound, combined with sorrow for the loss ofhis sworn and dear friend, proved fatal ; and inthe same day of the month, the year after thechallenge, they were both committed to the grave.This story was told on his death-bed to my particularfriend Williams, who belonged to the sameregiment.It is only those who do not keep a register oftheir lives, who disbelieve, that the principal occurrenceswhich influence their happiness or misery,take place at the recurrence of stated and particularperiods. Napoleon was a striking instance ofthis startling truth. All his great battles werefought on the same day, and extraordinary indeedmust have been his power, and little less than that58 LORD BYRON.of a God here, if he could at his own arbitriumso regulate his times as to overturn empires, andmake himself master of half the civilized world,by throwing the same number on a die. It wasfrom similar remarks that the ancients drew horoscopes,and had tables for calculating lucky andunlucky days — those * cveik aut carbone notandse.'Hence the descendants of the ancient Persians,the Parsees, consult their chronological recordsbefore they embark in any undertaking ; and it isfrom a recollection that on a Friday the seat oftheir empire was wasted with fire and sword bythe followers of the Prophet, that those greatmerchants never allow any of their ships to sailfrom Bombay on that day. Not that that prejudice(if you choose to call it one) is confined totheir nation, for it is common to many other people,ourselves among the number ; and a Welshbard has this passage, quoted to me by Humphrey,On Friday I saw great anxiety, Brien raged.It was from some such similar remembrance, thatLord Byron would never commence any work,nor even be introduced to one whose acquaintancehe wished to cultivate, on that day in the week.And speaking of him, he is almost as remarkablea corroboration as Bonaparte of my position, see-lordBYRON. 59ing that the three great and remarkable events onwhich his destiny hinged, the fatal wedding of MissChatsworth, his own unfortunate marriage, and hisstill more lamented death, took place when he wassixteen, twenty-six, and thirty-six, or at interveningperiods of ten years, called by the Romanstwo lustres, a term probably not derived fromsuch periods being physical climacterics, but froman observation that they, as from a mirror, reflectedthe lights of other times ; or, as (thoughwith a different application) has been beautifullysaid, cast the shadows of former years beforethem. You have also told me that he said heshould most likely die in Greece, yet with someinfluence foreign to, and perfectly independent ofhis own will, he was urged by fate to that verycountry to confirm his own prediction, his own predestination,and, what is still more singular, to thevery spot where in the same month, if not on thesame day, he had been attacked by a similar fever,and barely escaped falling a victim to its malignity.You call this accident,* and would condemnSunt in fortunae qui cassius omnia ponunt,Et nullo nondum credit restore mover,Natura solvent vices et lucas et anni,Atque ideo intrepid! quicunque altar tangent.Juvenal. — E.60 DEATH OF BRUCE.my fatalism ; by doing so, you are driven to adoptthe tenets (so well ridiculed by the great Romansatirist) of Lucretius and his sect, who attributedall things here to blind chance, — and must thusdeny that there is (as I firmly believe) a Beingthat rules the affairs of the world, who as he mustknow, must have fixed, the date of every man'sexistence.By way of elucidation of this my view of thesubject, I will give only three examples out of athousand. I might urge the case of the greatand calumniated Bruce, who after his unparalleledand providential escapes during his travelsin Abyssinia, returned to die in his own house bya fall from his staircase ; and that of him at whosename the world grew pale,' who, after avoidingrepeated attempts at assassination, and imminentperil at the bridge of Lodi and his other greatbattles, died a miserable exile on a wretched rock,ut pueri placet et declamation fiat."One more instance, which occurred at Aurunga-bad, and I have done. You have heard of that city.Its walls are of prodigious extent, and enclose splendidruins of Moslem architecture, and fountainsand runnels of water brought from the distantheights, that reminded me of descriptions of Rome.AURUNGABAD — Alla Rooks. 61Like that city, it was once the seat of a great empire,the favourite residence of the mighty Aurung-zee and his celebrated daughter, Alla Rooks.Her magnificent tomb, in admirable preservation,attests the sorrow of her adoring father ; and thedevotion still paid to it, as to a shrine, the memoryof her virtues. I have it still before me, — thegreat square in which njy tents were pitched, —the minarets of her mausoleum, and the weeklyprocessions of the women of the place, in theirwhite veils and gracefully folded robes, carryingflowers to scatter on her grave.I was detained at this place for several weeksby the monsoon, and a jungle fever, and wasinvited to assist at a fete given at the Viceroy'spalace, in honour of his eldest son, a boy of ten oreleven years old. We were seated on an elevatedplatform to command a view of the fireworks ;and the Prince was enumerating to the Residentall his good fortune, and singing the hollow praisesof the Company, when a nest of rockets ignited,and instead of a perpendicular, taking a horizontaldirection, scattered themselves in the midst ofus, to our imminent risk. We, however, all escapedexcept the Viceroy, who, as fatality wouldhave it, was struck by one of the sticks on the top62 DOCTRINES OF THE Veda.of his head, and almost scalped. The fHe was,as you may suppose, broke up in admired disorder— and lingering for some time, Govind Brushdied of his wound in great torments. This, too,you of course call accident.I once inclined to your opinion, but was soondissatisfied with such a view of things, when Ibecame initiated in the sublime doctrines of theVedass, whose inspired writings hold with Shelley,whose words I quote, that * man exists but in thefuture and the past, being not what he is,^ butwhat he has been, and shall be.' You have noother choice than of clinging to a grovelling materialism,or of disclaiming, with me, an alliancewith transience and decay, and acknowledgingthat our times are in the hands of God, and thatwe can neither advance nor put them back onehour. The moral side of the question I shall notdiscuss ; that would lead into too wide a field.Without any apparent cause to myself, Ihave been some time, as you must have perceived,much depressed, and was at a loss to accountfor it, till I cast my eyes over my journals. One,as this is the last time we shall ever meet again inthis world, for I feel my time approaching, I havebrought with me, to show you. You will from itDoctrines OF THE Veda. 63see, that in this very month, at two differentperiods, I was attacked with a similar malady tothat under which I am now labouring."Saying this, he took from his pocket a Chinapaper MS. which he read, and having read, committedto my hands. This is the exact copywithout the alteration of a single word.64 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.TWENTIETH DAY.JULIAN S JOURNAL.Boorwa Saugor, June 5, 1817.Ma-shin tush az gardish-i-ayam ki sabre.Talk last wa pekin bar-i-shlrin dared.*Sadi's Gulestan.The same despondency that drove me fromRussia, from Persia, and first from my nativecountry, has again exerted its baneful influenceover my mind, and renders me still more wretchedin the centre of Hindostan. Where now can Ifly ? When, under the blissful'protection of thoseto whom I owe my being, a depraved imaginationdrove me from their arms — a cursed destiny urgedme to venture on a world of which I was ignorant,Despair not. Patience is a bitter plant,Yet beareth it sweet fruit.JULIAN'S JOURNAL. 65and for which I was unfitted — a fiend, in whosegrasp ray soul writhes in convulsive torments,dragged me with unmeaning steps over half theglobe. When alone, a foreigner exposed to everyprivation — when penniless in the streets of Petersburg,when a dependant at the Court ofPersia, when wounded in the ruins of Persepolis,when traversing the three days' desert to Bushire,when hope of revisiting the abodes of ray countrymen,and of becoming a member of civilizedsociety warms no more my breast, then only do Ifeel the pleasures of existence : no sooner are thecomforts and luxuries of life administered to me,than the monster stupefied my judgment, obliteratesray memory, eradicates every emulative feelingfrom ray heart, tells me I am ridiculous in theeyes of mankind, and urges me to hurry my stepsto another quarter of the globe, where I may beunknown.We are now in a part of India which presentsa scene to every eye sufficient to rouse the soul ofthe most apathetic. I alone am torpid ; — at ourmess every man gives the most animated descriptions; the mind of each expands itself into themost winning language, idea ringing with sentimentis diffused from one to the whole company.VOL. II. F6Q JULIAN'S JOURNAL.The genius of mental felicity hovers over theboard, and her unfolded wings overshadow thegeneral conviviality, to the exclusion of only onewretch !Boorwa Saugor, June lOth.- pCJ^ (*cj ^(^ S— i 5 JjjRos o slab ghussa o sham mi khuram." * — Hafiz.The same load still presses on my brain. Mymental faculties are certainly destroyed beyondrecovery. An effort must be made. I am miserable.In vain have I attempted to write severalletters, which duty, honour, gratitude, politenessimperatively demanded. I have not a sentiment —how then can I find words ? Within the last twodays I have torn up quire after quire of paper, onevery page of which I have begun " My dear Sir,"My dear — " but could proceed no further. Twoyears are now expired since the commencementof this cruel malady. It is too keen a sensibilityto the opinion of the world, a want of self-esteem,a diffidence in myself, that are the sources of allmy ills. My judgment I cannot call into exercisewould it would whisper me ** respect yourself,"or rather, would to God it would thunder in myI feed upon my anguish night and day.JULIAN'S JOURNAL. 6?ears " you are like the rest of mortals," I knowthe root of aU my disease is the want of that self-confidencewhich a man should feel when he hasto seek out his place in society, take up his position,and maintain it. Am I a murderer ? No.Am I a misanthrope ? No. Have I ever injured ahuman being ? No. Why then am I haunted bya demon, who is ever gnawing insatiably at myheart's core, and tells me in the silence of thenight, and in the glare of day, " You are born tobe eternally my victim." God of nature ! it is tothee I have failed in my duty.Oh Heavenly Father ! forgive the wanderingsof my audacious imagination. Open the dim judgmentof the humblest of thy creatures, and restoreme to that peace of mind which I have neverenjoyed, since with a contrite heart I used to meltinto tears at the footstool of thy throne.Boorwa Saugor, June 11th.Sos-iman ba cesare nisbat ma-kun-0 namak bar cast'o man bar azv-i-resh.* — Sadi.♦ Compare not with another's my affliction ;He only bears the salt upon his hand,1 have it sprinkled on my wounded limb.F 268 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.Let me try to analyse the feelings that renderme thus wretched. There are some that wouldparalyse the hand were it to attempt to pen them.Everything around me appears to be placed purposelyto attract an attention I cannot bestow onit. A mist obscures my perception of the mostsimple and obvious circumstance. After writingthe last paragraph in my yesterday's journal, Iburst into a flood of tears, that gave me a temporaryrelief I will turn my thoughts again tothe Most High. " Lord, lend thou thine aid, Omy Creator ! to assist thy servant in this struggleto retain his reason, which is tottering on the brinkof dissolution. Graciously forgive wherein I haveoffended."Boorwa Saugor, June 12th.Yesterday passed better with me. Yet stillthat confusion of thought remained, and to-dayit has increased considerably. With the greatestexertion I have written two letters, one to MajorC, and the other to H., and after having despatchedthem felt an exhilaration of spirits thatremained with me for about an hour. The recollectionis strongly impressed upon my memory,how very miserable I was, at this time last year,at Ispahan.JULIAN'S JOURNAL. 69In turning over my common-place book, I caneasily account for, and am at no loss to fill up,the blank. Yet I do not think I was reallyso truly wretched as I am now. Then I wascut off from all European society, and yet wascomparatively happy in want and dependance :now I am fixed in an honourable profession, withallto make life worth living for, a kind patron inLord Hastings, and messmates who treat melike a brother. Yet death would be preferableto this oppression, the numbing lethargy thatweighs upon my understanding, that renders meanautomaton.Boorwa Saugor, June 13th.Ba hangam-i-sakhti ma-shaw ma-unitedKi-z-abr i-siyah bard ab-resumed.* — Nizam.I have spent a great part of the day in lookingover a number of letters I formerly received fromdear friends and relations at home. The forciblemanner in which they are penned, reminds me ofthe writers, the many happy days spent in theircompany, and the contrast between past and presentfeelings.Despair not then in thine affliction's hour,From the black cloud may fall the crystal shower.70 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.But enough! I must rouse myself from thisshameful, this unmanly depression, which dependsonly on the imbecility of my own mind — on myself.Boorwa Saugor, June 14th.Wretched ! miserable ! Would to Heaven Iwere rather a downright maniac than what I amat present — a half-mad, desponding, hypochondriac! Great and omnipotent Creator ! it is tothee I have failed in my duty ; assist me in there-establishment of my reason. O best Being !when will this horrid, this distracting feeling end ?To yield longer to my present weakness willonly be to exist in a state enviable by the damned.I will make a determined effort, and, by devotingmyself to the business of the present, try to forgetthe bitter memory of the past.I went to the mess, and sate more like a stonethan an animated being. My vacant looks certainlyproclaimed me * non compos.' A fieldofficer, a guest at the table, moved up his chairwhen room was made, and entered into conversationwith me concerning the celebrated Indianscholar Gilchrist in Edinburgh, and from thencewe turned to the subject of Persian literature, andJulian's journal. 71I found my companion as great an admirer asmyself of that language. He mentioned Hafiz,the metaphysical poet, whose verses admit of somany different interpretations, — Sadi, Ferdouzi,the Bazar Danish, the Glisten, that he comparedto * Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy,' (in style)and the Shah Name. I made some silly remarks,as if I did not understand those my favouritewriters and works. We rose from table, andwalked towards our tents ; we parted, and halfheld out our hands, without joining them, however.It was my fault. This again put me inafit of disgust with myself Every little circumstanceannoys me.Another gentleman, (as I am in want of acharger) lent me a horse in the morning to try,and I rode him, and know not whether he is goodor indifferent. I want to have him, and wish tohave nothing to do with him. These trifles showhow very wavering and irresolute I am aboutoccurrences that another man despatches withouta thought extended beyond the moment.Boorwa Saugor, June 15th.Well ! The same fool I was an hour ago, I stillcontinue to be — and so have shown myself atbreakfast. I exhibited a flightiness of spirits72 Julian's journal.that has rendered me ludicrous. I ask questionswithout meaning — without the least respect formyself, and show my deference to every manwho converses with me, never reflecting, till it betoo late, that my silly behaviour can only affordhim food for merriment by recounting it.♦ * ♦ ♦Here let there be a blank for ever. Let mecommence a new existence, and act with that resolutionthat becomes a man.« ♦ « «After wondering for an hour how I can hearbells in a camp without its having any steeples, Ionly now discover that such a phenomenon maytake place without any such cause — a pretty tolerableproof of my present state of mind.Boorwa Saugor, June 16th.I arose before gun-fire, and made a pedestriancircuit of the place, which occupied me aboutthree hours. The lake of the bluest and mostcrystalline purity is formed artificially by abund,' or embankment, being thrown across, toconfine the water collected from a number ofsmall streams which flow from the neighbouringheights. The * bund' is a colossal piece of ma-julianaJOURNAL. 73sorry, consisting of massy walls, the interspacefilled up by earth, in which trees are planted, andwhich from their size would show the whole to beof no recent date. At the west end rises a largepile, the fortress of the place. Below, is a beautifulbotanical garden, composed of the choicestplants and shrubs, from all parts of the Eastern,and some from the Western world, and laid outin the European manner. I could not help reflecting,that we are exotics in the animal, asmany of them are in the vegetable kingdom, andsighed and exulted over the concluding paragraphfrom Gibbon, whilst speaking of the overthrow ofthe Mogul Empire. " Since the reign of Aurung-zee, their empire has been dissolved — their treasuresof Delhi rifled by a Persian robber, and therichest of their kingdoms are now possessed by acompany of Christian merchants, of a remote isle inthe Northern ocean." The train of thought genderedby the recollection of this remarkable sentence,threw a gloom over my mind, that had tillthen been pretty tranquil. I sate down for sometimein the garden. The air was filled with theodours of the aromatic blooms, and the brancheswere ful of * bulbous,' but neither had anysweets or music for me.74 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.Jaunty, June 17th.We broke up our camp. Jaunty rises to agreat height in a level country, and is seen afar,presenting a very picturesque appearance. Wepassed through the town in the midst of crowds ofinhabitants, the finest-looking people I have yetseen — as fair as Persians. The masonry of theplace is substantial, and the architecture is, if Imay say so, Gothic in miniature. The countryabounds with temples of the Hindoo deities, andthe sculpture is in many as singularly minute anddelicate — the walls covered with figures of humanbeings in various postures, and * * * * the favouritedevices.To-day I have felt only now and then a passingcloud weigh on my spirits. — Activity, I will deifythee!DItteah, June 18th.The fields in the vicinity of Ditteah are hedgedin. The houses covered with red tiles, and thepalace, built on a rock, is a handsome and regularpile, bearing a nearer resemblance to a Europeanlandscape than any I have yet seen in this country.Poor C , the surgeon of the seth, is dead ofthe cholera. He was taken ill at six in the morning,and died at five in the evening. He was oneJULIAN'S JOURNAL. 75of the strongest men in the regiment. The mortality,though abated, still continues among thecamp followers from this disease, that has givenample scope for the theory sings of the medical officers.Some attribute it to unripe grain, some tobad water, and some to want of electricity in theatmosphere ; but that cannot be, as we have hadseveral thunder-showers of late. The most probablecause is the sudden alterations of temperature.When the cholera first broke out, the heat ofthe day was excessive, and the cold every nighttill sun-rise, within thirteen degrees of Fahrenheit.* * *I have felt less at my ease than I did yesterday.W. has given me a few books to read ; one is " TheBeauty of the Heavens displayed," by W. Friend,Mea., and another, a volume of Miscellanies.Having no library of my own, a scanty successionof ideas — little application — a confusion of intellect,proceeding from a want of arrangement, anda treacherous, because neglected, memory, I willcopy, as a guide, a few heads from the " Indices"of this latter volume. To these I will endeavourto direct my attention, and if possible regain thepower of collecting my thoughts and exciting mylong dormant reflections.76 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.From Dudley's " Economy of Human Life.""Duties that belong to man considered as anindividual : — Consideration — Modesty — Application— Emulation — Prudence — FortitudeContentment — Temperance. — The Passions :Hope and Fear, and Grief and Anger — Pity —Desire — Love. The Social Duties : — BenevolenceJustice — Charity — Gratitude — Sincerity — Re-ligion.'^These are copied merely with the intention ofarresting the mind through the eye ; and as theyoffer ample scope for meditation, they are sufficient.Another extract only, as being worthy to beengraved on the heart, may suffice. " The AbbeAubert was in the secret of being always at ease,because,' says he, ' in whatever state I am, I firstof all look up to heaven, and remember that myprincipal business here is, to get there. I thenlook down upon the earth, and call to mind howsmall a space I shall occupy in it, when I come tobe interred. I then look abroad into the world,and observe what multitudes there are who are inall respects more unhappy than myself. Thus Ilearn where true happiness is placed — where allour cares must end, and how very little reason Ihave to complain.' "Julian's journal. 77Soonaree, June 19th.We are encamped very closely together on theedge of the ravines which intersect the country onthe banks of the river Sind. It is an extensive,uncultivated plain, compared with that of thePhooj. I have felt a flightiness to-day that remindedme of crossing that river, which I havenever thought of since without shuddering.Being on general duty at head quarters, whenwe were first detached on this *odour" after thePindarees, I was not relieved till a late hour, andthe regiment had already marched. But the campfollowers, an army of themselves, indicated theway. After a time, however, I lost it, and wanderedabout all day, and found myself, near sunset, onthe banks of the river. The approach of nighta new ally's country, and a deep jungle on allsides, I thought it best to ford the stream. Itwas broad, and rushing swiftly over a broken,black, rocky bed, as slippery as glass. I had onmy full uniform, and did not even take theprecaution of unstrapping my sword, but let itdangle in the water, so that if my horse had comedown,I could have had no chance of getting outbyswimming. Sometimes he was up to his knees,sometimes to the girths, and stood occasionally78 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.(for I gave him his head, and did not attempt topress him) for five minutes, shivering and tremblingwith terror, after sliding for a yard or two.At last, after sometimes swimming, sometimesskating, he reached the middle, and sank with meatonce to the saddle bow, and passed (it fortunatelybeing deep enough) the rest of the way a lanage; whilst I was laughing hysterically all thetime, a feeling that continued the rest of themarch to the new camp : — a pretty convincingproof of the soundness of my intellect.« • « *Thought — reason — reflection — why have youforsaken me:— a torpid soul, illumined by oneray of genius — a dub imagination, without oneoriginal blaze — a stinted mind, unproductive ofeven the words of fancy !Soonaree, June 20th.Ba dardan del khudae tail. *Jabdl ud Din Rami.To-night I again had the honour of dining at theGovernor-general's table, and now hope to get mymind into a straight road by adhering to what theGod is the only medicine for the mind.JULIAN'S JOURNAL. 79conversation there suggested to me. It was interesting,and I believe, by taking down the heads,I may be enabled to re-acquire my memory, andsupply my want of books. I must endeavour tofancy myself more fit for the world than I havedone, and not seem so utterly inferior to othermen. Brooding over incapacity will never remedythe evil; I am determined to attend to passingcircumstances, and although I may not comprehendthem to that extent which will satisfy mewith myself, I shall not, as I have too often done,proclaim my ignorance aloud to every man.Much time have I spent in fruitless, instead ofadvantageous pursuits. Those days are gone forever,but the present moment is at least my own.I may sigh over the past, but in future, — O myGod! assist me — may it only be a passing sigh,and not one that is to engulph futurity, as it hasdone the last two years of my existence ! Ourconversation was concerning the Nepaul Hills — thesource of the Ganges, that like the great Europeanrivers, rises in the snow — the height of mountains.It may be worth remembering, that manyof those mentioned are 22,000 feet ; Mont Blanc15,000 feet. Jonas Han way was brought on thetapis; — the course of Indian rivers from north to80 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.south; — staining the hair with bismuth ; — thesuperiority of naphtha as a manure for dates —query, why ? and in what manner does the treeassimilate to itself from that substance nutritiousjuices? — the mineralogy of the country we are in,granite, trap, limestone ; — volcanic tumuli ; —the size of the spiders in South America, andcloth made from their webs.May these things be permanent in my memory !Soonaree, June 21st.My tent is pitched under a very remarkablerock. It rises like a column out of the alluvialplain, to the height of several hundred feet. Itis composed of granite, and reminds one of thewars of the gods and giants, and might be supposedto have been hurled, and left there by one of therebellious Titans. On one side the scarp is like arough wall ; on the other the precipice is less steep.At the top I had observed a hut, and saw aFakir, who inhabits it, wind up among the crags.I resolved to follow him. He had the advantageof being barefooted ; not so I ; but by crawlingon my hands and knees over the worst parts,I succeeded in reaching the ascetic at the summit.His rage was excessive, and he threatened tohurl me down, but I laughed at him. On my wayJULIAN'S JOURNAL. 81back, I was taken with a panic, and fainted ; andhow I got over it, and effected the descent, I knownot. It has given me a great shock, and I trembleall over.« # #At the mess every one said I was a madman.I am — I am.Soonaree, June 22nd.Dined again at the Governor-general's table —sate like a statue, and felt like one. Would Ihad, like Niobe, remained rooted to the spot, orthat my solid flesh had melted away !On my return, read some of Friend's "Introductionto the Months." He denies the influenceof the moon over the tides, and the mind of man.He reckons absurd the gravitation of the planets —why ? because they originated in the mind of aNewton. I shall now go to bed, with the hopeof getting up before the lunar influence can cooperatewith the solar in rendering me moremiserable than I have now so long been. Activity,I will deify thee ! Relieve me from the shacklesof indolence and despair.VOL. II.82 Julian's journal.Soonaree, June 23rd.♦ » * *The old way; a paucity of ideas — a dailyrepetition of the same remark that our very camelsmight make. A day so miserable as yesterdaywould give any man but myself nerve to make ithis last.June 24th.* * ^I have long ceased to exist as a thinking being,and only as an automaton do I stalk about in theeyes of the veriest fool, a mass of misery in myself!I see without observation — I speak withoutreflection — I hear without attention — I fancy^v^vxr T|r se i|c ri5)G * '(f ^ ▼ 'IfTime 25 th.* * *Every passion has subsided — but one remainsto hinder me from vegetating, baptizing — Annihilation.To it — a mere word, or — But I rave* * *Such is the journal I kept (as you will see bythe dates) in June 1817. The most striking andextraordinary part of it is, that none of my friendsJulian's journal. 83should up to the 25th have observed anything peculiarlyeccentric in ray manners. I breakfasteddaily with some friend in camp. I dined twice atheadquarters, and never missed, but on those twoevenings, the mess. Not less remarkable is it thatI should have been able to anatomize my mind tothe remotest of its ramifications, and analyse everysymptom of the disease with a presentiment ofhow it would terminate, up to the paroxysm thatended in total insensibility for many weeks. Thatwas a state of paradise compared with what Ihad suffered. You have before you a picture ofthe conscious agony that precedes madness. HasDante in his mis creative brain conjured up worsetorments for fiends of darkness? and yet 1will not continue.That I ever regained my reason, is due to onean incarnation, not a woman — the dearest, mostdevoted, gentlest of human beings. I had rescuedher, on the banks of the Sutlej, from the funeralpyre of an old man of high rank to whom she hadbeen betrothed. She lost caste, and it entirelydevolved upon me to supply the affection of thoseto whom she had become an alien. She tendedme during those days and nights of howling, andwould allow no doctor to approach me, and withG 284 JULIAN'S JOURNAL.the healing medicine of her spirit charmed awaythe fiend that preyed on me. But she died. Herashes I collected, and will never part from butwith my last breath. They are dearer to me thanwould be those of an Avatar of Vishnu to a Sooner.After her death I became a Manichsean, and supposedthe world governed by some malignantgenius.*ras chance would have it, I met at a Sur-daughter's* at Cawnpore, Shelley's ' Revolt ofIslam.' It had been sent out among literary lumberto the markets of India, — a common practicewith books that are waste paper at home. TheAmiable philosophy and self-sacrifice inculcated bythat divine poem, worked a strange reformationin my mind. But it was reserved for an *Athanasius' f at Benares, to effect my final cure andconversion. In process of time and instruction,I embraced the doctrines of Brahman, and continuedfor many years a correspondence with thatexcellent person Ram Mohun Roy, whose opinionsand my own are little different ; and I agreewith him in thinking that * the worship of Idols(that finds no place in the Vedass or Ventis) wasEuropean Merchant — Ed.f A character in one of Shelley's Poems.JULIAN'S JOURNAL. 85directed by the Shastras merely as a concessionmade to the limited faculties of the vulgar, withthe view of remedying, in some degree, the misfortuneof their being incapable of comprehendingand adopting the spiritual adoration of the Deity,and elevating their minds to the idea of an InvisibleBeing.' A circle, enclosing a triangle, is themystic emblem of our faith, and may explain theinscription on the School of Plato, ' Let none butamathematician enter here.'Remember, it was on the day we arrived here,where you brought me, Stanley, that I felt thestealthy approach of my malady. It comes againlike a beast to steal on its prey.'Julian grasped my hand and left the room, andwhen he was gone, I waked, like some opium-eater,as from a long and troubled dream.86 Separation FROM Sultan.Twenty-first DAY.Separation from JvJian. — His haggard appearance. — OldHumphrey. — His Annual Pilgrimage. — Feelings on leavingTal y Llyn Road to MachyntUeth.— The MarketplaceIndolence of the Peasants. — The Parson's Bridge.The Valley of the Rhydol. — Tremendous scene. —Junction of the Rhydol and Monach. — Meet Charters atthe Inn.The Devil's Bridge, 21st June.The hour came when I was to part with mydear, gentle, deluded, and I fear, death-devotedfriend, Julian. My entreaties for him to accompanyus were vain. He says, his fate forbids it.To argue with one who holds so absurd a notion,were worse than useless. He looked as if he hadnever taken off his clothes. His lips were bloodless,his face pale and haggard, and he had beenwandering again till morning, about the lake ; hisappearance indeed bespoke it, and there was aglassiness in his eye — a glare, strange and un-humphreysPILGRIMAGE. 87earthly. I proposed to remain behind, but hisLacedaemonian * I will not have it,' precluded allfurther expostulation.As we were standing at the door, (Charters hadstarted at an early hour,) who should hobble forthbut the apparition of Humphrey ? He was habitedin his new suit of clothes, out of compliment, Iimagine, to us, and with a fishing-rod for a staff.The sight of him seemed to animate Julian amoment ; he took the old man's hand in his, andquestioned him as to his journey.I am going," said he, with feeble and sepulchralvoice, " on my annual pilgrimage to Flavor,there to visit Nabell Llwyarc Hen, or the cot ofold Llwyarc, where, having drained the cup ofmisery to the dregs, he retired to die. There alsowill I end my days ; few and evil have they been.It will be a short time* that death will leave me.f Heavy is my longing. :[: Heavy is my load ofgrief. But your sympathy, my kind and benevolentfriends, has been like a ray of sunshineO angau byr a'm gadCyndyllan ab Cyndewyr.f Town hoed i mi.Cyndyllan ab Cyndewyr.X Trim hoed arnav.Cyndyllan ab Cyndewyr88 FEELINGS ON LEAVING TAL Y LLYN.on my grave. — Adieu ! may you be as happy asyou merit. If you think of your old fisherman,"(added he, turning to me,) let it be as of one moreoffended against by fate, than offending ; moresinned against, than sinning."We watched him till the boat-house hid himfrom our eyes, and when I looked at Julian, hiswere blinded with tears.* * *Parting with Tal y Llyn was like parting withsomething dear to meet no more. It seemed tomelike quitting the calm delights of the flowerywilderness of Eden, for a world of thorns andbriars, exchanging the fantastic visions of imaginationfor the cold realities of life. I had experiencedthis feeling of regret twice only more forcibly,on taking leave of Rome, and Switzerland.Yet when I looked back on the yellow Tiber,flowing through the many-domed city of theworld, and stood on the Jura above Lex, andgloated on Lake Leman, and the snows of MontBlanc, it was with a hope. — But now such wasnot my impression, and I have learnt from Julianto have some faith in presentiments.Having hunted the chamois among the avalanchesof the Jungfrau, and crossed the GeniiINDOLENCE OF THE PEASANTS. 89and the Western Alp, I was determined to takethe nearest road to MachyntUeth over the mountainthat overhangs with its rocky "wall thechurch and Pennibont. The ascent is difficult,and requires a steady foot and eye, and I will notrecommend it to those unused to Swiss pedestrianism.The scene is dreary and desolate. I arrived atMachyntUeth at an early hour, and sallied straightinto the market-place, then full of idle labourersassembled there — for in this country the wages ofthe day are regulated by the .weather, the seasonof the year, and the demand, but I could find' noone, notwithstanding liberal offers, who would actas my guide.Indolence is the prevailing vice of these peasants,and they cannot conceive the pleasure atraveller feels in journeying on foot, when he canafford to pay for a carriage. They pointed out tomethe Aberystwith coach then standing in thestreet. I paid my old hostess a visit — who wasequally astonished at my strange resolution ofcrossing the hills to Havoc. I had gone all overthe petits cantons with a map in my pocket, andhad no apprehension of losing myself, so thathaving first got up a few of the necessary questVALLEY OF THE RHYDOL.tons, such as — pean er ford y, (which is theway,) — saw miller, (how many miles,) — and afew others, I set out.I soon left the horse-road, and took a directline over black heathery hills, unwooded, and onlycultivated in patches — and those, from the imperfectand lazy mode of farming, and the want ofdraining, scarcely repaid, with their scanty, stunted,weed-choked crops, the toil.The distance proved farther than the chart hadled me to expect — and after an eight hours' tramp,I still found I had two miles to go, and continuingmy steeple-chase, instead of following from an inn,whose name I forget, the carriage-road that is quiteas near, took an ill-defined path through broken andprecipitous masses of rock to the bottom of an abyss,through which flows the Monach, of a deep tan-colour.The river was full from the heavy rains, and itrequired considerable caution to pick my way, asafalse step might have proved fatal in the descent.I arrived, however, safe at a single plank thrownover a deep chasm. It is called ' The Parson'sBridge.'There is no tradition attached to this name, andI imagine it was given by some Swiss Tourist,in remembrance of the ' Pont de Moine,' thatTHE PARSONS BRIDGE.spans the Rheuss with an arch of ninety feet. Thesame observation applies to the Devil's Bridge,which undoubtedly has been so entitled fromthe Teuflfel's brick. The Welsh one I soon reached,having been long in sight of the hotel. ThisPont,' had I not crossed St. Dotard, wouldhave seemed to me one of the most extraordinaryefforts of the hardihood of man, and the eye cannotwithout horror look down on the cataract.92 VALLEY OF THE RHYDOL.that leaps from rock to rock, making a fall of Iknow not how many feet. A description of thescene was given some twenty years ago, which, asit is unaltered, I will borrow from the pages ofthe Tourist.The valley of the Rhydol contracts into a deepglen, the rocky sides of which are clothed withplantations, and at the bottom runs a rapid torrent.This leads to the spot we were in searchof, which is full of horrid sublimity. It is formedfrom a deep chasm or cleft between two rocks,that just receive light enough to discover at thebottom, through the tangled thickets, an impetuoustorrent, which is soon lost under a lofty bridge.By descending a hundred feet, we had a clear viewof this romantic scene. Just above our heads wasa double bridge, which has been thrown over thegulph. The inferior bridge was built by a monastery,and hence called originally the * Pont arMonach.' It is growing to decay, and beingthought insecure, another arch was thrown directlyover, and resting upon the ancient one, and whichnow supports a good road across the precipice.The water below has scarped out several deepchasms in the rock, through which it flows beforeit rushes under the bridge. A large beech-tree hasVALLEY OF THE RHYDOL. 93flung its boughs horizontally over the torrent, asif to hide the spectacle, and the whole banks ofthis wild spot are rough with fern, moss, and nativethickets, except on one side, where a perpendicularnaked slate-rock lets in the light to theinmost recesses.Having sufficiently admired this tremendousscene, we walked along the cliffs overhanging adeep glen, which receives the mingled waters ofthe Rhydol and Monach, whose luxuriant woodsalmost concealed the numerous rapids and fallsoccasioned by the ruggedness of its rocky bottom.After a troublesom^and rather hazardous descent,forcing our way through the trees, and acrosstwo or three headstrong little streams, we arrivedat a rocky bank, a few feet above the river, commandinga fine view of the junction of the Rhydoland Monach, which seem to vie with each otherin the turbulence of their waters, and the frequencyof their cascades. Immediately above theunion of the two torrents (where the mingledstream is called the Istwith) rises a perpendicularrock, on the crags of which we saw several kitesperched. The summit of the rock is crownedwith wood, equal in luxuriance to that whichclothes the lofty sides of the glen."94 VALLEY OF THE RHYDOL.And now my reader must be as fatigued withdescription as I was with this long, and to mearduous march. The inn had nothing in commonwith those I had as yet met with. I fancied myselfat the Plough at Cheltenham, or the Yorkat Brighton.As I was retiring to my chamber I met Chartersat the door. He was en mauvaise humeurcomplained of the endlessness of the barren upsand downs of the road (nineteen miles fromAberystwith), and we agreed to halt tomorrow,it being Sunday. I hope, reader, you will finda great merit in our resolution.THE devil's bridge. 95Twenty-second DAY.The Devil's Bridge. — Tourists and Female Sketchers. — BadFishing. — A Stranger. — ■ His Angling in Italy. — EnglishSportsmen in Italy. — Water-falls. — Remarks on the landscapesof Wilson, Ruysdael, and Claude. — Judges of Artnot necessarily Artists. — Cascade of Tivoli. — Poem byDe la Martine. — Stanzas on Tivoli. — Temple on the Cly-tumnus. — Preserved Trout in that classic stream. — TerzaRima, written in the Villa Real Gardens. — A hithertounpublished Stanza of Lord Byron.We passed all the next day at this divine spot,listening to the torrent, gazing at the scene frommy windows, or sufficiently amused with watchingthe arrivals, in " chars," or flies, from Aberystwith :a whole line of them was standing all day beforethe door, that had come crammed with parties topicturesque" it. Nor was there here wanting, aswe perambulated the environs, many a petticoatsketcher seated on the banks ; nor " en passant,"96 A STRANGER.could we help taking a peep at the "Miss-doings!The fishing is not worth attending to, the troutare small and black. The smelting grounds, aquarter of a mile distant, poison the river ; so atleast I was told by a stranger, who, as there is akind of freemasonry among us brothers of the rod(I hope you will not use it, ye critics) entered intoconversation with me, (Charters having shut himselfup in his room.) I found he had passed twoyears in Italy, and had gone there — for what purpose,do you suppose ? — to fish. Fancy going tothat classic land to fish !I asked him with a smile what success he hadhad.The Italian rivers are mostly discoloured, anddo not contain either trout or salmon (the latter, Ibelieve, are not found in the Mediterranean at all.)The Po, the Arno, and the Ticino are thick withmud from the alluvial soil through which theyflow.During the last summer, which I spent partlyat the baths of Lucca, and partly at SerraVezza, I threw a fly several times in thesestreams, but they are much netted, and I foundthe fish very small. You will smile at the profanesANGLING IN ITALY. 97nation of angling in the Cascata di Tivoli, andthat of the Velino."For my part I never mean to throw fly anywherebut in the three kingdoms. There isamusement enough on the Continent without it ;but many of our compatriots are not of my opinion.' De gustavus, &c.' When. I was at Rome,an English squire, whose name I shall not mention,went there solely for snipe-shooting ; andSir Humphrey Davy travelled, as the Guicciolitold me, to the evergreen forest at Ravenna, consecratedby the memory of Dante, and the divinelines of Byron, expressly from London to killwoodcocks ! A ridiculous thing once happenedto a party of which I made one. We were sentimentalizingby moonlight in the Coliseum, when aschoolboy put an end to all the Childee Holdingby a tantivy on a bugle. But I interrupt you."These falls are superior to all the Reisbachsand Reichenbachs, and all your achs in Switzerland— they are nothing to them."You forget Schaffhausen, though indeed itmakes no picture. It is rather a torrent than acataract ; the buildings and vile manufactories, oneither side, are disgusting deformities."I fished there all day for a few chub."VOL. II. H98 WATER-FALLS."It is singular that the two Italian falls ofwhich you spoke should both be artificial ones ; butI am surprised that Wilson, who in his own time(the fate of all great men) was put in the backgroundby that tea-board painter, Smith of Chichester,should have left no picture of the Cascatadi Marre — perhaps it defies art. Wilson seemsto me infinitely superior in his waterfalls to Ruysdael,though his water is fine. As to his blacklandscapes and solitary trees, though true to nature,they have no charms for me. One of ourClaude's cascade, or castille of Tivoli, is worththem all put together.I perceive, sir, you are an artist."No, sir; nor is it necessary to be one in order todiscriminate rightly on works of art. Algarotti, andMilitia, were not painters, but did they not provethemselves able reasoners on colour, design, andthe effects of chiaroscuro ? Hogarth has shown,in his analysis of beauty, that he was by nomeans infallible. Cicero, Longinus, and Quintiliannever succeeded in versification (I am not awarethat the two latter ever made a verse,) but arethey not considered oracles in regard to poetry ?Lord Shaftesbury said that one might have a musicalear without being a musician ; and is notPOEM BY DE LA MARTINE. 99Curator the author of the * Perfection Poetica ? 'In fact, your best judges are seldom of the profession,for such rarely bring to the examination of thesubject a liberal and unimpassioned judgment."** Did you see the fall of the Velino from aboveor below ?""From above. I have heard Shelley say, itreminded him of Sappho's leaping from rock torock, and disappearing like a white swan in thedistance."I only tried it from below, where the pictureis perfect, but not so the fishing."The Cascata of Tivoli has been much injuredsince I saw it, by the carrying away of the banks ;a circumstance beautifully described by De laMartine, who was at Rome during this event,that awakened the sympathies of my amiable andtalented friend ; and I have in my commonplacebook some stanzas, written, I forget in whatyear, — in whose manner you will easily recognize.They are now perhaps valuable, as presenting thescene as it then was. You will find them whatByron holds in contempt (though, with his usuallove of paradox, he chiefly excels in that style),entirely descriptive ; they were addressed to a ladywho accompanied me."H 2100 STANZAS ON TIVOLI.I perceived the stranger wince a little at theidea of the infliction, but I did not heed his impatience,and repeated with due emphasis, but notdiscretion —•" We wind the zigzag path, and pause to hearThe torrent's deepening echoes — Oh, how clear !How lovely in the morn's white light appearThose tufted rocks, those crags whose shadows wearMagic varieties ; self-poised in air.Some overmatch the void, some tower aloftLike human masonry, and tissued there,Net-woven like the delicate woof.In shapes fantastic hang full many a pumice roof.*And down the sides of that precipitous skreenTrail feathery weeds, and brambles overheadIn graceful tresses of spring's earliest green,And moss of rich embroidery, ever fedBy gentlest showers, whose spray continuous shed.Fills all the vale with freshness — upward fliesThe silvery exhalation from its bedOf ' restless torture,' forming in its riseAn iris, bright as those o'er-arching tropic skies.Such tracery veils with its t dishevell'd locksA fretwork, fairer far than ever plann'd.For frieze or capital, copyist from the rocks,Corinth, or Athens, or the Ionian land :Sententia pumice tecta.t A plant called maiden's hair. — Ed.STANZAS ON TIVOLI. 101Can man with Nature hope to vie, whose handTissues with an enchantment, ever new.Webs finer far, and conjures with her wand,What sculpture never wrought, or painting drew,More glowing forms, and tints more eloquently true —To breathe and write her praises : woodbine lacesThe arbutus with its entangled lines.And ivy clasps the ilex with embracesWily as are the passion-flower's, or twinesHer parasite arms about the vine's ;And myrtle-berries jet the ground — all dyesOf blossoms bright are there that gem the mines,The blushing cyclamen with downcast eyes.And violet paler than those deep Italian skies —Emblem of Thee who lov'st the shade. — More nearWinds on the path — enrapturing more and more,A maze of wonder ; nor alone we hear.But feel the thunder of the Anno roar,Like breakers on the unapproachable shoreOf some Atlantic isle — till with the forceOf avalanche, loosen'd from some glacier, hoarAs its o'erwhelming snows, or as a horseThat bursts at length the rein, exulting in its course.,The disimprison'd cataract rush'd. BesideThe parent stream, e'en where it fiercest raves,Two infant rills in strings of silver glideOver the tapestry of the grass, that wavesLike sea-weed, which the current feeds and lavesWith gushing far too gentle to delightIn tearing e'en a tress : beneath, the caves102 STANZAS ON TIVOLI.Are steep'd in gloom, and drops of diamond lightSpangle those tresses fair as stars the vault of night.« And 'twixt the torrent and the wave-worn steep.High, under-arch'd, a little eddy makesA most translucent basin, of whose deepAnd living waters, not a circlet wakesThe soft repose, nor breath, nor ripple breaksThe glassy surface ; — contrast sweet is thisTo all the billowy turbulence that shakesThe gulph below — the 'hell of waves* * that hiss.And boil and rave, and make a night in that abyss.It is a spot where Dean might resortAt noontide with her nymphs, * its crystal floodTheir mirror,' and its fount their bath — or sportThe Fauns and sylvan deities, no moreFabled in song. But fancy still may storeMemory of those creations, and, above,A columns temple may revive the loreOf elder worship — worship that may proveWorthier a scene like this, where all .that live and move,All we behold, breathes, feels, and glows with love.This cataract is a far more fitting shrineTo wake the spirit's homage ; all above,Around this stream, must ever be divine ;It flows in classic lore, and must entwineWith the heart's best devotions ; nor can Time,With its obliterating hand consignTo cold forgetfulness one lyric rhyme.That bids thy bard and thee live on through every clime.TERZA Rims. 103Your account of the * Precepts Anno ' pleasesme, and the Temple of the Sibyl reminds me ofthat on the Clytumnus, that deserves to be carvedin ivory, and put into a glass case. The troutthere are numerous in the extreme, but they arestrictly preserved, belonging now to the *Deanand Chapter' of some monastery, as perhaps theyformerly did to the Sacerdotal of old. I shouldhave liked (though you smile) to try that classicstream, for the trout were darting about in alldirections. I passed a whole day there on myroad to Rome and Naples. I found no amusementen route"A pause now ensued in our dialogue, and theItalian angler had been, or affected to be, so muchpleased with my Byronic stanzas, that I wasdetermined, with Horace's *Cantor,' to singusque ad ovum! and repeated the followingterza rima, written in the Villa Real Gardens,which enabled us to while away the rest of theevening. They are steeped in Shellfish, andprove, I fear, in three or four lines, too good amemory of his works.A gorgeous net-work covers half the sky, —In the far south the Vesper star is dancing,And mirrored in the ocean, tremblingly104 TERZA RIM AS WRITTEN IN THEHangs o'er the dim horizon's verge, advancingSlow up the steep. Warm hues of day are glowingOn the young moon, from sunset's caves placingIn lines on lines of gold ; promise bestowingOf spring, and hope, and joy — but chief that lightKindles a strain, that fills to overflowingThe depths of heaven, from poet-bird of light.Whose liquid stops are link'd in sweetest song.The rivulet confesses its delightIn lulling murmurs, as it plays alongThe winds are gone to sleep, and stir not hereThe leaf self-quivering; but the groves among,Charm'd by the melody divinely clear,Of that sweet air to lose one note unwilling,Listen in breathless ecstasy to hear ;And seem to chide this tideless bay, as stillingIts waves to rest upon the pebbly shore.Each ripple with a softer whisper fillingA gentler cadence, lower still and lower.Till hush'd to deepest slumbering. Every flowerTells out its bliss, and richer gladness showerThe honey-laden blossoms that embowerThe daisies mead — it is the Acacia,Enamour'd maid, in coyness wont to storeHer virgin charms, and treasure them by day.To spend their odours on the sense of night.In calm repose enwrapt all nature lay —VILLA Real GARDENS. 105The tinkling fount that rain'd its diamond light —The clematis that interlaced the zoneOf jasmine, spangling with its snowy whiteThe intricate pathway, gently sloping downTo the blue waters in the moonbeam sleeping,And now but murmuring to themselves alone —All, all is love ! so deep, so spirit-steeping,What wonder if the bird, wind, stream, fount, flower.Felt each a pulse, like that voluptuous sweepingO'er my full bosom, if in such an hourThey each possess'd a soul, to feel, and ownThat here is Paradise, here dwells a powerEnclosing one in all, and all in one.Sweet bond of fellowship ! harmonious scene !Nor voiceless, nor unanimated ; noneThankless but man. The earth with verdant sheen,Gift of the year, rejoicing wakes the bloomsOf the young buds from out their cradles green.Where they had slept among their wintry tombs,To star her heaven, those children sweet of hers,Who weave from out their many-coloured loomsNo meaningless embroidery, and in verse,The poetry of nature, ever writeHer praises in life-flowing characters.Endless variety of love, and light,And youth ; from whose maternal altar steamsWorthiest incense, whether they unite106 STANZA BY BYRON.From opening lips to breathe when morning beamsTheir silent vows, or shed their dewy sweetsAt eve, or sigh them forth as now in dreams.List ! how the wind in every accent greetsThe Author of its being and its motion,In every echo hymning this repeatsThe voice of leaves and streams ; in like devotionThe stars diadem the night, her throneWith crystal curtains veiling : in the oceanEflFusing love, — worship there else is none.In order to recompense you," I added, " for allthis dull poetry, I will repeat a stanza of Lord Byron's,written under the Lombards Venetian Arraswhen he left Venice in disgust for Ravenna, andwhich verses, perhaps, he had some idea of oneday incorporating with the fourth Canto ofChildee Harold, but there is reason enough whyhe should not have made them public during hisstay in Italy: —** Aloft the necks of that vile Vulture rearThe Cap which Kings once bow'd to, and thus seek,Lifting that headless crown in empty air,To mark their mockery. In each double beakToo well do they the insatiate ravening speakOf a most craven bird, that drains the bloodOf two abandon'd carcases, that reekFestering in their corruption — never broodGorged its rapacious maw with a more carrion food."PROJECTS FOR THE MORROW. 107• * * ♦And is this the way to pass a Sunday? Wehave agreed to start tomorrow at an early hour ;and Charters, who has been in the sulks all day,has promised to communicate his adventures to meon the road to Pontrefindiggert.108 JULIAN'S LETTER.Twenty-third DAY.News from Julian. — His Letter relating to Humphrey. —Reflections on Death. — Our route over bleak and barrenMountains. — Charters's narrative of his own Adventures.— Sketch of Aberdovey. — His description of theCambrian Amazon. — The little Inn at Pont Gros. —Group of Miners.Pontrefindiggert, 23d June.As we were starting, a pied, a messenger e.r-pris brought us news from Julian, which I wasdying to receive.What nature, what feeling, in every paragraphof his letter ! It relieved me to find that hecould write so rationally. The matter of theepistle related chiefly to Humphrey.I was anxious to learn how our old fisher-mansfieldhad terminated his day's journey,and, mounting Gwynedd's black pony, rode toFlavor, two miles beyond the Bala Lake.There I made enquiries, and having learned thatan old man answering the description of HumphreyON HUMPHREY'S DEATH. 109had been seen on the road to Label Llwyarc Hen,doubted not that he had at once sought that spot.It was not far distant, and I soon discovered acircle of stones that I had no difficulty in recognizingfor the place of the pilgrim's destination. Soitproved. On coming close to the mound, I discoveredthe object of my search.He was seated, leaning against one of the fragmentsof rock, with his face turned towards thewest ; his eye vacant and motionless, fixed onthe sun hanging over the summit of Cader Iris.I could perceive that his mind was dwelling onfuturity, and did not venture to disturb his sacredmeditations.It was a gorgeous sunset, and as the orb sankbeneath the horizon of the mountain, his spiritseemed to die with it, and to mingle with thatparadise of clouds, and become part of the overhangingday.* No struggles of dissolution — no pangsof nature betrayed the approach of death ; buthis unchanging countenance was calm and placidas that of a child that has been nursed to slum-lordByron seems also to have entertained this doctrineof the Epicurean.His free'd soul rejoin the Universe."Childee Harold.110 HUMPHREY'S DEATH.ber in his nurse's arms. Unlike an infant, I perceivedthat he had slept his last sleep. I closedhis eyes, and returned slowly to the village, andhaving made due preparations for his interment,we removed some of the loose stones that coveredAlly ware's remains, dug his grave, and committingthem to the earth, left him to mingle his asheswith those of his favourite sportsman-bard."The remainder of his letter contained manymelancholy reflections on death, in his own peculiarstrain. One particularly struck me ; it is aquotation from some Hindoo work, and it is allI have time to copy: — "^Vhat occupier wouldhesitate to quit a mansion with bones for its raftersand beams — with sinews and tendons forcords — with muscles and blood for mortar — withskin for its outward covering, filled with no sweetperfume — a mansion infested with age and sorrow— the seat of malady — harassed with pains,haunted with the quality of darkness, and incapableof standing long."♦ * ♦ *We continued our route, over a black and barrenmountain tract, for some time in silence : Ibroke it at last by asking Charters for an accountof his own adventures, which he thus related : —CHARTERS'S NARRATIVE. IllI started, as you know, before day-break, onthe old cart-mare, being already acquainted withthe scenery of the valley, and the road well calledFord Diu, or the Black Road ; and only stopped,as the day dawned, to finish a sketch of one of thewildest parts, lying between Llwyn-du and Llwyn-gwyn, which I had begun some time before.*On my arrival at Town, I found a brother ofthe rod just setting out to try the pool, and though Ihad no affection for these Epicurean * Lacustrines,'was persuaded by the host of the inn, (to whom thepool, I found, belonged, and who keeps a boat forthe accommodation of his guests,) to accompanythe stranger. The little lake has been originally apeat-moss, for the water is, either from reflection,or naturally, of a jet black. It is extremelyshallow, and does not exceed six feet in any partThe morning was hot and sultry, andVast quantities of thick dense fleecy cloudsCame wandering in flocks over the sea,Shepherded by the slow unwilling wind.But a brisk sea breeze soon sprang up, thatagitated the water gloriously. It was consideredSalvator Rosa's wild imagination never drew a moreCalabria scene. Some of his bandits would have been notunappropriate figures to the landscape.VALLEY OF THE Town.an omen of success. The place is, I was told,full of red trout, and my companion said that theywere the most cunning of all the finny tribes, forthat Lord , one of the best and most determinedanglers in England, had lashed and lashedfor two days, and though he had some hundredrises, had only been able to extract three of itsinhabitants ; but, added he, I have an expedientif they rise short (as was said), ^vhich I know tobe irresistible in its temptations.' My paste Isoon abandoned, after two or three unsuccessfulcasts, and sate watching the operations of theinfallible.CHARTERS'S NARRATIVE. Ilf3Rise after rise did he get from fish that Ijudged to be of considerable size ; but not one couldhe hook, though he seemed to strike at the rightmoment. This went on for some time; when Iobserved him take from out of his pocket a tinbox, and select from it a small gentle and applyit at the end of his dropper fly, whose hook it justcovered, and looked like a white film over it.The result was as he anticipated. The trout couldnot resist the lure, and one after another, with myassistance (for he had declined having the boatman),were thrown into the well. Some wereupwards of two pounds, and all of a good weight.I was half sorry that I had no fly-tackle, and, soontired of a sport in which I could not participate,made good my retreat and returned to the hotel"'** And this he called a gentle art. Charters!"I proceeded immediately on my journey, andcrossing over to Aberdovey, of which I made ahasty common-ink sketch, took another horse,and at two o'clock reached Aberystwith. It wasthe day of the race meeting, and backing a merlin(pony), I galloped straight to the course.I was not long before I discovered the objectof my search mounted on the hunter she wantedto have shown me at , when just come from aVOL. II. • I114 CHARTERS'S NARRATIVE.breathing. The mare, of a jet-black colour, wasat least sixteen hands high, and as she surveyedproud of her rider, was mounted with an easeand grace, that would have won the heart of anyracing character at Newmarket or Doncaster, (as arelation of mine did of the owner of the celebratedWaxy and Mealy by a similar display of horsemanship.)The fair Cambrian had just won thecup, and was holding it in her hand; it was ofan elegant and classic design, and had she been inadifferent costume she might have been mistakenfor a Hebe. About her was collected a * possecomitatus ' of Welsh Squires ; and among themI had no difficulty in distinguishing our strangerat Tal-y-Llyn, who had been so enthusiastic inher praises, and who, close to her left side, waswith animated gestures complimenting her on thejoyous occasion.I walked my pony quietly to the edge of thecircle, and her eye, which flashed with the exultationof victory, immediately descried me, andmaking her way through the crowd, that openedright and left to let her pass, she advanced towardsme (to the great annoyance, I perceived, of herInamorato Squire, who did not deign to recogniseme.) I began to speak of our interview, but sheTHE CAMBRIAN AMAZON. 115immediately stopped me, as if to preclude all allusionto it, and entered into the favourable stateof the ground in consequence of the two days'intermission from rain. But I will give you herown words, which are very graphic.My training groom had his orders, and yetI was afraid Idris would not be set upon muzzle,and so get improperly Filled, for he is a large-carcasseshorse, and being started close to hisstable, if thus overfed, he has not so great atime, as horses generally have, to digest hisfood. I therefore looked to him myself, to seethat he was in proper condition to enable him torun in his best form. I knew that he was fastand a slug, and desired Bill not to be tootender with him, but to make play whenever helay farther off than two lengths from the nearest.My words to Bill Jones were — The first part ofriding in a race is to command your horse, to runlight in his mouth; it is done with manner; itkeeps him the better together; his legs are moreunder him ; his sinews less extended.; less exertion;his windless locked; the horse running thusto order, feeling light for his rider's hunts, hisparts are more at ease and ready, and can runconsiderably faster when called upon, to what heI 2116 CHARTERS'S NARRATIVE.can when he has been running in the frettingsprawling attitudes, with part of his rider's weightin his mouth. I know that some of the Newmarketjockeys say you should pull your horse toease him in his running ; but when horses are ingreat distress in running, they cannot bear thatvisible manner in pulling looked for by the sportsmen.He should be enticed to ease himself aninch at a time, as his situation will allow.This, I told Bill, was the real way a horseshould be held in his running. You may wonderat my knowing all this, but it is only to beacquired by practice and genius, and is to mostpeople Greek, for the field are lost to parts of thebest riding, as they are to training. Well! Ishan't trouble you with the trials and weights, norwith the character of all the horses entered. Iknew that Cwmry's running was so much gonefrom him that there was no weight that couldbring him up to run with any horse ; that OwenGlendower could not get his legs out ; that Cambrianwas not well to run, and that Warden wasa jade. Indeed the only two about which I hadany suspicion were Tickler and Toby, and so itproved ; for Owen, who had been much beat byWarden and Cambrian, was some lengths behindTHE CAMBRIAN AMAZON. 117in the last hundred yards ; but finding that Tobyand Tickler stayed to their running, and thosebefore them slacked their pace, Idris went up tothem very near, and just before getting to thewinning post, poured upon them, and Toby thendropped to the hind part of Tickler, and then hestopped short, and some thought passed thewinning post before Idris. The shout was,• Tickler wins, and a yard by the winning post.'But to my mind Tickler's head was after Idris's.Not so thought the field, not even with the winningpost, and there were some ungentlemanlyingthemselves, by giving it against the horse ; butthat don't argue. They were all out, and so decidedthe judge, and here is the cup. Idris wasrode to a T, and in the best of attitudes, byBill.'She then went on to detail all her racer'spedigree, which she deduced from some Arab thathad been ridden by the renowned Saladin, andby him presented to Richard Coeur de Lion, andbrought to England during that holy war, whenhe became the property of her immediate ancestor,whose genealogy (as I was afraid) would have followed,probably, if she could have spared the time.*' The subject of the turf was new to me. I had118 THE CAMBRIAN AMAZON.never seen but one race in my life, and then I arrivedas the last horses were coming in at Epsom ;and I stammered and stammered, and hesitatedand hesitated again, to the amusement of thebystanders, who (as I candidly at last made theconfession of my profound ignorance of such matters)opened their mouths, and wondered at, anddespised me. She seemed to be of their opinion,for the trumpet sounding to saddling, she deliveredthe cup to her saddle-horse groom, suddenly wavedher hand, and in a moment, with half the field inher train, put spurs to her mare, and set off at fullspeed to the starting post, to see the horsesstripped for a race, in which I afterwards heardshe had heavy bets at stake.I did not stay to view the result, but returnedslowly and disconsolately through the desertedstreets of the town to my hotel.In the coffee-room was a naval officer, whoseeing me in my fishing attire, for I had forgottenin my haste even to unwind the tackle from myhat, entered familiarly into conversation with me.He told me the Istwith was a bad river, and thathe had taken to angHng in the sea. He dweltwith delight on sole-pitching, mackerel-fishing,and cod-fishing, and related an anecdote about thecharter's narrative. 119latter of these sports,* that proves how soon fish canbe drowned. ' Being on the Lagunes Bank, andbecalmed, in sight of the coast of Africa, in heavingthe lead, we attached to it several hooks. We mightbe in ten or twelve fathoms of water, and drew upwith almost every hook a rock cod. One ofa very large size broke his hold by a suddenjerk in being dragged rapidly upward throughthe water, and was so completely suffocated duringthe transit, that he lay on the surface impassive,and we sent out a boat and picked him up quitedead. — ' I am going,' the officer added, ' andshall be happy of your company, to see a differentkind of amusement.'Though I was little in the mood, I thought todivert my thoughts by novelty ; and his boat beingin readiness, we went on board, and having gota little way out, dropped anchor.He had tremendous machinery, that no onebut himself could handle, (reminding me of a mustwas once present at the sport of sole-pitching on thecoast of Sussex. It can only be followed when the seais perfectly calm. My companion had a very long harpoon,and discovered by practice, what I could not, thesoles at the bottom. Indeed their backs were precisely thecolour of the sand. He was so dexterous in the managementof his implement, that he rarely missed his aim. — Ed.120 CHARTERS'S NARRATIVE.ket of vast calibre I once saw carried by an Herculeanmurderer of my acquaintance,) and he soonbegan to throw. The fly he used was of a sortnever before produced, and was like a hummingbirdin size and plumage. There was a strongripple, and he soon succeeded in capturing threeor four back, that showed great sport, and diedvery game. I was not surprised at his predilectionfor this diversion, though I heard afterwardsit had excited the merriment of the old fly-fishersat the place.I lingered about Aberystwith till a late hour,hoping to get a last glimpse of the racing fair one,but was disappointed, and with a fly, and horse ;that could not go out of a walk, he having beenblown with hard riding on the course, reached, asyou know, the Devil's-bridge at a late hour."I laughed heartily at the description of theCambrian Amazon, and Charters joined in it — asign of his convalescence ; whilst he made continualappeals to his snuff-box, and I smoked my cigar,till we came to Pont Gros, where the grounds ofHavoc terminate.Entering the little inn at the bridge-end, wetook our places at one end of the benches in thevast fireplace of the usual structure. A numberGROUP OF MINERS. 12Jof miners, from Lord Disburse's Plan Gwyn(lead mine), were collected there ' ar ei feddwdod'(on the drink) ; and an old grey-headed man,who seemed to be more decent than the rest, asort of half sir, as the Irish say, and who wasalready discussing his third pot of cwrw, was talkingvery loud and thick, and beginning to detailto his comrades his history, in his own Welsh-english,in which I shall not attempt to followlira. It was, however, in substance this.SKETCH OF ABEBDOVEY.122 THE miner's tale.Twenty-fourth DAY.The Miner's Tale. — leave the Inn — The Lead Mine. — TheTiny. — Flies. — Our repast, and recapitulation of theevents of the Day.THE MINER'S TALE.** I WAS once the owner of a mine of my own,instead of working in that of another. The woodsextending along the right of the road, and avery considerable farm, were once ray own. Myfather possessed them by inheritance, and by theincrease of his flock, and the sale of his wool, hadamassed what in this country, where provisionsare cheap, wants few, and luxuries unknown,is looked upon as a considerable fortune. Fortunatehad it been for me, when he died, if I hadcontinued the same occupations that had broughtwith them the calm delights of good old age, andthe blessings of health and content.THE miner's tale. 123But the daemon of avarice possessed me, orrather a fiend in the shape of a gooch (witch)."She was, though Welsh by extraction, astranger in the place, and no one knew whenceshe came. AH was mysterious about her, and heractivity little corresponded with her years, for shewas wrinkled, old, and bent double, and had thelongest nose and chin, and the most diabolical expressionof countenance I ever saw in woman.She was, in fact, a hideous crone, and the children,when she passed by, would run and hide themselvesin their mothers' laps. She entered into no relationsof acquaintanceship, or interchange of goodoffices, with any of her neighbours, and was detestedby all the country round, yet no one everdared refuse her alms, lest it should occasion (ashad happened) the death of a cow, or a horse,or perhaps one of the family.You must know, that there inhabit our mountains(whatever may be the case in Cornwall,whence you all are,) certain invisible beings, thatwe call tylwithley,* or knockers. These geniiThe miners in the Forest of Dean have a similarsuperstition. It appears that there is a pit, called to thisday the " The Voice Pit," which takes its name from thiscircumstance : — A voice was heard there desiring the minersto desist from work, inasmuch as they had obtained their124 THE miner's tale.(or whatever they are) live underground in ornear mines. You may haply laugh at our simplicityin maintaining the existence of such spirits,but you will not meet with any one person conversantwith our employment, who does not believethat they are pre-indicators of mines, andby their noises point out to the workmen theveins of ore of which they are in search, as visionsin dreams are the precursors of prizes in thelottery, and other accidents that occur to us.But, not to endeavour to account for one phenomenonmore than another, I can only say, thatthere are very many who speak well of * theknockers,' because they have stood good friendsto them ; but for uiy part, all I know is, theyproved the ruin of me. There was a time indeedwhen I was as incredulous of them, as, I see byyour faces, you are, and deemed it a mere popularsuperstition, and have often thought that it mightbe in vengeance for my want of faith that theyleagued with the old hag against me. Whetherthat be so or not, who can tell ? — but I for a longshare of ore, and should injustice leave the rest to posterity.How this singular request was complied with we have noevidence to determine, but this we know, that for manyyears the mysterious sanctity of the mine has remainedinviolate. — Ed.THE MINERS TALE. 125time shut my ears to her reports of their nightlymeetings at the foot of one of ray hills.As I was amusing myself one evening withmy rod and line, for I was then a gentleman likeyou,) on the Monach adjoining ray grounds — andthat, till the smelting went on, was a good riverI chanced to meet with old dare Cadwallader,as she called herself, picking up toad-stools on thebank, I suppose for compounding her poisons. —Accosting her, I laughed at her stories about thelittle folks of the mountains. She was not, however,to be put out of countenance, or easily foiled,for she described to me the nature of the noisesshe had heard, and always at the same place, andat the same hour of the night, though there wasno mining going on at that time within milesand miles.To hear her talk, one would certainly thinkshe must have dealings either with the spirits(who are said to be harmless), or with some infernalpowers, for she brought forward an instance insupport of her argument, that might have convincedthe most sceptical. There was a deaf anddumb tailor in the village, who had a particularlanguage of his own. From practice, I couldunderstand him, and he me, by motions of the126 THE miner's tale.fingers, hands, and eyes. Now, argued the beldam,if this man had really seen ore in the bottom of asink of water in a mine, and wanted to tell youhow to get at it, would he not make two stickslike a pump, and go through the motions of apumper, at the very sink where he knew the orewas, and then imitate the wheeling of a barrow? —what would you have inferred from these signs,but that the * sourd muet' wanted you to pump,and drive, and wheel the stuff out, in the veryplace where he had seen it ? By like reasoning,the language of the * tylwithley' signifies, that youshould do the same, where I heard the sounds.'"I must confess that I was staggered by thisillustration* of the gooch, and, when I left her,could not get it out of my head. But she saw shehad made some impression, and shortly afterwardspractised on me another imposition with entiresuccess."The natives of this country have an equalfaith in the ' rejoice divinatoricE.' They are madeof hazel, cut when Saturn, the significant of lead,is in conjunction with Jupiter. The latter mustbe sextile or trine, but if the conjunction happensThis illustration is taken from a letter published somethirty or forty years ago, and written by a Welsh clergyman.Ed.THE MINER'S TALE. 127when he is square, the effect is marred. Practisedin fraud, the witch pretended with one of thesedivining wands to have discovered the precisespot where the matrix of ore was, — but first demandedof me for the discovery a large sum,which I refused.My tranquillity of mind was, however, now lost,I neglected my farming — took no longer any pleasurein angling — was indifferent to the caresses ofmy children, and behaved harshly to a wife towhom I had been, till then, devotedly attached.Dreams made up the better part of my existence,and my eyes gloated nightly in visions of heapson heaps of glittering metal, and my ears werefilled with the rolling of barrows, the pumping ofwater, and the hammering of the spirits. Thecrone had brought me to the point desired, andnow it was my turn to importune. Her demandsrose with my impatience, and, after a long treaty,she consented, as the price of her discoveries, toaccept a third part of my father's hard-earned andhoarded gold. Never dawned so happy a day onme, as that on which I paid down the money tothe old impostor ; whether she was equally pleasedI know not, but in a few weeks she left the country,and has never been heard of since.128 THE miner's tale.The place pointed out by the inclination of thehazel twig, as ray Eldorado, was Clin Clwyd ; anda neighbouring mine having been abandoned,and all the Cornish workmen who had been employedthere out of pay, I immediately hiredthem, and set to work in earnest. It was notlong before I became initiated, to ray cost, in the(till then to me mysterious) phraseology of drivinglevels, boring, blasting, loading dead, beatingdown the loose, &c. Every evening after hoursI went myself into the shaft, and often stoodthere till midnight, listening ; but the little peoplehad, as I said before, either forsaken theirhaunts out of spite, or suspended their labours,expressly not to indicate the precise spot in themountain where the vein lay.'*^ Once indeed, when I was visiting the level ona Sunday, — a day when my thoughts ought to havebeen, and used to be, otherwise directed, tillMammon had got the better of God,— I heard avoice that seemed to me that of the witch, whisperdistinctly — ' Fool — infatuated fool — desist !'A loud laugh, that echoed through the shaft,succeeded the words, but they might be perhapsthe offspring of my heated imagination, for I wasbecome little better than a poor irreligious, dotish,miserable visionary."THE miner's tale. 129The old man here seemed overpowered withconflicting emotions, but, having taken a longdraught from the mug, continued : —The warning voice was vain. I was blinded,besotted, and hardened of heart, like him in thescriptures, by an obstinate perverseness.My ready money was gone — yet no trace oflead was discoverable, and notwithstanding everyindication to the contrary, from the nature of thestrata through which they were boring, I wassatisfied that the mine could not be far distant.My workmen (who were glad of a job) contributedalso to keep alive my hopes, by occasionally producingthe * mammoth' of some Cornish ore, whichthey pretended to have discovered."Here one of the miners, jealous of the honourof his countrymen, got up and showed an inclinationto fight ; but I stopped him by ordering forhim a pot of ale. He re-seated himself muttering,and the old man finished his tale thus : —"Acre after acre, one by one, did I squanderon this mad and hopeless undertaking, deaf tothe prayers and reproaches of my wife and friends,and the exhortations of our good pastor, till atlast I sold my house and all the remainder of myfarm to the proprietor of Hafod, who had alreadyVOL. II. K130 THE MINER'S TALE.got a heavy mortgage on the estate. All I reservedfor myself was the manorial right in the barrenrock (where so much of my property had alreadybeen buried, and whose bowels were about to engulphthe rest) ; and this done, I removed to a cottagenear the shaft, the better to superintend theworks.But why continue my narration ? The storyof my madness — no, that you cannot know* — butmust already have divined my ruin — you see itexemplified in myself — you know what I was,you see what I am. Ere long I was penniless.My wife died of a broken heart — my children arereduced to beggary for bread, and the long shaftof Clin Clwyd is called to this day * Owen'sfolly,' an eternal monument and record of myshame."♦ * ♦ »We left the public-house, and a few hundred yardsfrom it, after crossing the Monach, passed close tothe lead-mine where the old miner now laboured.The ore seemed very rich in silver, and we couldnot help wishing he had been so fortunate as tohit upon the vein in the opposite hill, wherehanging woods (of which he was once master) relievedthe nakedness of the impending mountain.Thetis. 131We soon forsook the main road that leads toLampeter, and striking across a series of barrendowns, came at length in sight of the Tiny, stealingthrough a marshy plain covered with blackcattle ; and after a walk of six hours, at the approachof evening, entered the little romanticvillage of Pontrefindiggert.Our first enquiries at the gwaldy (inn) werefor a pysgator (fisherman) who had been recommendedto us, called the Weaver. He showed ussome very well made millions (flies), his own handywork, of which I bought (being idle) a dozen, andarranged with him to accompany me on the morrowto the Tiny pools. Over a good fire, withbare zenith (wheaten bread), some roast fowls,and beakers of hot concha a la Farigi (which Iflatter myself I can make Toscanamente) and half adozen cigars. Charters and myself talked over theevents of the day, and at an early hour retiredto our coarse but clean beds.K 2132 PENTREFINDIGGERT.Twenty-fifth DAY.Pontrefindiggert. — The Weaver's Anecdotes. — A Salmon-leap.— Remarkable Ruin. — Tiny pools. — A day's Sport.A Wild Bull — Unsuccessful Angling. — Advice. —Gloomy Evening. — Fears for Julian.Pontrefindiggert, June 25th.The Weaver called me, as agreed, at an earlyhour. He was a tall, thin, intelligent-lookingman, of about forty, and reminded me of PierreTerrae, or one of the Swiss guides of whom ourLady-Tourists are so fond. He spoke Englishsans accent, and whiled away the time withnumberless anecdotes, relating to the gentle art,and exploits, in which, of course, he was alwaysthe hero. His name of the Weaver was not inapplicable,for he spun me not a few yarns, asthe sailors say, and very long ones.Among the rest, he wove one that, he said, agentleman, whom he cicerone, promised to insertTHE WEAVER'S ANECDOTES. 133in the New Sporting Magazine, but whether it appearedin the pages of that amusing periodical, Iknow not — all I know is, that it beat out and outthe anecdote of the turbot, as recorded on a monumentin Stephen Church, which was bought bya lady in the market, and in whose mouth wasfound a ring, the pledge of her affection for alover lost at sea.The Weaver's story was this. He had a kill-devil,(talk of a kill-devil and the gentle art !) thathad been given him by some brother of the rod.This he lost in the Tiny by a large fish, but whilstthrowing 2ijly the next season in the same pool,he took a salmon of twelve pounds, and, to his andmy amazement, discovered in its mouth the identicalartificial minnow he had so much regretted.Now, supposing the fact to be as related, did thefish remain behind, or effect his double migrationto the same spot ? I leave this to be decided by anotherSir Humphrey Davy. It might be so, as theTiny has none of those deadly weirs we saw on theDivlas, and in the freshes the salmon make theleap at Newcastle Emlin. Among others — and heseemed acquainted with all the fons (rivers) andwants (brooks) in the Principality — he was speakingof that fall; and as we did not mean to descend134 A SALMON LEAP.SO far, 1 questioned him as to it, and he describedthe place in great raptures. Drayton, in his Poly-olbion,makes mention of this leap, and says thatthe salmon '* takes his tail in his teeth and bendinglike a bow,Stems the watery tract,When Tiny falling down doth make a cataract."The Weaver's narrative ran thus :I have just returned from an excursion witha party of English gentlemen anglers from ourNewcastle. It is one of the most beautiful spots inWales. The country houses, as we approachedthe town, looked over an island, on which stands agateway and two octagonal towers, a picturesqueruin, and round them flows the river in two broadstreams, and the side-hills on the opposite banksare clothed on all sides with sloping woods. Amile below is the celebrated leap, where the streamhaving been long tranquil, as if to gain strength,rushes to the depth of thirty feet over rough rocksthat seem to preclude all possibility of a salmonmounting the cataract. This, however, is not thecase — for I observed them sometimes failing inthe attempt, and sometimes baring their broadbacks as they jerked themselves over.One of the Sauces (Saxons) called it the Cam-remarkableRUIN. 135brian Staff hausen, which, if his description iscorrect, it deserves to be compared with. The weiris at the bottom, and a neat villa and salting-house,belonging to the proprietor of the fishery, standromantically situated on the left bank, and withina few yards of the deafening fall. A rivulet ofwater, winding from a tunnel, has been artificiallybrought down from the heights to communicatewith the main stream, in order to deceive thefish; and up this narrow channel they push, intheir ignorance or forgetfulness, till they findthemselves precluded from turning, and are thuscaught. None of the salmon exceed ten or twelvepounds. The fishing must be very profitable," headded, " if he might judge from the quantityalready prepared for the market. It is sold thereat6d. per pound salted, and for 3d. fresh, atCarmarthen 2d. dearer, but the price dependsupon the supply."Thus we killed time. The morning was oppressivelysultry and windless. The road led forsome time along the banks of the infant Tiny, tillwe came to a remarkable ruin, one arch of whichis in admirable preservation, and a fine specimenof the Saxon dentated style. I think he told meit had been part of a monastery, but as I am no136 SMALL LAKES.antiquary, I will refer the curious in such mattersto Pennant.My guide called the distance five miles, but itwas at least six to the farthest pool, Llyn Pregnant;that should always be visited first. These lakesare five in number, and are seated in the bottomsof heathery hills, where there are bred a fewgrouse, whose packs no one could better find thanmy friend the Weaver — I warrant him.These pools slope gradually down to water ofthe usual transparent tan. As there are no boats(with the exception of a large sunken one in thelast) I would strongly recommend the taking up ofa coracle, to a person practised in the managementof so ticklish a vehicle, though it would beattended with some risk, in case of an upset, particularlyas some of the lakes are full of weeds.The wind got up with the sun, and I promisedmyself a glorious day's sport, but my companionwas not so sanguine. The first throw I madegave me two fish, but smaller, and of a differentkind from those of Tal y Llyn ; for instead ofbeing silver bellied, and tortoise-shell backed, theywere in bad condition, and black in colour — aninvariable sign of old age, as well as the sort ofclement they inhabit. In fact, I soon found thatA WILD BULL. 137the place was considerably overstocked, and shoulddoubt of its containing a trout of a pound weight.Whilst we were wading up to our thighs, a verylarge bull — (what, another bull ? yes !) — left theherd and came down bellowing to the water's edge.He is selected, the Weaver told me, expressly forhis vice, in order to prevent the poor women fromgleaning the wool the wild sheep (often left unshorn)hang upon the heath, by rubbing themselves. Itwas indeed a savage brute, and would certainlyhave attacked us had we landed; but we continuedour pursuit, paying little attention to hismenaces, whilst the Weaver promised him a bulletthrough the thorax at his next visit, should heplay similar pranks : a consummation devoutly tobe wished.After coasting the windward side of this irregularlake, I was disgusted with the small sizeof our numerous fry, and we proceeded to theother lakes in succession ; but strange to say,though the fish were taking the flies in all directions,neither of us got a single rise. We triedall our flies, besides making one in imitation of asmall and very peculiar mole-coloured gnat onthe water, but in vain.After heavy walking, we came to the fifth and138 FEARS FOR JULIAN.last pool, Llyn Tiny, said to be unfathomable.The trout, I was told, reach here a larger size,and cut red, — a peculiarity, Humphrey observed,at the Began pool, and accounted for perhaps,as here, by the leeches, which are abundant.I was anxious to take one of these fish ; butI threw till my arm was tired, and at last putup my rod in despair.The trout are of no value, owing to the distancefrom any great market-town. Unless it blowshard, it is quite needless to attempt the Tinypools. It must be, besides, a cloudy day. Now apiece of advice ! Take with you your munitionsde bouche, for there is no inn nearer than Contrewhich we reached about four o'clock,having made almost a blank day. Not so Charters,who brought home ten pound of trout ofdelicious quality, as was proved at our " Vespers."We passed a gloomy evening, talking exclusivelyof Julian. The fatal 25th approached, and wefelt, or fancied we felt, a presentiment of someevil to him, and retired earlier than usual.THE TIVY. 139Twenty-sixth DAY.The Tiny. — Marshes. — Intricate course. — A rapid. — A gloriousfish. — Fall in with a new Sportsman. — His description.— Recognition. — His account of himself. — HisYacht. — A Storm in the Adriatic. — Wreck. — Escapefrom drowning. — Built.Tregaron, 26 th June.Started at six o'clock. The Tiny is in its boyhood— but in a vigorous boyhood. It flows in astream, blue, rapid, and containing trout of a considerablesize ; later in the season, salmon. Owingto the long continuation of the spring drought, ithad been little affected, so near its source, by theheavy rains, and was much dwindled from its accustomedvolume of water — but even within amile of the village, Charters had taken somegood fish. The falls are numerous. The runnelsdashed over the broken, rocky beds, and thebanks are so free from wood, that a fly may bethrown anywhere without interruption.140 MARSHES.Behold us then, following the river down. Hadwe known the locale, we should have avoidedgiving the Tiny our company after the first league,and have struck off into the road ; for we thencame to marsh after marsh, through which creptthe sleepy stream, in a still, deep, weedy channel.A more intricate course I never threaded thanthrough the valley for six or seven miles. Theriver had evidently some months before oversteppedits barriers, and covered the whole plain,through which had been cut drains of greatdepth, which it required the full play of the Hen-donAchilles' to leap. Occasionally too, we gotinto a labyrinth of turbaries, when the tremulousnessof the ground betrayed the quagmireyawning below, and threatening to engulph usat every step.We heartily repented not attending to theWeaver's advice, during a three hours' march, inwhich we had no opportunity of making a castwith any chance of success. We, however, atlength emerged from the desolate tract, and onarriving at a bridge, that crossed a by-road, ourfriend assumed a new face. Charters's sport nowbegan. The morning had been overcast, and therain began to fall in heavy showers, but we wereINTRICATE COURSE. 141too good water-spaniels to heed their pelting.He soon called me to his assistance. " Whish,whish !" — I perceived the fish was one of the patriarchs.The rapid where he had been successfullytempted by the bright blood-red berries, was brokenby rocks that gave the water the resemblance of jetor obsidian, Down he went — * whish, whish!' respondedthe multiplier again. Who could havedared to curb or check him ? — " There he is, outof his element, — once, twice, — now wheel up."In a few moments he was lying amid the weedsand grass, and flowers, a worthy study for Murillo,and reminding me of a fine picture ofthat master's, at Sir John Guise's, at Entomb,being the interior of a refectory. Those Monkswith their * magna' days! — Fasting forsooth ! Ionce dined with Cardinal Gonsalvi on a Friday !Our trout was a glorious fish, and must haveweighed, though I did not measure him, threepounds and a half — yes, a glorious fish, I repeat,for this or any water, and the largest we hadtaken of his species in Wales. " Ignoble sport !"would have cried Clericus to Barrington, whenon the banks of the Cone — " throw him in again."Had he been taken even at Dunham, I shouldhave demurred against such a preposterous and142 AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.mistaken act of generosity by this unanswerableobjection : " He had a barb in * his gullet,' andno ' small hook' to pull it."On entering Tregaron we were overtaken by asportsman (for other than a sportsman no onecould mistake him). By his side ran two sandycoloured, wiry-haired Scotch terriers not muchlarger than Persian cats, whose relationship it requiredno pedigree from the Heralds' College tomake out, and a pointer and Newfoundland dog(a retriever) led the van. He was about five feetnine inches in height, remarkably broad and somewhatbowed about the back, round which wasstrapped a double gun, of ponderous calibre andvast bore, and, by way of counterpoise to thebutt, over his fishing-rod, that he balanced on hisright shoulder, was slung an otter's skin ; a knapsackof no ordinary dimensions completed hiscostume. He was a man on whom the Sassenachsquire's gamekeeper at Llandyssel wouldhave looked with a very jaundiced eye.His figure, at the first view, seemed slight, andit was only when analysed that the witness ofthe muscle might be more than guessed at, for hewas unencumbered with a portion of superfluousHIS DESCRIPTION, AND RECOGNITION. 143flesh. There was an elasticity and firmness in hiswalk that seemed to defy fatigue ; and a leagueand an hour, by which they measure distance inSwitzerland, were by no means synonymous withthe pedestrian, as far as I could judge from hispace. His eye was of a peculiar grey. No eyehas so much expression as a grey one; as hasbeen remarked of Lord Byron's, which, like a chameleonshifted its colour according to the feelingthat predominated. Over all his gestures andfigure was thrown an air of manliness, and triedand determined courage strongly characterised hisweather-beaten countenance.I have been thus particular in my description ofthis personage, as I shall have shortly to presenthim to the reader.I scanned him narrowly as he came close, andwho should it be— could I believe my eyes? — butmy old friend who, it may be remembered, wasmy sporting companion in the Maremma, wherewe had so narrow an escape from the hogs. Yes,it was R , a Commander of the royal navy fortwice ten years, and likely so to remain for twiceas many still. But more of this hereafter.Our recognition was mutual, and my hand methis soul commingling in the grasp. I was surprised144 HIS ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF, — HIS YACHT.also to see that Charters and he were not absolutelystrangers to each other, and soon learnt thatR. was the identical Captain who had been thetheme of Salmonius's panegyric for his base exploitsat Aberystwith.After a few of the ordinary questions, withwhich I shall not trouble the reader, I said,I can scarcely believe but that it is yourghost ; when I was at Genoa, I read a long andseemingly authentic account of your beingwrecked in the Bolivar. It was, I think, in thelatter end of the year 1828 or 9.""Ay, ay, sure enough. The tight little Bolivardid strike on that iron-bound coast, and noteven a plank of her was saved. Poor Williamtoo — another hand would not have been amiss.There were only the boy and I on board. A vesselis not well manned in the Adriatic, when, as onan Indian voyage, she has just hands enough toweigh anchor. Not but I had sailed in her forthree years in the Mediterranean with the samecrew in all weathers, but never did I meet withsuch a gale. ^I was at Trieste when it set in. You havebeen in that wind-swept place. It is open to everystorm that blows, especially to the Decanters, andSTORM IN THE ADRIATIC. 145for three days one could hardly walk the streets.But on the fourth it lulled a little, and, tired ofbeing shut up there, I resolved to run down toAncona. I got under weigh, but scarcely had wecleared the port, when the wind headed us apoint and a half, and I ought to have put intoVenice ; but when I thought of the heaviness of theport charges, and the tracasser'ies of the AustrianDogameriy and the difficulty of getting out of theharbour in case the wind continued in the samequarter, I rashly determined to run close-hauledalong the coast.Never was there a better sea-boat, or one thatmade less lee-way than the dear little Bolivar —but she could not walk in the wind's eye. I darednot venture to put her about, for fear of gettinginto the trough of the sea, and being swamped intacking, and had we missed stays, we should havegone right ashore. To take in sail was impossible,so that all we had left for it was to luff herup in the lulls, and trust to Providence for the rest.As evening set in, the gale freshened — it blewa hurricane — we were forced to carry on tokeep her off the lee-shore, and every point thatvise opened out showed us others in succession,against which the waves beat high.VOL. II. L146 WRECK.— ESCAPE FROM DROWNING.She went hissing, half under water, throughit ; occasionally a sea struck us, and swept herfore and aft, and then she trembled like a drunkenman under a heavy blow. Night came on darkand cold, for it was November, and as the seaboiled and foamed in her wake, it shone throughthe pitchy blackness with a phosphoric efflorescence.The last thing I heard was William's exclamation,* breakers a-head,' and almost at the sameinstant the yacht struck : the crash was awful ;a watery column fell upon her bodily like an avalanche,and all that I remember was, that I wasstruggling with the waves.The shore was not very far off, hardly morethan half-a-mile — you know that I am a strongswimmer, for I have often contested with Byronin his own element. I retained all my presenceof mind, and divested myself of my coat, andafter battling long with the billows, covered withbruises, and more dead than alive, I succeeded inscrambling up the rocks, and found myself in theevergreen pine forest of Ravenna, some miles fromany house. But at last I sheltered myself in aforester's hut. Death and I had a hard strugglethat bout."Built. — CAPITAL RIVERS. 147Well, thank God, here you are ! and whathave you been doing since ?"The last two years I have passed in Wales,making Bhilt my head-quarters, and in a few daysI shall return thither. We have there a perfectcolony of half-pay officers — those Epicene ! — andcontrive to live like gentlemen on our demi solde.It is a delightful place — the climate excellent.The rivers and streams abound with trout, and,what is a great advantage, are entirely unpreserved.When the fly-fishing season is over, Iamuse myself with shooting and hunting, and yesterdaykilled this Dourghie, or water-dog, as theWelsh call it. I am now on an otter-expedition ;and having tried the Wye last year, and killed ten,I mean to beat down to Llandyssil, and am promisedeven better sport on this magnificent Tiny,which has not been disturbed for an age. Supposeyou join me."We are ourselves destined to that place, andnever having seen the sport, shall enjoy it themore. We are become glutted with trout-fishing,and it will make a pleasing variety. To-day wemean to halt, — we shall dine together, and youshall recount to Charters some of your adventures."* * *L 2148 R A FRIEND OF LORD BYRON.We dined sumptuously, — and in the evening,under the inspiration of his grog, the naval captaingave us some particulars of how he had beenpassing his life : they will serve better thanWelsh angling, to fill up the leaves of my journal,than which, except a log-book, nothing can wellbe more tedious ; and as those faithful records ofthe wind and weather are sometimes enlivened byan account of the catching of now and then adolphin, or shark, so my rambling diary containsdetails (though they are few and far between) ofsome piscatory exploit. It is not the first time Ihave confessed my unfortunate love of digression,and being turned of forty, I fear I am too old tomend. No one improves, they say, after that age.R 's had been a life of adventure. Hehas the line of truth, as the skilled in palmistrysay, and I can vouch for the exactitude of everycircumstance he narrated. He began thus: —With the exception of two years, passed, as Itold you, in Wales, I have spent most of the lasteighteen of my life on the Continent, many ofthem in company, as you know. Charters, withLord Byron, whom, I believe, I know better thanany other individual — au fond.I left England at the Peace, having justAN AFFAIR OF HONOUR AT PARIS. 149returned from a survey of the coast of Africa.That coast is subject to strange caprices of weather.In the course of twenty-four hours thewind veers entirely round the compass, blowingalmost a gale. To be on a lee-shore in sightof sand-banks covered with stunted bushes, theresort of lions and other savages of the desert,is no very agreeable service. But I did ray dutyto the satisfaction of the Lords of the Admiralty,and when I applied for another command, receiveda refusal.I crossed over with the ol-TroXkot to France,and took up my abode at Paris.I had not been ten days in that metropoliswhen an occurrence, not unfrequent at that time,an affair of honour, the only one I was ever engagedin, happened to me.A French officer of infantry, who had beenconfined in one of our prison ships for some yearsand prison-ships they were, in every sense of theword, it is true, for the unhappy prisoners of warunderwent the most dreadful privations and miserieshuman nature is capable of supporting, —just released from' his confinement, had rejoinedhis old regiment then in the environs of Paris.Burning with animosity towards the English150 AN AFFAIR OF HONOUR.nationally and individually, he was resolved towreak his vengeance, and to wash away his indignitiesin the blood of the first British officerhe should recognize as such.He chose as the likeliest plan for meeting withsuch an antagonist the Tuileries Gardens, and Iwas the individual whom he singled out. Ihad on a military blue stout coat ; to whicharticle of dress I am indebted for the honourof his acquaintance. I have him still in mymind's eye. He was a short emaciated man ofabout forty. To make his skeleton person stillmore conspicuous, he was dressed in clothes thatcompletely fitted his figure, and his cadaverousface was surmounted by a narrow-rimmed hatalmost pointed in front.This worthy had been concerned, it is said, inno less than twenty duels, in all of which he hadbeen victor, and looked upon the life of a man,especially one of our nation, as that of a worm.Such was the scarecrow who at two o'clock inafine spring morning, in the Garden of the Tuileries,crowded with fashionables of all countries,and numbers of our fair countrywomen, chose tocome up to me in an avenue to the right ofthe main walk, and with a baboon grimace to callAN AFFAIR OF HONOUR. 151me chien Anglais, and not only to shake his caneover me, but to touch me with it.My father was a Welshman, and I have somewhatof the Fluellin in me. I made a rush athim, and planted my fist, whose force was hardlyless powerful at that time than the kick of ahorse, under his jaw-bone, and dropped him atonce."Several of his compatriots came up, seeinghim fall. * Monsieur,' I said to him, * I am notyet satisfied. You have insulted me grossly andpublicly. Nothing but your life can be a reparationfor the affront. Here is my card — yours, sir.*Whether the blow had stupefied his faculties,or that he thought he had found a wrong sujetto deal with, I know not, but I could obtain noanswer, and being lifted up by two of his friends,he was conveyed, or rather towed out of the gardens.I remained in Paris for three weeks, expectingdaily to hear from my aggressor, and endeavouring,through my acquaintance, and every channel Icould think of, to learn his name and address, butinvain.I was dining one day at the Trois Frees ,in one of the smaller rooms, with an152 A MEETING.English party, and over our wine we were discussingfully the circumstances of the affair, andbranding the pseudo knight-errant with the titleof poltroon, when an officer-like middle-aged man,whom I had not before observed, rose from thenext table, and begged to have a few words withme aside.He spoke very good English, and said, * Sir,I am the colonel of the regiment, now stationedat Versailles, and suspect that the personof whom you have been speaking belongs tomy corps. I have been listening involuntarily toyour story : it has reached me for the first timeto-day. One of my captains has been on the sicklist for some time with a broken jaw, and I havelittle doubt that he was your antagonist. If itprove so, and you will give me your card, I willsee that you shall shortly have the satisfaction yourequire.'Two days only had elapsed when I received avisit from the Colonel. He said, ' I am come tosettle the preliminaries of an affair between youand Captain . The choice of weapons isyours, as you are the challenger.'I named pistols, and the next morning we metin the Bois de Bologna.TERMS OF DUEL. 153The ground marked out was thirty-five paces.The conditions were that at a given signal theparties were to advance, the pistols pointed ateach other, and to fire when they pleased. Thismode of fighting was novel to me. I was not atthat time a great adept at the pistol, though Ihave since practised under Byron, and a morefamous shot even than he, an extraordinary, perhapsone of the most extraordinary characters, ofthe age, who accompanied him to Greece, whoselife has been a tissue of adventures so rare andstrange, that compared with them reality becomesfiction, and the pictures drawn by the greatestnovelists of our times, or of any times, seem pale,lifeless, and inanimate copies. 'But this is along parenthesis. Knowing the uncertainty ofmy hand, I was determined to wait, though Iknew my antagonist to be a dead shot.Whether it were that he was agitated by tooardent a spirit of revenge, or was apprehensive ofmy fire, from having had a foretaste of my coolnessand presence of mind, he, contrary to his usualpractice of trusting to his opponent's missing himfor his skeleton form presented an edge not muchbroader than that of a sabre — on this occasion,after progressing five paces, stopped short. It was154 THE RESULT.an infringement of the rule laid down, — n'im-porch — he took a deliberate aim at me.I heard the click of his pistol, and the ball,though directed with a firm and deadly aim, asluck would have it, struck one of the metal buttonson the breast of my coat, and glanced off, givingme a slight shock. Astonished and panic-struckat having, as he thought, missed me, he stoodstill, whilst I steadily advanced till I was at ourusual distance of twelve paces. I then took myfire. My direction was good — bang — he fell, andwas immediately borne off the ground by hisseconds.I also returned to my apartment in the RueVienne.In the evening I sent to enquire into the natureof the wound.The ball had broken his right arm, much shatteringthe elbow. It 'had, however, been extracted,and a few months afterwards, when I wasin Switzerland, I learnt that he would never againhave the use of it. Thus he had to thank himselffor a broken jaw and a stiff arm. He found inme an awkward subject to deal with. Indeed,most of the duels (and they were of daily occurrence)that took place at that time, were infavour of our compatriots.THE NAVAL SERVICE. 155This made no noise at the time, and did notcome under the cognizance of the police.Soon after this rencontre I visited the Southof France. There I made surveys, by stealth, ofseveral of the great sea-ports, and just as I hadfinished a drawing of the port of Marseilles,was one night visited by gens-d'armes. My paperswere seized, and I lodged in prison. I was,however, soon released, through the interferenceof our consul, and, having secreted the originalsketch of the works and harbour, completed asecond survey some time after at Geneva on alarger scale, and sent it to the Board.One might suppose that I had now some claimson them for employment, but all my applicationswere replied to or negatived, and I was at lastcoquetted with to retire from the service — to makeway, no doubt, for some sprig of nobility, or son ofsome naval hero, in whom no other merit than hisgenealogy is now required. They are sailors byinstinct — brave by prescription. Should there beanother American war, we shall see what figurethese beardless boy-captains will cut."The commander was becoming lachrymose, andwe soon after retired, engaging to hunt the otterat an early hour in the morning.156 START FOR OTTER-HUNT.Twenty-seventh DAY.Start for Otter-Hunt. — Vixen and Viper. — Scenery of theTiny. — Otter-Haunt. — A Sprain, — Turn-out on Otter.Tregaron, 27th June.Omne ignotum pro magnifico est," says someone,but who I forget. A strange sentiment toapply to an otter-hunt.We got under weigh, as the captain wouldhave said, at twilight; and our eagerness for thisunknown sport was whetted by stories on stories,which he graphically told, of several of the featsperformed by Vixen and Viper, and their perilous'scapes from the jaws of sundry of these amphibioussavages. Each of us was armed with a harpoon.The shafts were nearly eight feet long,and had been attached by a carpenter over nightSCENERY OF THE TIVY. 157to spear-heads, forming part and parcel of mynaval friend's implements of warfare. The Tinybreathed freshness and health. We followedits course buoyant and gay as the wild riverwe accompanied. What companionship is therenot in a trout stream ! How often have I felt,during a whole day, what Shakspeare has sobeautifully expressed, that " a solitude is populousenough." What a calm and soothing medicinedoes the mind drink in from Nature — fromsuch scenes !For some miles the banks were little wooded,but at length a double precipice of gnarledoaks, their trunks hidden by the thickness ofthe foliage, and forming, as Madame de Steelsays of the pines in the Villa Pamphili atRome, a green meadow in the air, almostmet in the narrowed bed, and threw a deeperblackness on the water, now scarcely flowingthrough the gorge. The river was only assumingstrength for exerting its energies, for rudemasses of rocks, thrown together in wild confusionby some mighty inundation, soon encumberedthe channel, and where an isolated cragrose pyramidically above the rest — the current,indignant at being confined, rushed with mad158 OTTER-HAUNT.impetuosity, boiling and foaming, and setting upits many voices of exultation, as though theywere chanting a hymn of liberty.Open meadows succeeded, fringed here andthere with alders, through which the morningsun gleamed on the broad quiet stream, that, asit sparkled and flashed like silver, murmuredforth a correspondent delight to that in whichour drenched spirits sympathized.We had as yet seen no trace of our prey.They are shy creatures, and avoid the resorts ofmen. Our little terriers seemed to be acquaintedwith this peculiarity in their natural history, foras yet they had kept at their master's heels, andhad not thought it worth while to draw. Wecame at last to an unfrequented, untrackedregion, a more likely haunt. One side was denudedof wood, and on the other a steep bankran shelving down to the river's edge, clothedwith underwood, so closely intertwined as hardlyto admit of the dogs penetrating it, whilsttwo or three alders dipped themselves, andshowed their portraiture in ' leaf and lineamentwith more than truth expressed,' in the glassymirror.It was just such a spot as otters would chooseA Sprain. — TURN OUT AN OTTER. 159for their kennels; and R soon descried asprain, that appeared fresh. He immediatelyhied in the dogs. Their rough wiry skinsseemed impenetrable to the thorns and brambles,and they began to beat actively among thebriar-work.It was soon surmised that they were on thescent of the game ; and R , who was acquaintedwith their habits, said —They are on an otter ! Look out ! theyare not far from him ! Push him out. Vixen !At him. Viper !"He had hardly spoken, when a rustling washeard ; the leaves trembled and shook, and adog-otter, of prodigious size, rushed from hiscouch among the roots of the alders, and tookto the water, the two terriers close behind. Iwas near enough to make particular observationof the brute. His head, rounded and slightlyflattened in front, was gigantic for one of hisspecies, being twice the size of that of theanimal I had seen the day before, slung overR 's shoulder. The bristles of his whiskerswere long and stiff, his ears very short, andhis tail appeared to be strong, pointed, andsomewhat depressed. His sleek, dark, glossy160 THE OTTER-HUNT.skin, seemed to be impregnated by the element,through which his membranous clawsurged him with the velocity of a fish.There cannot be a finer spot," said R ,for a successful chase. Once drive him onthe opposite side, and he will find it difficult tohide himself, and must be our's. You perceivethat this covert does not extend far ; all isnearly open on the other bank, and our aimmust be to prevent his getting back. Welldone. Vixen !"The dogs wanted no encouragement. Whenthe otter dived, they dived also ; and such amonster was he in size, that when he rose totake breath he could hardly at first be distinguishedfrom the terriers.R had waded the river ; and the dourghiewas for some time lost, the dogs swimminground and round, anxiously looking about forhis reappearance. He did not remain manyminutes invisible ; the fresh-water seal soonshowed himself again. This time he was notabove fifteen yards from where R wasposted, but he was afraid of throwing his harpoon,for fear of spearing Vixen, so close did herise to her.THE OTTER-HUNT. l6lHe now mounted the bank, and crossed ameadow, where he was soon hid from viewamong the high grass. But the scent of anotter is extremely strong, so much so that it issaid to remain for many hours.Tally ! He has again taken to the water,and concealed himself in one of his old holts, orburrows, under the bank."It was some time before we could persuadehim, by shaking the ground, to stir from hiswell-known retreat. But he again bolted ; andjust as he was about to land on our side, wasprevented from so doing by seeing us. I threwmy harpoon, and missed him. He again dived,and we thought we had lost him, but he atlength came up, and was so much exhaustedfrom being hard pushed, and remaining so longunder water, that he was forced to make for thesame shore to take breath, and having reacheda bush, that projected over the stream, andscreened him from our sight, prepared to standat bay. He had posted himself with his back insome old rat-holes, and, his flanks protected bytwo stumps of trees, he presented his front to hisenemies, only one of whom could come at him atVOL. II. M162 THE OTTER-HUNT.a time. He showed very good generalship, andhad all the advantage of position.The contest promised to be a severe one.Vixen was, as I said, in advance, and on her thebrunt of the onslaught, the odds much againsther, fell, for she was forced to swim in order toget at the foe. She was soon in upon him, andpinned him by the neck, a favourite point ofattack of her's, as I afterwards heard from hermaster ; but the powerful animal soon shook heroff, and seized her in turn in his terrific jaws.No animal is so hard-biting as an otter.Their mouths are armed with teeth sharp asneedles, and wherever they make good theirhold, the breadth of their nostrils enables themto retain it like bulldogs. None but a veryvarmint dog, to borrow a phrase of Charters'sAmazon, when severely punished, will face oneof these water-weasels a second time. Not soVixen, who, extricating herself from his gripe,returned with fresh courage to the conflict.Owing to the projection of the bank, and thethick bush overhanging the water, R couldnot come to the assistance of his little favourite,and stood, not without some misgivings as tothe result, within a few paces of the combatants.THE OTTER-HUNT. — VIXEN. 163The battle was a terrific one, and long doubtful; but at length the dourghie seized Vixen bythe throat, and made his fangs meet in herjugular vein. The water was dyed with blood.The bitch gave a short low howl of agony, andin a few moments we saw her extended as ifdying, on her back, and borne down with thecurrent.R forgetting the otter in his anxiety for hislittle pet, rushed into the water up to his middleand succeeded in reaching and bearing her out,when he laid her on the grass and endeavouredto stanch the blood with his handkerchief.In the mean while the dourghie dashed frombehind the bank where he had effected somuch mischief, himself evidently the worse forthe affray, and, closely followed by Viper, recrossedthe stream, and succeeded, though withdifficulty, in gaining a stronger position thanever among the roots of some hawthorns, whenceR did not attempt to dislodge him, for hewas so much affected at the piteous state ofVixen, that taking her up in his arms he calledoff Viper, and we made the best of our way backto Tregaron.The sufferings of the little creature were164 THE WOUNDED TERRIER.great, but she was too game to show them bywhining, or any outward expression of pain.The blood kept fast oozing from her neckthough tightly bandaged.On our arrival at the inn, having washed itwith brandy, we made a bed for the patientin a corner of the room, and she soon fell into adeep sleep.The affection of the two terriers for eachother was such as few human beings show, andmight have been a lesson for humanity. Viperlay down by Vixen, and by low whines told theexcess of his grief, and endeavoured to lick themortal wound. He could not be induced totake any food, or to quit her side.LORD BYRON. 16STwenty-seventh DAY.(continued.)A Page out of R 's Book. — Lord Byron. — Furore forFishing — The Avon. — Geneva. — Rhone Angling. — Characterof some Vaudois Paysans. — Republics. — GenevaUniversity. — Lac Leman. — A Cockleshell Boat. — Byronand Shelley. — Evenings at Diodati. — Byron. — Society ofVenice. — English Abroad.If I were to issue a bulletin of Vixen's health,^ it would hold out small hopes of her recovery.In the evening we requested the Commanderto dictate to us another page out of the bookof his eventful life, and Charters was very anxiousto learn, among the many conflicting opinionsrespecting that strange phenomenon Lord Byron,what R 's was.He always seemed to me to have taken avery dark estimate of his character; it is theonly point in which I have ever had reason tosuspect the freedom from bias and prejudice in166 FURORE FOR FISHING. — THE AVON.his opinions. We will let him, however, speakfor himself; like all conteurs he began in a verydesultory way, and his innumerable I's showedthat the first person singular (himself) was a farmore important one than the third, (Byron).** My furore, as the Italians say, has beensporting of all kinds, and I have been particularlyaddicted to angling, indeed to all sorts offishing. To give you an idea of my enthusiasticlove of it when a boy ; I had got me a rod withswivels and minnow-tackle rigged out for me bya friend of my father's. I continued to spin,hour after hour, without a run, for the skywas of a deep, almost an Italian blue, andscarcely a ripple broke the surface of the water,itself so transpicuous, that the bottom was visibleat the greatest depth. I espied at last a largetrout lying behind a projecting bank as if asleep.There he remained for some time unattracted byall I could do to awaken his attention ; but towardsevening he set out on the feed, and began- beating in zig-zags (as they do) like a pointer inthe search of game. My silver bait enticed him,and I took the fish by a miracle. He was somuch exhausted that I thought him dead, andlaid him on the shelving river-side upon a tuft ofGENEVA. — RHONE ANGLING. 16?withered grass, when he suddenly made a springand rolled down — down till he plumped into hisnative element. When I saw my hard-earnedprize lost, I stood and stamped in childish rageat my folly, and it ended in my throwing myselfinto the Avon, for there I was angling. It wasdeep and was nearly proving my grave ; but withinfinite exertion, for I could scarcely swim, Isucceeded, half-drowned, in climbing up the bank.The scene recurs to me as though it happenedyesterday.From France I took up my residence duringthe summer and autumn of 1815 at Geneva;Shelley and Lord Byron were there, but accidentonly made me acquainted with them. I nameShelley first, not only as he was the greater poet,but the better man. I will introduce you tothem presently."The difficulty of the angling in the Rhonewas to me a great temptation, and I might boastof a success that none other, native or foreigner,ever could. My plan was to cross the bridgesand, having obtained leave to fish in one of thecampagnes on the banks of that noble stream, topass the whole day there, taking with me myprovisions in a wallet, and either with fly or168 CHARACTER OF SOME VAUDOIS PAYSANS.minnow, or rather with a small perch, at someoneof the twelve hours, either morning or evening,my perseverance was always crowned with goodfortune. The envy of the Genoese, when acquaintedwith it, was extreme ; they surpass allpeople I have ever met with in evil dispositions :no — the Vaudois are a match for them."One specimen of these republicans will suffice.I had gone to angle in a river, the name ofwhich I now forget, at the foot of Les Rousses,the great pass into France ; yes, now I recollect itit is called the Bonne ; the natives of the villagewhence I set out had never seen fly thrown, andcame out to laugh at the ' Anglais.' But whenI took trout after trout, till my basket wouldhold no more, their derision turned into a furyof jealousy, and they began to pelt my flies, andfrom pelting them, finding I still continued, notwithstanding,to take fish, attacked me with thesame weapons, and would have certainly stonedme to death had I not left the stream.I however repeated my sport the next day ;two of the stoutest paysans came down andsacred me. You have had one specimen of myprowess at the pugilistic art! I fought themboth, and gave them a tremendous drubbing ;REPUBLICS. 169and, what do you think ! — was cited before theJuge du Pays' for an assault, and actually finedfive Napoleons.* Such is the justice foreignersmeet with in that land of liberty."You seem to be no friend to republics."What have all been ? Look at Athens ;look at Florence, Genoa, Venice : do they notteach a repetition of the same story — the insolenceand lawlessness of the many, or the strugglesof overgrown wealth for power."The latter case, at least, does not apply tothe Swiss republics."Reside in one for six months, and you willbe disenchanted, and never after, as Shelley says,talk Utopias.' ""But Geneva, the bulwark and outwork ofProtestantism ; the great university — "Yes, it concentred in itself more than enoughof the over-righteous — well sobriquet with thetitle of mothers — and many of the sons of ournobles and gentlemen finish their educationthere : it had at that time within its walls sevensimilar circumstance occurred to Lord , at Geneva,who, in addition to the fine, was ordered to quit thecanton in twenty-four hours. His reply was, " I will be outof it in ten minutes !" — E.170 GENEVA UNIVERSITY.oral of the petty Princes of Germany, — and thattraitor to the cause of liberty, Carignan, is a specimenof what its professors inculcate. But whatdo the students learn ? I never met with onewho did not leave behind the little he hadbrought with him : and what did they acquire inits place ? — a smattering of botany gleaned fromthe lecture-room — a deep insight into dissipation; execrable French picked up at the conversazioneof a few soi-disant aristocrats, who keeppensions, the last of the ailes de pigeon. Nowhereis nobility so disgusting as in these petty states.Castes prevail in Geneva to an extent unknownanywhere but among the Hindoo; no talent,no wealth, no merit can break through thebarrier of birth. Yes! strange enough, afemale can ennoble ; if she make a mesalliance,she can elevate her husband into sufferance ; butif a patrician marry a plebeian he is for ever excludedfrom society ; a morus aeneas is built upagainst him, which nothing can break down ; the'Rue basse' and the * Treille' might as well attemptto form a junction."And yet you seem to have been partial toGeneva."Yes, I have passed halcyon days there ; itLAC LEMAN. — A COCKLESHELL BOAT. 171has been mine to traverse and explore everycreek and winding of that magnificent basinLac Leman,' for which I entertain a passion,that no other inanimate object (admirer andlover as I am of Nature) ever inspired in me.To watch the sun set behind the piny Jura ;to see it long after it sank beneath the horizonglowing in roses upon the domes and palaces ofsnow ; to watch their portraiture in the bluemirror, till they assumed the paleness of death,and left a melancholy like that we feel at parting(though with the certainty of meeting again)with some object of our idolatry — these were mydelights."But — Byron. You told us your acquaintancewas accidental?"I had got sent me from Genoa a skiff,built in the Darken by a friend, who had chargeof the navy-architectural department. Shecame on the top of the Diligence, and was, asyou may imagine, not large, being about eightfeet long, keeled and clinker-built, and riggedwith Latine sails, in the manner of the feluccas,and indeed the barks, at Geneva.In this fragile machine, to the wonder ofthe natives, I used to brave almost all weathers.172 BYRON AND SHELLEY.and walk away from their flat-bottomed batteau.One day I was overtaken by a violent ' Juan,' orwind from the Jura, and being unable to beatagainst the severe wet squalls, thought to takerefuge in a small port, almost the last, on theMont Blanc side of the lake; it belonged toMont Allege, Shelley's campagne. On roundingthe point of the wall, I observed two persons,whom I recognised as that young poet andByron. They were about to step on board theirboat — and this was the origin of an acquaintancethat only ended with their deaths."What was Byron's appearance at this time ?"Anything but what I expected, from a portraitI had seen of the bard. * The likeness theworld drew of him was a fancy one. His figurewas anything but good. It was short, and devoidof symmetry ; his voice was effeminate andwithout compass ; and then there was an affectationin the way in which he modulated itstones. Shelley's was equally extraordinary, be-notto mention several painters, two sculptors of greatrepute have made busts of Byron. Thorwaldsen's, (or threeyears must have changed him indeed) never could have beena likeness. It is impossible to deny this merit to Bertolini's,but there is no soul in it — none of the poetry of marble — itwants the Promethean spark. — Ed.EVENINGS AT DIODATI. 173ing what I should call a cracked soprano. Wehad a very animated conversation, and it endedin the two friends giving up their water-party,and his lordship's inviting me to Diodati, thatstood commanding the port, and separated fromit by a sloping vineyard. We passed a pleasantevening ; and I frequently renewed my visits toColigny. Perhaps that was the beau ideal ofsociety. Our days were passed on the lake, insauntering along its banks till the shades ofevening set in ; then Shelley would read to ushis favourite poets Dante or Petrarch, or explainpassages from that romantic and wilddrama of Goethe, whence Byron drew the inspirationof Manfred, or he would charm away thenight in recounting his adventures in those landswhere he passed the first days of his travels, andindulge in dreams (such we then thought them)of the independence of Greece. Those wereglorious hours."Was Byron at that time the misanthropeChildee Harold' would lead us to suppose ?"The Byron of Geneva and the Byron of Englandand Italy were widely different persons. Certainfamily affairs, and the dilapidated state of hisfinances, caused by a long course of extrava-174 BYRON.gance, had produced in him a despondencysometimes bordering on madness. But he wassuffering from wounded pride rather than hurtaffections; from a morbid sensitiveness ratherthan a healthful sensibility. He had more of themisanthropy of the snarling Apemantus, than theinjured Timon — the difference between a hatredof his species and their vices. In fact he possessednothing of that within —Quod se sibi redit amlcum,Quod pure tranquillity."Never were there such different accounts asare given of his person. I have heard fromsome, that, as to his feet, one could hardly bedistinguished from the other in make or shape."** Much was done by Sheldrake towardsstraightening them. An Aberdeen schoolfellowof his told me, that when he was young theywere both turned inwards. A Harrow womansaid, that one leg was shorter than the other,and that he used to wear a patten on it atschool. There seems to be as great uncertaintyon this subject as on his character, which hisbiographers have found irreconcilable ; in fact,he was a riddle, as difficult to solve as theSphinx's."BYRON. 175He had the character, when he left England,of being remarkably handsome ; his complexionruddy ; his hair dark-brown, and glossy, andfull of curls as the Anxious's, or Hyperion's ;his forehead expansive ; his eyes possessing wonderfulfire and expression."If so, he must have much altered, marvellously.The greatest change, however, tookplace in him in a few months at Venice, where Isaw him in 1818. I should hardly have knownhim. The life he led there surpassed Rochester'sor Fables's, and fitted him well for theBolgi of the * Inferno,' into which Dante plungesthose immersed in such degrading pursuits as hethen indulged in. As Chesterfield said of Boling-broke,his youth was there distracted by thetumult and storm of pleasures in which he mostlicentiously triumphed, disdaining all decorum.His fine imagination often heated and exhaustedhis body in celebrating and deifying the prostituteof the night, and his convivial joys werepushed to all the extravagance of frantic Bacchanals.His passions impaired both his understandingand his character.Venice is a disagreeable winter residence,many of the palaces have no chimneys. The176 SOCIETY OF VENICE. — ENGLISH ABROAD.floors are mostly of stone, the cold intense, orthe atmosphere surcharged with vapour. Theadvantage of the place in Byron's view of it was,that he could pass months there without beingseen or known. The gondolas are like oneanother. Sometimes, it is true, he went to theconversazione ; but few Englishmen have theentree. The society of Venice is, however, perhapspreferable to that of any other city in Italy.The women are, some of them, highly educated,and can converse on other topics than the weather,the opera, or the last Parisian fashions.I like to hear them talk their ' soft bastardLatin,' and they are in general good musicians.Their beauty has been much exaggerated, orthey are become degenerate by constant intermarriages,and their complexions, like their pictures,are somewhat tires au noir. But a belleis a belle to the end of the chapter, and does notwant admirers or lovers up to seventy. WitnessMadame B , &c.Of the sex he held very strange opinions, andhad a horror of ' Blue-Belles.' I remember hisdesignating the female English society in theItalian towns thus: — *It consists of mothers withdaughters in the despair of virginity, 'out' forENGLISH LADIES ABROAD. 177many seasons in London ; and who having gonethe round of Brighton, Bath, and Cheltenham,and other watering places, and figured next atrace-balls, hunting balls, and that capital contrivancefor match-making, archery-meetings ;are now on the look-out to entrap some inexperiencedyoungster, raw from college, ona continental tour ; — old maids, who hunt incouples — Blue-stocking misses, collecting materialsfor books of travels. English women haveall the same national propensity to quarrel ; buton the Continent the points of contact are drawncloser, the sources of jealousy more abundant — •this amiable weakness is called therefore intomore continued exercise, and it is rare for anytwo families to remain a winter in the samecity without breaking out into open rupture.Precedence is one of the great rocks on whichthey split. I once wrote to one of your compatriotesfor the character of a servant. Her answerwas, that she discharged him because he neverwould hand the tea to the ladies according totheir rank. Of this vagrant tribe I have a horror.And who has not 1It was the time of the Carnival, whenintrigue is the very soul of both sexes amongVOL. II. N178 THE CARNIVAL. — BYRON AT PISA.the Italians. Lovers, who have sighed in devotionalconstancy for months at the churches,now, beneath the convenient black of the Domino,plead their passion, and reap the rewardof their sighs. The mask spares the blushes ofyielding virtue — makes bold the timid, andeloquent the silent. Byron was one of the initiatedin the mysteries. He was then deadlypale, of a leaden hue. Harlowe's portrait ofhim could never have been in the slightest degreea resemblance***' You saw him afterwards at Pisa ?"Yes, in 1820. He had then grown grosslycorpulent, ' vulgarly fat.' His palace on the Lung'Arno was a specimen of the Italian palazzo, large,gloomy, and uncomfortable. Below was a stonehall that struck with the chill of a crypt or catacomb,which its arched roof resembled. A perpendicularflight of steps led to the primo pianoor piano nobile, guarded by Lion. A narrow corridor,which was his den, conducted to anotherdark anti-cavern, to the end of which the eyecould hardly reach. I found him in his sanctum.The walls of it were stained, and against themhung a picture of Ugolino, in the * Torre dellafame,' the work of one of the Guiccioli's sisters,BYRON AT PISA. 179and a miniature of Ada. The apartment hadneither carpet nor mat, and an arm and a fewother chairs formed, with a table, the ensembleof the furniture ; unless some boxes and saddlebagsin one corner might bear such a denomination.I there found him a laughing philosopher— a Don Juan.His talk at that time was a dilution of hisletters, being full of persiflage, and aboundingin humour that was not wit. He always remindedme of Voltaire, to whom he wouldhave thought it the greatest of compliments tobe compared, and if there was one writer morethan another whom Byron admired, perhapsenvied, (for he was even jealous of Shakspeare),it was the author of Candide. Like Voltaire, henever argued, looking upon converse as a relaxation,not a toil of mind ; or he might think that reasoningsterilized the fancy, and rendered less vividthe imaginative faculties. Both possessed the samespeculative, I was nearly saying, sceptical turn ofmind ; the same power of changing at will thesubject from the grave to the gay; the samemastery over the sublime, the pathetic, and thecomic — no! in one particular he differed fromVoltaire, he never scoffed at religion. His organN 2180 ENGLISH DEFINITION OF FRIENDSHIP.of veneration was strongly developed, and hadhe returned to England, he would, I have littledoubt, have died as Rochester died, and asTommy Little lives — in the odour of sanctity.He was a disciple of La Rochefoucault and LaBuyers, and had no faith in virtue for its ownsake — in love, unde vested of the animal passion ;or of friendship, if disinterestedness and self-sacrificeform its essentials. Friendship, he usedto say, according to an Englishman's definition,means men eating and drinking together ; and hefrequently quoted (no one more echoed himself)Walpole's bon want, who, having lost his friend,said, ' I will go to the club and find another.'At Geneva he was a great dandy, but hisdress at this time resembled more that ofsome Bengal officer in musty than an Englishnobleman. His clothes were of a strangeand anything but a Stilts cut, and were quiteinnocent of a fit. He wore a green redingote, withmetal buttons, hanging below the calf of the leg,whose nap betrayed considerable antiquity ; awhite waistcoat very short, from having shrunkin many a year's washing, sailor-like blue pantaloons,and between them and the waistcoat wasappended an immense bunch of seals.BYRON'S STUD. 181His face, that was pallid and fleshy, betrayedno signs of a single hair, being closely shaved uptohis ears, giving his visage an unmanly and unbecomingappearance, rendered still more so bythe downward fold in his collar, and the lownessof his white cravat, that showed a considerableportion of his neck, of whose bull thickness hewas not a little vain.In the afternoon we rode together. Thoughthe Casting was only distant two miles, wherethere is excellent turf to gallop on, and beyonda pine forest, through which roads are cut ofgreat extent, bordering the sea, it was strangethat he should invariably take the same monotonousround.His stable was at this time numerouslythough not very nobly supplied ; and where hepicked up such a set of dog-horses is amazing.The animal that carried him was loaded with fat,and resembled what we call a Flanders mare.She was encumbered with a hussar saddle andholsters, a standing martingale, and breast-plats.Though skittish, she was only remarkable for thelowness of her action, and, what made her a favouritewith her master, the consequent ease of herpace, the amble, her ordinary one. A brown182 BYRON'S STUD.gawky leggy Rozinante, very long in the tooth,and showing every bone in his skin, was generallyridden by his courier, though occasionally,by way of variety, and to show the extent ofthe stud, he was mounted on a black, entire,forest pony, who had acquired the mauvaisehabitude of having his own way, and would frequentlytake it into his capricious head to quit,the cavalcade, and return to his stable. His owncalash horses were of the true Italian breed —their years might not be conjectured — and theycould never have been whipped into a ten-milestage.The pair he lent the Guiccioli were betterto look at than to go. These we met with hisCoupe ' and the fair Ravennese en route, andstopped to hold a short parley with the Confess.When she was gone, he said, * I loved her forthree weeks. What a red-headed thing it is !I am much obliged to Lady Byron becauseI cannot marry while she lives!' She littleknew that the object of her Lord's visits tothe farm was a rustic divinity, called Francesca,who might be about eighteen or nineteen.She was an Italian in face, form, and figure. Herhair was black as jet, and through her clearA TUSCAN Contains. 183brown complexion shone the light of health, anda certain expression. Shyness is not the characteristicof the Tuscan ' Contained and this girlhad sufficient self-possession, for, after presentingher bouquet, she would put herself by Byron'sside, and remain a looker-on during the pistolpractice. The spot is present to my memory. Itis about two miles from the Florence Gate, shutout from the road by fruit-trees, and an outhousethat received the balls. On one side was thefarm-house.We fired at scud and pieces of five paul,giving the farmer the counterpart of thosestruck, which Byron kept as trophies.There were few days that the Contain didnot receive several of these coins, a very seasonablerent for the use of his orchard, and no smalltax on the party. Byron had some excellentpairs of pistols, about most of which there werehistories, and their merit in his eyes was that theimplements had been deadly in the hands of theirformer owners.It was always a matter of wonder to me, howByron ever struck the mark. His aim was long,and his hand trembled as though he had St.Vitus's dance. Shelley's was firmness itself, and184 hothouse's illustrations.his shots quite as good as Byron's. He tooka boyish interest in the sport, and would, afterthe discharge of the pistol, run up to see the successof it, and was as delighted as a child at agood shot.Byron's duelling stories were numerous.I have heard him more than once tell of hisrencontre with an ex-flogging Secretary at War,who, he used to say, was a man without aspark imagination, and a very doubtful patriot.He knew mankind well. I am told that his oldfellow-traveller denies the fact of the duel.Speaking of his illustrations of Childee Harold,Byron observed, * That specimens of worsestyle do not exist in our language, and have defiedtranslation in any other.' He was right.The air of pedantry and self-sufficiency — theaffectation of learning, the fruit of some halfdozen walks through Rome, with Nibbi theCicerone — he solemn dogmatism unleavened byone spark of genius to lighten the dough, whichreign through them, is very remarkable. As aspecimen of confusion of metaphors, Byronpointed out a passage, in which the commentatorspeaks of Eustace. It begins with ' The stylewhich,* &c. ; but I refer my readers and CobbettDALLAS's VISION OF JUDGMENT. 185to the original. It will be worth more than halfa dozen King's Speeches to him in the next editionof his Grammar."Dallas's * Correspondance, &c.' is not moredull, I observed (for I know nothing of Englishbooks but through translations); the old twaddlertalks with much complacency on the society LordByron is to meet in heaven. The passage iscurious : —' Si dans Autre monde on conserve la memoiredes choses terrestres. Lord Holland, Rogers,Davies, et HobkousCy — (what a partie quarrel !) —avec la generosity des esprits celestes (si toutefoisles leurs le deviennent) (unkind parenthesis !) pardonnerontsans doute au poete estonn^ (astonishedat what ? — finding himself in such company?) — avec les ouvrages duquel leurs nomsdoivent descendre le torrent des ages. Lui et eu.vrecevront aussi une signe attention de ma partdans cette occasion"How condescending! I have frequentlythought that Byron's society at Pisa pleasedhim better than any he met with on the Continent.He looked forward to our daily visitsas a recreation after his severe poetical labours.Most of his friends there had seen much of186 ALLEGRA.the world, were fond of literature, and capableof appreciating his talents, and Shelley'svaried and transcendant acquirements proveda never-failing source of conversations the mostanimating. His daily regular rides were a stimulus,and a source of health to him'*Pisa," I remarked, " is indeed a delightfulwinter residence. The climate is a perpetualspring. The sunsets rival Titian's in gorgeousness.Often and often have I stood with Byronat a window of the Lanfranc, gazing on theArno, when tit was a flood of glory, reflectedfrom clouds of crimson and gold. Insensibleto the beauties of nature must the heart be, unmovedwith wonder and delight at the spectacle."When I was there," continued R ,news came of Allegra's death. Byron sent directionsthat her corpse should be transmitted toDrury, and buried at Harrow, where it nowlies. It was a strange caprice to commit toEnglish ground, one whose fortune was to havebeen forfeited in case she married a person ofthat nation. He told me it was his intention tohave divided his property equally between Adaand her, had she lived ; though only a few weeksA RUSSIAN COTERIE. 187before, he, by a codicil to his will, bequeathedher, with the condition I mentioned, five thousandpounds, leaving the bulk of his estates tohis sister, and disinheriting Miss Byron.At Florence I met several times the motherof this child, then living en pension. She was abrunette, with very dark hair and eyes thatflashed with the fire of intelligence, and mighthave been taken for an Italian. Her history wasa profound secret. As she possessed considerabletalents — spoke French and Italian, particularlythe latter, with all its nuances and niceties, shewas much courted by the Russian coterie, anumerous and fashionable one in that city.Though not strictly handsome, she was animatedand attractive, and possessed an esprit de societyrare among our countrywomen. She might beabout twenty-five or twenty-six, and supposingme unacquainted with the particulars of her unfortunateconnection with Byron, never mentionedhis name, or that of her daughter.*' No part of his conduct is more mysteriousthan his neglect of this interesting young woman ;and the reason of his abandoning the mother ofhis child after withdrawing it from her care, isone of the many problems I leave others to solve188 MARY WOLSTONCRAFT.— RAKES.in this enigma. I have often heard Byron speakof Allegra. The little creature took a violentdislike to him, as it was just she should to onewho so cruelly renounced and injured her whogave her birth. I do not accuse him of seductionas regards this lady. She was of a fearlessand independent character, despised the opinionsof the world, and looked upon the law of marriageas of human invention, having been earlyimbued with the doctrines of Mary Wolstoncraft,and entertaining high notions of the Rights ofWomen. The sex are fond of rakes — a strangeinfatuation. It is said that Byron's attentionswere irresistible, and when these were enhancedby verses, the very essence of beauty and Feeling,C 's fall from virtue was inevitable.The little affection he felt for this haplessinfant is shown by his wishing to make her overto a stranger, — an intention Shelley, I believe,prevented from being carried into effect ; and tohave left her in a convent at her early age, onhis leaving Ravenna, was a barbarous act. Herfate might have been anticipated. Unaccountablebeing ! "You know," I interrupted R by saying,my enthusiastic admiration of Byron. WhoTASTE OF THE AGE. 189can analyse the particular causes which influencedhis conduct ? He is not to be weighed inscales with other men, or to be measured by thestandard of ordinary mortals. The world willsoon cease to canvass his feverish existence — tospeculate on his intrigues — on his separation, or tothink concerning Lady Byron more than it nowdoes about Mrs. Milton or Martha Blunt. It isas a poet, and a great one, that we are to considerhim. Poetry died with Byron, and is notlikely to have a second resuscitation. He is aspopular now as he was in his lifetime ; and speakingof the last edition of his works, is it not asign of the times, when a coronet ostentatiouslydisplayed on them could enhance their sale, orgive it any eclat ? Were Byron less noble, hadnone of the blood of the Barons and the Gordonflowed in his veins ? But does not the same depravityof taste reign all in all with us ? Brassglistens more than gold. Sound literature is exploded: the classics a dead letter, and held insovereign contempt. Nor is it to literature alonethat this corruption is confined. The modellingof Wedgwood from the drawings of Flaxman, theGrecian designs of the author of Anabasis, havegiven place to the vile and tawdry deformities of190 SHELLEY.Louis Quatorze, and bear the same relation tothe profligacy of the age as the monstrous figurescalled Arabesque did to the brutal vices and killingluxury of the degenerate Romans."You are become a satirist, Stanley, and havemerged the patriot in the cosmopolite."I am very curious," remarked Charters, " tolearn some particulars of Byron's friend, Shelley :can you not gratify our curiosity 1 "The next time, I met him was at Florence.I happened to go into Delesseau's Library there,and heard in the English room some one laughingalmost hysterically. On entering the SalonLiterature, I perceived a person reading a review,and at intervals laying it down to indulge in afit of merriment which convulsed him. It wasShelley. He had met with an article outrageouslyvehement in its abuse of him and hisbooks.The writer would have been disappointedhad he conceived that his venom would have producedthe effect it did on the author. I accostedhim, and after some time he read me thepaper, with the most amusing comments. Youremember his ' Lines to a Critic ;' they wereoccasioned by this Crispin's gall.SHELLEY. 191What erroneous opinions exist in the worldas to the poet and the man.Ingenii numen, simplicity puer.' "Manly wit and sense were never combinedwith such ingenuousness and trust and confidencein mankind, and acquaintance with theworld, as in Shelley. His boyish appearance, asI said, little accorded with the metaphysical subtleties,the close reasoning, the various andextensive reading, and sound classical learning,which he displayed ; and of him it might be remarked,with more truth than was said by LordOrrery of one of his contemporaries, " that thewisdom of Socrates, the dignity and ease of Pliny,and the wit of Horace, appeared in all his writingsand conversation." He was, as Cowley says ofPindar, ' a vast species alone,' a genus of himself,all enthusiasm ; and when anything particularlyinterested him, he felt a tremulous shivering ofthe nerves pass over him, an electric shock, amagnetism of the imagination. He was themost amiable, gentle, generous, and benevolentof human beings, and Byron used to say, themost moral. His taste was refinement itself.After our laugh was over, I shall never forget awalk we took together in the Officii Gallery."192 BACCHUS AND Impels.His remarks on the Niobe, and some of theother statues, have already appeared. Can younot remember any of his observations on theother master-pieces of sculpture in that divinecollection ?"After a pause R said — " Yes ; his remarksoccur to me on * The Bacchus and Angelus,*and you shall have them in his own words.Winkelman's and Cicognara's descriptions arecold and lifeless common-places compared withhis glorious burst of enthusiasm as he stoodentranced before this celebrated group : —' Look ! the figures are walking, as it were,with a sauntering and idle pace, and talking toeach other as they walk ; and this is expressedin the motion of their delicate and floweryforms. The arm of Bacchus rests with its entireweight on the shoulder of Ampelus ; the other,the fingers being gently curved, as with theliving spirit that animates their flexible joints, isgracefully thrown forward, corresponding withthe advance of the opposite leg. He has sandalsand buskins, clasped with two serpents*heads, and his leg is cinctured with their skins.He is crowned with vine-leaves, laden with theircrude fruit, and the crisp leaves hang with theBACCHUS AND Impels. 193inertness of a faded leaf over his neck, andmassy, profuse, down-hanging hair, which gracefullydivided on his forehead, falls in delicatewreaths on each side his neck, and curls upon hisbreast. Ampelus, with a young lion's or lynx'sskin over his shoulders, holds a cup in his righthand, and with his left half encircles Bacchus,as you may have seen a younger and an elderboy at school walking on some grassy spot ofthe play-ground, with that tender friendship foreach other that the age inspires. The countenanceof Bacchus is sublimely sweet and lovely,taking a shade of gentle and playful tendernessfrom the arch looks of Ampelus, whosecheerful face turned towards him, expresses thesuggestion of some droll and merry device. Ithas a divine and supernatural beauty, as onewho walks through the world untouched by itscorrupting cares. It looks like one who unconsciouslyconfers pleasure and peace. The countenanceof Ampelus is in some respects boyishand inferior ; that of Bacchus expresses an imperturbableand godlike self-possession ; he seemsin the enjoyment of a calm delight that nothingcan destroy. His is immortal beauty.'VOL. II. o194 ROMANCE IN REAL LIFE.You may from this specimen judge of hisfeeling for this branch of the fine arts.A singular circumstance happened to Shelley,as he was coming abroad. The night before hisdeparture he received a visit from a lady, — young,handsome, and of noble connexions. Byron andmyself have often discussed this strange eventThe force of love could go no further, when aperson, so richly endowed as Shelley used todescribe her, could so far forget the delicacy ofher sex, and the reserve due to the character ofwoman, as to make the following confession: —I have long known you in your works ; in theimpassioned tenderness of their language I haveread the heart that inspired them ; in yourardent love of liberty — your benevolence for allmankind — your virtues removed from all selfishconsiderations, and a total disregard for theestablished maxims of the world, I have foundthe beau-ideal of what I have long sought for invain. I am come to tell you I have renouncedmy husband, my family and friends, to followyou through the world, in spite of all the obloquywhich may be cast on my name and fame.' Butthe tale is a long one, and the denouement ofthe piece was as protracted as a three-volumeCARIGNAN. 195novelist could desire. I have no time to dramatizeit. Casanova, when asked to relate hisescape from the ' Piombi' at Venice, used to say,Have you two hours to spare V — So say I ; Iwill only add, that the inamorata traced him toAcheron, used to watch him with her glass in hiswater-parties with Byron; followed him to Como,where she had a villa on the lake ; often lodgedat the same auberge with him en route ; residedat Venice when he did, and finally, arrived atNaples on the same day as himself'*He must," remarked Charters, " have beenmore or less than man to have been unmoved bythe devoted attachment of this infatuated woman."To which R replied,Ran amant, ran in for deal* anni."But to return to Byron ; with all his faultshe had a saving one — an ardent love of liberty.Carignan was then a resident at the Tuscancourt. The mock attempt at a revolution inPiedmont had just failed through the pusillanimityor treachery of that prince, who passed allthe winter at the palace. He was in great disgrace,and so limited in his pecuniary resources,that he had not even a horse to ride, but wheno 2196 BYRONIC ENERGY.he went hunting used to borrow a cart-mare of afarmer. I was present at one of the court-balls,and observed the great coolness with which hewas treated by his father-in-law the Grand-duke.In person he was tall and exceedinglythin, and had a melancholy air. A traitor tothe cause he had embraced, he had denounced,as the price of his reconciliation with the HolyAlliance, all the friends who had confided inhim. They were rotting in the dungeons of thatinquisitorial power Austria, and he in daily apprehensionof falling by the hand of some assassin.Byron's hatred of him was extreme, andthe terms of his reprobation of his infamyunmeasured.But the night is far spent. More of theByronic energy,' as Shelley used to call him,tomorrow."VIXEN. — BYRON AT GENOA. 197Twenty-eighth DAY.Vixen. — Byron at Genoa.— Missolunghi. — Byron at Misses— Quarantine regulations. — Portrait of Maurocor-dato. — Byron's gaiety at Missolunghi. — Byron's menage.Press in Greece. — Maitland's administration. — PistolPractice. — Another Portrait of Byron. — Pronunciation ofhis name. — Sibileth. — Scotch accent. — Projected expeditionagainst Lepanto. — Cause of Byron's separation.We found Vixen, as we expected, stiff andcold this morning, and have been employing ourselvesin burying her on the banks of the river.Charters has since sniggled abundance of trout :* '^ *Our Byronic nodes vere resumed.I saw Byron (some months after his Pisanaffray) at Genoa. He had then reduced himself,by a strict system of regimen as to diet, to a perfectshadow, a mere skeleton, as may be judgedfrom Count Doorway's sketch of him. He wasbecome, in fact, the thinnest man I ever remember.The Guiccioli used to put her finger in her198 MISSOLUNGHI.cheek to intimate that the hollowness of hisvisage kept pace with his general emaciation ;she did not by any means approve of his Pythagoreans— his ascetic diet.I found him very uncomfortable ; he wasbecome tired of the Confess, and he had also avery great annoyance. He was anxious to get toGreece, and full of preparations for his departureWhen we parted, I knew it was for ever.Nothing can be more dull and unsatisfactory,flat, stale, and unprofitable, than all the accountswe have as yet had of him in Greece."'forester, however, afterwards surgeon onboardof the Convict ship lost oflP Bologna, andwho went down with her, poor fellow ! wrote twovery interesting letters describing a visit to himat Missolunghi, a few weeks before Byron's death.Missolunghi is just as wretched a collectionof houses and huts as can be well imagined. Itstands in the recess of a large and shallow bay,upon a morass which extends from the bay tothe foot of the hills, which rise two or three milesinland. The season was very rainy and thehouses were insulated among mire and water*the communication being kept up by steppingstonesand attempts at trottoirs, which resembledBYRON AT MISSOLUNGHI. 199low walls, in passing over which, the least loss ofequilibrium would plunge the unfortunate peripateticin deep mud. A visit to Lord Byronwas our first step in landing ; his abode was atolerable house close to the part of the beachmost convenient for landing or going afloat. Ithad, for the place, great pretension, and wasapproached by a gateway opening into a littlemiry court-yard, surrounded by a wall, with somesmall offices on one side. The principal andonly tolerable room was approached by an outwardstair. Three sides were furnished withsofas in the Turkish taste. A deal shelf, apparentlystuck against the wall, was loaded withbooks ; the floor was encumbered with packing-cases,some nailed down, some opened ; the latterfilled with books, as, I took for granted, werethe former. Round the walls were appended tonumerous nails and pegs, fowling-pieces and pistolsof various descriptions and nations ; sabresand yataghans. The corridor or antechamber,or whatever else it might be termed, swarmedwith Minutes and others, armed to the teeth.We were ushered in by Vita, his Lordship'schasseur, who reminded me of the French Sapeurs,as he wore a bushy beard, with his livery.200 BYRON AT MISSOLUNGHI.which was set off by two silver epaulettes. Hewas an immense fellow, upwards of six feet inheight, and although well-proportioned for sucha herculean figure, his frame was too large andheavy, for his stature too came within the descriptionof elegant. His page was a youngGreek, dressed as an Albanian or Minute, withvery handsomely chased arms in his girdle, andhis maitre-d' hotel, or fac-totus, an honest looking,though not remarkably elastic Northumbrian,named Fletcher, who seemed, and doubtlesswith reason, a great favourite with hismaster.I have often seen engravings prefixed to theworks of his Lordship; and one which was vauntedas a most striking likeness, had not long beforemet my eye in every print-shop in London.Of course I entered his house as in a certaindegree familiarised to the appearance of its master,but great was my astonishment, althoughprepared to make a fair allowance to artists, tosee before me a being bearing as little resemblanceto the pretended fac-simile, as I toApollo. True, by the representation which hadbeen palmed upon the world, I had certainlybeen taught to expect one thing which I found —QUARANTINE REGULATIONS. 201a long oval face with a handsome nose, and akind of rapt expression of thoughtfulness, blendedwith a cynical hint amounting to ' don't thinkme thoughtful for want of thought ;' but instead ofthe specific style of feature, the absent, unsociable,and supercilious deportment I had been preparedto meet, we were presented with the personificationof frankness itself ; his countenance enlivenedwith smiles, and his whole manner the veryreverse of anything like abstraction, not to saymisanthropy. On the principal of our party,who was a friend of Lord Byron, mentioning ourerrand, his Lordship immediately volunteered toaccompany us to Maurocordato. He asked usto return thence with him to dinner, which weof course accepted ; our intercourse was undersome ludicrous restrictions. Any communicationwith Turkey would have classed us amongthe unclean at any of the Ionian islands, orother parts where certain precautions against theplague are attended to ; therefore, as wood hasbeen pronounced a non-conductor, we made it asort of quarantine case of conscience to sit on awooden stool and packing cases, and to denyourselves the luxury of his Lordship's Turkishcushions and sofa.202 PORTRAIT OF MAUROCORDATO.But now for our call on Prince Maurocordato.We found him a strong-built man of about fivefeet seven, of a grave and thoughtful manner;his complexion was of that dirty pale hue, withoutan approach to red on his cheeks, whichevery one who has had that opportunity mayhave remarked to prevail amongst such subjectsof the Turkish empire as are in easy circumstances,or not subject to hard labour. Hisfeatures were large and of a flabby plumpness ;forehead high and broad ; eyes large, black andexpressive ; nose aquiline ; mouth and chinregular. He wore a black coat, a drab clothwaistcoat, greyish mixture trowsers, with boots ;his dress was very threadbare, and obviously notfrom any excess of brushing ; a quantity of strongbushy black hair fell down on the collar of hiscoat upon his shoulders. His outward man hadmuch the appearance of the inferior class ofexcisemen in England, or of foremen amongmechanics, whose situation and income make itnecessary for them to wear a suit for a twelvemonth,after it can no longer appear on Sundayand other great occasions. The reason for hiswearing this garb is, probably, because the assumptionof a Frank dress bespeaks the wearerBYRON'S GAIETY AT MISSOLUNGHI. 203in some degree unamenable to the government.For instance, those who are employed by andunder the protection of foreign powers, all mountit as a badge of independence ; besides, wereMaurocordato to appear in the oriental costume,it would put him to very considerable expense,not to be eclipsed by some in immediate attendanceupon him. In communicating withMaurocordato, Lord Byron spoke French, butoftener, Italian, the latter beautifully. As therearose some demur at the idea of restitution, hebecame warm, and even went so far as to declarethat rather than not have it made, he wouldadvance the money out of his own pocket. Thisof course was instantly declined ; the interviewended in a promise from the prince, to sendthe sum required at a specified time to thehouse of Lord Byron.*' On returning, his lordship went into a veryanimated and desultory conversation, which savouredmuch of Beppo and Don Juan, more thanof his other productions. Far from showing anyof th gloomy misanthropy or wayward shynesshe affected in most of his writings, he rattledaway in such a harum-scarum manner, that itrequired an effort to recollect that he had ever204 BYRON'S MENAGE.written on a grave or affecting subject, and withsuch a profusion of smiles upon his countenance,as seemed to leave no space where care mightthrow in a single sable touch. Now and then,indeed, in efforts to recollect anything, or whenarguing with Maurocordato, four or five veryexpressive furrows would streak his forehead, butthey disappeared with the fleeting rapidity ofthe Aurora Borealis.On sitting down to dinner, which, to deliverus from plague and pestilence, was set on a dealtable, without the intervention of a cloth, helaughingly apologised for his table, which, fromthe circumstances wherein he was then placed,was not, as he said, trop bien monte ; but he feltthe less annoyed when he reflected that personsof our profession understood those things,and were of course prepared for all sorts of privations.He then bustled about, actively assistedby Fletcher, who was but poorly aided by theGreek menials in placing the dishes to the bestadvantage, drawing corks and all the et cetera ofthe table. To dispose the table was rendered aservice of some difficulty by its imperiousness.On opening a bottle of wine, and inspecting thecomplexion of its contents, his lordship question-pressIN GREECE. 205ed Fletcher as to its name and lineage. * Ireally don't know, my lord ;' was the reply.then away with it,* he rejoined; 'I hateanonymous wine.'We were five at table, and Count Gamba,the proscribed Neapolitan (Romagnese), whosesister the Countess Guiccioli is more familiar tothe spreaders of scandal, when Lord Byron happensto be the subject, was one.I shall spare you the detail of what was said.The Greek cause, of course, was expatiatedon largely. His Lordship was extremely amusingon the subject of an impression on the mindsof some, that Greek liberty was to be achievedby the establishment of a printing-press, whichhad been sent out by the Greek Committeefrom London."'To be sure,' he said, 'the danger of dealingwith them in the style of an English newspaperwould be reduced by the general incapacity ofthe patriots to read what might be written. Butstill there were not wanting those who, upon asecond-hand report of a petty critique, wouldannounce it by tying the machine whence it hadissued, round the poor printer's neck, and droppingboth into the nearest pond.'206 maitland's administration.One observation of his I must not forgetto notice. When speaking of the Ionian Islandshe observed — ' On returning to them, I formeda very different, and a much more favourableopinion than I had before entertained, and expressed,of Sir Thomas Maitland's administration.In short, I found them getting rich underit.' — On being asked if he had seen him whenat Corfu, he said — ' I called on him, and hewas in the country.'This shows that, if he occasionally expressedhimself with severity, he was too upright, whenhe found his opinion more poetical than just,not to confess it; and in this instance, he didso spontaneously, for neither Parma, nor anyallusion to the Lord High Commissioner, hadbeen introduced at the time. But his writingsvouch that this is not the only instance in whichhe has shown, as Sir Lucius Outrigger says, ' Anaffront handsomely acknowledged can be madean obligation.*On looking over the arms about the room,his Lordship asked the principal of the party ifhe would like to try a shot with pistols? Onhis answering affirmatively, they walked up tothe landing-place of the outside stairs, fromPISTOL PRACTICE. 207which they fired at Maraschino bottles, placedon a pilaster in the court, upwards of twelvepaces off. They had an equal number of shots.Byron struck each time. His antagonist missedonce, although a very good shot. But one ofLord Byron's was excellent : — the upper rim ofa bottle which his competitor broke, fell on thetop of the pilaster, and remained there, reducedto a size not much larger than a finger-ring.Instead of having another bottle placed, he tookaim at this fragment, and reduced it to dust.His precision was the more surprising, becausehis hand shook as if under the influence of anague fit, and the time he took to take aim wouldhave made any other man's hand unsteady.On trying at the same marks, placed out ofeverything like pistol-range, neither succeeded.As each fired, a large Labrador (Bull) dog,named Lion, ran and picked up the bottle, whichhe laid at the bottom of the stair. I remarkedto Lord Byron, as we were laughing at hisofficiousness, ' That is an honest tyke of yours.'' Oh ! oh !' he replied, ' I find you are halfa countryman of mine.' — ' I answered I was awhole Scotsman.* — ' Then, we are half countrymen,'said he ; ' my mother was Scotch.' "208 ANOTHER PORTRAIT OF BYRON.Forrester's second letter draws another portraitof him, which if faithful, he must be one andseveral " gentlemen at once."Lord B is, as near as I can judge, aboutfive feet nine inches in height, and of an athleticmake, which is most apparent from the loinsdownward. The breast having suffered from theattitude acquired through his lameness, whichhas occasioned a slight stoop in the shouldersin walking, and a correspondent cavity of thebreast. His face is pale, and from the angle ofone jaw to the other unusually broad. The foreheadis remarkably striking and fine. It is veryhigh and convex, and tapers considerably at itascends. The hair receding at the temples ; itssurface as smooth as alabaster, except when amoment of abstraction leaves it with lines ofthought. His eyes are strikingly expressive,although the colour is not in much demandamong those who attempt to paint or describethese organs to the most advantage, it beingsomewhat between a light blue and grey. Hiseyelashes are long and thick; eyebrows distinctand finely arched, both nearly the colour ofhis hair. His nose, so far from aquiline andthin, as represented in plates I have seen, ratherPORTRAIT OF BYRON. 209inclines to turn up at the point ; it is of moderatelength, somewhat broad between the alae, andits ridge rounded, and by no means sharp ; infact, I do not know how I can better characteriseit than by saying it is fleshy, and much of thatstyle which is found among athletic, full-facedhighlanders of a fair complexion. The upper liprather short than otherwise ; the mouth wellproportioned, the lips round and plump withoutbeing thick, with a pleasing curl or curve outwards,which, on their being separated in speakingor smiling, display to great advantage abeautifully white, regular set of teeth. His chinis dimpled, and of a paleness which harmoniseswell with the rest of his face, the point prettybroad, and projecting forwards sufficiently toform an agreeable concavity between it and theupper lip. His hair is parted all over the headinto innumerable small spiral curls, about threeinches long, which is somewhat surprising, as itis as fine as silk. The effect is very becoming.Its colour light auburn, or perhaps it may bemore properly described as light brown, incliningto auburn. It is very glossy, but neither thisnor the natural colour of the hair can be perceived,except when seen close, at the distance ofVOL. II. p210 PORTRAIT OF BYRON.a few yards (five or six) ; it has a blond or lightfair appearance, produced by a thick sprinkling ofwhite hairs, which amount to about one-fourth ofthe whole, and which certainly do not owe theirtransmutation to the agency of time. It is ' greybut not with years.' His beard is shaved all overthe face, except the upper lip, but his moustacheis certainly no ornament, as it is of a flaxenwhiteness, which does not proceed from anychange it has undergone like the hair of thehead. The head is rather large than otherwise,circular in its horizontal section, and its diameteris long from the base to the vertex, which last isvery concave. Complexion fair and florid.The attempt at describing the physiognomyof this great genius, though drawling and inelegant,is, I hope, at least intelligible. At allevents, if it can be understood, it may be reliedon as correct. His countenance certainly belongedto neither of the styles called Greek orRoman, so much affected by the artist. Yet itstout ensemble of contour and expression has moreof pleasing and intelligent, than might be foundin a dozen of those insipidly regular faces of whichevery tyro in modelling or drawing can form agiven feature at any time desirable for himselfPRONUNCIATION OF HIS NAME. 211with a pair of compasses. His hands are exquisitelyformed, very white, and the *nails beautiful.Of the feet I cannot judge, as he wore boots ; thaton the sound foot was clumsily made, with theview, I suppose, of rendering the shapelessness ofthe other less apparent by comparison ; the rightfoot, as every one knows, being twisted inwards,so as to amount to that description of distortiongenerally known by the appellation of clubfoot,and though not so deformed as many I haveseen, yet it is sufficiently so to occasion a considerablelimp in his walk.He wore a deep green hussar jacket, withblack woollen shag collar and cuffs, with a profusionof cording, braid, and frogs, a plain blackwaistcoat, blue trowsers with a broad scarletstripe on the sides, and a blue foraging cap witha scarlet border and leathern shade.He told me he had for field duty two fancyuniforms, besides that of Lord Sligo's militia, andhe showed us three ponderous helmets, with bluesilk starry crests, his arms in front, Crete Birth.And this reminds me of a circumstance which,though of little moment, sometimes I have knowngives rise to disputes, namely, the pronunciationHe must have given up biting them then. — Ed.P 2212 SIBILETH. — SCOTCH ACCENT.of his name, some pronouncing it in the Frenchmanner, whilst the greatest number adhere tothat authorised by the English orthography.His Lordship gave countenance to the former,from a document which he read to us (a manifestoaddressed to the Provisional Greek Government,explaining his motives for taking suchan active part in support of the cause, disclaimingall selfish views, and declining anydenomination of rank or station, civil or military): his name, as it was written in the thirdperson, occurred several times, and this he constantlypronounced in the French way ; and, bythe by, there existed a sibileth in his enunciation.He had a slight burr in uttering words when theletter r occurred, such as in Corinth, for instance,and it was far from disagreeable. Hisvoice was sweet and sonorous, his most prevailingmode of expression deliberate, thoughnot slow, and I thought I detected a slighttouch of a Scottish accent, which, however, Icould not quite satisfy myself existed.After whiling away six hours in this highlyinteresting way, the time fixed for Maurocordato'sultimatum arrived. Lord Byron was the first toallude to it, by wondering that the answer hadPROJECTED EXPEDITION AGAINST LEPANTO. 213not come. On our leader saying that perhapshe might not send an answer. Lord Byron said" O yes ! he will." A moment after, he leftthe room for an instant— it struck me, to send amessage by way of stimulus, for, in about aquarter of an hour, a young man, whom hisLordship laughingly styled Secretary of State,made his appearance, with a canvas bag in hishand, containing the dollars in question.Byron laughed at the grave carriage the manput on while counting them, and said — " Well,I am wronging the poor devils if each dollaris like a drop of their heart's blood." My firmopinion is, that the sum ultimately will be madeup from his coffers, and I think that was thepurport of the message, I believe, he sent. Henow said that an attack on the Castle of Lepantowas meditated, in which he was to actas commander-in-chief, which post was thrustupon him on the plea that the troops would bemore subordinate to him than any of his countrymen,as Maurocordato said, he had no dependenceon any of them except Lord Byron'sMinutes, amounting to five hundred, unless theycould be acted on by the respect they had forhim.214 CAUSE OF BYRON'S SEPARATION.'• * I do not know how it will end,' said hisLordship, gaily ; * but one thing is certain, thereis no fear of my running,' at the same timeglancing at his lame foot.He wanted our ship to enter the Straits andgo up to the castle to see the result : which thecaptain said he would do by all means, but wasin the first instance under the necessity of runningover to Zante for water, which obtained, hewould immediately go to Lepanto. Night wasadvancing, we were forced to bid his Lordshipgood bye and return on board. This interviewtook place on the 23rd of January 1824. Onthe 11th of May following, when at Malta, Iheard of his-death, which took place at Misseson the 19th April 1824."I have often wished," said Charters, " toknow the cause of Lord Byron's separation fromLady Byron, and his self-exile — circumstancesthat have given rise to so many varying conjectures,and excited so many dark suspicions."Like Ovid's banishment, it will perhaps alwaysremain a mystery, at least till the presentgeneration is past. That secret is only known,from Byron himself, to one person, though thereis another now in America, into whose handsCAUSE OF BYRON'S SEPARATION. 215his papers fell at Missolonghi, and who may perhapshave discovered in them evidence of thisinteresting event. But question me no more onthe subject. From me, at least, inquiry will bevain. This much I will tell you, that no onewho has as yet written on the subject, has affordedthe least clue towards the unravelling of the knot.All the arrows shot have fallen wide of the mark."Thus ended our nodes.216 VIPER LOST.— ll's RETURN TO Built.Twenty-ninth DAY.Viper lost. — R.'s return to Bhilt. — Death of Viper and theOtter. — Scenery of Tiny. — Shelley's Terza Rima fromDante. — New Devil's Bridge Hotel. — An Innkeeper'sBill. — Effect of the Welsh Language. — Welsh FuneralSermon.Lampeter, 29th June."When we arose in the morning Viper wasmissing. R. lias been sending messengers in alldirections in search of him, but without success.We thought he might have been found at Vixen'sgrave. There he had certainly been lying, numerousmarks of scratching being apparent in thenewly turned up earth. After the lapse of severalhours his master gave up all hopes of recoveringthe lost favourite, whom he naturally concluded tohave been stolen, and secreted in the town. Hisotter expedition being thus completely frustrated,he " girded up his loins," and took leave of us toDEATH OF VIPER AND THE OTTER. 217return to head-quarters at Bhilt, promising tomeet me in three months at Geneva.After breakfast we retraced our steps on thebanks of the Tiny, now much swollen by the lastnight's rains.We came at length to the spot which had beenthe scene of the otter hunt, so fatal to the bravelittle Vixen.Curiosity led me to look if any fresh swages ofthe dourghie were visible, or if he had forsakenhis kennel. To my surprise I perceived somedrops of blood — these we followed — they becamemore numerous, and led to — what do you suppose,reader? Yes, rolled up together, and stiff andcold, were discovered in the embrace of death,the otter and Viper. From the appearance of theground, the battle had been a desperate one, — theturf was reddened with their gore.We stood for some time gazing at them insilence. We could not help admiring the determinedcourage of the otter, but still more theaffection of his adversary, and the feeling whichled him to brave danger, and revenge the death ofone he loved.It was a memorable incident — a proof of sagacity— an instance of memory, thought, and reactsSCENERY OF TIVY.sowing, combined in one of the canine species,which proves their intellectual superiority (if Imay so designate it) to all other animals.With our spikes we contrived, with some difficulty,to dig a hole large enough in which to depositthe remains of the terrier, and bore off theotter with us as a trophy. I shall retain his skinfor R. and give him an account of the occurrenceon my arrival at Llandyssil.We soon reached Pont Gogoyan, and crossingit proceeded leisurely along the banks of the windingriver, where we did not cast line this day.Nothing can surpass the scenery of the Tiny ;the character ever changing — now broad andplacid, it walks with a signore pass throughmeadows green as emerald — now almost stunningwith its deafening torrent, and shouting " with agiddy and frantic gladness," — sometimes confinedto a channel of a few yards, — now eddying andboiling like a cauldron in a basin it has worn foritself among the rocks — now shadowed by woodsof oak that overhang the whole stream, and makemore dark the water, itself of a pitchy blackness,reminding me of Dante's lines, in the "Purgatory,"admirably translated by Shelley ; and as theversion has never been published, it will serve toSHELLEY'S TERZA Rims FROM DANTE. 2J9fill up my day's journal better than I can do. Ihave marked in double inverted commas the wordsmost appropriate to this subject. In no languagehas inspiration gone beyond this divinest descriptivepassage : —sand earnest to explore, within, around.That divine wood, whose thick, green, Using roofTempered the young day to the sight, I woundUp a green slope, beneath the starry roof,With slow slow steps, leaving the mountain's steep ;And sought those leafy labyrinths, motion-proofAgainst the air, that in that stillness, deepAnd solemn, struck upon my forehead bare,Like the sweet breathing of a child in sleep :Already had I lost myself so farAmid that tangled wilderness, that IPerceived not where I entered, but no fearOf wandering from my way disturbed, when nighA little stream appeared ; the grass that grewThick on its banks impeded suddenlyMy going on ; " Water, of purest dewOn earth, would appear turbid and impureCompared with this, whose concealing hue,Dark, dark, yet clear, moved under the obscureOf the close boughs, whose interwoven loomsNo rays of moon or sunshine would endure."220 NEW devil's bridge hotel.My feet were motionless, but mid the gloomsDarted my charmed eyes contemplatingThe mighty multitude of fresh May-bloomsWhich starred that night ; when, even as a thingThat suddenly for blank astonishmentCharms every sense, and makes all thought take wing,Appeared a solitary maid, — she wentSinging, and gathering flower after flower.With which her way was painted and besprent;Bright lady ! who, if looks had ever powerTo bear true witness of the heart within,Dost bask under the beams of love, come lowerUnto this bank, — I prithee, let me winThis much of thee. Oh come ! that I may hearThy song : like Proserpine, in Anna's glen.Thou keenest to my fancy, singing here.And gathering flowers, as that fair maiden whenShe lost the Spring, and Ceres her more dear."But this is copied at Lampeter, the Universityof this part of Cambria, which we reached at alate hour.There we got into a second Devil's Bridgehotel — English comforts — port (no English port)English man-waiters, (give me your little Welshhelps, as the Americans say) ; and to sum up all,English prices, and only the caterpillar in theAN innkeeper's BILL. 221heart of the cauliflower forgotten in the bill.Thereby hangs a tale. I was dining at theCastle at Brighton, many years ago. The billwas, as usual, none of the most reasonable. Beforethe President calculated the quorum to each ofthe party, he sent for Mr. Tilt, the landlord, andsaid, loud enough for the whole room to hear, —Mr. Tilt, you have forgotten an item in the bill?"Have I, sir ! — I am much obliged — what mayit be?"You should add, — To a large caterpillar in theheart of the cauliflower, so much ; it is the onlything come to table uncharged for in the account."We soon found that we were sitting in the Commercialroom ; our host naturally enough concluding,from our external appearance, that ourpockets were not superfluously lined.In the afternoon came in a rider, dripping wet.He was a short, pursy, laughter-eyed middle-agedman, with a face whose rubicundity did amplecredit to beefsteaks and port, of which he wasalmost a concrete. He had some humour and*talent for mimickry, and seemed quite au faitin all that related to Wales.Mr. Bags was in fact a wag, and a considerableacquisition. Speaking of the language of the222 EFFECT OF THE WELSH LANGUAGE.ancient Britons, he said, "What I most admirein it is, its virginity, which has remained unde-floweredby the admixture of any other dialect.The purity of the Latin was debauched by theVandals, and Hunted into corruption by an equallybarbarous people, but the maiden integrity of theCymry remains inviolate. It is a tongue, to besure, not made for every mouth ; as was instancedby a friend of mine, who, having got a Welshpolysyllable in his throat, would have been inevitablychoked with consonants, had I not clappedhim on the back, made him disgorge a gutturalor two, and so saved him."Among other buffoonery he, in the course ofthe evening, repeated to us the following orthodoxfuneral sermon, which he pretended to have hearddelivered last Sunday ; but I mightily suspect Ihave seen it in print, and that it has passedthrough several editions, which, indeed, its intrinsicmerit deserves it should. Le voila : —Nearly beloved brethren, I am here amongyou to make a creat preachment upon a teat body.My text is in the ten and twentieth chapter ofMacabeSy the verse, indeed, I cannot fery wellremember, but I am sure it was there ;' the wordsare these, imitate and orate, that is to say,WELSH FUNERAL SERMON. 223watch and pray. I will stick to my text, I willwarrant you.** Our creat grand-father Adam was a fery cootold man, indeed, truth he was, and lif'd in Cod'sown house, in Paradise, a fery fine place, I willwarrant you ; he had all things profited to hishands ; he needed not to puy a spoon or a stocking; he hat all sort of trees, as plumb-trees, pear-trees,sherry-trees, and codling-trees, but for wantof cood-take-heid, hur was fall. Our creat grandmotherEfe, a plague take her, must needs go dropan orchard, the tephil shew'd hur the way, forthere is no mischief on foot but tephil and thewoman must hase a finger in the pie ; so hur wascome home, and persuade hur husband to eatsome of hur stolen apple — it was Cod's mercy itdid not stick in hur throat and choak him. Afterthis, she was prose with child, and prought to petof prate poy, and call hur name, I cannot ferywell remember — Oh ! Cain, aye, Cain ; it was thisprate poy, but unlucky rogue, like hur mother.After this, hur was prought to pet of anotherprate poy, and call hur name Ape, oh ! that wascoot lad ; and now I come to part with my text ;hur was pray, and had hur watch too, beforeCod, hur brother Cain had not come behind hur224 WELSH FUNERAL SERMON.pack and knock hur pains out. This was murtheringfillan, so hur was forced to out-run hurcountry, and go into a strange land, which taughthur strange tricks. O this sin of murther, mybeloved, prought leafy judgment upon theearth ; and what do you think it was ? I willtell you then. It prought these lawyers, andpura-pailiffs to drop the people of their estate andmoney. After this, my beloved, was come anothersin upon the earth, and prought heavier judgmentalong with it ; and what do you think that was ?I will tell you then. It prought these consumingcaterpillars — these destroying locusts — thesehellish vermin, joined together with excisemenand custom-house officers, to pry into every nook,and look into every corner for trop of coot think,marry; Cod confound them all, and from themlibera nos Domine that is to say, coot Lord deliverus.My beloved, beware, I beseech, of this loathsomesin of drunkenness, for our creat grandfather,Noah, had no sooner scape scouring in theark, and cot safe to land again, put he went to thefirst ale-house he could find, and then was think,think, think all day, and all night, and thencome home trunk, and abuse hur family ; so ICOMPARATIVE PULPIT ELOQUENCE. 225doubt it is with too many of you. My beloved,at the dreadful day of judgment, when thepastors shall be called to life an account of thesheep delivered to their charge, and when thepoor unworthy Parson of Llangwilliadurnog,shall be call to life an account for the sheepdeliver to my charge, — when the Lord calls Iwill not hear, and when him call again I will notanswer ; and when him call a third time, I willsay as old Eli bid Samuel say, Lord, speak, thyservant heareth thee ; and when he ask me for thesheep delivered to my charge, before Cot, I willtell him flat and plain, you are all turned coats(i. e.) goats."If Julian were here," I said to Charters, " Iwould beg him to send this fine specimen ofpulpit eloquence to the Cheltenham * Qui Hi,' orhis fat friend."Thanks to the stranger," replied Charters,(addressing him ;) it has proved an excellentCloser to our soiree''VOL. n.226 LARGE OTTER.THIRTIETH DAY.A large Otter. — A Welsh Curate. — Tale of the TwinBrothers.Llanwnnen.We have weighed the otter, and find that heexceeds 30lbs. ; it is the largest the Tiny hasever produced, says one of its oldest fishermenhere.Charters declares, that were he in Lapland,he would hire a witch to bring good weather.It has poured all day, and two miles and a halfhave been the extent of our march.We met at the Inn with a venerable-lookingman, his hair silvered by years more than travels'by sea and by land, or the troubles of life, forhe prided himself on two things, — never havingbeen fifty miles from his own house, and atA WELSH CURATE. 227having escaped that "pace divortium,"* — marriage.He was the curate of the parish. Wasit possible to find a better chronicler ? I askedhim if he could amuse us with no tradition ofLlanwnnen ? He replied in the affirmative, butthat the tale would be long; a hint which weunderstood well, for it implied a wish to partakeof our punch. It was not till he had discussedseveral glasses, (not Irish, but wine glasses,) thathe felt disposed to gratify our curiosity. Thecircumstances he related having occurred in theplace, added, doubtless, to the interest of hissimple, though not short annals. Interest theydid us, (who were disposed to be pleased,) whateverthey may the reader; though certainly thusmuch is to be said in favour of the village historian,that he told the story in his own way ;I mean to tell it in mine :« THE TWIN BROTHERS.Little would you imagine, gentlemen, that thisquiet village has been the nurse of great crimes.I am told that the savages make a demon theobject of their idolatry, with the view of depresssays Petrarch. It is not generally known that he isthe author of the most " sanglante" satire on the sex, everwritten. Vide " De remedies utrinque fortunae." — Ed.Q 2228 THE TWIN BROTHERS.eating his wrath ; and we still are forced to admitin our church and dread the immediate agencyof Satan, whose power would appear to be undiminished,notwithstanding the great redemption.Such at least is the inference you will draw frommy narrative, and agree with the Psalmist, thatwe are born in sin.'I was trying to remember some dates, butthey have escaped me. Dates are written inin sand, whilst facts (with me) are traced inbronze ; and those in this case are as freshas though they had been engraved yesterday.To distinguish characters and letters at a distancewhich are invisible near the eye, is aproof of its defect ; so the vivid recollection oflong by-gone events, whilst every-day occurrencesleave no memory of themselves, is the mark ofthe mind's decay. Such is mine ; old age creepsupon me apace. But I am forgetting my story.As far back as I can remember anything, aSassenach and his wife came to reside at Llan-wnnen. He had purchased a small estate on thebanks of the river about a quarter of a miledown, and built a cottage there in the Englishstyle ; — tomorrow I will take you to the spot.It was the neatest and prettiest abode in all thisTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 229part of the country, and possessed what you callcomfort, of which our Gwalladwrs have no idea,our language no word to express. It is now aruin ; the fences down, and the cattle browsethere at will ; but it was a pleasure to see it inthose days : the walls nicely whitewashed ; theporch with its double bench, the sides and roofcovered with woodbine, and here and there afestoon hanging over the arched entrance ; theflower-plot divided into equal compartments, andthe garden behind, containing, besides such esculentsas we are too idle to cultivate, many fruittrees, planted by the proprietor's own hand. Ishould have spoken of him first, but you mustlet me ramble on in my own way.I will tell you how this family happened tomake choice of our village for their residence.The new comer had wedded a Welsh girl, (anative of Cardiganshire,) and having few relationsof his own in England, had been persuadedby his bride, (for such she then was,) tosettle in Wales. We Welsh are very inquisitive: I remember hearing that, like his fatherbefore him, he had been from boyhood in theservice of Lord Arundel, at Ardour, and hadquitted the castle on his marriage with two THE TWIN BROTHERS.sand pounds of savings in the funds — a considerablefortune. He was a tall, slight-built man offorty years of age, with a strongly-marked countenance,and a complexion dark as a Spaniard's ;and we supposed, from his being a Papist, thathe was of foreign extraction. Three or four yearsafter his arrival, his wife bore him twins ; andabout the same time an old lady, a connexion ofhis, with her niece, an orphan child, also arrived.These latter lived in the village, and made apleasing addition to the strangers' circle. Theywere obliged to depend on their own little colonyfor acquaintanceship, — for if it be a fault amongus Britons, we are strongly prejudiced in mattersof faith. One reason these were looked upon asinfidels was, that they made no difference betweenthe Lord's day and any other day in theweek ; and it was only once a month that theyhad service performed, (or rather went to mass,)when an itinerant priest officiated, never failingto think of their spiritual welfare, on his wayfrom Yarmouth to Monmouth, where there arechapels. They were very hospitable, and nodoubt the good padre found it an excellent for man and horse. Our neighbourswill hardly admit Catholics to be Christians ; theyTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 231thought the crucifix at the head of the bed aprofanation, and the Madonna and Child, in theniche of the wall, a species of idolatry. I amof that opinion also ; but this I will say, that ifthe sect to which they belonged all resembledthem, it would have been as well that some ofour scoffing drunkards should have become convertsto their mode of belief."But to return to the twins, for thereby hangsmy tale. Never were there two boys, not to saybrothers, in form and feature so different as Ferdinandand Frederick. The elder was the miniatureof his father ; his complexion Moorish ; hislocks curled over his neck, black as the plumesof a raven ; his eyes were of a correspondingcolour, and a gloomy fierceness lurked in themwhich showed the embryo workings of those passionswhich afterwards made him a terror toothers and a misery to himself. The youngerwas a fair pale boy. Partiality is blamable inparents when it is regulated by the personalqualities of the object ; but the violence of temperin the one, his stubbornness and love of mischief,could not but be the more obvious fromthat comparison which the docility, meeknessand affection of the other naturally challenged.232 THE TWIN BROTHERS.making him at least the favourite of his mother,to whom he bore a striking resemblance ; andwhilst the first-born came into the world with astrong and hardy constitution, the second wasweak and puny, and I have heard a gossip say,he was at first judged by some, hardly worth thetrouble of rearing. Not so thought she whogave him being ; and this her maternal solicitudeand the fine air of our hills made him soon, if notrobust, healthy.The love and affection of twins has been almostproverbial; so devoted, indeed, is frequently theirattachment, that instances have been known ofone dying of grief for the loss of the other. Thesehad drawn their life's blood from the same fountain; had eat out of the same bowl, and slept onthe same couch; yet, from infancy, Ferdinandwas observed to exhibit an aversion he did notattempt to conceal, for Frederick. Cruelty in theformer might be said to be second nature ; hisdelight was, as soon as he could go alone, totorture every insect or creeping thing, howeverharmless, chance threw in his way : to spin cock-chases,to crush worms, or thread them ; tolisten to the shrill plaintive buzz of flies in thefangs of spiders — these were his early sports.THE TWIN BROTHERS. 233When tired of agonizing the brute creation, hewould love to torment his brother, — waken himby running needles in his flesh when he wasasleep ; do mischief, and then tax him with thecommission of it, and long himself, when he gothim punished, to inflict it."And here I must repeat the remark with whichI set out, that vice seems to be innate; for itis else unaccountable whence Ferdinand inheritedhis evil dispositions, seeing that his parents wereexcellent, charitable people both, that the samepains were taken with the education of the twochildren, that they were subject to the sameinfluences, and exposed to no associations whichcould corrupt their minds or morals. Never, infact, were human beings so dissimilar; theymight have passed for the embodiments of thegood and evil principle.There is another of the dramatis personae inthis tragedy, to whom I must introduce you. Itis the niece of the good dame of whom I spoke.Unlike our peasant girls, who lose all the gentlergraces and attractions of the sex by hard labourand exposure to the sun, she was of a slender,delicate, and sylphs form, and like the woodbineon the porch I spoke of, seemed to require234 THE TWIN BROTHERS.support. Her artless innocence and gentlenessgave her an inexpressible charm ; so that, as shegrew up, the prejudice against the strangers onaccount of their religion was not extended toAgnes. Never had modesty and beauty a fairershrine ; the whole village almost adored her."I shall make a long span in the strangers'lives and bring the three young people to seventeen.At this critical period, when the girl expandsinto the woman as the bud into the flower,I observed in May, (the year I quite forget,)Agnes, following the course of the Tiny, or wanderingamong the hills, in 'twilight conversehand in hand,' with a youth, whose beauty wasalmost feminine, but the elasticity of his gait,the nobleness of his gestures, and the fire in hiseye, showed a fearless independence of spirit, atvariance with the delicate slimness of his form,and the fair and silken locks which profuselyshadowed his blooming cheek. There is alanguage soothing yet melancholy, in the soundof falling waters, and the murmuring of theleaves in spring, which speaks irresistibly toyoung hearts and is the food of love. Themind, it is said, when left to its own choice,naturally seeks its antitype ; no wonder, then.THE TWIN BROTHERS. 235that these two beings, brought up as they werefrom infancy together, should have mutually contributedto nourish in each other a resemblancethey could not fail to discern ; that they shouldhave been drawn together by a mutual sympathyof tastes and feelings ; that they should haveloved each other unconsciously, without tellingtheir love. If to be sad when absent ; to partwith regret, and meet with rapture, be love :this did Frederick and Agnes. Their parentscould not fail to observe, and saw with pleasurethis ripening attachment ; and as shedaily replenished with fresh flowers the vasebefore the shrine of the Virgin, and offered upprayers to her whom she looked upon as themediatrix with the Son, and to whom she couldmentally confess every secret of her soul, Agnesnever omitted to mingle another name with herown orisons.*' We have for some time lost sight of the serpentin this paradise, for such it might have beenbut for Ferdinand. There is an old saw, thatidleness is the root of all evil.' Though it wasnot the root, it gave additional vigour to his passionsand maturity to his vices. Instead of improvinghis mind, as did his brother, by reading236 THE TWIN BROTHERS.and listening to his father's experience and instructions,and assisting him in the culture of hislittle farm and garden, he roamed the countryround, in the prosecution of low amours, infrequenting the neighbouring fairs, and associatinghimself with dissolute and idle characters,who were not wanting among the assembledmultitudes on these occasions. It was a mysteryhow he contrived to obtain money for theindulgence of his excesses. He frequently sleptout of the cottage, and it was suspected thathis nights were not solely occupied in layingspringes for the Squire's hares, or in shooting bymoonlight his pheasants. He had frequentlybeen summoned before the magistrates for theseoffences ; had been fined ; and once only escapedimprisonment on account of his youth. Butthe warnings of the Bench served to excite hisderision. He called law the tyranny of thestrong over the weak, and hardened daily moreand more — looked upon crime undiscovered, asno crime ! Such was Ferdinand ere he hadattained his eighteenth year. ,After an absence of some days from home,as the evening was just closing in he hadTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 237crossed the ford and was treading the pathwhich wound from the church to his home,when he perceived two persons seated on thegreensward. The air was still, and the bloomsof the white thorn, that formed their canopy,mingled its odours with the violets, which thicklycarpeted the bank. They were so earnestlyengaged in conversation, so absorbed in eachother, that they were insensible to the stealthystep of the wolf that was so near the fold. Itwas not so dark, but Ferdinand recognized at aglance, Agnes and his brother. Locked in hiswas one of her hands ; she held in the otherthe strings of her straw bonnet, whilst her head,with its profuse and massy ringlets, rested, inthe abandonment of confiding affection, on thehalf-hidden shoulder of her delighted lover.Our great poet has shown us Satan in the gardenof Eden, when he saw the innocent dalliance ofour first parents : not much less harrowing tothe envious and malignant soul of Ferdinand,was the sight of this loving and beloved pair.His slumbers that night were broken by thevision of the fair Agnes. It was not that heloved her. A heart so hard, so depraved as his.238 THE TWIN BROTHERS.was incapable of love ; but her charms, to whichhe had till then been insensible, roused hispassions, and his brain, fertile in evil, suggesteda variety of schemes for their gratification.The next morning he betimes visited her cottage.Perhaps a finer specimen of manly beautydid not exist than Ferdinand. He had as yetnever sued in vain ; and, despising the inferiorpretensions of his brother, with a confidence thathis addresses would be irresistible, he openlydeclared his passion ; but all he met with fromthe terrified girl was, the rejection of his suit.You must excuse here my making some reflections,which a coming scene suggests.There is a difference between a divine, anda religious man. The first understands thescriptures, the other practises them. Thus religionand morality are terms that have nothingin common among the Catholics. Religion withthem is a form, a ceremony, a rite ; but no tie,no pledge of virtue, no check to vice ; and a manmay, be constant at mass and confession whoseheart is black with every crime. Thus Ferdinandwas at that time not only a good Catholic,but a believer in all its superstitions. ThereTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 239is a strange custom, once prevalent in thiscountry, but now happily almost abolished, calledthe offering of an enemy.' * Incredible assuch wickedness may seem, this unnatural brotherresolved to perform the Druidical vow.For this purpose he set out the same day forYarmouth. Having reached that place, he repairedwithout delay to the chapel, and on hisknees, and with great earnestness, making anoffering in money, invoked the saint, beforewhose shrine he had prostrated himself, to hearimprecations and curses at which the soul recoils,and my tongue dare not repeat, on thehead of his brother, and the innocent object ofhis affections, and ended with for ever disclaimingall the ties of blood, and dooming them tohis unremitting vengeance here, and to that ofthe saint hereafter, whom he fancied he thus hadnot only pledged to the accomplishment of hisvow, but had made a participator of every crimehe might commit.The Welsh language is strong in curses ; that inKehama," the " Giaour," or " Tristan Shandy," are triflesin comparison. The vulgar one is called " OfFrwn Gelyn ;"the classic, " Meredith Galon ;" that of a witch, " RhaibGwrach ;" and the sacrifice of an enemy, such as is herementioned to be made, " Berth Galon." — Ed.240 THE TWIN BROTHERS.This diabolical rite concluded, he found, oncomingback to the place of his birth, preparationsmaking for the nuptials of those whom hehad by a solemn mockery of religion devotedto destruction, and, fertile in expedients, afterabandoning several, one of which was murder yhe hit upon a scheme suggested by the Devil,that was crowned with perfect success. He concealedhimself for three days in the neighbourhood,before he could carry it into effect.His father had, a short time before, receivedhis dividends. The place where he depositedthem was known to Ferdinand, and by a falsekey, from an impression in wax, one night, whenthe family were locked in sleep, he entered thecottage unobserved, stole a considerable portionof the guineas, and deposited them in his brother'strunk.The loss was immediately discovered, and inthe midst of the trouble, occasioned by this unaccountableevent, he showed himself. His indignationand abhorrence of the crime were wellassumed. The hypocrite! Can we judge by theminerals on the surface what the centre of theglobe contains ? By his innuendoes he excitedsuspicions against Frederick. A search wasTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 241made and the lost gold, together with the falsekey, found hidden among his linen.Against such damning evidence of guilt whatprotestations of innocence had availed? Theseeming culprit had not a word to say in his defence,— stood staring in the vacancy of idiotism.But who, at that trying moment, can paint theheart-readings of his parents — the affliction of hisbetrothed ? Suffice it to say that he was thrustby his Satanic brother, ignominiously, like ourfirst parents, from Eden — Were his sufferingsless ? No. — A few posts brought the intelligencethat he was at Portsmouth, had enlistedhimself as a soldier, and was about to embark onforeign service. Two letters announced thisevent; one was to Agnes. He in them, withoutaccusing any one, solemnly protested hisinnocence, desired her to forget that such abeing as himself had ever existed, said that heshould never cease to pray for her happinessand that of his deluded and adored parents, andconcluded by taking of them an eternal farewell.I shall not detain you, as I might do, with alist of the miseries that were entailed on thesetwo families during fifteen years subsequent tothis memorable circumstance ; nor enter into theVOL. II. R242 THE TWIN BROTHERS.adventures of the young exile during his campaigns.He distinguished himself in the regimentinto which he entered by his bravery andgood conduct, and long before he obtained hisdischarge and pension, had had his jacket ornamentedby the honourable addition of the badgeof a non-commissioned officer.1^ mic M^ * ^It was on the 29th of November that a sunburnt,soldier-like man, of a middle-age, witha broad scar on his cheek, was crossing thewild and desert tract, called Ali-Wallis,* thatlies between Pencader and the Willy. Therewas at that time only a cattle path over themountain, and the road that has since been cutthrough the solid rock was not begun. Heappeared lost in thought, and heedless of theprecipices which yawned around him on everyside. His countenance and appearance betrayedrather fatigue of mind than body, and it waslate in the day when he entered a public house,near Chantilly, and not very distant from whereNew Inn now stands, to take some refreshment.A party, very boisterous in their cups, wereassembled round a table in the kitchen, andSupposed to be derived from Alta Wallis. — Ed.THE TWIN BROTHERS. 24 3a dark ferocious man, in whose cheek thejaundice of evil passions had supplanted itsnatural hue, was exciting the vociferous applauseof his pot-companions by recounting a recentaffray in which he had been engaged with therevenue officers in assisting to land some kegsfrom a smuggling cutter. The cruel delightwith which he minutely circumstantially thatscene of bloodshed, excited in the stranger adisgust he could not altogether conceal. Yetthough he shrank from the language of theorator, he was obliged to listen to it ; the tonesof the man's voice and features also struck himas not unfamiliar, and made him conclude theyhad served together in one of his campaigns,but where he could not call to mind ; and whenhis eyes met those of the ruffian they reflecteda glance which seemed to say that he was considereda spy and an intruder. Having quenchedhis thirst with a draught of ale, the travellerprosecuted his journey.By the time he reached Pencarrwg, the sunhad set in a thick bank of vapours, and the dark,like that in tropical climes, ' came at one stride.'His road lay across a dismal waste, and the blaststhat howled rustling over the dry heather andR 2244 THE TWIN BROTHERS.withered grass, seemed to him the footsteps ofdeparted spirits. There are certain momentswhen the mind is peculiarly alive to such chimericalideas, and the stranger, whom you may conjectureto be Frederick, was not un divested ofsome of the superstitions of that country whichhad been his foster-mother. As he continued tofollow almost mechanically what he thought thepath he observed, or thought he observed, acane welly corfu, or coffin candle, which you callawill-of- the wisp, flitting with a dubious anddancing light before him. It retired as he advanced,and led him into a quagmire, from whichhe had some difficulty in extricating himself Onemerging from it, the lost track was at lengthregained, and he calculated that he was only threemiles from the ford at Llanwnnen, where the riverflows peaceably along as might have done thecurrent of his days but for one whom I have hadtoo often occasion to mention — his brother.His mind gradually concentrated itself in onethought — in one object — that most unnaturalbrother — until a series of portraits, like the ghostsin Macbeth, passed in review before his eyes,and at length assumed the shape of the ferocioussmuggler at the inn — when — he suddenly felt/THE TWIN BROTHERS. 245his hand in another hand. The person, whoeverit might be, that seized it, seemed to him, as wellas he could distinguish objects through the gloom,of gigantic stature and superhuman strength,and his bewildered imagination conjured up in themysterious being some infernal daemon. Hisfingers were icy cold, and Frederick shrank fromtheir pressure as from the paralysing touch of atorpedo. His efforts to disengage himself fromthe grasp of the unknown were feeble and unavailing,and, like a canoe within the drift of anunnavigable cataract, he was dragged resistlesslyalong, and fancied himself, like its fate-devotedboatman, rushing to inevitable destruction. Horrortied his tongue. His incomprehensible guidepreserved an obstinate silence. At length hefaltered out some inarticulate words. A laughof scorn, which echoed like the yell of a *bainamong the mountains, was the only response.They were now on the edge of some loftyand broken rocks. Their bases met in the narrowedchannel of the Tiny, whose raging torrent,as it flashed in a sheet of foam through the chasm,revealed the height at which they stood, and setA bain is a ghastly tall female spectre, supposed tostand at cross-roads howling. — Ed.246 THE TWIN BROTHERS.up a hoarse and subterranean voice, whose tonessounded in his ears like the tolling of a funeralknell. The spot was three miles below Llan-wnnen ; it was familiar to him, for when a boy hehad often hurled stones over the precipice, andlistened to the splintering of the fragments againstits iron-bound sides, till they were absorbed intothe gulph*'You will never see Llanwnnen,' with a deepunmodulated voice, in concert with that of thetorrent, roared the mysterious stranger.* Who art thou ?' gasped convulsively thesoldier with accents faltering from indescribableemotions, in which some superstitious fears stillmingled : * Who art thou ?'** * Who ? — thy evil genius, sent into the worldat the same moment as thyself to be thy tormentor,thou my victim with a wild ecstasy, rejoinedthe unknown. ' Dost thou not know by thepressure of my hand how I love thee ?'' Who art thou ? — speak,' repeated the other,in a voice almost inaudible through its tremulousness,as the hand that grasped him almost forcedthe blood through his nails."*Ha! ha! ha! What! not know me yet?Has time obliterated all my boyish kindnesses toTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 247thee — ray matured affections? Unnatural and ungrateful,hast thou renounced one of the dearestties — dishonest thou thy brother?' (The sameinfernal laugh ended as it had begun the sneer.)The strangeness of the adventure had so disorderedFrederick's faculties, his brain was sodizzy from the rapidity with which he had beenwhirled along, that though his imagination hadconjured up on the heath Ferdinand in the personof the identical ruffian at the inn, as actuallyappearing by his side, reason almost immediatelyrejected the idea as suggested by supernaturalagency. The withdrawal of the film fromhis eyes diminished none of the horror which inspiredhim — as well might words such as brothernever used to brother ; yet strange to say, sostrong was the tie of blood — of that blood whichonce circulated in their joint frames — such wasthe goodness of his heart, that he felt at thismoment he could have forgiven him all hiswrongs, and with an accent which betrayed thisfeeling — all he could articulate was"* My brother!'* Yes, thy brother ! ' (ironically, and layinga stress on each syllable of the word, howledFerdinand,) * thy brother who loves thee as Cain248 THE TWIN BROTHERS.did Abel. Dost thou remember in what way heshowed his love?'' Talk not so wildly,' expostulated Frederick,more in sorrow than anger ; ' fifteen years havepassed since we met, Ferdinand ; and is thy heartthe same — unchanged by my long absence ? — Hasall that I have suffered — you have suffered —divorced from it none of those evil passions ofyour boyhood? — abated none of that hate thouknowest I never in word or deed provoked, a hatewhich * grew with your growth, and strengthenedwith your strength,' till it became, in its rankness,the poison of your being — till, in order to sateits venom, you did not hesitate to spurn the lawsof nature and of God, to affix on my good namethe stigma of the worst of crimes — for eversunder the ties that bound a son to a father — tillyou drove me from my native country, from myhome, and more than all — ,'* All this is nothing,' interrupted the other,• my abhorrence of thee rankles in me still ; astrange delight runs tingling up and down myveins to feel that thou art in my power.'' — More than all,' added the younger brother,attending to his words, * blighted all my hopesof happiness — crushed in the bud the affections ofTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 249two fond hearts — eternally tore me from my first,my only, my devoted love ?'* Thy love !' (echoed contemptuously thewretch.) ' Thine ! Say mine, rather. No, I neverloved her ; should not have sought her love, hadshe not loved thee. Yet, she was fair. Do youremember one May-day evening, when you half-encircledher, nay, when your lips met, on thebanks of the Tiny ?'* It was the evening of the mutual acknowledgementof our passion, the seal of our love : —Why dost thou plunge a poniard in my heart by theremembrance ?' — A deep groan followed the words.His tormentor was silent, as if mentallyenjoying and not wishing to interrupt the bitterthoughts with which he had racked his victim,and at last said —' Imagine how the first Tempter looked andfelt when he witnessed the embraces of the firstpair, and you may judge what those caressesworked in me. You remember my five days'absence from home. I then pronounced on youboth ' the curse of an enemy.' The solemn vowwas registered above — shall be ratified. Thy timeis come. For her! The frail thing has evenglutted my thirst of vengeance !'250 THE TWIN BROTHERS.* Fiend ! thou mean'st not what thou mayest !Never could the atrocity of guilt' (gasped Frederick,as the dreadful conviction of the truth of hisbrother's words flashed on his mind) 'harbouraught against the virgin innocence and purity ofAgnes !'* Fiend ! mayest thou ?' (with a guttural andinwardly suppressed rattle, that bespoke his exultation,ejaculated the daemon,) * I thank — thankthee for the word ; 'tis well applied. It soundslike a term of endearment. Invent for me somenew phrase of execration. Invoke on me someunheard-of unimagined curse. — Wouldst thouknow the fate of thy beloved ?'There was no reply ; for Frederick, struckwith the numbness of one who has been bittenby some deadly reptile, and is conscious that allmedicines are vain, that the mortal venom ismomently working its way to the heart — awaitedthe revelation.It was not long delayed. With a quiet,composed, apathetic delivery, as though he wererelating some indifferent occurrences, the elderbrother continued : —* I construe your silence into an affirmative.You shall be gratified. It was not till you hadTHE TWIN BROTHERS. ' 251been chased from home with infamy, that I wassensible to the charms of Agnes, to the doveliketenderness and softness of her eye — to herbudding beauties — the luxurious symmetry of herrounded limbs. Love, in my definition of the word,means passion, and such I madly felt for her.She was long inconsolable at your loss ; but thecertainty of your crime — the unworthiness of theobject — shame — by degrees wore away your impressionfrom her fair and guiltless bosom. It issaid, that a woman crossed in love is ever alive toa new attachment, and that, either from hurtaffection or pride, her heart yearns to have thevoid filled up. Thus, her step regained its elasticity,her eye its fire, her cheek its bloom. Thesesigns of her convalescence I marked. It was thenthat I devoted all my time and attentions to her,pleaded the ardour of my passion, and perceived,with a malignant pleasure, that she daily listenedto these protestations with less impatience. Atthis time her relative died. I had already buriedthe other two. — She was now an orphan. I sympathisedwith her. We mingled our sighs ; sometimesour tears. Her's I wiped away with kisses.What a frail, feeble thing is woman ! We naturallyadopt the habits of the country in which252 THE TWIN BROTHERS.we live. Here nothing is more common thanthat the ceremony of marriage succeeds the consummationof the rite. Overcome by my vowsof eternal regard, she, in a moment of weakness,yielded to the seductive and resistless empire ofthe senses. How worthless is the flower onceplucked from the stalk ! Such she seemed to me.The tie of marriage ill suited the roaming, andsomewhat strange life I led. When she spoke ofour wedding, I derided her credulity. The shockoccasioned premature delivery. The child wasstillborn. She did partly recover her health ; buther mind — her mind — was irrecoverably gone.Would you hear more ?'Like the * wedding guest,' who was forced tolisten to the tale of one who had been transformedinto a fiend by misery, being held by the spellof * his skinny hand and glittering eye,' or as abird is fascinated by the rattlesnake, till it falls tobe enveloped in its folds; so this unhappy mancould not * choose but hear read' the catalogueof these cold-blooded villanies. He staggered asone who had received a death-stab from someunseen assassin. A weight was on his brain,oppressing him with a sense of suffocation —a cold— a creeping of the flesh — like that felt by theTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 253Arabian Prophet when touched by the hand of asupernatural being. Savage, vindictive, obduratein cruelty, as he knew this blot on humanity to be.Fancy, in all her discretion, could not have picturedto lira the capability of such an execrablecrime.Frederick at length recovered from the shockhis reason had sustained — disengaged himselffrom the viper's grasp, and vented on him theoutpourings of his soul in words which wouldhave been daggers to all but this wretch * withouta name.'A laugh, like that of some fallen angel over anextinguished world — a long, loud, demoniac laugh,mingling strangely with the roar of the fall, andseeming to have with it a mysterious sympathy,told that the ' denouement ' of the scene was notfar distant.' Thy curses,' shouted Ferdinand, ' have beenthe sweetest music to my ears. You can guesswhy I have dragged you hither. Hark ! — thecataract sends up a voice of reproach — chides mydelay — is impatient to receive you. Sound notits measured pauses like a death-watch? — Nowwill I hurl thee down, and store up the memoryof this hour to be among the comfortable of my254 THE TWIN BROTHERS.after-thoughts. You are here a traveller, unknown— a stranger — no eye sees us.** Yes !' awe struck, gasped Frederick ; * theeye of God.''* ' Little rocks he of our deeds; think you, in thecare of so many worlds, and of existences towhich we are perhaps worms, that he finds leisureto think of such as thee and me? — I have noremorse, and know no natural fear of that bugbear,priest-invented — that hereafter, about whichsuch as you prate, and in which I was once sobesotted as to believe.'To these scoffs, and the killing blasphemy ofwords, at which the soul recoils, the tongue faltersto utter, the younger brother made no answer,but mentally addressed a prayer to the greatAuthor of his being, and that done, felt a confidencein his superintending providence. The designsof this new Cain were no longer a secret,Frederick felt himself armed with power from onhigh to make a determined effort for the preservationof that life to which, though it may havenothing further to live for, he, in common withallin such a moment, instinctively clung. Hehad by a miracle escaped every other wound thanthat in his cheek, during the numerous pitchedTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 255battles in which he had been engaged ; his muscleswere steel-hardened by service, and fortified byconstant exercise ; whilst debauchery for two daysat the Inn had somewhat unbraced the nerves anddiminished the else superior energies of his enemy.Ere he could fold him in his arras, Frederick hadretreated seven or eight paces, and as good luckwould have it found a ledge of rock which offereda good arena. He had been in the habit ofwrestling with a North-countryman in the regimentto which he belonged, and, this his antagonistbeing taller and stouter than himself, hadlearnt by experience those artifices which wererequisite to make the contest equal ; he thereforeprepared his mind for the onset, and was resolvedto put in practice arts to which he had often owedthe victory.It was well that the night shrouded thismortal and unnatural conflict. It was begun byFerdinand, who, confident in his superior strength,and thinking he could lift his brother with theease a mother lifts a three years' child, with thatview seized and clasped him in a muscularembrace. But other legs were twined about hisown ; and making up by suppleness and agilityfor some inequality of weight and height, FreeTHE TWIN BROTHERS.derrick succeeded in throwing him a heavy fall onthe rock. Had the former possessed himself of theadvantage gained, he might have prevented theadversary from rising again, but whilst he stoodirresolute how to act, the savage sprang up, andrushing at him with redoubled venom, enclosedhim again in his arms. The struggle this time waslong protracted ; on one side stimulated by deadlyanimosity, and thirst of blood ; on the other, itmust be now confessed, by a sense of injuriessuch as no brother ever received from brother,so that both were inflamed with an almost equalrancour. Their arms, legs, and bodies wereconfused together, till they resembled, in thecomplexity of their folds and contortions, twoserpents interlaced. The comparison, however,only applies to that reptile in human shape, Ferdinand,who, feeling that his strength graduallybegan to fail, endeavoured to extricate himself,and succeeded, and being on the side most distantfrom the precipice, and having longer arms, nowthrew himself with all his might against his brother: he staggered with the shock, and for threepaces was obliged to give way, till a projectingmass of stone at length afforded him a footing-place.He stood firm, and making a buttress ofTHE TWIN BROTHERS. 257his left leg, and lowering his head, drove it likea battering-ram against the other's chest. Herecoiled ; the head now became a lever or pivoton which to whirl Ferdinand round, who, changedin his position from rear to front, was drivenstep by step backwards towards the chasm. Thedanger now was, lest the victor should be involvedin one fate with the vanquished. The latterfelt his end approaching ; a panic seized him,whilst Frederick, exerting all his last remainingenergies, threw him off with a sudden jerk — helost his balance beyond recovery, made one reel,and, with a yell of execration, toppled over theyawning abyss. A heavy sound and then a deepsullen plunge broke the monotonous roar of thetorrent, and proclaimed that it had sucked himinto eternity."The good curate here made many moral reflectionson the sin of fratricide, into which I shallnot ask my readers to follow him, particularly asit was evident that they had formed part of asermon on the Death of Abel. The only way inwhich we could hope for any end to this out-placeand edifying less than amusing homily, wasto question him as to the sequel of the tale. Hecontinued it thus :'* At midnight Frederick found himself at aVOL. II. s258 THE TWIN BROTHERS.cottage in the village; the door was half open —he entered. A dying lamp was disposed in aniche of the wall, and shed an ambiguous light,which, as it flickered, served to show the MaterDolores with her eyes turned towards a crucifiedSaviour, chased in ivory. On her knees beforethis well-known shrine, was bent in adorationa female figure. Her dress was strange andnegligent; her hair, fantastically wreathed withpansies, streamed in dishevelled strings over hershoulders, and across her breast hung trailing onthe floor a massy cross of ebony, attached to a rowof beads of the same material. So profoundlywrapped in her devotions, so motionless was thatfaded image of poor Agnes, that she looked asthough she had been carved ' in monumentalstone,' — transformed into a statue by grief. Atlength, deep sighs seemed to rend her bosom;she wrung her pale thin hands in despair, andwith the clear and plaintive voice whose familiartones thrilled to the very bottom of his soul,sang the following prayer, which, learnt at thecommencement of her malady, she, poor maniac,had continued mechanically to repeat.Oh I graciously inclineOn me one look of thine !Lady of many griefs, remember mine !THE TWIN BROTHERS. 259No mother grieved as thou hast done ;Deep in thy soul the sword is gone IThy looks are fix'd upon thy dying Son IThou to the Father turn'st thine eyes ;Thy bosom sends up sighs on sighsTo Heaven, for him thou lowest, and thine own agonies.My wounds — what power can heal them IMy pangs — what tongue reveal them !The deadly pangs, that rack me to the bone 1How keen this poor heart's anguish is,For what it throbs, pines, languishes 1Thou only know'st — none other, Thou alone !'Tis woe ! 'Tis woe ! 'Tis woeFollows where'er I go !To quit my side no more ; oh ! never more 1I moan, and moan, and moan,And alway am alone !This broken heart is aching at the core !The shatter'd vase that 'neath my window lay,I water'd with my tears ! Ah ! well-a-day !How happy were the hoursWhen on the May-day morn I cuU'd those flowers!A sleepless watch this bosom since has kept.For ere the sun peered through the panes, I wept ;Uprose in wild dismay ;Sate on my couch, nor knew when it was day !Save me ! O save me ! Hear my prayer !Help ! or I die in my despair !s 2260 THE TWIN BROTHERS.Oh I graciously inclineOn me one look of thine ILady of many griefs, remember mine ! *Having concluded, she wept bitterly, then roseand taking the withered flowers from the vase,pressed awhile to her heart, and replaced themat the foot of the Virgin. She now turned herface towards him. That hollow cheek — thoseglassy sunken eyes — the wildness of her air andfeatures, told too well her tale of woe.As soon as she discovered the stranger, for allfaces were alike strange to her, and most sheshunned that of man, she rushed past him, terror-stricken,and fled through the night, utteringunearthly shrieks, which grew fainter and fainter,till they were lost in the distance.Alas, poor Agnes ! On Christmas eve hername was audibly heard whispered in the Church-porchesand on the 1st of May following, I interredI am no German scholar, but have a shrewd suspicionthat this prayer is a translation from Faust. — Ed.f The names of those parishioners who are destined todie during the coming year are believed, in Wales, to bewhispered in the Church porch on Christmas eve. TheGermans have a similar superstition, on which that greatestof tale-tellers, Hoffman, has founded a beautiful story.THE TWIN BROTHERS. 261her on the south side of the churchyard, wherealready slept her three relatives, who had sunkinto untimely graves.And Frederick?" I asked.Was haunted by the spectre of his brother.The apparition crazed his brain. He still lives,if, with the non-perception of life, he can besaid to live, — an inmate of a lunatic asylum.God rest his spirit, and grant, that separated inlife from those he loved, he may be united tothem in another and a better world !"In Wales the south side of the churchyard is crowdedwith monumental stones, whilst the north has only a fewscattered graves. A prejudice confined, I believe, to thePrincipality — Ed.262 LLANDYSSIL.LAST DAY.Llandyssil. — Miseries of a Bookseller's hack. — Limit of ourTour. — Our fair Hostess. — Carmarthenshire Belles. —Beautiful Spot. — A tempting Brook. — A rustic Tyrant.Flies. — My sport. — Forge fulness. — Mary's Tombstone.— The Sexton. — The Church-yard Reflections.Visit to the Pool. — Reach Carmarthen Farewell toWales. — Start for Cheltenham.Llandyssil, 1st July.Here we are — my descriptions of the Tinyare quite exhausted, like those of the bookseller'shack, who was dismissed by his reader becausehe could not add another panegyric to a bookalready puffed fifty times. In order that I mayavoid a similar fate from mine I will only say,that we have reached the " ultima Thule" of ourtour.Yes, we are at Llandyssil, and Pennibont —only think of our being at Old Humphrey's BELLES. 26Snibont ! Strange to say, the name of the presentTafanwr is Jones, and that there is also a Mary,not the Merci, but Grig (wife) of our host.There must be something in the air, the climate,or the place, or perhaps beauty is demior epidemic here, and has been caught from thefair damsel of the Inn's still haunting it, for ourhostess is one of the prettiest blue-eyed creaturesI ever set eyes on, and so gentle and obliging,I think I could pass a second month here —though it might be dangerous ; and I am surethat were I another Horace, I should renew hisfate at Brundusium — but I, alas ! vm pullsnuper idomeneus, — and cannot say, nor would wish,in this instance, to add the military, for it wouldbe sine gloria.The Carmarthenshire belles are a different racefrom the Welsh highlanders, — of a softer mould,made of tenderer stuff. Byron is right ; the warmsouth is the right latitude.Humphrey's picture of the place is somewhatovercharged, but it is a remarkable spot ; — the village— the church — the river — the rich meadowsthrough which it placidly flows, and the woods itloves, leave nothing but himself and Mary to bedesired as a foreground to the picture— it would264 BEAUTIFUL SPOT. — TEMPTING BROOK.then be perfect. That idle fellow Charters won'tmake a sketch, even in crayon, so I am forced togive one in ink.But I hardly know the Tiny. It is runningdown, as the old fisherman would like to see it,dark and troubled with the last four days' rain. Imean to try a tempting little brook that concubines,or more politely speaking, in the languageof a fair poetess, odalisques and dancesalong like a Bayadere into the arms of the greatBashaw, only a stone's throw from the Inn. Sal-moniesis gone to bob and dabble in the mud, forhe has learned that a young lout of a squireentook yesterday, with worms, (quelle horreur!)thirty pound of trout in one rapid.Talking of squires reminds me of the avengerof outraged innocence who repaid with a justdeath the little * tyrant of his fields ;' and I amtold that the last tenant of the inn, if not actuallyturned out, was menaced to be, havinggiven umbrage to the proprietor, by harbouringsome of us brethren of the rod.But this is an "exceptio romans regular."We at least owe an ovation to Welsh " squires."*' But my flies. I have none that will do for thislittle stream, and must first manufacture a few. AFLIES. — MY SPORT. 265blue gnat is on the water." — A dozen were soonmade, and my shortest rod put in requisition.Pannier on my back, I sallied forth, for Iknew that when the great river is discoloured,the tributary rivulets are not, but generallycrowded — quaere whether the tenants of the formerget sick, and shift their quarters — " Mais anos raoutons."I am returned, having beat the brook up till itwould not afford swimming room for a minnow,and returned glutted with sport, and my shouldersaching with the weight of six dozen trout,some of them very good, and one, I measured him,fifteen inches. I took him three miles up, in avery shallow pool, but he is as narrow as a pike inthe love season, and only weighs two pounds anda half, so much for length being a criterion ofweight. One might as well say, that a man of sixfeet must be so many more stone in proportion toone of five ; or that a woman's waist (as a friendof mine affirms) is known by the span of herwrist.266 FORGETFULNESS.I now walked to the village across the bridge :I tried to make out the cottage where theold fisherman was born, but in vain. As hewas no more, I alluded to his story, but itwas forgotten. My enquiries after the SassenachSquire were equally unsuccessful. And have twoshort generations, the brief span of less than fortyyears, thought I, obliterated the memory of anevent, so tragic, so worthy of being chronicled inthe annals of this little world ! Yet so it is withthese poor ignorant, besotted creatures, who aretaught by a set of fanatics, or hypocrites, interestedonly in filling their own garners, that terrestrialaffairs are chaff, and that all we are sent into thisworld for, is solely to lay up wheat for that whichis to come. How well does the witty and sensibleMadame de Seine describe the righteous-overmuchin her times. What is the history of alltimes, but a repetition of the same lesson — onlylearnt to be forgotten ?Thus musing I walked through the street tothe eglwis, and passing into the moment, thoughtof Humphrey as I looked from over the wall uponthe meadows, the river, and the white house peepingthrough the plantation. I next read over thehumble records of the dead, in the hope of findingMARY'S TOMBSTONE. 267that of the little Mary. There were so manyinscriptions on persons, young and old, of hername, that my search long proved abortive, butafter patient examination, I discovered a plainerect slab, on which was rudely carved, " Tothe memory of Mary Jones" — no more of theletters were visible, from the circumstance ofthe tomb-stone being deeply embedded. I removedthe earth from about it with the spike ofmy rod, and was then enabled to decipher theremainder of the epitaph. It indeed recordedthe death of Mary Jones, spinster, of Pennibont,aged twenty-three, with the date of 1795; andI no longer entertained a doubt that it indeedmarked the spot where rested one who hadlittle rest on earth — the dear, faithful, gentle,noble-hearted creature, who never forgot her vows,and would not survive her shame.The next grave was of recent date, where slepta girl of eighteen, but, unlike Mary's, it was as ifby some affectionate lover newly hoed, and deckedwith such flowers as are appropriate emblems ofone cut off in untimely youth and virgin purity.I was reminded of Fidele. The sexton, a manof middle age, at this moment approached, and,putting a piece of money in his palm, I desired268 THE CHURCH-YARD. — REFLECTIONS.him to clear away the weeds and rank grass whichdeformed with their unworthy covering as finea piece of clay as went to the moulding evenof that loveliest of our immortal bard's creations,and to plant the * mouldering heap' in the samemanner as her neighbour's.Byron's —There weeds or flowers at will may growSo I behold them not,"seems anything to me but an 'Euthanasia.'Who wishes to die and be forgotten ? The bestproof of our immortality is the ambition of leavingbehind us a memorial of ourselves ; still moredoes it take the sting from death, to think thatsome beloved hand will close our eyes, and sheda tear over our remains. It is perhaps a foolishnotion, but I have ever had a horror for lying pentup and prisoned in a vault, and wish that the sunmay shine on my grave — that my body, un-immuredin shell or coffin, may sooner minglewith the elements of which it is composed. Agreat poet has said, that there is "not a speckof earth but was once a portion of man ; " and astill more beautiful fancy is it of a French writer,that every particle of the air we breathe, is peopledwith the spirits of the departed.VISIT TO THE POOL. 269Should Mary's hover nigh, may the tear shedby the sole-surviving remembrancer of her blightedlove, and justly avenged wrongs, prove no unwelcometribute to her shade !My next visit was to the pool — this I had nodifficulty in discovering. Whilst all has perishedthe name — the memory of him who destroyedwith a rude hand that fragile and delicate vase ofexquisite workmanship— and of the two devotedlovers in the place of their nativity — the aldersyet fringe the bank that overhangs the waterytomb of one, and the little heap of gravel so fatalto the other, still remains to tell his tale. TheTiny flows on as wont, and in its melancholymurmurs, and dark and gloomy stream, seemsto sympathise with their fate and sing their obsequies.Yes, it still flows on, unchanged andunchangeable —"Labour et labour in omne volubilis aevum."Nature is ever the same; not so all humanthings. And as I gazed on the spot where the Playonce stood, and brooded over the just extinctionof its owner's race, I could not help changing thewords of the Psalmist, and wishing that only theseed of the wicked had perished from the face ofthe earth.270 FAREWELL TO WALES.* * ¥^Late in the evening we reached Carmarthen,where I read to Charters my Journals, and wetalked over the varied events of the days andnights of our * horae historiae,' to which he affixedhis recensui ; (for whatever the reader may besceptic enough to think, every incident occurred,every anecdote was related during our tour.) Wenext packed them up, and directed the parcel toJulian, with all the drawings ; but before we putourselves in the mail, for Cheltenham, re-openedit, to tag to the end, a la maire de la Vestries,these words :Those who travel in order to enjoy the beautiesof nature, and who merely wish to find a comfortableshelter for the night, and a sufficiencyof wholesome food, may be well accommodatedat almost every inn in Wales, may proceedfearlessly night or day, from mountain to mountain,from lake to lake, from river to river, asfancy, or inclination directs — may even, if penniless,enter into any cottage, and share thepeasant's humble meal, and find himself, " thougha stranger," in the words of a Welsh poet, " kindlygreeted." *Ovid cyvarwydd cyvarch.FAREWELL TO WALES. 271Let the valetudinarian, the malade imaginaire,and the epicure, and those who maketheir happiness to consist in indolence, and whatthey call comforts, remain in their easy chairs attheir clubs; to each of them I would say inthe words of Horace : — *' tu nidus serves."They are unworthy to breathe the pure mountainair, or to revel in the varied delights that are tobe found in the wild and wonderful of Nature — totrace the Tiny from its source, or to see the sunriseor set over Cader Idris.272 JULIAN'S STORY CONTINUED.CONTINUATION OF THE TAL Y LLYNPAPERS.Stanley's Letter from Cheltenham. — Editor's Note.Poetry a drug. — Man a gregarious animal. — Hive withoutBees. — Special Jury. — A second Chasse. — Siege. —The Storm Capture of the Governor of the Fort. — Durancevile. — Pathetic Speech. — Stanley's Letter fromLondon. — English Tongue. — Difference between ' Vale'and ' Vales.' — Transformation of Charters. — OmeletteRusse. — Viola. — Byron's Monkey. — Soirees in Italy. —Robert le Diable. — Cranfield. — Scribe. — Reform in theLaw. — The Cook's Shop. — Effect of Sour Trout. — Bar Stories.— Sergeant * * * and the Jay. — Feeding Turkeys. —Canning's Statue — Trinity not Unity. — Faggots and Eggs.Phrenology. — Angling not laid down. — Memoirs. —Advice to Julian. — Editor's Prefatory Note to Poem. —Julian and Gizele. — Notes to Poem. — Conclusion.July 1.EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION.I MENTIONED in the Preface, that in addition tothe poem, which will be found at the end of thisvolume (though my publisher rather winced atthe length of it, and muttered something aboutmake-weighty poetry, and drugs,) my host atTal y Llyn, among the other manuscripts, com-LETTER FROM CHELTENHAM. 273mitted to my charge two letters. I had for aconsiderable time much hesitation in breakingthe seals, under the hope that I might be ableto discover the executors of the mysteriousstranger, but having failed to do so, I nowopen them. The contents are these : —The Imperial, Cheltenham, 4th July 1832.My dear Julian,Another post and no letter. — We miss you heresadly, and your curry-dried friend, the Company'sGeneral, whom I meet daily at the MontpelierSpa (looking, by the by, more conventicle-facedand atrabilious than ever) reminds me how gay amonth ago my friend Julian was at Cheltenham, andhow sad and desponding we left him at Tal y Llyn.What can have enamoured you so with the wilddesolation of that barbarous Cader ? Few minds,believe me, are sufficiently well organized to bearsolitude. Man is a social animal, and made tobe gregarious. It is better for him to communewith his fellow-beings than with his own mind. So,a truce to sentiment and metaphysics, and back tothe cheerful haunts of this hive, if the word be applicableto the dolcefar nantes, who here fourmil-lent thick as bees. 1 dined yesterday at the PloughVOL. II. T274 STANLEY'S LETTERwith Charters and another of his brethren of thelong robe. I have heard you speak in terres ofpraise of the Indian forms of justice, and condemnthe introduction of our laws into that country ofyour heart. I am half inclined to think with you,from what I heard over our wine, and shall giveyou a resumed of the stranger lawyer's reprobationof a special jury, impanelled at the Gloucestershireassizes some time back. These werehis words ;It is the pride of an Englishman that everyman's house is his castle. Blackstone and DeHolme have vaunted our glorious constitution asteres atque rotunda, without flaw or blemish ia it.Whether this panegyric be a just one, judge ye."An outrage was committed in this neighbourhood,which has been the subject of muchconversational discussion.A gentleman was residing on his own estate,a very pretty place, well known to the ramblersin the environs of this watering-place. He hadincurred debts (though very inconsiderable inamount compared with the value of this property)to a relation of his wife, an old woman borderingon ninety. Not to be tedious, she had a writissued for the arrest of her nephew : such thingsFROM CHELTENHAM. 275are of daily occurrence in this boasted land ofcivilization, and scandalize none but foreigners.The amiable relative of the gallant Captain(for such he was) looked upon him, it seems, as asecond Chasse, and his country house as anotherAntwerp ; for the execution of the process oflaw was entrusted to no less than eight tipstaves,selected from different parts of the county fortheir ruffianly qualities. They opened the batteriesabout half-past eight o'clock in the morning,whilst the family were in bed. They did not,however, proceed in a covered way, or regularlyinvest the fortress, but came prepared to take theplace by a coup-de-main, and by open assault.One of the besiegers, by way of a diversion,climbed over the iron palisades, in front of thechateau, leaving part of his clothes on thespikes, while the others attacked on the rearof the villa. The first attempt was to make apracticable breach into the ground floor, but itwas protected by iron bars. Some of these theybent, but finding their implements of war notquite equal to the battering rams of old, and thatthe windows of the buttery were strongly boltedwithin, they held a conseil de guerre, and madea reconnaissance of the place. In an outhouseT 2 • /276 STANLEY'S LETTERwas at length discovered a ladder ; this wasraised against one of the bed-rooms, and theycommenced an escalade. Now it so happened,fortunately for the accomplishment of their purpose,that in the window of this back room apane of glass had been broken, and a piece ofstrong paper supplied the vacuum. The discoverywas fortunate enough — and they profited by it.The most daring of the sows-bailiffs, in thrustinghis hand through the slight obstacle, had no difficultyin uplifting the latch, and while some of hiscompanions were holding a parley with the governorof the fort, now roused from his slumbers,two of the storming party made good their entree.They then forced with a hatchet an inner door,and captured the head of the garrison. Havingmade the commandant their prisoner, they placedhim in an open cart, and transported him toGloucester gaol, deaf to the prayers of his wife,and his earnest request to be allowed a Habeasand proceed straight to London.In that most execrable of prisons he was confinedfor many months, and, when finally removedto the Fleet, was sent there in the company ofthe female convicts.The consequence of his loss of liberty hasFROM CHELTENHAM. 277been the utter ruin of this unfortunate gentleman.His estate has been sold by the mortgagee forone third part of what it cost him ; and he hasbeen forced to make the last sacrifice to obtainhis release from thraldom."But," asked I, '* had he no remedy ? — wasthere no redress ? — would not a jury of his peershave granted him ample justice ?""You shall hear," replied the Jurisconsult.He sued the High Sheriff; Mr. Sergeantwas his counsel, and perhaps a more eloquentand feeling appeal was never uttered in a court.But what chance had a ?iovus homo against theunited and preponderating influence of the numerousand powerful partisans and friends of therichest squire in the county ? The cause waspreceded at the Assizes by four actions of a similarnature ; but these actions were so frivolous as tosuggest doubts whether they were not got upwholly for the purpose of biassing the minds ofthe Jury, and farthing damages were all thatthe plaintiffs obtained. Mr. 's address 1perfectly remember ; it concluded thus :'* * It is for you, gentlemen, to say whether aperson of the respectability of ray client, one whomerely owes a debt, is to be placed in the same278 STANLEY'S LETTERsituation as those who have committed the mostatrocious crimes. I am sure, gentlemen, in thedelivery of your verdict, you will disregard thoseprejudices which my client's misfortunes have produced— misfortunes caused by this arrest. Ofthis I am quite sure, that you will judge of thiscase only as the case of a stranger ; that you willjudge it unconnected with any feelings which thegreat influence of his enemies has raised upagainst him. How can I perfectly describe to youwhat must have been his feelings ? — you only knowthem as strange things far off from your doors,for they are beyond the sphere of your observation.You may indeed contemplate the circumstancesimmediately attendant on this outrage; you may picture to yourselves the miseryef the wife and children — you may calculate thedesolation of a family thus rudely deprived ofits natural protector, but how can you estimateall the hours of lassitude of one accustomedto active occupations — all the head-achesand the heart-aches — all that * hope deferredthat maketh the heart sick,' — all the desertion offriends — all these — how can they be made intelligibleby words? Action, indeed, is short, but thatwhich follows who can tell ! Action is momentCHELTENHAM. 279try — a wound — a blow — a motion of the hand ;but suffering is long, obscure, and infinite. Intothe consequences of that disastrous day I will not,I cannot enter ; but I ask you to consider what agentleman so injured ought to receive for such aflagrant and outrageous violation of the law.' "And what was the verdict ?" I asked.One shilling damages !"* * *Your affectionate,Stanley"!f The remainder of this letter was undecypherable,which seems to prove it had been penned after a morethan wonted sacrifice to Bacchus. — Ed.280 STANLEY'S LETTER« Clarendon Hotel, 20th July 1832.Amico Mio,Nous voila a Londres. Pardon ! I havebeen writing so many foreign letters that I havealmost forgotten my English. What a poor, barbarous,monosyllabic, runic, unphilosophical, andimpossible-to-be-correct-in tongue, it is; and wereit not for a tolerable smattering of Italian andFrench, I must, with Childee Harold, leave manya voiceless thought, rusting, like a sword, in thescabbard of my mind — no, in my brain, whichhas now been clearly proved to be the seat of,what the Romans had three words to express,mens,' ' animus,' and ' anima.' Nous avonschange tout ca. Bene — benissimo (as Charterssays, * over the left,' or as Terence does, whenby 'vales'* he means — what I shall not say).Here I am, after being * speed' for a week atCheltenham, where we saw your old gambogeQui Hi,' and his curled, portly Simeon Pure.By the by, the Greek Professor at Cambridge ends hisPreface to aeschylus with a " Vales" to his pupils, forwhom a classical friend improvised the following epitaph.Cette German ! gens Gallican, cede ! janet virCommentators possumus, hie — Vafeat." — Ed.FROM LONDON. 281And first, to tell you about Salmonius.Horace is all wrong about his * Coelum non ani-mummutant,' &c. The Charters of Tal y Llyn,and the Charters of Lincoln's Inn, barrister-at-law,are not one and the same person, and, wereI a Pythagorean, like you, I should believe thathe had undergone a trans-fig — or mig-ration.What a chameleon it is ! — musician, painter,scholar, poet, though he never wrote but fourverses (which are the least part of poetry), and, Iam told, a great speaker (a great speechifying weknow he is) ; and to dry up all these talentsin that 'seccatura,' — the courts! He wantsnothing but more travelling, to make him anAdmirable Crichton' (if he was admirable, orif there ever was such a person, which I doubt.)I told him, ' Veda Napoli e poi mori.' What doyou think the ' fanatic della Musica's ' replywas ? ' Veda Paganini e poi Mori.' But, willyou believe it? even music has no charms forhim now ; he is become quite as dead to thebeau ideal as Don Juan ; nay, unlike its author,the * ripe and real' has no charms for him. TheBar is his sole passion — Law his only mistress.I have been able to set eyes on him butonce since I came to town, for he lives excludesSTANLEY'S LETTERlively with his sable-stole fraternity, who formas separate a caste as you Hindus. But whenI did seize him by the button-hole, I neverlet him go till dinner-time, and then broughthim, vi et armis, here.Talking of dinners — what do you think?the Hottentot of a cook did not know how tomake an omelette Russe ! I was as much shockedas a Parisian bon vivant, who, after his returnfrom John Bull-land (we were dining at theCafe de Paris), said to his friend — ' Will youbelieve it? — the barbarians! they imprison pepperin a box !' He was right ; it is a cruelhabit. But not make an omelette Russe ! Youknow I can (but then one must have a Welshappetite ea:pres) feed on trout fried and troutboiled, as Lord Robert Seymour used to do atNorris Castle, boiled leg of mutton and boiledfowls one day, and roast leg of mutton androast fowls another, usque ad ovum ; here, however,c'est une autre chose. As for you, caterpillarthat you will become, nay, are, you neverknow if you have dined or not, and run no riskof meeting with the fate of Apicius ; but, nextto ' viola,' an omelette Russe is my rabbit. IFROM LONDON. 283ordered both, and neither made their appearance.Pazienza ! ,Do you call this a civilized land ? ' Englandsays a compatriot, * would be a very goodcountry if it were not for the natives.' I agreewith him ; but by England I mean the uncultivatedparts of Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, i. e.the rivers and lakes, whose inhabitants, the finnyones, are most to my taste. They don't bother,as Byron said, when he bought the monkey.Talking of botheration, or any other actionwhat a detestable, smoky, miry, Babylon this 'Swallow'* is ! I was nevera week in it without wishing myself, to my soul,in another place, which it well resembles, byDante's lively account. The question is (as wasput to a Frenchman when about to take a wife)where to pass one's evenings ? Now, at Naplesthere is St. Carlo ; in most little towns in Italygood music ; and conversazione in all. Andthen at Paris, that darling little Opera Italienne,where one does not miss a note. Not but I likethe Scala, too, at Milan, and the dark boxes, andthe snug retiring rooms, and — but no matter, orLord Erskine's name for Armata. — Ed.284 STANLEY'S LETTERI might mention the * Cent,' the ' Beccaficas,and * Macaroni a 1% Piemontese/ and the ' PetitsMots,' which none but the initiated, who meettogether three hundred days out of the threehundred and sixty-five, thoroughly understand.Talking of theatres, you know I am a perfectAbderite. Only think (quelle horreur) of gettinga music-thief to score down poor Meyerbeer's'Robert le Diable,' and what is still worse, tomaim and mangle it (there is an Act of Parliament,Charters says, against maiming and mangling),before it was murdered, so that had it notbeen for the Nun-scene and the words of the songs(that surpassed the original) I should hardlyhave recognised it. That's a fine fellow, Stan-field! The Campo Santo was magical ! likeone of Varney's moonlights, or Claude's (no, Ibelieve he never painted one) ; then the Minorschare Paris — pauvre Scribe! To have thosedear delightful Vaudevilles of his, that handleso airily and delicately (like Horace's Satires,where the ridicule and acre are so gentlemanlycombined) the passing follies of the day,planked up with all sorts of loose materials, andodds and ends, as people make rafts in a shipwreckto carry them on shore, and when onceFROM LONDON. 285safe, discard the clumsy contrivance ; to seethese charming petites comedies larded, like fricandeaux,with puns in lieu of wit, and thevolatile people of that modern Athens caricaturedinto heavy John Bulls. Boeotia nevermatched it. Helps ! Hold I as Voltaire said, inthe only good epigram since Martial, to a playwrightof his times.But to return to Charters ; what do you thinkhis 'bald disjointed' talk was about for twohours ! No Pont-garth ; no mention of thecruel Naiad of the stream ; no panegyric of hispet bait, but one incessant jargon about indictments,fines and recoveries, (over which he sighsas he used to do over the memory of the Welshamazon,) suits of law, actions at law, prosecutionsand the Courts of Exchequer and CommonPleas, and other equally un-dry topics.He complains, with weeping and gnashing ofteeth, of the big besom, the great and mightyscavenger, who has swept the Augean stable, andthreatens to sweep with it all the ordure of theland, the lawyers, off the face of the earth — tantmieux. Charters says, that what was law yesterday,is not law to-day ; in fact a revolutionin church and state would seem to him a trifle286 STANLEY'S LETTERcompared with this dire and radical reform. Ithought his Jeremiad would never have ended,but after the second bottle of claret he began toopen out, and was really a pleasant fellow, andunlocked some of * the secrets ' of his * prison-house'or cook's shop, the Hall, (he never missesone commons in term-time,) where they assembleto dine three days out of four, on tripe, andpeas and pork, about which I think with Goldsmith: —Now as to your tripe it's my utter aversion,And your pork I hate worse than a Jew or a PersianEither are to me as bad as a double doseof sour trout ; hg x§cc[j^(Br} ^ccmrog, * take it andyou 're a dead man.' Two or three of his storieswere not amiss.There is a learned sergeant who is broughtout at every circuit by some youngster observingto another, 'I saw to-day, one of those rarebirds, a jay ;' on which the ancient turns round,and says, ' Rare bird, sir ! whilst I was shootingon my manor in Kent (he once had a cottagethere) I saw fourteen in a tree ; I put up my gunand down fell thirteen, and was loading to killthe fourteenth, when he said to me, 'Goodmorning to you, Mr. Sergeant.* I could notFROM LONDON. 287find it in my heart to fire.' This beats the pieof old, who thus addressed his master : —Pica loquax certe, dominus te, voce salute,Si me non ideas, esse negabis ave."The same Munchausen (though he has toldhis stories till he believes them) relates also, thatat that identical ideal estate, his Arcadia, heused to feed his turkeys on green-gages. Hewas asked if he thought the questioner as green.** Talking of green," said Charters, (" that colourwe assign to jealousy, and the Spaniards tohope,) a learned judge who owes his soubriquetto it, observed of Canning's statue, near St.Margaret's at Westminster — 'It is larger thanlife, and greener too ;' — ' Yes,' responded thelistener, * but I know some one quite as greenTwo more, and I have done. " Some presentor by-gone judges of the Exchequer were designatedthus : one as a gentleman and a lawyer ;another as a lawyer but no gentleman ; a thirdas a gentleman but no lawyer, and the fourth asneither one nor the other. The same sort ofchanges on double-bob majors, I heard rung onfour of our episcopal, about divine, scholar, andgentleman, a trinity in which, however, therewas no unity.288 STANLEY'S LETTERA certain big-wig of the former bench,known, whilst writing a letter, and uncertainof the spelling of the word, to have rung for thewaiter at Harrogate to know if there was a win it, has the habit of reasoning with himselfin a sotto voce, and in a cause about the identityof some faggots, said, loud enough for theadvocate who conducted the defence to hear,Why one faggot is as like another faggot,as one egg is like another egg.' This wasnot lost on the shrewd quick-eared Hibernian,who, as soon as he had an opportunity, madeuse of the argument ; on which the judgesaid, ' How strange that Mr. should haveexactly hit what I have been thinking !' anddismissed the cause."Laughing is good," Hippocrates says, " forthe liver." Your's, my dear Julian, is a terriblelazarus of bile, and a good cachinnation is betterthan your twelve grains of calomel, which, unwashedas ours is, contains, I am told, corrosivesublimate enough to poison any but anIndian.Now, a word about myself. I am off to theContinent the day after tomorrow. I shouldnot have gone so soon, but for Mr. Devil (I begFROM LONDON. 289his pardon, I believe he spells his name Neville,)the phrenologist, who says, I have got the organof travelling more strongly developed in mycranium than in any man's he ever met with,except Holman, the blind circum-orbem-viator.He is right ; not that I like the act, for it is atriste plaisir, and the great object is, when onesets out, to get to the end of a journey. Thus,I never stop between London and Paris, Parisand Rome, Rome and Venice, Berlin and Petersburg.But he went on feeling my bumps,one after another, and found, not to speak ofthe occiput (the animal part), that my organ ofveneration is sadly deficient ; a hollow, like Godwin's(I wish my head was like his), insteadof a swelling, as it ought to be. Only think ofbeing able to hide two fingers in it !Another craniologist says, too, that mypoetical and pictorial bosses have been muchenlarged since the last 'tact.' What a conjuror!though, I suspect, my fair conductress had givenhim a hint about our tour. Will you believe it,there is no vacant corner in the chart left forangling ! What an imperfect and incorrectscience ! This system of materialism does not, Iknow, chime in with your unbelief in matter ; butVOL. IL u290 STANLEY'S LETTERI am determined to leave behind me my bust,to swell Spurzheim's collection, and moreover tobe a living testimony to confirm my frontal indications,by starting for Geneva on Monday.And you, *' Caro mio," — rattle as I am, Ithink of you often, and seriously. Tell me whatyou think of my ' Memorabilia,' and either keepor burn them, as you like. But, take my advice,and commit all your own to the flames. They,it is true, cannot contain the records of oneevent that ought to leave behind it a permanentsting. But what are mine ? A memorial oftime misspent ; health destroyed — prospectsfoundered — fortune impaired — and, to crown all,of a killing and deadly blight in love, and aninseparable perpetual-blister in marriage. Whilstyou must find the bright spots so predominateover the dark ones, that they ought to eclipsethem in your ' Tabula ;' and yet I perceivedthat you never rose from their perusal the happier.But, tell me that you have chased awaythe clouds that overhung you at our parting,which I fervently hope will not be, as you said,for ever. If your cheerfulness is not restored,by a determined effort shake off torpor andlethargy, and, to enable you so to do, lose noFROM LONDON. 291time in quitting Tal y Llyn. Bear in mind, thatQuiet to quick bosoms is a hell ;'that indolence is an improve Siren, and believe,that though I have, as you know, lost all myearly friends by neglect, no one has a warmerheart — no one appreciates more the value ofyour friendship thanYour affectionateStanley.u2292 JULIAN'S HISTORY CONTINUED.EDITOR'S NOTE TO THE POEM.Debita spares laciym^ favillam. — Thor.The mention made by Julian of his Indian bride,whose name it seems was Gizele, the allusion to herrescue from the funeral-pyre and premature death,excited in me so much interest, that I was happy tofind he had preserved from the wreck of his journalsand papers the following poem, of which I have alreadyspoken.In passing through Cheltenham some weeks ago, Imade inquiries of several Anglo Indians in the hope ofgetting a clue to the discovery of the poet's real name,and was one day in company with an officer just returnedfrom Bengal who, by the following description he gaveme, had, I have no doubt, met Julian at the residencyof Delhi. His words were these : —JULIAN'S HISTORY CONTINUED. 293During the hot winds of 1820, on my way to theGreen Desert on a tiger-excursion, I visited Delhi, thecourt and the prison of that shadow of royalty, the descendantof the kings of India, and still mocked withthe title of the Great Mogul. The few days spent inthat capital, now a splendid ruin, were employed in exploringits antiquities. One evening I happened todine at the ambassador's, or, as he is called, the * resident's,'and opposite me was seated a stranger of so remarkablea form and appearance, that he absorbed myundivided attention. He was considerably above thecommon height, and, though emaciated and darkenedby the sun, possessed the outlines of a manly beautysuch as I have never seen equalled. His age it wouldhave been difficult to guess, and it was evident that awinter of strange sorrows' had prematurely furrowedhis brow and thinned his hair, which had become almostgrey. A profound expression of melancholy sat on hisfine features, a melancholy so deep, that it acted like achilling atmosphere on those around him. Shortly afterthe hookah was introduced, I observed him, as if accidentally,cast his eye on a ring inscribed with orientalas well I could judge, with Persian characters — and,pressing it to his forehead with a look of unspeakableanguish, he suddenly rose and left the table. His departureexcited neither remark nor inquiry ; it seemed294 JULIAN'S HISTORY CONTINUED,that the sacredness of his grief forbade either. Mycuriosity was, however, strongly roused, and some daysafter, an attache to the embassy, who joined our ,narrated to me a story similar in all its partsto the one you have read me."Editor.THE PINDARRIES. 295JULIAN AND GIZELE.Lo ! on the ground, where idling groups, reclined.Greet the soft breathing of the evening wind.Through cocoa's^ shell the perfumed weed inhale,Or circle round to hear some veteran's tale ;Or count their feats of outrage on the way,Like tigers dreaming o'er their mangled prey.Forth from his turban's twists one draws a prizeOf coin to feast an envious comrade's eyes.Anklets and armlets some, of women wore ;And some show'd those of infants stain'd with gore ;Whilst many, from their cummerbunds ^ unfoldRings, diamond-sparkling — cloth of tissued gold :Cashmere's gay shawls another's temples braid.Each shawl * a yearly task of one fair maid.With flowers embroider'd, that in beauty vie —Rare art ! — with Nature's every choicest dye.What delicate webs from Dacca's looms are here !Like woven * wind, or films of gossamer !There lay a bale, rich-laden with a storeOf spice, from Lanka's ^ incense-wafting shore.Here — sables barter'd'mid Siberia's'^ snows;There — steeds ^ from where the famed Hydaspes flows,296 THE PINDARRIES. — ZALIM.Whose race in lists of battle far exceedsThe crest of Cutch, and fire of Katawar breeds.All that the gorgeous East of treasure boasts,Made up the plunder of those brigand-hosts.Till close of day they had not broke their fast.Yet ghauts ^ and trackless jungles had been past,Unfelt such abstinence — for hope beguiles —The hope of spoil — a weary waste of miles.And now their hands, in ancient rite, prepareA simple feast of vegetable fare.Some boil the rice, and to its grains supplyArabia's ^° spices, and the turmeric's dye.Mix with the mess the consecrated ghee,"Nor envy the Nawab ^^ his luxury :Whilst others, on the living embers bakeThe ripening corn, or roast the Acta's '^ cake :Beside, each palfrey stands, who shares or stealsA wonted portion of his master's meals ;Slave of his will, companion of his course !If aught he loves or worships — 'tis his horse !III.Apart, but undistinguished, sate their lord,Zalim — fit chief for such a bandit-horde.In them the blood of wolves and tigers ran.Nor did his nature misbecome the clan,For stamped in every lineament were readThose demon-thoughts, a train of crimes had bred.Crimes unrestrain'd, that in the flowing tideOf a long life's success, seem'd justified.ZALIM. — Spares. — Bells. — TUGS. 297All ties — if e'er he owri'd — had lost their force.He fear'd no God — and could he feel remorse ?Pindaric-bands a subject train he ledBeyond the swift Bermuda's '* sacred bed,Where many a Jaghire ^^ bow'd beneath his reign,Wrench'd from the Gwalior ^® Rajah's wide domain.His name was terror — and his neighbours boughtWith ^"^ gold, that safety arms had vainly sought :Hence distant realms invite — a richer soil.And provinces, that promise ampler spoil.What though on every hand, or soon or late.May wake the thunders of the guardian *^ state,Full well, by past experience proved, he knewHow little care the many for the few,And all their wrongs and injuries meet at bestWith empty threats — or pity — unredrest.IV.Small then his gole^^ — but daily, hourly cameFresh followers, lured by his success and name ;Till, as when swoln by Tibet's gather'd snow.Streams rise to oceans, widening in their flow.His durra^° thus — when rush'd on every sideAll castes and sects, in one overwhelming tide.East, west, north, south — a wild and restless flood —In nought united, but the thirst of blood.No oaths are given, no question made of deeds —A claim to brotherhood, their swords and steeds.Then many a Spahee left for hopes of spoilThe slow returns of honourable toil ;The robb'd, by rapine seeking to renewTheir broken fortunes, to his standard flew,And many a Beil,^^ and Tug, whose evil eye298 Hebrew. — GOORKHAS.Spoke the fix'd heart, alike to do or die :And Ghebres ^^ too were there, a son and sire,Best of idolaters, who worship fire :And many an outlaw, well prepared to climbThe desperate steps that lead from crime to crime.There too the homeless, childless wanderer — rivenAll bonds on earth, and lost all hopes of Heaven.One such I mark'd, and soon the Goorkha knew.By his high Calmuc cheek and tanner hue :111 fit his mountain-garb for such a field,His only arms a battle-axe and shield.What nerves the hand .'' what more the limbs can braceThan Alpine air, and wrestling, and the chace ?His iron frame that march had fail'd to tire ;His sunken eye still flashed with all its fire.Aloof he sat, unheard to breathe his sighs,And gaze on heaven, to think of louder skies;Gazes on that horizon's boundless blueTill fancy sees, what he no more shall view.His pastures ever green, and lawny dells,And home with all its unforgotten spells ;Sees peaks on peaks immeasurably hurl'd.The giant barriers of an elder world !Above, their virgin realms of glittering snow.And all Terhoot's*^' rich rice-grounds stretch'd below.That vision wakes from Memory's inmost cell —How leaped his boyish heart with Tartar swell.What time, impetuous as their ice-fed rills.His hardy tribe rush'd down from all their hills,And, like a deluge in the monsoon's rains,Swept the ungamer'd harvest from the plains ;ARABS. — BRINJARRIES. 299Taught by their sires that slaves should guide the plough,And freemen reap what toiling Helots sow.And what are they ? — estranged from home, — and thou ?A father's curse pursues, where'er he be,A wretch that sold his tribe, * vile yellow dross,' for thee !VI.But of all these, the locusts of the land.That swell that robber-chieftain's lawless band,Where, rancorous all, like Arabs, ^^ none proclaimSo loud their scorn for Issa's^^ hallow 'd name,Remnant of Ishmael !^^ nor can time eraseThe hate enjoined to Hagar's recreant race.Where shall they fly ? their huts in ruin laid ;War no employment, yet their only trade !Stripp'd of their last-loved all, the sword ^^^ — disgraceNo deeds of future prowess can efface —Oft in that day of fate, invoking death,They call on Vengeance with unwearied breath,Long for their tents, and herds, and desert sands,And curse the hour they roam'd to stranger lands.These join'd his flag, with sheiks, a martial clan.Distinguish 'd as an unmix'd race of manBy port more lofty, stature more erect,And courtly grace peculiar to their sect.VII.Enforced by Want, the mistress of Despair,Mix'd with the crowd, I see Brinjarries-^ there,Who ill exchange a life of pastoral easeFor scenes of blood and fellowship like these.Carriers of India, their associate bandsTransport the products of its farthest lands.300 BRINJARRIES.Stout Amazonian dames, wherever bendTheir wandering steps of enterprize, attendAn equal burden of the march to bear,An equal portion of the labour share.Nor envy they, content with frugal board.Those artificial comforts towns afford ;Their flocks with covering, herds with milk supply.And others' wants to them are luxury.All, too, are equal : no colossal prideTramples a little world beneath its stride ;No rich they have, if meant by golden store ;If all their wishes crave be wealth, no poor.No chiefs hereditary rule their clan ;No written laws, for man is just to man.Though train'd to arras, no mercenaries theyTo stake their lives and consciences for pay ;And yet well skilled in either hand to wieldThe two-edged sword, or parry with the shield.That native courage freedom ever gives,Stamp'd in their youth, is mark'd through all their lives ;Brave to a fault, with soldier-creed they deemDeath bartered well for life's inglorious dream.VIII.Such were his troops ; more dexterous none to guideThe arch-neck'd courser and to tame his pride.Vault from the saddle, mount again at speed.Halt in full charge, or wheel the fiery steed.Poise the light spear or hurl the rocket-brand,Or aim the matchlock with unerring hand.Yet all undisciplined their ranks to join.Compact, extend, or form the battle-line ;Their fields defenceless towns, their march a flight.A MAHRATTA. — HIS ADDRESS. 301And spreads, like summer-frosts, a killing blight.No law they own — no master but their will ;In wanton waste, with plunder laden, stillThey ravage, torture, murder, burn ; nor ceaseTill all is desert ^^9 — and they term it peace.IX.But hark ! what mean those voices ? and a cry —A buzz of gathering words, " A spy ! a spy !Seize him and drag him to our chief !" The throngAn unresisting captive press along.Unbent that stranger's form with fear or shame.No feet unsandaPd to " The Presence" came;Haughty his mien, and from his eyes' quick firesFlash'd the bold spirit of Bundela'*' sires.Once they had groan'd beneath a despot's power,And many a fierce Mahratta rued the hourWhen, bursting each a lion from his cage.They taught their tyrants what the noble rageOf patriotic feeling, as it brokeThe galling chain and snapped the heavy yoke.The bandit chief a moment shrunk askanceAnd cower beneath the freedom of that glance ;Yes, Zalim, crouched to man that heart of thine.Which ne'er had trembled at the name divine.Whence com'st thou ? answer, as you hope to saveYour carcase, caitiff, from the vulture's grave !"— Whence come I ? whence'— enough for thee to know*' Though not a spy, that I am Zalim's foe !Once I had all that makes existence dear —But no ; I must not play the woman here !Thy savage nature tells me what my fate,And thee — yes, thee the dogs of vengeance wait ;302 ZAUM's REPLY.Track'd to your lair, on every side beset,*' Thou shalt not 'scape, and canst not break the net !To fly, not fight, is thine ; divided part'* Of antelope and wolf, in feet and heart !'Tis thine to torture ere you tear your prey,And prowl by night, for darkness is thy day :Then shall thy death be worthy of thy name'sAnd close, as it has passed, a life of shame !" —— False prophet, cease ! and thank thy stars, not me,You 've lived so long — I listen'd thus to thee.Is it for thee with Pundit breath ^^ to preach, —Zalim to learn what morals thou canst teach ?Free as the wind, 'tis ours at will to rangeFrom land to land, new joy in every change.Fleet, though unroofed, our small and hardy steedsDefy the Kaffir's^^ sleek and pamper'd breeds.From eve to morn, again from morn till night,We shape our course as prompts pursuit — or flight ;No noonday sun, hot winds, or rains, we heed —No march and halt alternate check our speed.Where is the stream so strong we cannot ford ?Here forced the gate — there hews a way the sword !Let priestcraft prate of worlds of future bliss,Enough tor us— there 's joy to spare in this.Man's date is fix'd — what matter when, or how .'''Tis wiser far to make this world a now.And can, or fairer forms, or brighter eyes,Than bless our harass, beam in Paradise ?We envy not the Prophets*: Seeva's heaven,Keylas '* and Aden, both in woman given.*Tis more than Heaven to circle in our armsAn universe, their hemispheres of charms.To us not different sects, but climes supply.ZALIM's REPLY. — THE HOOLEE. 303Inclosing, ever fresh variety,From those wide shores the arrowy Indus laves,To where the Ganges rolls its yellow waves ;Gazelle-eyed maids,^^ whose race unsullied springs,Through a long lineage, from ancestral kings,And those scarce sweeter flowers, so hard to rear,That pine with passion for their lov'd Cashmere''All yield their tribute to our daring hands,And grace the march of our triumphant bands.Let others, in the slow pursuit of gain,Eke out their years, and each an age of pain,The patient drudges sow, but who shall reap ?The stubble theirs ; — the harvest ours to sweep. —Still may each mean and plodding spirit stoopTo drag his chains, or play the willing dupe,And deem it (sprung from Brahma's feet) ^ his doomTo turn the sluggish soil, or ply the loom,For what ? — to die, as lived his sire — a slave !And add another heap to swell his grave.'Tis nature's ordinance, — man preys on man;Our's not the fault, — condemn the general plan !Call us Pindarries,^9 Cossacks **' — to the strong,All that the weak protect not, should belong.Kings have no better title than the sword !What are their armies but a bandit-horde ?But thou who dearest to question or to blame,Whence is thy title, babbler ! to the claim ?Hence to the flagstaff,*^ — thus to prove, in spiteOf all thy dreams, that here my Will is Right."X.The moon is up ! and 'tis a time of feast,Hoolee,*'^ — the Saturnalia of the East.304 JULIAN. — ATTACK BY PINDARRIES.List to the cones and cymbals, as they stunThe deafening ear: — the orgies are begun.Youth, age, rank, sex, in like confusion lost,As reel some crew in helpless vessel tost.'Tis riot all in that disordered rout.And mirth, rude mirth — they shriek — they scream, theyshout.Spring forward — dance — vault wildly from the ground.Or wheel in dining mazes round and round,Join hands, in multitudinous acclaim,Her ! *^ — Hera ! — invoking Vishnu's name.XI.Rolls the dark Jumna in its pride !In his Chabootra's ** trellised bower,That overhung the deep-blue tide,(Where creepers interlaced on highA star-engemmed canopy,)Soothed by the freshness of the hour,Julian sat listening to the flowOf the smooth current — festive humOf voices, and the doubling drumThat mellow'd o'er the waters come ;Or watch'd the soft and tremulous glowOf** countless lamps that floated by,And seem'd as 'twere another sky,A brighter firmament below.But whence ? ah ! whence that lurid gleamWhich dies with crimson hue the stream ?Was it a line of lengthening fireThat blazed from some funereal pyre ?Or comet streaming from afarThat shook its loose and sanguine hair ?SACK OF GIZELE's NATIVE VILLAGE. 305No ! 'tis the beacon-blaze of war !And torches hurry to and fro,And, mix'd with shrieks of woman's woe,The din of conflict rends the air.The sabres clash, the matchlocks flash,And now and then the sullen dashOf corses, seen by the red glareOf crackling flames that pierce the sky.From boats below, and roofs on high.Hist ! Hark that shout ! — in peals it dies away, —Now in the distance melts each fading ray,Till not a spark is mirrored in the wave.And all is night — substantial as the grave,And silence, — save at intervals, around.As knells the Nobut's*^ faint retiring sound.XII.The deed is done. — And did no arm extendIts succouring aid, almighty to defend !Thus falls the fold to prowling wolves a prey ?Must horror shroud the crime ? nor dawn a dayOf just atonement for this night of woe .'' —Yet what, alas ! remains ? — No tear to flow !No house to rifle ! — none the brand to feed !No heart to break ! no bosom left to bleed !Gizele's native village razed — and heIn idlers lingering thus beneath a tree !Whence is the film that veils his eyes ? — a tearTrembles a moment there — to disappear.The pious drop that pity's fount supplied,A thirst for vengeance in the socket dried.Yes, Vengeance marks her victims ! — sure, tho' late,Rolls back the clouds that brought the storm of fate.VOL. II. X306 PARTING SCENE— GIZELE's REMONSTRANCE.XIII.Through the tall casement, where the moonbeam weavesA mellow light, amid the blooms and leavesOf jasmine and the orange, that diffuseOdours concentred by the midnight dews.Whilst o'er the pavement's rich mosaic *^ play'd .A fount, that sleep-inviting murmurs made, —Lull'd by those sounds and sweets, a shape of IndIn infant slumbering on a couch reclined :Pale as the Tajh's*^ marble was her cheek,Her features and her form half-breathing speakThe love that animated them, each lineMight pass in sculpture's language for divine ;In each harmonious motion was a grace,A gentle beauty beaming from her face.And sighs, through lips like young pomegranates, stole,That half reveal'd what dream had waked her soul.What was the wish on which her fancy roves .''What murmurs she ? The name of him she loves.She starts — 'tis he : — her joy-o'erflowing tears,Changed by his look, too soon give place to fears —For kindred hearts, in sympathies unsought.Speak, ere the tongue finds utterance for the thought,And lovers' eyes the inmost soul unfold,Till words too soon confirm'd what her's foretold —XIV.We part! — this night — part— dearest ! is it meetMy pulse should throb, when thine has ceased to beat ?When once a love like ours is snapp'd in twain,What power can link anew the broken chain ?With none to solace — none to bless —Shall one of thy Gizele's raceA SUTTEE. — RESCUE. 307Crawl, self-detested, on the faceOf earth's wide trackless wilderness ? —Still linger here — condemn'd to castA look despairing on the past,Enchanting for a world of light,An universe of death and night ?Where could I turn ? — nor here — nor there —Life's poison would be everywhere :For what can make the heart forget ? —Yet deem not, love ! that this of mineWould have aught left it to regretBut thee : I did not, could not pine,For that, whose loss has made me thine —Link'd as it was — is — must be now,With those who urged the barbarous vow ;For though betroth'd, I was a child,*' And therefore easily beguiled,And till I reach'd the fatal pyre,I knew not what's a Suttee's rite,I deem'd not of the harrowing sight —I saw the crackling flames up-spire !And on his bed, but now his bier,Saw cold in death, the form of oneTo me no tie had rendered dear,My own must soon be stretched upon ;All that I loathed to be — above —And all — below — that shared my love —Yet then so senseless to my cries !That but for thee, had soon been drown'dAmid the brazen lots sound —For I the pile had circled twice —And was I spared this sacrifice,Thus to be torn from life and thee ?x2308 HINDU PHILOSOPHY.Is this the death reserved for me ?For me — who lived not, till I drewThat breath of thine. Dear Julian ! you —'Twas you first taught this heart of mineTo throb in ecstasy with thine,To beat in mystic ebb and flow,Self-conscious of thy joy, or woe.*' Thy very fingers intertwined,** Have each a pulse, a chord of mind,That wakes in this a kindred tone,*' Twin instruments in unison.Why said I two ? We are but one —One heart — one mind— one soul — one breath-andshall we not be one in death ?One urn should hold, enwrap one flame,The ashes of our mingled frame.Is it for souls like ours to range .''Our natures then we cannot change.My ^ saumur, when she lost her mate, —And shall a bird affections proveMore tender than a woman's love ? —Remember ! how I wept her fate,When anguish broke two hearts in twainThat may not reunite again.Why is a Paradise assignedTo us, and not the feather'd kind ? —** My darling too, my favourite tree,Whom I have nursed from infancy, ~And water'd thee, and given thee air,And reared thee with a mother's care,Thou hast not or a bud or flowerBut I have watch'd them hour by hour.HINDU PHILOSOPHY. 309Counted thy petals, one by one,And shielded them from cold and sun.Think you, my basil ^^ does not knowFrom whom its life and fragrance flow ?*" It fades, and it will die with me,An emblem of my fate for thee. —I dream'd — an angel with a veilAppear'd, and hid you from my sight.I only dream'd, — then why so pale ?'Twas but a visionary sprite.Or, dearest ! it were best to joinThy creed, and quit my own for thine —Yet in this amulet 's a charmTo guard my frame from mortal harm ;Nay more, a stronger spell, 'tis givenTo pave the soul a way to Heaven,(If words have any spell, they can,)And claim for us those rights with man,Untaught, unknown, in the Koran.Our law, 'tis true, forbids that oneu Qf 52 yg presume such verse to con,'* For that on meditation's wingAlone should seek the fountain-springOf truth, inspired in every line,That stamps our Shatter as divine.Ah, no ! I cannot quit my shrine —Tell me I need not kneel at thine ;For I 've been taught to love, and spareThe inhabitants of earth and air,To view beast, insect, bird, and tree,As spirits in captivity,And thus a sisterhood to claimWith Nature's universal frame ;310 HINDU RELIGION.Till all I hear, or breathe, or see,Image her Deity to me.Yon orb on high, this little flower,Are emblems of her love or power.These stars that light the blest above !These flies that trim their lamps of love !The birds, that in their slumber dreamOf love with morn's awakening beam ;This boolbool, on whose every note*' The soul of passion seems to float ;The fount that stars with diamond lightThe raven tresses of the night ;The stream that ripples by, scarce heard ;The breeze, amid the blossoms stirrM,That pant and tremble with delightOf their own motion, and the airWith incense breathing everywhere —In such an hour, in such a calm,Have each a sense, to feel their balm,A tongue to speak their love like me,A soul to thrill with sympathy.Then by this ^^ intra that I tearThus from my breast, this lock of hair,This token-lock, that must not part,When throbs no more ray widow'd heart -This mirror-rings* that to my breastReflects thine image, fondly prest —By all that's dear to me, to you,Recall — recall that word ' adieu !' "Hush, my Gizele ! hush those fears ;Such omens dark, and boding tears111 suit with Julian's bride— with you ;JULIAN'S FAREWELL. 311A parting this, and no adieu !Danger in every strange disguise,In visions ever haunts your eyes :In every flower that tells its taleOf love, some poison may exhale ;The love-lit sky in night's deep calmMay yield a falsely-flattering balm ;Each breath of heaven that I respireMay teem with pestilential fire.Such brooding o'er the land of latestSpread not o'er me its wings of fate ;And years for both are yet in storeBright as those hues the sunset wore,And, like that sun, thy love and mineShall still glow on as we decline.But deem not death our hearts shall sever,That when we part, we part for ever ;No — if we should return to earth,And live again in some new birth,As thus your creed as taught you, dear !What is there, life of mine ! to fear ?Whatever changes we may prove,Our forms may alter, not our love ;Whate'er I am, where'er I be,'Twill be a paradise with thee !And if in realms of bliss aboveThere should be different heavens of love,Deem not the more that we shall part ;The pure religion of a heartSo chaste, so innocent as thine,Might breathe its prayers at any shrine !That form, with which the antelope"In symmetry would vainly cope;312 JULIAN'S FAREWELL. — PURSUIT.Eyes tenderer far than hers, that shineBright as the gems of Punna''5^ mine,Scarce heighten 'd by their fringes' jet, "The foil that "*s to the diamond set,Might call a seraph down to save,And spare such charms an earthly grave ;Far more, your spirit one might winAt any heaven to let you in. —But is it that illusive lightWhich cheats the eye while yet 'tis night ?Ah, no ! I hear my charger neigh :That signal gun — alas! 'tis day !This — this embrace must be the last :My heart beats quick, and thine how fast !Your tears, too, fall upon my head,And mine, I deem'd not would be shed."* * *» * *XV.Spurr'd their fleet steeds — lo ! ready-marshall'd standOn Jumna's banks, in haste convened, a band.Few, though determined, they ; each breast inspiresThat rancorous hate a thirst of vengeance fires.The rapid stream is forded : soon appearsA scene, how harrowing ! to confirm their fears —A scene of midnight rapine and of blood !It was a village, nested in a woodOf spreading mangoes, whose perpetual leavesWere wither'd when devouring from the eavesThe flames flash'd upward, and discolouring threwAn autumn on them, of unnatural hue.RUINED TEMPLE. — Penchant. 313Save where in clusters, from some topmost bough,The golden apples hung untasted now.No hand was left to cull that fruit — no birdsThat borrows thence its gorgeous plumage, heard ;But all was silence — a sepulchral gloom —The mansions of the living made their tomb !XVI.The Fane, that now a tottering ruin stands,Reveals the work of some remorseless hands ;A statue's shatter *d fragments strew the bank.And forsworn-steps of the polluted tank. ^In fancy still the maids and matrons seemTo throng around the consecrated stream.Perform the ritual at ablution's hour,And pluck from purple stems the lotus-flowersI mark their stately forms of native graceAnd the full pitcher that overshadow the face ;Whilst half the cheek and half the swelling breastHides the light drapery of the envious vest,Through whose thin folds in flowing lines are seenShapes such as Art might choose for Beauty's queen.XVII.Yon benches, where the hoary elders sate,^"Where oft they held, assembling, high debate,To guard the morals of their little state.To cheer the virtuous with the meed of praise,And turn the wayward back to virtue's waysBy mild reproof; that venerable seat,Which in his play the little urchin's feetDared not to print — that circle's sacred round,Sacred no more, is levell'd with the ground !314 DESERTED VILLAGE. — AN ASCETIC.XVIII.We roam along the solitary street,No breathing thing — save pariahs there to meet.Next sorrowing visit the deserted shrine ;Some chumpak- flowers 6^ proclaim it still divine.Those holy flowers have lost their scent and hue ;Haply the hand and heart are withered tooThat made those humble offerings — none shall bringSuch presents more to deck the mystic Ling,^Mother or maid. Look on ! what form appearsBy sorrow crazed, with fasting bent and years ?Is it a man ?^^ So spectre-like, he seemsAs one who crawls before us in our dreamsFrom mouldering charnels. His emaciate frameHangs o'er the embers of a fitful flame.The storm that left a wreck, yet pass'd him by,A human step revives to fancy's eye ;He starts, and glaring wildly at the sound,With one faint shriek falls lifeless on the ground.XIX.Ill suits the tale — perhaps "twere slight to boastThe foul discomfit of that felon-host.Less fit to grace the annal-lists of fightThan pall of houseless dogs the appetite.What boots to paint how Vengeance loosed the rein,And, leash with Carnage, gorged herself with slain ?What flocks of ravening vultures filed the skies,Or wheeled and wheeled to earth, with joyful cries.On those purveyors who for them had madeFull many a banquet, as in turn they prey'd .'*And yet 'twere worth the telling, of that bandROUT. — FIELD OF BATTLE. 315How died the leader, struck by Julian's hand ;And Singha's^^ fate a pitying sigh might claim,Whose feats of valour well had bought his name.Worse foes o'ertook them, if from man they fled ;The roads are choked or avenue with dead.'Twere vain to count their numbers, or recordWho fell by plague, who perish'd by the sword.These had their victims : more in the unequal strifeWith Nature lingered out the dregs of life.Some sank a ghastly prey to that diseaseWhose torturing gnawing on the vitals seize ;And some in writhing martyrdom to thirst,Of woes embittering man's last hour the worst,That makes more difficult the thick-heaved breathAnd racks with fire the fluttering pulse of death.Stretch'd in the dust, outworn with toil and pain.The enduring camel strives to rise in vain ;Here with long sobs the belaboured courser lies,And here with equal pangs his master dies.All forms, and sights, and sounds, are there to fillThe black account and catalogue of ill ;And pang severer far than any there.The conscious stings that make the worst despair.No quarter 's given ; 'twere vainly ask'd of thoseWho treat as fiends in human shape their foes.Give scope to rage not blood itself can sate,Nor deem, while one remains, complete the task of fate.XX.But Rumour soon with pestilential breath,With Single's, noised the news of Julian's death —The wound, the weapon that had pierced his side,And e'en the very hand by which he died ;316 GIZELE's DEATH.Nor were the hour of conflict or the spotIn circumstantial falsity forgot.Soon met the sad detail Gizele"'s ear, —For one who loves is ever first to hear,To read in looks what words would ill conceal.And what that mirror fails to image, feel.Scarce had she borne her Gingham's loss, who fellProtecting one by duty proved too well ;For in that brother's memory centred allWhich blood endears or childhood's dreams recall ;But Julian was a tree, round which her formHad clung for refuge, sheltering from the storm,And with it, branchless, leafless, sapless, sunkThe ivy that had leaned upon its trunk.There is a woe, far, far beyond the source.The shallow-channeird seat of tears, whose courseFlows, healing balm that many a wound relieves ;But what can heal the broken spirit that grievesO'er all it loved ? No tear was in her eye —Her bosom inly bled, but heaved no sigh ;To none she told her pain; for words, how weakTo soothe an anguish all had fail'd to speak !From morn till eve it works its cankering way.Till, like a flower which dies with dying day.Fled her sweet spirit — whither ! who can tell ? —Rest evermore a heart that loved too well !XXI.The Durra routed, and their chieftain slain,Julian his sabre sheathes and quits the plain,With noble pride disdains to lift his handAnd crush the remnant of a scattered band.This to his followers — back he wends his way,HINDU GREETINGS ON RETURN. 317Much musing on the horrors of the day,Oft o'er his Arab's neck is seen to bend,As swells the sad remembrance of his friend :A brother's fall he mourns — in thought repairsGizele's loss by softer, tenderer cares ;Then rise the unforgotten scenes of home,Spells of the heart to exorcise its gloom —The festive offerings for his safe return ;The countless lamps, shrine each within its urn ;The mora-wreaths about his neck entwined.Those flowers the emblems of as pure a mind ;The delicate attentions ever new,Slight to repeat and understood by few ;The tear unshed that glistens in the eye,The sigh of joy, whose echo is a sigh;Limbs trembling, lips with passion quivering through,Where soul and spirit intermingle too :One hour like this (how rarely given !) requitesAn age of dreaming days and sleepless nights,Brings fairy visions back to Fancy's eyes —Makes coming years in bright perspective rise.Ah ! why recall — anticipate these charms ?An urn — her dust, is all that fills his arms !XXII.Then in his bosom Julian more and moreCherish'd a snake, long coiled about its core.Whose fangs, too deeply printed, left a woeThat time in its obliterating flow.Which blots all memories else, could not efface ; —Estranged from man henceforth he ran his race.One must have known a loss like mine, to knowHow much such woe surpasses other woe,318 JULIAN'S DESPONDENCY.Who envy here a brother's happier lot —He sleeps without a stone to mark the spot —I — thrilling once with all love's eloquent force,Must bear an endearing intercourseWith those who make of life a cold pursuit,And laugh at feelings in their bosoms — mute?XXIII.Year after year, waned lingering moons away.And Julian's hair tumid prematurely grey :Grief has a hand more furrowing far than Time's,A fire more wasting than the worst of climes ;'Twas this, like wax before the taper's ray.Made all that cheer'd existence melt away.Then grew his form attenuate, and the storeThat fed the lamp diminish'd more and more.Till, in the socket glimmering, it but threwOn the dark future a despairing hue,A dull and melancholy-tinctured gloom.Where, in the dim horizon seen, that tomb.However sought or sigh'd for, none have yetView'd free from doubt, or terror or regret.JULIAN'S NOTES TO THE POEM.Note S page 295.The bubble bubble, or goor-goorie. The commonpipe used by the lowest caste of Hindoo.Note % page 295.It is the common practice with these barbarians tocut off the legs and hands of infants and children, toenable them more easily to obtain these ornaments.Note 3, page 295.The girdle about the loins.Note % page 295.Many a Cashmere shawl is said to occupy a yearnslabour of the delicate hands employed in its embroidery.Note ^, page 295.Centum texticulum. — Apuleius.Note ^, page 295.Lanka. — Sanskrit. — Ceylon. The cinnamon, afterits transport to Calcutta, is sent up the Ganges to Mir-spore,and thence conveyed on Brinjara bullocks tothe inland provinces. I remember overtaking in my320 NOTES.overland journey a herd of Brinjaras thus laden, whosefreight perfumed the air to some distance.Note ', page 295.A considerable trade is carried on between Siberiaand the shores of the Caspian, in sables, Russia leather,&c. which find their way to Hindostan in barter forcotton cloths.Note % page 295.The caravans are on these occasions accompanied byTurkoman horse-dealers, who supply our cavalry withchargers of a noble and original breed. Some also arebrought from the Seek country, the Punjab, or Fiverivers, one of which is the Greek Hydaspes. TheProvinces of Katawar and Cutch furnish the Dukkin,or Western part of India, with its best horses.Note 9, page 296.A ghaut is a chain of mountains, a mountain pass, orford of a river.Note 1°, page 296.Curry.Note ^S page 296.Ghee. Clarified butter.Note 12, page 296.The Nawab, now King of Ode. " Que de plusridicule en effet*" (says Niebuhr,) " que de voir cinqou six employed, acres avoir mani les estoffes pendanttoute la matinee, assembler le soir pour nommer (hemight have said therefore) des rois i"NOTES. 321Note »^ page 29G.Acta ; coarse flour.Note 1*, page 297.The Bermuda, or Nerbudda; one of the sacredrivers of the Hindus.Note 1^, page 297-A district granted to a military commandant for thepayment of his troops.Note i*^, page 297.Scientia.Note ", page 297.The Rajahs of Gwalior, Nagpore, Jubbulpore,Rajhpootana, and others, paid tribute to the Pindaricas an insurance against their aggression, similar to theBlack Mail once levied by the Highlanders, that ofthe Barbary States, and the Wahabees in the PersianGulph. Immemorial custom seems, in the minds of thenatives of this country, to have established, or at leastreconciled them to such a right.Note 18, page 297.The Company.Note 19, page 297.A troop of Pindaric.Note 20, page 297.A predatory horde.Note -1, page 297.Bells; associated bandits. The Tugs are an equallyVOL. n. Y322 TUGS.daring band of assassins, who infest the upper provincesof Hindustan. They frequent the principal roads, andjoin company with any travellers they meet, ingratiatingthemselves with them till they discover what propertythe strangers are possessed of, and then take afavourable opportunity of strangling and robbing theirvictims. A curious confession was made to the judgeat Minpoorie some years since by a lad of seventeen,who turned king's evidence. He gave a circumstantialdetail of having been present at no less than sixtymurders, and afterwards pointed out the spots wherethe dead bodies were hidden. It appears by his accountthat the gang murdered his father when he wasonly three years old, during a journey from Cawnporeto Meerut, and sparing his life on account of his tenderage, brought him up to the profession. Most of thesedaring villains were by his testimony brought to justice.This profession, like that of the Gulph pirates, is notconsidered by the nation as other than honourable, andis one of prescriptive right. Similar notions are entertainedat the present day by the Albanian robbersin the Greek islands, as Thucydides says Averse heldby the ^olians, the Acharnanians, the Pirates, andother nations. The Hindus have this proverb: — "Amusket to the Sphaee, a dagger to the Bell."Note 22, page 298.When I was at Bombay, I collected from an oldresident there much information respecting that singularand interesting people, who compose the mostintelligent and active part of its population — theParsees. At the close of the sixth century, after thefinal destruction of Persepolis, the seat of the ancientParties. 323Persian empire, and the sanctuary of the Magian religion,and on the extinction of the race of Choses inthe person of Yestezerd, the last of the Sassanian dynasty,vast multitudes of the Ghebres fled from thesabres of the Arabs, beyond the banks of the Oxus andthe Jaxartes. At this period also an inconsiderableemigration took place to the island of Ormuz ; butsoon ceasing to find it an asylum, the refugees retreatedthence to the Western Coast of India, where they establishedthemselves in the vicinity of Surat, at a villagecalled Oudwarra. Of all these exiles, none seem tohave preserved the pure faith of their ancestors butthis latter colony, and Oudwarra is still venerated as thesanctuary, the oracle and depository of perpetual fireof Zurdiist (Zoroaster).To adore the Supreme Being under the symbol offire, to marry and people the earth, to succour theneedy, to plant fruit-trees, to till the ground, to destroyno other than noxious reptiles and insects, and carnivorousand ferocious animals, were the first precepts ofthe wise and beautiful morality of the Magi, whichconstituted, according to Newton, the oldest, and SirWilliam Jones, the noblest of all religions. Theirphilosophy was intimately connected with theirworship. Careful observers of the luminaries that werethe objects of their adoration, they became at a veryearly period acquainted with the true system of theuniverse ; and it was to their discoveries that Chinawas principally indebted for her early progress in astronomy.The ancient languages of Iran, the Zend, andthe Pahlavi, are now extinct, whilst that now in useamong the Parsees bears a striking similitude to theSanscrit, of which it had been supposed the parent.y 2324 Parties.Whatever claims in point of maternity this nation mayarrogate to itself in language or science, there is onepoint on which I entertain no doubt — that the religion ofthe Marian and Hindus was originally the same, andthat the solar orb was alike the primeval object of devotionwith the followers of Zurdust and Brahma.Certain it is, that the conviction of their affinity gavea keener edge to the sword of Timour, who, with asanguinary fanaticism worthy of the early Moslems,entertained the same hatred and hostility to the fire-worshippersthat had subsisted in the days of the Cali-plat,with this difference, that he exhibited a muchmore inveterate spirit of animosity and intolerance tothose who persisted in an adherence to their ancientsuperstition, which he considered to be derived fromthe same source as that of Mythra. Almost all tracesof the antiquities, arts, sciences, philosophy, andliterature of the ancient Persians are now lost; eventhe most enlightened of their descendants are ignorantof the metaphysical tenets or doctrines of theirtheology, whilst they adhere to a few traditional institutions,and practical rites and observances. DiscardingZurdust the First as a fabulous lawgiver, the Parseesconsider Artesian the second (Artaxerxes) the greatest oftheir kings. This monarch, whose memory they stillcherish, convoked from all parts of his dominions, thenextending from the shores of the Mediterranean to theconfines of India, the Magi, many thousand in number,for the purposes of rectifying the abuses and corruptionsthat had crept into their faith. From this multitude ofpriests seven were selected, to whom the great work ofreformation was entrusted. Of this reduced number,one who had a superior character for sanctity wasParties. 325made to fall into a trance that lasted several days, atthe end of which he awoke from his divine dream,and declared the will of Heaven, or rather gave out acode of laws, civil and religious, which had been previouslynew-modelled and dictated by Artaxerxes himself,by the faint light of whose tradition they are atpresent guided.The few particulars I have been able to collect oftheir doctrines are, that the world has been eternal,and governed from all time by two opposite principles,called Ahriman and Ohriman. To reconcile the existenceof evil with infinite goodness, has been one of thepoints that has engaged in useless and unsatisfactorycontroversy the metaphysicians and divines of all ages.Firm predestination, the Parsees consider good and evilas names alone, and, like the Hindus, attribute all thecrimes and virtues of mankind to a ruling and uncontrollablefatality. Hence they do not assign eternity oftorture, and denunciations of unquenchable fire andsulphur to the souls of the departed, but make thempass progressively from one state of probation or purgatoryto another, till they arrive at final beatitudeand perfection. They conceive that there are nineinfernal abodes, where, for a certain term of years, proportionatetorments await the wicked, and an equalnumber of heavens or regions of space, placed one abovethe other, like the layers of an onion. In the first,which is in immediate contact with our globe, is thecommon atmosphere, clouds, &c. In the second, themoon. The sun, which they consider an orb of fire, isplaced in the third, and the stars are fixed in theothers. These latter bodies they conceive to be mirrorsof polished steel, which derive their splendour from the326 Parties.reflection of Horsed, or the sun. Differing from allother Asiatics, they possess an extraordinary attachmentfor the canine race, which may be thus accounted for.They have an opinion that the access to these Elysianfields is guarded by a Cerberus, who is placed assentinel over a bridge many millions of miles in length,formed of an edge of sharpened steel ; and hope to propitiatethis monster on their journey to the next worldby kindness to his species in this. Perhaps also theirrespect for this animal may flow from a different causeits utility. It is well known that the Parsees exposetheir dead to the beasts of the field and the predatoryfowls of the air, and the destruction of one of thesewould be considered equal to the murder of a humanbeing. Some years since, the governor of Bombay was,from an apprehension of the power of the irritatedParsees, obliged to rescind an order which had beenissued for the destruction of the dogs in that island, ameasure deemed indispensable from the increase of theirnumbers and the presence of hydrophobia. In order torid the state of this nuisance, a vessel was expresslyhired to convey these animals to the north of Surat,where they were disembarked.The doctrines of Zurdust the Second are very ambiguous,and can only be collected from some fragmentsof his writings, contained in a work published some yearsago in Bombay, called The Despair. This bible of theGhebres is composed of scattered passages and chaptersfrom the works of the Magi, whom they consider inspired.It consists, however, rather of prayers and addresses totheir deities, than of institutions legal or theological.The Parsees are indebted for these scriptures to the labourof a learned priest of their religion, called MulePasses. 327Peruse, who undertook a journey into Persia, for thepurpose of collecting any memorials relating to theirfaith, that might have survived the wreck of ages andthe fanaticism of their conquerors,A small remnant of the Marian is still said to inhabitthe city of Ispahan, and to be scattered through theprovince of Kerman, and along the banks of the Indusa considerable number of Ghebres under a sovereignpontiff once possessed Mount Elbourz, near the city ofYezd, but they have insensibly melted away, and amalgamatedwith the prevailing faith of the Arabian prophet.Here was said to be deposited the sacred booksof Zoroaster, and the Mule to have found them. Thesewritings, whether genuine or apocryphal, not unfrequentlyrise to great sublimity of thought and language,being for the most part composed of fervent andanimated appeals, and invocations to their principal divinities,the Sun and Moon ; they contain also severalremarkable prophetic denunciations, particularly one ofthe advent of Mahomet, the destruction of the empire,persecution and exile of the Parsees, and finallythe overthrow of the religion of the Koran, and restorationof their own. There is also a prediction of thecoming of Christ. The greatest objection that can bemade to these Scriptures is, that they are not sufficientlyobscure to be genuinely prophetic.The cemetery of this sect is situated on an eminencenear the Malabar point road, about two miles from thetown of Bombay. It consists of oval compartments,which belong, like our vaults, to particular families.Each of them has iron bars at the bottom, and is openat the top. Beneath is an excavation or receptacle,in which the body in a state of putrefaction falls, if328 PARSE ES.endeavoured by the vultures, dogs, and jackals. Thehigher classes, however, after these ' living sepulchres 'have done their work, inter the remains of the corpses ;most probably an innovation. The Parsees entertain asingular superstition respecting the dead ; the vulture,it appears, makes the first choice of the eye, and it isthe business or office of the relations of the deceased,or their priests, to watch the manner in which the birddevours his prey. If he selects the right eye, it islooked upon as an omen that the soul of the dead ishappy — if the left, a presage from which they areled to form a contrary presumption.Close to the cemetery is a plain unadorned building,containing the sacred fire of Zurdust, said to have beenbrought from Persia at the period of their emigration.Into this sanctuary the profane are not allowed to enter.A certain number of priests, as was the case with thevestal, is appointed to perpetuate the flame, and takecare that it is not extinguished, — a circumstance that,though it occurred frequently to the virgin guardiansat Rome, either has never happened to, or hasbeen carefully concealed from the Ghebres.The Parsees at and in the vicinity of Surat amount tonear one hundred thousand, and in the island of Bombayto upwards of twenty thousand, an industrious, active,and enterprising population. They are very skilful inthe mechanic arts, all of which they follow, exceptworking in the metals, which their religion forbids.They may be considered the most peaceable subjectsin the Company's dominions.They are the soul of trade at Bombay, and possessan immense capital, particularly the Logie family, atthe head of which is, or was, Horace, one of theParties. 329partners in the principal house of agency at Bombay,and who is said to be worth fifty lacs of rupees. Astory is told of this man which shows their delicacyof feeling, or rather jealousy, with regard to theirwomen. Sir E. Nepean, the governor, had a customof saluting the brides at all marriages, whose celebrationhe attended : being present at Hormagee''s, heavailed himself of his usual privilege ; this the bridegroommuch resented, and afterwards consulted theAdvocate General of his Majesty's Court in that island,whether he could not bring an action against the governorfor the disgrace inflicted on his family. Polygamyis common among the Parsees, but no one cantake a second wife without the concurrence of his first,a consent seldom obtained or applied for, except in caseof failure of issue. The Greeks probably derived fromthe Persians a similar custom. See Euripides'' Medea,490.The women, though exceedingly fair, are not remarkablefor beauty either of form or features, nor is therea single instance of their infidelity with Europeans,but amongst themselves they are not highly distinguishedfor chastity. The Parsees have fallen intoour customs and manners, and in fact adopted everythingbut our religion and dress. They are generallywell educated and informed. They are munificent evento ostentation, and treat charity as the first of all virtues,and the expiation of all sins. At the famine of 1804,their subscriptions alone amounted to a lac and 70,000rupees, and many of their merchants privately subscribed1000/. to relieve the pecuniary distresses ofLord Melville, in 1805, when a paper was circulatedat Bombay by Mr. Duncan, and headed by 6000/. onhis own part.330 Parties.In the plainness of their dress they resemble theQuakers, nor in this respect alone : the destitute part ofthe population is supported by the community at large,nor is a beggar of that sect ever seen. They arealso under the jurisdiction of elective elders, and it isthe dread of their censure, and of bringing disgrace onthe character of the sect, that incites to good conductand renders them the best of citizens and subjects.Like the Jews, their objection to the military professionis rather referable to their condition of coloniststhan to any religious restrictions, though the use of firearmswould be inconsistent with their faith.It has been much doubted whether, at the Mahometaninvasion, the women accompanied them to India.The fairness of their complexions, and peculiarity oftheir forms and features, seem to prove the genuinenessof their descent ; for the Mussulman who have intermarriedwith the natives, are now hardly distinguishablefrom them, nor is their degeneracy marked only by theircolour, whereas the uniformity of character and figuresufficiently attest the unmingled purity of the blood ofthe Ghebres.Note 23, page 298.The predatory excursions of the Goorkhas on thisfertile district, which lies at the foot of the Tibetmountains, was the ostensible pretext for the Nepaulwar.Note 2*, page 299.The body guards of the Mahratta confederates consistedprincipally of Arabs, on whose fidelity the Peeshwa,their head, mostly relied, in the campaign of 1817, whichended in his dethronement and exile to Benares — theMecca of the Hindus.BRINJARRIES. 331Note ^^^ 'page ^i%%Jesus.Note 26, 'page 299-And he will be a wild man, his hand will be againstevery man, and every man's hand against him. — Genesis,chap. xvi.Note ", page enduringthe campaign of 1817, the Arabs were drivenfrom their village huts at Poona, Nagpore, and elsewhere,thus fulfilling the last part of the prophecy,or curse, pronounced against the offspring of Hagar.At the capitulation of Muligaum they were deprived oftheir arms ; a disgrace felt as I have described.Note 28, page 299.The Brinjarries are, perhaps, the bravest of all thetribes in India : though they make no profession ofarms, they are remarkable for their skill in horsemanship,and the dexterity with which they use the sabre,wielding it indifferently in either hand. Like the Arabsof the Desert, they principally live in tents, and areconfined to no particular districts, being scattered alloverthe face of India, and frequently changing theirplace of abode for the convenience of pasturage, orwater. Their religion is Hindoo, and their tenets areaspeculiar as themselves. Every clan is perfectlydistinct, and acknowledges the authority of an electivechief. Between these clans the most deadly feuds frequentlyprevail, and they carry down their resentmentto distant generations, being constantly involved inpetty wars with each other. Instances of this kind areof common recurrence : but a desperate battle betweentwo of the tribes was fought in 1815 in the vicinity of332 BRINJARRIES.Seroor, that marks the spirit of inveterate hostility whichsometimes animates them. It seems, that a neighbouringchief had been accessory to a murder committedtwenty-five years before, and that some trifling causehad occasioned the revival of the quarrel. One of theirforces consisted of eleven hundred men, and the otherof fifteen hundred. The inferior number formed a trenchround their encampment, and awaited the onset, whichthus became somewhat equalized. A most desperate conflictit is described to have been, the engagement lastingnearly the whole day, and the camp being taken andretaken several different times. Night only separatedthe combatants, when upwards of five hundred were leftupon the field. So much for their bravery. All theirmercantile transactions are made through the mediumof their Zemindar ; and so remarkable are they forthe correctness of their dealings, and such implicitfaith is placed in their honesty, that Lord Wellingtonduring the Mahratta campaign advanced one of them,on his own responsibility, three lacs of rupees for thepurchase of grain, nor was the confidence misplaced.Their wives and families accompany them in all theirjourneys ; the former are perfect amazons, loading andunloading the paniers, and performing the most menialand laborious offices. Though conscientiously observantof contracts, like the gypsies, to whom they bear astriking resemblance in other points, they make noscruple of appropriating to themselves anything theymeet with in their travels, and of purloining and kidnappingchildren, of whom they make slaves. Suchare a few of the characteristics of this singular people.Note % page 301.Quando solitudinem faint, pacem appellant. — Tacit,Bundles. 333Note 30, page 301.The Bundles are certainly the finest race of men inthe Upper Provinces, and consist principally of theRajhpoot, or military caste. Considering their innateturbulent spirit and impatience of masters, it is astonishingwhat peaceable subjects they are become.Since the annexation of their fine country, nearly onehundred miles square, by the Company to their territories,the revenues have been more than doubled, thepopulation nearly tripled, and vast tracts of waste landbrought into the highest state of cultivation. The soilbeing of a rich and soapy nature, retains so much moistureas hardly to require irrigation, and when it does,the Persian wheel, that greatly diminishes manual labour,is almost in general use. Not a mendicant is tobe seen, and the inhabitants are well clothed in cottondresses, the produce of their own looms and dyes. Howdifferent the condition of the Bundles under theMahratta rule ! " The effects of tyranny," says aJavanese writer, " are as the tears of a young virgin inthe arms of decrepit age. The assailant multiplies hisinsults on her charms, and meets with the same returnthat the oppressor does from his subjects, abhorrenceand contempt." To show the Roman spirit that actuatedthis people, a Zemindar, whom I knew, ratherthan enter into a composition with an extortionate collector,suffered the tips of his fingers to be burnt offacommon mode of torture, and effected by attachingto them pieces of folded wax cloth set on fire.Note 31, page 302.Zalim means a tyrant, or oppressor.334 NOTES.Atone S2, page 302.A learned Hindu of a religious order.Note 33, page 302.An infidel ; a title applied to the British.Note 3*, page 302.The principal deity of the Hindus — the first personof their Trinity.Note '^ page 302.Aden, Paradise of Mahomet ; Keylas, of Seeva.Note '^, page 303.In the district of Benares, as well as in the Dukkin,is a caste of Rajhpoots who claim a descent from thekings of India of the Hindu dynasties, and practise femaleinfanticide, on the plea that their families may notbe disgraced by inferior connexions in marriage. Suchexposure is, however, uncommon at the present day.Note ", page 303.Many of the Snatch or singing girls are Cacheme-rians. They are chosen for this profession from theirbeauty, and are in general domestic slaves, being broughtinto Hindustan, and sold as such, when children.Note «8, page 303.The lowest castes are said to be sprung from the feet,as the Rajhpoot or military castes are from the head, ofBrahma.NOTES.Note 39, page 303.Synonymous terms for banded robbers.Note *«, page 303.An idea borrowed from the First Philippic of Demosthenes.Note *\ page 303.The usual place of execution.Note 42, page 303.The carnival of the East, and resembling in many respectsthe Saturnalia of the Romans. These orgies arecelebrated with the utmost dissonance of vocal and instrumentalmusic. The greatest licentiousness, riot, anddebauchery then prevail among the lower classes ofHindus, who besmear their persons and clothes with ared dye called Huldee, and even have the insolence tothrow it on their masters and all who approach them.On these holidays the lowest menial servants of thePeeshwa intruded themselves into his presence, and evenentered the durbar, where they indulged in as greata liberty of speech as Davis did to Horace on a similaroccasion, and with the same impunity. — Hor. lib.11. 7.Note *\ page 304.Her is a title of Vishnu, the second person of theHindu Trimourtee, or Trinity.Note ''*, page 304.An elevated terrace or pavilion.^36 A SUTTEE.Note ^^ page 304.Lamps OD certain days of Hindu festivals are floateddown their rivers in small earthen vessels called chattels,which make the water appear like another heaven ofstars.Note *^ page 305.The kettle-drum. Every Durra has its kettle-drum,as every regiment has its drums, or trumpets, or standardswith us. Some of these tintinnabulary trophieswere taken by one of the divisions of the army, in thePindar campaign, or Dour.Note *% page 306.The Zenanas (Gynaecea) of the rich are often pavedwith mosaic. That on the tomb of Shah Jean's empressin * pietro dura' has nothing in Europe to comparewith it.Note *«, page 306.The Tajh Meal at Agra, the celebrated mausoleum,if such a word be applicable to a female tomb.Note ^\ page 307.Although this sacrifice is made a voluntary one by thePranks, instances are not wanting of relatives bindingthe infatuated widow to the funeral pile, as soon as shehas expressed a wish, or been forced into a promise ofperforming the dreadful rite. That such is not invariablythe case I was myself an eye-witness ; and it provesthat a devoted attachment, accompanied by a mistakensense of religion, sometimes leads to the commission ofthis self-immolation. Having heard that a suttee wasabout to take place at Mundelah, I hastened down toA SUTTEE. 337the spot with an intention of preventing, if possible, thehorrid suicide. On my arrival I saw the corpse of thehusband laid on a pyre built of the fascines of one ofthe batteries (for the place had only fallen a few days),raised about four feet from the ground by a gabion, andbut slightly furnished with fuel, and that full of sap.Round it were assembled several Brahmans, and thewidow, a girl of about twenty-one or twenty-two yearsof age, exceedingly fair and interesting in her appearance.Most of her relatives were also present, andappeared in extreme affliction ; particularly the father,whose heart-rent groans and grey locks excited a generalfeeling of pity. They were all using their utmostendeavours to divert her from her purpose ; but she remainedinexorable to their tears, and deaf to their entreaties,though urged with many offers of all their propertyif she would relinquish her design. Being a proficientin the Hindustan language, I joined in theirearnest solicitations, accompanying them with the mostliberal pecuniary promises.She told me, that since her lord and master was gone,she had no inducements to live ; that existence had nolonger any comforts in store for her, and that she wasdetermined to abide by the resolution she had formed.She added, that she would not remain here a uselessburthen to her relations, who had great difficulty in providingfor their own wants, and might abandon her tothe world ; that it was with a view of avoiding the temptationsthat might assail her virtue that she made suttee; and ended with expressing a confident hope of immediatehappiness after death, in being re-united in anotherstate of being with the lost object of her affections.During our conversation the priests stood aloof and didVOL. II. Z338 A SUTTEE.not make the slightest attempt at interference. Findingher inexorable, I ordered some more fascines to bebrought, in order that her torments might be shortened.She now went down to the Nerbudda, on whose banks thepyre stood, and performed her ablutions. I then madeanother unavailing attempt to dissuade her. Whilst Iwas doing so, a Brahman came up, and begged me notto pollute her by my touch, as she was now purified bythe sacred waters of the stream. The priests, as sheadvanced with a composed air and collected step, strucktheir lots, or brass pots, and made repeated acclamationsof Seta Rama ! Seta Rama ! The pile was nowlighted. In a moment she sprang upon it and threwherself on the corpse. There were no pots of ' ghee"" tofeed the fire, as is usual in the settles of richer natives ;for the want of which, and in consequence of her wetclothes, it was perceived, after many minutes had elapsed,that animation had not ceased. The blisters wereobserved to rise upon her face, and once she half raisedherself as in agony on one knee with her head bent overthe body. She uttered no shriek or lamentation, andas if sensible that the attitude betrayed a want of firmness,again stretched herself on her husband's remains.The struggle was soon over. Suffocation almost immediatelysucceeded. — I almost forgot to mention, that asshe was about to enter the flames, after encircling thefuneral pyre the last time, she divided among her relativesall her armlets, anklets, necklaces, and trinkets,accompanying each gift with some expression indicativeof her regard for each. Perhaps no instance of heroismcould be greater than this. The only noise that wasmade, and that not a loud one, was from the brass potsof the Brahmans. Certainly she was not inspirited tothe deed by opium or other intoxicating drugs.DIAMOND MINE. 339Note ^, page SOS.A species of thrush, whose note almost equals thenightingale's.Note ^S page 309.The sweet basil, or tools, is a sacred plant.Tooloosee was the Daphne of the Hindus. It is asimilar fable.Note 52, page 309.The excuse the Brahmans offer for not allowing theVedass to be perused by the vulgar. A similar reasonis urged by the Roman Catholic priests against theindiscriminate reading of the Bible.Notes, page Sionspell.Note 5*, page 310.The Hindu women use a ring with a speculum.Note ^, page 311.Alluding to the epidemic the cholera.Note ^, page 312.Punnah is in the province of Bundlecund; it hasbeen immemorially celebrated for its diamond-mines.The ground within several miles of the city resemblesthe tumuli of a large burying-place, and appears unfitfor the purposes of agriculture ; indeed, as far as theeye can reach, not a trace of cultivation si visible, butwere it of a different quality, the Rajah would of courseprohibit such a use being made of the land. The NOTES.minds are found very near the surface: persons employedin these researches dig up a space of two orthree yards square, and about a foot in depth. Bycareful washing, the earthy particles are then separatedfrom the gravelly ones, and the latter sifted throughdifferent-sized hollanders, a slow and tedious operation.The extensive scale on which the mines of Brazil arenow worked, and the superior lustre and value of thediamonds, have almost spoiled the Indian market. ThePunnah mines are, however, said to be nearly exhausted,and few adventurers are now found to farm them :those who do, purchase a certain number of superficialfeet, all stones beyond a fixed weight of carats beingreserved to the Rajah, who employs inspectors or overseersto superintend the works.Note ^f, page 312.The Hindu women rub antimony on their eyelids.Note 58, page 312.The false day common in the east ; the Persians pretendto account for it by the rays passing through anaperture in the mountains before the sun is above thehorizon.Note % page 313.The mango-bird, said by the natives to owe its brightyellow plumage to the juices of that finest of fruit.Note ^, page 313.An artificial pond or pool generally faced withstone.NOTES. 341Note ^S page 313.The lotus is a sacred flower. Brahma is representedas springing from the calix, an emblem of the fertilizingpower of water.Note ^, page 313.Punchayet, an assembly or jury of five, much resemblingour Saxon Written Remote. This beautifulsystem of internal police, which had place under theNative governments, has been nearly abolished, even ifit exists at all in the Company's states. A foreign gendarmemay prevent the concealment but not thecommission of crimes, which, in fact, these sbirri encourage,in order to make a parade of their zeal to theiremployers : thus a hatred of the instrument of oppressiondestroys all sense of moral virtue, which is sustained bylove, and not by fear — by prevention, and not by punishment.■*.Note ^3, page 314.Botanic, Chumpaka.Note ^\ page 314.The great object of Hindu adoration.Note 65, page 314.Of all people the Hindus rest more confidently thanothers their hopes of salvation and future beatitude inthe endurance of voluntarily imposed tortures and penances,thinking by the sufferings of the flesh to purifythe spirit, and obtain a complete victory over all the sensualpassions. This severe discipline which they undergoproceeds, however, oftener from motives of vanity,342 ASCETICS.pride, and worldly consideration, than any view ofpropitiating the Deity or expiating their sins ; andperhaps no religion has more impostors than theBrahminical. Col. S , who has a blind attachmentto every thing Hindu, says that the example ofthese ascetics must be highly edifying and salutary,and that they are calculated to enlighten by their discourse,and excite emulation by their piety. I havehad an opportunity of meeting in all parts of Indiawith many of these itinerant monks, and cannot speakvery favourably of their order.Some of them are such hypocrites as to pretend to becompletely absorbed in mental abstraction, and seldomspeak, and then in monosyllables. Their piety consistsin the repetition of a few prantras, and the mummeryof certain ceremonies and ablutions. Others have apractice of keeping their lips in constant motion, as ifgiving utterance to prayers. I observed at Cawnporean ascetic, who employed himself daily in making acertain number of circles in the sandy bed of theGanges. He had a pair of rude compasses, and if,after the number was complete, he discovered one circlethat was the least irregular in figure, he would recommencehis labour. This wretch was stark-naked, themost disgusting object I ever beheld. His beard andhair long and matted, and of a withered yellow, and hiswhole body besmeared with ashes. Nothing couldsurpass the sanctity in which he was held by thenatives. It was in consequence of a vow that he wasengaged in that absurd occupation, which was to lastfor five years. With all his mechanical patience hehad not learned to command his temper, for I one dayaccidentally put my foot in one of his circles, and neverASCETICS. 343heard such volleys of abuse as the holy man pouredon me, and I fully believe he would have murdered meif in his power. Mr. E told me, during hisembassy in Caubul, that he met a pilgrim measuringhis length to a temple in Malwa, who at the rate hewas travelling, would have been fifteen years in accomplishinghis journey. I saw two munies, who hadwithered arms from holding them in one posture forseveral years. They were then resident at Bombay, andheld in such extraordinary sanctity that they receivedupwards of a lac of rupees annually in alms. Thereare only a few days in the year that they would condescendto accept the offerings of the charitable. Oneof them had his nails growing through the back of hishand. Their insolence was only equalled by their prideand ignorance.There was a man then lying in harrows, aboutfifteen miles from that presidency ; and I saw at Myn-poore,one of these devotees, who had been livingin a hole about four feet deep for three years ; hispenance was to last five, or until he had obtainedmoney enough, by begging, to build a temple. Thissum I am told was raised, and he murdered by theTugs shortly afterwards, on his way back to his nativevillage. Passing one day by a hill in Bundlecund, Itook notice of one of their travelling Franciscans sittingon the top, and found on inquiry that he had vowed toremain there fasting till a certain sum was collected forhim. To save this mendicant from threatened starvation,the inhabitants from all the neighbourhood wererunning in different directions to raise the money herequired. A levy of this kind can scarcely be calledgratuitous, from its being strictly enjoined by their344 HYDROPHOBIA.religion, and falls much more heavily on the peoplethan any systematic contribution could do. Such arethese rogues or impostor priests, who, according to Col.S , are to make men better subjects of the state,and worthier members of the community.Note ^, page 314.The dogs in India are domesticated ; they are keptfor their utility, which nearly equals that of the vultureand the stork, called, vulgarity, * the adjutant.'They are the scavengers, and throng the streets andenvirons of every village ; they are cowardly creatures,but frequently become dewan or mad, and the consequencesare, as may be conceived, dreadful.Hydrophobia is indeed of common occurrence, and notayear passes but numbers of the natives fall victims tothat horrible disorder. The only application they maketo the recent wound is chu nam (or quick-lime), but this,though an active caustic, does not seem sufficientlypowerful to obviate the poisonous effects of the bite.It was long supposed that the tooth of the snake andthose of the mad dog affected the frame in a similarmanner ; but late observation has refuted that idea.It is now well known that the venom of the serpentacts immediately on the blood, and through the mediumof that fluid destroys the irritability of the muscularfibres, the suddenness or protraction of dissolutiondepending on the size of the veins which the toothhappens to come in contact with, and their communicationwith the vital parts. This was discovered byFontana, whose work on this subject has set aside thefanciful notion of the bite acting on the nervous systemanotion that had long had its advocates.HYDROPHOBIA. 345Such being the case with the bite of the snake, itseems almost useless to adopt cautery or cutting outthe wounded part ; but the different nature of thecanine virus is proved by the successful adoption ofthose very means in the one case that have invariablyfailed in the other. Certain it is, that it does notpossess the same active and searching principle, andthere is every reason to believe that it operates solelyon the humours of the body. There is one remarkablecircumstance attending the wounds of the mad dog,that they are difficult to cure, remain long open, andeven when closed are scarcely ever soundly healed ; aredness generally remains, and a scorbutic eruptionmakes its appearance ; the patient at intervals oftencomplaining of pain and spasm in the whole limb wherethe morsus occurred.I will mention a few facts communicated to me bya medical gentleman : —A mad dog bit two Europeans and several natives atJaulna ; the wounds of the former were laid open andcauterized as soon as possible, but an interval of halfan hour had elapsed. The natives made use only of thelime — they all died of hydrophobia; but the Europeanswere attacked by it. Another remarkable instanceoccurred in the case of two gentlemen who hadbeen bit when surgical aid was not attainable for severalhours, and when it was thought too late to apply thecaustic. They were put under a strict regimen as todiet, subjected to a severe course of mercury, and tooka vast quantity of digitalis, which completely succeededin repelling the disease that proved fatal to severalnatives bit by the same dog. He also mentioned thename of a patient who had been affected by hydrophobia.II. 2 A346 CHOLERA MORBUS.bia, after a lapse of several years from the bite. It isscarcely conceivable that the venom could have laindormant in the constitution so long. In a confirmedstage of the malady, all remedies seem to fail. Bleeding,which is so much recommended by Dr. Shouldered,has never been known to succeed ; and there are strongreasons for concluding that the cure he states to havebeen effected by the lancet was a case of spurious orpseudo-hydrophobia. Phlebotomy has the effect oflessening the symptoms of the patient by exhaustion,but renewed strength always brings them back.Note ^i page 315.Single means a lion.Note ^, page 315.The cholera morbus. One march I shall never forget,it has haunted me to-day. I was in the rear-guard, anddid not get to my new ground till night, and then lefteight hundred men, at least, dead and dying, on theroad. Such a scene of horror was perhaps never witnessed.The disease first made its appearance amongthe coolies, next our servants were affected, afterwardsthe Spheres, then the European soldiers, and last theofficers ; reminding me of Homer's account of thepestilence among the Greeks in the first book of theIliad, except that the animals escaped with us. Welost a whole troop. During the first few days, everyman who went into hospital fell a martyr to the epidemic.So partial was it at this time, that though sovirulent in our camp, the neighbouring villages escaped ;and what is very remarkable, only one battalion in GeneralMarshall's division suffered, and that lost nearlyCONCLUSION. 347half its strength. A similar plague (though there areconflicting opinions as to this being infectious) made itsappearance about fourteen years ago, at which period itwas aggravated by a famine. A Persian writer says,that the natives of India have been from time immemorialvisited every fourteen years by these twins. Apleasant country to have come to. I often think ofpoor Leyden's lines to a gold-mohur. What pathosin every word ! How they come home to my heart !How keenly I feel the truth ofI cross'd the tedious ocean waveTo roam in climes unkind and new,The cold wind of the stranger blewChill on my wither d heart. The graveDark and untimely meets my view,And all for thee, vile yellow slave !EDITORS CONCLUSION.There is no date to this Poem, but it appearsto have been written soon after Julian's arrivalin India, when his fancy, like Leyden's, turnedback to the friends and scenes of his youth.How much this attachment was weakened, if notdestroyed, by his long residence in the East maybejudged by the regrets expressed in his andStanley's journal — regrets which in a great measureled to his untimely fate. A few wordswill suffice.348 CONCLUSION.On the fatal 25th of June Julian fell into astate of mute melancholy, and having refusedto take any nourishment for many days, passed,for the most part, in wandering about CaderIdris, expired of inanition.Peace be with his manes !FINIS.ERRATA.Vol. I. Page 6, line 5 from bottom, ^or Colonel read Cone.183, line \6,for them read him.187, line 3, for posts read forts.245, line 12, /or Mise read Niesen.Vol. II. Page 4, line 13,/oc caecum read calcium.62, line 22, for time read evening.1 19, the note relates to the foregoing page.I.OXDON :PRINTED HV S. Bentley, DORSET STREET, FLEET STREET.