THEANGLER IN WALES,ORDAYS AND NIGHTS OF SPORTSMEN.By THOMAS Edwin, Esq.LATE OF THE FIRST LIFE GUARDS,AUTHOR OP "THE CONVERSATIONS OP LORD BYRON.SI aUID EST IN Libels Mess Quod Placet, Dictate AUDITA.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREETVublidijrr in <S)rtJinari) to ^ii fBaititv.UW4.London :Printed BY SAktUEL Bentley,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.TOROBERT ALLEN, ESQ.In gratitude for most of the Illustrations, andsome of the best materials of these Volumes,they are inscribed by his affectionate friend andBrother of the Angle,THE EDITOR.o t-to - *JLibraryPREFACE.Having sought in vain for companionship byturning over and over again the leaves of thetattered, dog's-eared, dirty, margin-annotatedalbum, at Tal 'y Llyn, in Merionethshire, ona wet, cold day, as I had often done at ChasInterlaken, and Grendelwald, I rangfor the landlord, and asked him if he had nobook he could lend me ?*' Eze, sure, sir, a Welsh Bible.""A Welsh Bible!" I shook my head. Hesaw I was disappointed. " Well, indeed, sir, Idon't know," after a pause, said he, in his ownidiomatic dialect, (that may be thus translated,)perhaps you might be able to read somepapers, lying in an old trunk in my topsee (attic)that belonged to a * Goorb'mliUlieg-O'Lluiger,VI PREFACE.(which being interpreted, means, an idle, orgood-for-nothing, or useless Englishman) whodied, a year come next 7th of July, at myhouse, and now lies buried opposite the window(here he pointed to the church-yard). Poorgentleman ! we all loved him as if he had beenone of the family ; he was as lively as a troutin our lake, when he first came among us, butgrew all at once very melancholy, which wasstrange, for he was in the prime of life, and, fromthe free way in which he spent his money, musthave had enough to be considered rich, in thiscountry. He came here to angle with two travellingcompanions, who, when they continuedtheir tour, tried all in their power to dissuadehim from staying behind ; but he obstinatelyrefused to go with them. I should tell you thathe was no great fisherman, for some days beforetheir departure, he had laid up his rods on thepegs of my kitchen, where they now are. Hisdaily custom was, to take long walks on thebanks of the lake, and on Cader Idris, neverreturning till long after sunset, and he wouldthen pass his time till morning in poring overhis writings. I shall be glad to get rid of thecharge of them, for you may chance to discoverPREFACE. Viiby their means, his relations, which I have beenunable to do." Thus saying, he left me.No blue-stocking Miss, burning to know whatcompliment had been paid her beauty by anauthor, on returning her album with his autograph; no lover waiting for a reply to his billet-doux;no spendthrift opening a letter with ablack seal that might announce the death of anannuitant aunt of ninety-five, could have feltmore anxious than myself, (as I heard my host'sheavy step descending the stair,) for a sight ofthis virgin literary treasure. It consisted of twounopened letters, a poem, and a bundle ofpapers, very illegibly written, and much interlined,and interleaved, which at a glance, I saw,were descriptive of a Welsh tour. No littlepatience, and ingenuity, and a constant referenceto Gary's admirable map, were required, beforeI could trace the route of the anonymous writer.He was evidently no great adept, though anenthusiast, in the gentle art ; I frequently metwith very crude ideas, and extremely loose writing,which however, in my peculiar venerationfor authorship, and diffidence of my own powers,I thought best to leave untouched ; I discoveredalso many an ' hiatus ma. rime (k/h'ndas,' and thereviii PREFACE.were no few passages obscure as those of theGreek tragedians, which, like them, are doubtlessvery fine if they could be made referableto any mode of construction, or known idiom,in our language ; these also I have not attemptedto emendate. Thus the matter, after all thepains I took to reduce it into form, somewhatresembled the cub of a bear, that wanted a betterfoster-parent to lick it into shape. Oneother observation must be made. I disclaimall responsibility as to the sentiments of thewriter, and the genuineness of the facts, nor amI philosopher enough to know if his theorieshave any soy arch.The sketch-book was well supplied. Few dilettantiarrive at the freedom of outline, thedelicacy of touch, and truth to nature, whichthe drawings, many of them coloured, bespoke.There were no less than five or six of Tal 'yLlyn, from which, though I doubt their being byany means the best, I selected three. As to thepoetry, especially that of the Bengal, all thatcan be said amounts to this, it was comme f«, yetbetter than might have been expected from anofficer, if Mr. Leigh Hunt's well-known definitionis to be trusted. But lest I should chancePREFACE. ixto be considered here one of the tribe of thatfiddle-saddling, dull old prosing pedant, Fadla-teen, I intend to reserve my scholia, or runningcomment, for the text.On my return to town, a few months after myCambrian trip, I was dining one day with someepicures at our club, and descanting very eloquently,as I thought, on the merits of this unknownmysterious tourist, and hinting at somehalf-intention of imparting his lucubrations tothe world in the shape of one or two octavos,whichever they would make, (the dual numberbeing certainly most to the purpose,) when Ioverheard a dandy, an amphibious animal nowrare, (a term revived by the late Lord Kinnaird,from the English dandyprat, and that comesfrom the French word, *dandies') in a sottovocesay to his next neighbour, ' Who would reada book about angling, the poor angling, too, inthat terra incognita of goats and barbarians, —Wales!" A significant, or insignificant sneerwas the only reply, but I perceived certain telegraphicwinks, nods, and backs pass electricallyround the table, showing the contempt in whichsuch pursuits were held. I threw down thegauntlet in defence of my brethren of the rod.X PREFACE.One of my opponents, as he luxuriated over a• Salmi des Perdrix,' shrugged up his shoulders atthe mention of * Bare couse,' and * Bukon a gui ;'another gouty young gentleman, as he scrapedthe Turkey carpet, shuddered at the idea of wetfeet : a third, as he inhaled the bouquet of theBurgundy, and imbibed it after the manner ofGeorge the Fourth, turned up his nose atCwrw :' a fourth, — but I found I might as wellattempt to convert Mussulman, and resolvedto 'print and shame' the infidels.Here is the book, * gentle readers,' and a ' farragolibeller' it is. The last word, I hope none ofyou will render Libel.CONTENTSOFTHE FIRST VOLUME.FIRST DAY.An old Schoolfellow. — His altered appearance. — Mutualinquiries. — Some account of Julian. — The Author determineson an angling excursion to Wales. — My friend'shabits and eccentricities. — His denunciation of the " gentleart." — Defence of it. — An old Company's General. —His singular appearance. — Human pursuits. — Qualities ofan Angler. — Sir H. Davy's enthusiasm for the Art. — Julianconsents to accompany the Author. — Further addition tothe party. — Arrival at Hereford. . . . Page ISECOND DAY.Jaunting Car to Pennibont. — Loquacity of the Driver.Taming of animals. — Conflict between a tiger and abuffalo — Beauty of the tiger's paw. — Anecdote of an elephant.— Breed of dogs in England. — King James's spaniels.The Duchess of York's pets. — Byron and his bulldog. —Anecdote of Rogers. — The Lawyer's angling preparations.Inutility of Julian's fishing-tackle. —The may-fly dellCONTENTS.scribed. — Its history. — Extraordinary number of differentflies and insects. — Angling books. — Manufacture of flies.Lines and hooks 17THIRD DAY.Our supper. — Trolling — Objections to the fly. — The flyvindicated. — The Ithon.— A depopulated jungle. — Art ofthrowing a fly. — Rods. — Chub not worth catching. — Etymology.. 36FOURTH DAY.The Wye. — Romantic spot. — A run. — A sein. — Hearingof fishes. — Voracity of fish. — Hooking. — Wariness offoxes. — Samlets. — Dinner. . , . . .49FIFTH DAY.Our inn. — A Fisherman. — His advice. — Start for Pliny— Approach to the mountain. — Oriental Hot Spring.Religious Rites. — Hindu Baptism. — The old Fisherman. —A chalet. — Its inhabitants. — Our notes. — Julian. . 65SIXTH DAY.Birdlime. — Romantic town Dragging for Salmon. —Resorts of Trout. — Hooking a Trout. — Water-proof boots.Precautions. — Wading. — Size of Fish. — A glorious Pool. —Enormous Eel. — Eels. — Their migration. — Food of Eels —Propagation. — Variety of Eels — Adders. — A strange Supper.— Stewed Cat. — Anecdote 80SEVENTH DAY.Dejeuner. — A Bull. — Narrow escape. — Boar-hunt in India.— Henry's death. . . . . . .101CONTENTS. XiiEIGHTH DAY.Arrival of Salmonius. — His account of himself. — A bet.A Kilkenny story. — Lord Byron's faith in abstinence. —Ortolans. — A poacher's fly. — The Duke of Norfolk's milk-punchStart for Plinlimmon. — Our flies. — My companion'stravels. — The Fisherman's Tale. . . .114NINTH DAY.A fine morning. — The bet given up — Mountain scenery.Annoyance from Flies. — Flying Bugs, and other wingednuisances in India. — Travelling in Hindoostan. — Myriadsof White Ants. — Their mode of architecture. — Their devastations.— Their King. — Grandeur of the Welsh mountains.— Cader Idris. — The Towyn famous for Salmon andSea-trout. — The Pennibont Inn. — Colonel Vaughan's liberality— Destructive sport of three Anglers. — A delightfulevening. . 154TENTH DAY.A Stranger's Invitation. — Perpetual Rain. — Angling inaBoat. — Irish Rods. — Metamorphosis of a German Flute.Advantage of a strong Breeze. — Sir Humphrey Davy'sFlies. — Hooking a Trout. — He is landed. — Description ofhim. — Beautiful scenery. — A new comer. — Disadvantageof wading in the water while fishing. — Deep water notfavourable — Cormorants — Signal for dinner. — A Morning'sdiversion. — Digression. 171ELEVENTH DAY.Sketches of Salmonius — Musical Phenomenon NotesIndiana;. — Delights of a migratory Life in the East. —Oriental Field Sports — Descriptive Verses. — A Shikkaric.XIV CONTENTS.Astonishing feat in the den of an Hyena. — Crocodilesand Alligators 182TWELFTH DAY.Start for Cader Idris. — Ascent of the Mountain, — LlynCay. — Mountain-trout. — A fall of Frogs. — Summit of theMountain. — Vast Prospect. — Julian's excitement of spirits.Return to the Inn. — Charters meets with ah Adventure.A Female Angler. — Her history. . , .199THIRTEENTH DAY.Fishing on a Sunday prohibited. — National Customsshould be respected. — The River Lea. — Inn at Bow. —The Parlour. — Representation of a Chub. — A consequentialPersonage. — His sanctum sanatorium. — The Inn Ordinary.Cockney Anglers. — Welsh Congregation and Curate. —A deserted Village. — A Meeting-house. — A Publican'spiety. — Hypocrisy. — Welsh Peasantry. — Their overreachingspirit. 210FOURTEENTH DAY.Julian's fondness for smoking. — Anecdote of Maturin. —Swallows. — Their habits. — Sir Humphrey Davy's Remarkson those Birds. — Flying Fish. — Atmospheric Evaporation. —Fishing in Boats. — New arrivals. — Angling in Ireland andSwitzerland. — Piscatory character of the Lake of Geneva.Byron's opinion of Angling. — Walton and Sir HumphreyDavy. — Colour of Rivers. — Geneva Flies and Rods. —Rhone Trout. — Cretins — Goitres. — Azote. — Bridge of St.Maurice on the Rhone. — Angling in that river. — Bains deLouche — Pass of the Gemmi. — The Aar. — Lago di Guard.Enchanting View. — Swiss Scenery. — Traditions. . 227CONTENTS. XVFIFTEENTH DAY.Colloquy with a Cigar. — Anecdote of Glover the Painter.His knowledge of the language of Birds. — New Flies. —Success produced by them. — A Decoy Charters and hischaste Mistress. — Julian's sporting Reminiscences of India.Juggernaut. — Infatuated Pilgrims. — Self-immolation. —Dangerous bathing. — A barren scene. — A Herd of Antelopeschased. — Cheetahs. — Lion-hunt. — Tiger-shootingA Lion's lair. — Lamentation on leaving India. . . 248SIXTEENTH DAY.Tal y Llyn. — Success on this Pool. — Dine en petitcomte. — Lady Holland and Tommy Moore. — Return ofCharters. — His Adventure. — Shelley's English-ItalianLines. — Buona Note 26GSEVENTEENTH DAY.The old Fisherman. — His illness. — His opinions. — ABard. — Transmigration of Souls. — Origin of that doctrine.Bardic Poetry. — English translation of a Welsh Poem. —A Salmon Hunt. — Neapolitan method of Fishing. . 279APPENDIX.The Ephemera. — Maxims and Hints for an Angler. —Fishes. — Samlets. — Eels. — Sauce for Salmon. — CrimpingFish. — The Eagle. — Salmon Trouts. — The Nightingale. 205ILLUSTRATIONS.VOL. I.Pennibont InnBoat-house at Tal y LlynScene on the IthonScene on the WyeAnother Scene on the WyeBegalen PoolEntrance to MachynllethRiver DoveWeir on the DivlasBegalen Pool, by MoonlightValley of the TowynFrontispiece.Vignette in Title-page.Page 42• 6480114205VOL. II.Pont y Garth . • • Frontispiece.Cockney Fishing . Vignette in Title-page.Tal y Llyn, by Moonlight . . .46Parson's Bridge . • • • ^^Valley of the Towyn . • .1121 o IAberdovey . • • • ^'^THEANGLER IN WALES.FIRST DAY.An old Schoolfellow. — His altered appearance — Mutualinquiries. — Some account of Julian. — The Author determineson an angling excursion to Wales. — My friend'shabits and eccentricities. — His denunciation of the "gentleart." — Defence of it. — An old Company's General. —His singular appearance. — Human pursuits. — Qualities ofan Angler — Sir H. Davy's enthusiasm for the Art. —Julian consents to accompany the Author. — Furtheraddition to the party. — Arrival at Hereford.Cheltenham.Whom should I hit upon at Cheltenham oneburning afternoon in May, but my old school andclass-fellow, Julian ? We had not met for nearlytwenty years, and all his " quondam acquaintances,"if they had ever thought of him, consideredthat he " was dead, or ought to be." Insooth, he was one of the " quantum mutatis."VOL. I. B2 AN OLD SCHOOLFELLOW.His fine features had become marked and hardintheir outline, his cheek shrunk and liny, andhis figure, once distinguished for a rare beauty,and six upright feet of honest measure withouthis shoes, was bowed about the shoulders withno classic bend, such as the finest bas-relief inthe world, of the Anxious in the Villa Albans,is famous for. Before I stretched out myhand, I was half inclined to say, with Beppo'swife —How 's your liver ?"I addressed him familiarly by his name, but,to my horror, he did not recognize me. Howabominably our mirrors do lie ! little are wesensible of the change that day by day takesplace in our prizes ; how complacently can wecriticise others' eyes, for his were sunken andcrow-footed, and hug ourselves with the convenientunbelief that the penciling of time hasbegun to radiate about the corners of our own.I was so taken aback, as the sailors say, at hiswant of recognition, so self-reflective grown, that\Jixed on him for some seconds a vacant stare,and at last said : — " Don't you know me ? Don'tyou remember Stanley ? Do I look so veryold ?" What a bore it is to put such questions !MUTUAL INQUIRIES. »What a still greater bore, when he to whomthey are addressed is too candid to lay a flatteringunction on the vanity of the questioner, byundeceiving him in the damning suspicion conveyedby such an interrogatory as the last. Hegrasped my hand, whose pressure I did notreturn so cordially, perhaps, as I had intended,but strolling, arm-in-arm, towards the MontpelierGardens, we soon leaped over space andtime ; —And as we walk'd we talk'd, and the swift thought,Winging itself with laughter, linger'd not,But flew from brain to brain ; such glee was ours,Charged with light memories of departed hours —None deep enough for sadness."Among other topics, our inquiries turned uponwhat each had been doing during this long spanin our existence, this best part of the life of man;for, of all my acquaintances, I have never knownone quite sound at five-and-thirty, and we hadboth passed that " Mezzo del cummin di nostravita." Julian, I learnt, had left Englandat eighteen to seek his fortune, and gone toRussia for that purpose, where, not liking theservice, he had made his way, with a letterof recommendation in his pocket from Doctorb24 ACCOUNT OF Julia.C to Lord Moira, through the Don country,over the Caucasus into Georgia, thence traversedthe Persian empire, and crossing the Desertto Bushire, finally reached head quarters inthe Upper Provinces. There he succeeded ingetting a commission, and had just arrived onfurlough from Bengal, with the brevet rank ofCaptain, and half a liver, to pay his devotions toHygeia, in that paradise of chemists, where adecoction of Epsom salts and soda passes currentfor the genuine elixir vitae, an unadulterated spa.And your memorialist (as Madame d'Arblaydesignates herself) — What of him? Are you curiousto know? — after a long* continental tour,(by no means his first), and a short stay in town,he had just descendu at the Imperial. I hadbeen unfortunate in my last trip ; got the malariaat Rome, a coup-de-soleil at Naples, a coup-descentat Geneva, and made a mauvais-coup atParis, and, sick of London (as I always am in aIt is evident that the writer had been much on theContinent, and need not have told us so, from his bad tasten constantly interlarding his style with foreign words andGallicisms, or, as the Roman satirist says of the travelledroues of his time —In Liberi defluxit Orontes." — Ed.HIS HABITS AND ECCENTRICITIES. 5week), was on my way to Wales, to make a newconstitution amidst its mountains, its lakes, andrivers, and to seek a remedy for that tedium vitadoing nothing and having nothing to do, inwhat had always been " my passion and myenjoyment'* angling.I found my old friend a person neither Englishnor Indian, Christian nor Hindu. In diethe was a rigid disciple of Brama, confining itexclusively to such esculents as are enjoined bythe Shastras. They consisted of fish, rice, potatoes,and other vegetables, and fruit of all kinds.His daily meal (for he took but one) wascurrie and mulligatawney, the last part of whichword well expressed the hue of his countenance.Instead of " ghee," his sauce was olive oil, anounce of which, he says, is equal to a pound ofmeat. The only exception he makes to thisrigorous Pythagoreans is, that he indulges inample potations of the juice of the grape, which,according to him, was first planted in the Eastby the Indian Bacchus, whose exploits are socelebrated in the " Dionysia " of Nonnus. Hehence, perhaps, considers himself privileged toluxuriate in wine without discretion ; but itcheer, not inebriates" him, for he confines6 JULIAN NO ANGLER.himself solely to claret. He is the same amiable,gentle, and gay creature he ever was; butthis latter quality he attributes to an abstinencefrom animal food, and looks upon theslaughter of a cow as only next to the murder ofa human being.Nee distance putat human came hominem."His tongue ran on " antres vast and desertsidle," on jackal-hunting, on hog-hunting, onanthropophagi " in the shape of tigers andalligators ; on cobra de capelle, wild elephantsand rhinoceroses, and other nondescript animals,catalogued even by the wonder-relatingOthello. It would have made unquiet the ghostof old Isaac Walton to hear Julian's disparagementof " the gentle art," which, I told him,had been lately designated by the " Ultimapiscatorum" the philosophic one. He repeatedthe words " Ultima piscatorum" with a markedand not very respectful emphasis, and said —It would be well that he were, if you Pis-castorsare all as dull fellows. Why, he goesangling in the Colonel in a court-dress, bag-wig,and ruffles, and talks of catching trout withthe same imperturbable sang froid as he doesof crimping them. His book reminds me of theA "QUI HI." 7Cours Gastronomiquey where the tutor lecturesvery pedantically, or, as you would say, enphilosophe, on the. most approved way, ancientand modern, of dressing * plats.' Dr. Kitchenerstrikes me as quite as great a philosopher asyour Clericus."If you had named," I replied, " the immortalUde, the greatest of men and first of artists, Imight have hesitated before I differed from you.Sublime sciences both, my dear Julian, though,I fear, it will be no easy task to convert you toone or the other. Mais essays nous. I despiseangling where it is practised on the tame andpent-up trout in these Gloucestershire streams,where each is watched by keepers, and everyparticular inhabitant an old acquaintance of theproprietor. Here I should agree with you inproclaiming angling unworthy, unmanly, anduninteresting.As I was about to put forth all my eloquence,I was attracted by an apparition coming upthe avenue, not unusual at that refuge for Indians,a " qui hi," (a corruption of quis hie.)His high cheek bones, his scimitar-reversednose, and grisly red whiskers, where the whitehad long predominated, marked him for a3 HIS SINGULAR APPEARANCE.Scotchman, as nine tenths of the HonourableJohn's servants were during the administrationof all the patronage by the Melville. Hisair was anything but military, and had it notbeen for a part of his accoutrements, viz. scarletpantaloons, broadly streaked with green, hemight have been mistaken for a train-band captain.He was habited in a cerulean-blue frockcoat, down to the heels, studded with ranks oflarge metal buttons, a Leghorn straw hat witha very wide rim lined with green, and roundhis neck was a leathern stock of two or threeinches in height, over which flapped, in unstarchedease, tremendous gills ; a white waistcoat,of true Bengal cut, gave an appropriatefinish to his accoutrement.I asked Julian if he knew him ?Yes," said he ; " he is an old Company'sGeneral, SirThis braw Scot, having never been for thirtyyears inside a church door, is now Closeted dailywith a ranting player in the shape of a parson,*and has ' a conspicuous box and a front row ' inhis theatre ; though he has not seen, during allthat time, an apostate Hindu who did not turnCasti.-E.GEORGE THE FOURTH'S SNUFF. 9out a mauvais stijet, he is a strenuous advocate forthe propagation of the Gospel in foreign parts ;*and, having drunk more wine than any threemen in India, is become a member of all thetemperance societies. He is a great man, but (and it is out of the way ofhis calling) puts the last first, as you will findwhen he offers you a pinch of **A pinch of "Yes," he whispered, for he was now close tous;and I could perceive that in the folds ofhis enormous frill, (out, as Coleman says,) waslodged snuff enough to fill an ordinary mull.Julian presented me to this original, who said,extending his tabati^re of ample dimensions, ofchina-carved tortoise-shell —Sir, this snuff, I am sorry to say, though it isreal Masulipatam, is nothing to some, of whichI once had the honour of taking a pinch, out ofhis Majesty George the Fourth's box. It was soSir William Jones says — "We may assure ourselvesthat neither Mussulman nor Hindoo will ever be convertedby any mission from the Church of Rome, or anyother church." One of the old Christians on the Malabarcoast is easily known by two circumstances — wearing a pairof black silk shorts, that match well with his bare legs, anddriving a pig. — E.10 HUMAN PURSUITS.peculiarly exquisite that it has put me out ofconceit of tobacco all my life."But, General," observed Julian, " Stanleyand I should be glad of your opinion aboutangling, which he denominates ' the philosophicart'"In a pulpit tone he mouthed forth the followingdiatribe, being a leaf out of the book of hisghostly preceptor, and a close imitation of hisstyle of performances.*Man has so short a time to live, that,according to a heathen's definition, he is but thedream of a shade ; ought he not therefore seriouslyto occupy himself in the preservation ofhis immortal soul, in sowing the good seed,and in extending the diffusion of the Holy Scriptures,with proper note and comment, to thevery ends of the earth, that savage tribes mayleap for joy, like an infant in the womb, insteadof wasting his time in giving importance totrifles and substance to shadows? When fourfifths of the human race are unacquainted with,The constant sneer, and much-to-be condemned ridiculeof sacred things, cannot but have shocked the editor ofthis journal, and he will often have occasion to apply anantidote to the poison. — E.QUALITIES OF AN ANGLER. 11and unredeemed by the great Atonement ; whenInfidelity and Quietism, fixing their point d'appuiin hell, shake the earth, and render man blind tohis own destruction, whilst he is only sent intothis world to make trial of the miseries incidentto his state, and solely that he may hereafterbecome capable of enjoying ineffable bliss — howcan those whom Nature has endowed with superiortalents, consume the best part of theirexistence in systematising a set of vain speculationsand empty theories, in writing Salinas,and teaching their species how to entrapfish ! Fine occupations, in sooth, for a philosopher! I hold a different faith."To this pompous tirade I only replied with asmile —Faith, you will remember. General, is thefoundation-stone of our religion, as saith anancient cockney poet : —The first is faith, not wavering and unstable,But such as had the Patriarch old Abraham,That to the Highest was so acceptable,As his increase and offspring manifoldExceeded far the stars innumerable ;So must we still a firm persuasion hold.''* But in addition to faith, the qualities of anangler are, hope, love, patience, humility, SIR H. Davies ENTHUSIASM.rage, liberality, knowledge, placidity of temper,and long fasting. These are our cardinal virtues."But, seeing something like a sneer playingabout the new lamps countenance, I turned toJulian, and said —Had you been present, as I was, at a conversazionechez Lydia White, the literary ladyin * Beppo,* and heard Sir Humphrey Davy, as Idid, dilate so enthusiastically on this his favouritetopic, you would have become a convert. Therewas present her usual coterie; Rose, the translatorof *Ariosto,* and Southey, of whom thebard of Beppo makes such honourable mentionunder the soubriquet of 'Brotherly;' Mrs.Siddons,who never could ask for a cup of tea but in atone theatrical, and a few others. So eloquentwas the great chemist that he drew at last theattention of all the party, which was strangewhere so many were come to shine. He spoke ofthe buoyancy of spirits that living in the open airnever fails to excite, the secret of a lazzaroni-fisherman's happiness ; said, no exercise or pursuittended so much to health of body and peaceof mind. He expatiated with rapture on thedelights of following the windings of some unfre-SIR H. DAVY'S ENTHUSIASM. 13quitted stream, now rapidly rushing amongrocks, now winding gently along through richopen pasturage, and now overhung with gnarledoaks, or fringed with alders ; a fresh landscapeat every turn of the stream, and a perfect foregroundto every picture ; the flowers reflectingthemselves in a clear mirror: above ourheads to mark the clouds weaving themselvesinto a delicate network ; to observe the slowrise of the thunder-clouds, or to see the rackdriven tempestuously across, and * laying barethe heavens !' then to listen to the songs pf thebirds, or to behold the myriad insects thatswarm in the sunbeam ! But I give a veryfaint and inadequate idea of his words. Thesewere his joys. To gratify this ruling passion,he would travel a thousand miles to throw afly in some untried stream, undergo the fatiguesof a tedious journey to visit the unexploredrivers of Norway and Sweden, or the Fall ofTrain, to fish for the lucien. But I will sendyou my breviary, one of the most glorious andspirit-stirring pieces of writing in our language,Fytte the First' of Blackwood, and refer youto its pages for the further defence of theargument."14 JULIAN BECOMES AN ANGLER.Almost thou persuades me to become afisherman," said Julian.Not so seemed to think the man of the newlight, for he turned upon his heel, having exhaustedthe lesson from his primer ; and we sawhim in close confab with an important-lookingpersonage, whom I had no difficulty in distinguishingfor his spiritual vade-mecum. Soonafter he had left us, I observed to Julian, thatmy object in visiting Wales was to invigoratemy health and unbend my mind. Come withme," I added, " and, as Pliny says, perhaps ifwe do not fill our panniers, we may our tablets."Julian was easily persuaded to try my prescription,and the next day we turned our backson the black-legs, on the look-out whom theycould run down, that swarmed before the Ploughand the Rooms, the mankind " Pantaloons," inwhose gamboge visages Bengal was legibly engraved,the tall and mincing old maids, blue-stockingsit at Weller, and the pale-facedexquisite, parading their emaciated persons inthe High Street.I forgot (as in a letter the most importantpart of it is always tagged to the Postscript)to mention, that we made an agreeable addi-ADDITION TO OUR PARTY. 15tion to our party in a young barrister, whom Ihad met during the last long vacation at Parisand there inoculated with the rabies victoria,for he had for several months been thinning theWindrush with some mysterious and murderousbait, and having showed that he possessed theorgan of combativeness, by sending a cartelto the ex high sheriff of the county, was a"licensed" man. It was, as I said, his longvacation ; but term and vacation (for his wereinterminable) were confused with him, like theterms "plaintiff" and " defendant" at the endof an expensive lawsuit. If you should wish toknow what he was like, all I can say is, that hewas a great man for the ladies (now that is apuzzle), and I would not by any opinion of mineattempt to upset their verdict, which must beright. He was, however, a good musician, sanga good song, and during term-time told a goodstory, but never at any other, for he made apoint of forgetting them, with his gown, at allother times of the year, just as the young parsonssport mustachios, and drop the "Reverend"on their cards, on the Continent. Though hehad never missed a circuit for five years, andnot had as many briefs, yet, nevertheless, he had16 ARRIVAL AT HEREFORD.SO strong a development of Hope (which madehim an angler) that he fully expected the Chancellorship.And now, reader, after this introduction tomy two friends, consider us at Hereford, wherebythe by, there is an excellent rod-maker, andwhere I procured some hanks of gut latelybought from an itinerant Italian. My fishingcompanions did not know that each filum of gutis a drawn-out silkworm just before it is aboutto weave its cocoon. In the evening we proceededto the last town in England, Kington ;where commences our tour.JAUNTING CAR. 17SECOND DAY.Jaunting Car to Pennibont — Loquacity of the Driver. —Taming of animals. — Conflict between a tiger and abuffalo — Beauty of the tiger's paw. — Anecdote of anelephant — Breed of dogs in England. — King James'sspaniels. — The Duchess of York's pets. — Byron and hisbulldog. — Anecdote of Rogers. — The Lawyer's anglingpreparations. — Inutility of Julian's fishing-tackle. — Themay-fly described. — Its history. — Extraordinary numberof different flies and insects. — Angling books. — Manufactureof flies. — Lines and hooks.Kington, Tuesday, 1st June, 1832.We hired a double-benched cart, a sort of"jaunting car," to take us to Pennibont. Thedriver was a young savage lately caught, andspoke a patois difficult to be understood, suchas a literal translation into English from a languagefull of inversions naturally produced. Asaspecimen of the lucidity of his style and construction,his first remark was, at the sight of adrove of pigs coming along the road — " A pig isthe most difficult thing in the world to driveVOL. 1. c18 A BULL TERRIER.along a road, when there are many of them —very." — By the side of the vehicle ran a bullterrier,whose master was very loquacious in describinga fight which the animal (I mean thedog) had gained the day before. The first exploitof the brute now was to kill a goose thatcrossed the road, and his next to worry a lamb,notwithstanding all our endeavours to choke himoff. The lad assured us, that Gellert (as he calledhim) had never been guilty of such acts before ;but we advised the young lout to hang himon the first tree. Not one presented itself forseveral miles over the barren downs, and ourconversation took the following turn.Though I am not altogether a disciple ofHelvetia, who considers the human mind originallya sheet of blank paper, no doubt educationdoes much for us, and is all in all with theanimal world. This brute, for instance, has inall likelihood acquired his sanguinary taste fromthe effect produced on the sensorium of the brainby a recollection of the scene so graphicallydescribed by the young Welshman ; and a dogwho once takes to worry sheep, never leaves offthe habit ; and, as he only sucks the blood, hewill destroy several in the course of a night.TAMING OF ANIMALS. 19There is no animal that may not be tamed.Kean made a pet of a half-grown lion ; and(another proof) I saw last week, at Ramsey, agreyhound and a fawn course each other reciprocallyover a green paddock, playing together asthough they were of the same species. Nothingcould be more graceful than the motions ofthese beautiful creatures, who, after they hadmade several circuits of the lawn, came andfawned upon their fair mistress."*' I remember some half-grown wolves atCawnpore, who followed their masters about thebarracks, and answered to their names ; and Ihad then a pet leopard, who used to lie aboutmy bungalow, and would purr when stroked,like a cat. His teeth and claws were drawn, Ishould tell you."All animals have an instinctive dread ofman. I was at Drury Lane at Martin's first exhibition.I know not what effect it produced onothers, but when I saw him irritating with aspear that monstrous maned brute, who pursuedhim roaring round the cage, I felt as much forhim as I had ever done for a Matadore in Spain.It revived in my mind the spectacles in theRoman amphitheatres."c 220 COMBATS BETWEEN WILD BEASTS.I was present at Cheribon in Java at a fightbetween a jet-black tiger, peculiar to that island,and a buffalo. The former was conscious of hisinferiority, and required rousing with fire beforehe would make the attack ; the buffalo receivedhim on his horns, and tossing him high in theair, the tiger fell dead in the arena. The Nawabof Lucknow had once the barbarity to turnouttwelve English greyhounds against a royaltiger. The contest was quite as unequal as theother. What a subject for Considers! or agreater animal-painter still, Rubens ! The dogs,though they fought well, were all disseveredlimb from limb.Did you ever see a tiger's paw dissected ?It combines beauty and elegance of proportionwith immense strength and intricacy ofmechanism, beyond the power of human contrivance.Each claw has a tendinous communicationwith strong muscles, and is kept in aretractile state, that its sharpness may not beinjured by walking. Whenever a tiger strikesat any animal, not only do the claws enter it,but the toes - often follow. I have frequentlyseen wounds that were made by them probed toDECLINE OF BULLDOGS. 21the depth of at least five inches'* Perhapstwelve bulldogs would have had a better chance,for I had one who pinned an elephant by thetrunk. You are aware that the elephant is verycareful of his proboscis, and when in the vicinityof a tiger, rolls it up in a ball, being aware that,when once injured, it is difficult, if not impossibleto heal the wound. Three years after thisbulldog had been in the country he lost all hiscourage, and would not have attacked a pariahdog."Man is the only animal whose morale (inseparablyunited with the physique in other animals)climate does not affect. The race of ourbulldogs is getting fast extinct, and it is rare tosee one now of a pure and genuine breed. Thismay be accounted for by the discontinuance ofbull-baiting. When I was a boy, a West Indianof my acquaintance showed me a Cuba bloodhound,whose sire had been employed in thathorrible war against the Maroons ; he was a fierceand untamable creature, even more so than theGreek dogs, of which Prince Ulysses had severalin the caves of Parnassus, when besieged thereThis passage, by the inverted commas, seems to be aquotation. — E.22 ENGLISH BREED OF DOGS.for many months, and to whom, probably, heowed his life. They slept around him, and heused to feed them himself. At a word of histhey would have torn any one to pieces. It isno joke, I assure you, to enter a Greek villageon foot after sunset. In the Pyrenees, too, Iwas once severely bitten, and could show youthe wounds. These Spanish dogs are very savage,but I believe an English mastiff would beamatch for any of the three foreign races.Our British dogs were famous in the times ofthe Romans. Gratis panegyrists them; andNemesianus, in his ' Cynegeticon,' mentions aremarkable fact of the instinct of one of them.Nam postquam conclude visit sua germina flames,Continuo salt transcendent fervid zoneVincula, rapid rictu primum, port atque cubiliMox alium, mox deinde alium. Sic concha materSegregat egregiam sobolem virtutis adores'*We in England have carried the breed ofdogs, no less than that of all other animals, toFor when she saw her offspring girt with flames,Leap after leap, passing the fervid zone'sEncircling ring, with opening jaws, first one,And then another to her hutch she bears ;The mother, conscious of their danger, thusWith an instinctive fondness saves her young. — E.ANECDOTES. 23the greatest perfection. Till the peace therewas scarcely a good pointer or setter in France.Our Marlborough and King James's spaniels areunrivalled in beauty."The latter breed, that are black and tan,with hair almost approaching to silk in fineness(such as Vandyke loved to introduce into hisportraits), were solely in the possession of thelate Duke of Norfolk. He never travelled withouttwo of his favourites in the carriage. Whenat Worksop, he used to feed his eagles with thepups ; and a stranger to his exclusive pride inthe race, seeing him one day employed in thusdestroying a whole litter, told his Grace howmuch he should be delighted to possess one ofthem. The old brute's reply was a characteristicone : — ' Pray, sir, which of my estatesshould you like to have Y "You put me in mind of a visit once paid toGarlands, where we met the old Duchess of Yorkwith a perfect pack of spaniels. There is a littlepool of water near the grotto, encircled with thegraves of her pets, and an inscription on one ofthe tomb-stones in honour of some Chloe orDaphnis, that gave great offence. The lineswere by Monk Lewis, who, I remember, attri-24 BYRON'S CERBERUS.butes to this canine lady virtues that were deniedto belong to any of the biped ones in theneighbourhood.I have always thought Byron had this epitaphin his eye when he wrote that on the Newfoundlanddog. Him I never saw, but Tiger was anold acquaintance of mine, and I will tell you astory of the bard, which is very characteristic ofhis ' malice.* It appeared, some months ago, inadefunct periodical with an unintelligible name,to the editor of which I sent it, and, as onlyeight copies were sold of the number, it cannotbe much known, unless it has been pirated bysome thief. At all events, you have not seen it.Byron had a Cerberus, in the shape of anEnglish bulldog. As I said before, his namewas Tiger. He was fastened at the top ofthe colossal flight of steps in the Casa Lanfranc,with a rope long enough to enable himto guard the passage to what some, who attributeto Byron a cloven foot, might call hisinferno. The animal was an intelligent one ;and though little inclined to make new acquaintance,soon learned to distinguish his master'shabitual, and allowed them the entre, contentinghimself with growling at one and wagging hisBYRON S RECEPTION OF ROGERS. 25tail at another — a compliment, however, seldompaid to any but Shelley. Byron was much attachedto this fine creature, and frequently hadhim loosed when playing at billiards, his favouritegame. An anecdote is told, very characteristicof the poet, in which my gruff friendTiger played a distinguished part.*' It has become an historical fact, and one ofalmost as great importance as the meeting ofthe Triumvirate to decide the fate of the world,that ' Child Harold' and the ' Bard of Memory'met at Pisa. Rogers, in one of his sentimentalnotes, had announced the probability of this interestingevent, and Byron heard at length thathe had descendu at the * Tre Donzelle.' Knowingthat Rogers was momentarily to appear,Byron gave orders to Vita to introduce themonkey and bulldog. I think I see Byron inhis jacket stumping round the billiard-roomwith the heavy sound that, once heard, could notbe mistaken, and, after making some successfulhit, bursting out into one of his usual gibes orflashes of merriment, which success always inspired,or dividing his caresses between Jackand Tiger. There existed no slight jealousybetween the two favourites, which showed itself26 BYRON'S RECEPTION OF ROGERS.on the part of the latter by a short, loud, angrybark at his rival, whilst the ape sat perched outof reach, grinning and chattering defiance, tothe no small amusement of their master. Thecoming of the expected guest was now announcedby a bark of deeper intonation, whichByron made no effort to repress, but returned tothe game, to which he affected, with one of hiscynic grins, to pay more than common attention.In the mean time Tiger rushed furiously at thestranger, who backed to a corner of the roomshivering and breathless with terror. Byron,without casting a look towards the poor bardat bay, contented himself with drawling out,at intervals — * T — i — ger ; Ti — i — ger,' but insuch an accent, as rather to encourage thancheck the baiter, who continued a furious concertof menaces at the ' Death in life, or departedMr. Rogers.' Byron at length pretendedto discover the cause of the affray : to kick Tigeraside, and press his * dear friend ' in his arms,was only the affair of an instant. It was a finepiece of acting : the mock fervour of his professionof regard, his upbraiding and threats toTiger — nothing, in stage language, could surpassthe * situation.' "THE DOG Gallery. 27This anecdote reminds me of the Swift-likeverses in ' Fraser,' on ' The Bard of Mummeryin which he takes a similar view of the characterof his friend to that in the ' Conversations ofLord Byron,' winding up with —For his virtues, would you know 'em,Once he wrote a pretty poem.' "Talking of virtues, poetry, and dogs, remindsme of Gellert, whose tomb we will visit, andwho gave his name to a town in North Wales.You perhaps have never seen the stanzas, written,I believe, by the Honourable W. Spencer, onthe faithful guardian of the child of Llewellyn.They are among the most beautiful in the balladstyle our language possesses."This Gellert trotting by our side, was certainlyno relation to Llewellyn's ; and just as wewere wishing him condign punishment, and hadcrossed the Ithon, and reached the inn, twoWelsh farmers, on ponies without saddles, cameriding at full gallop up to the cart. They werethe owners of the goose and lamb, and appearedto be very much disappointed when they foundthe dog was not our property. They, however,took charge of our Welsh jehu, of whom weheard no more.S8 COSTUME.Peiinibont.Julian has brought with him baggage enoughto load a camel, among which is a six-dozenhamper of claret, galore of currie-powder, andsoluble cayenne (a kuiu, to burn,) many a flask ofFlorence oil, and some twenty dozen bundles ofTrichinopoly cheroots, which he asserts to be theonly genuine tobacco, this herb being indigenousin no other part of India, whence it has beentransplanted into the Savannas, whose cigars helooks upon as little better than shag. The Ben-gale'scostume is characteristic, i. e. : a white jacket, white nankeenpantaloons (tights), numero tfe, Indian leatherhessians. A rig-out enough to frighten all thefish out of their skins. But he has promised tomend his attire at Machyntlleth, if such a personageas a " Schneider" can be found ; and Ihave advised him to send on to that place hisimpedimenta.The lawyer is better provided with body thanfoot gear, for he has boots coming up to his knees,which, he says, are water-proof; but he will soonprove the contrary. Water-proof they are ashigh as the ankles, into which I prognosticate theslush," once entered, will remain, as in a cup,Fishing-tackle. 29and act like the sucker of a pump ; and that saidboots will not be so easily got off as on, but stickto him like birdlime or cobbler's wax ; and thatin order to drain off the bilge water, he will haveto be served as Tulliver was by his Brobdignag-giant nurse, lifted up by the heels — a scheme Ionce saw successfully practised on a half-drownedfox hunter, after he had been fished out of aditch. His tackle occupies a very small space,consisting of one trolling-rod and apparatus.Not so Julian's ; for he has brought with himhalf the stock-in-trade of a Cheltenham tackle-vender.He has been triumphantly displayingtwo splendid blue morocco books of flies, theretire of the shop ; most of them unlike anythingin nature — but wonderful specimens ofart. Several ends (literally ends) of gut, allrotten and flat, were in the pockets ; and hewas about to tie one on the line, but did noteven know how to make a loop, much less awater-knot. The first dropper was a graham,or green-tail ; the second a willow-fly, and thestretcher, a may-fly. I had angled in Wales in1824, and knew that neither of these would succeed.As to the second dropper, there are few,if any, willows on the Ithon, or any other of the80 THE May-fly.Welsh rivers, and the May-fly was not only over,but said I —The may-fly is scarcely known in Wales, atleast I have never been able to get a riseat one."The tackle-man told me it was the mosttaking of all flies."Yes, in England ; indeed, perhaps, the superiorsize of the trout there is in some measureattributable to the enormous meals the troutmake of this little ephemera ; and it is worthyof observation, that before its appearance thefish are in general poor, lousy, and smutty ; butafew days of the may-fly will make so great adifference in their condition as to occasion anincredible increase of bulk. The French fishermen,I think, call this periodical and providentialsupply of food, * La manne des Poissons.' "I am curious to know something of thehistory of this little creature ?"In the great fall, or, to speak more properly,rise of these animalcule, related by Mr.White as having occurred in the Beresfordstream, the air was perfectly crowded, and thesurface of the water overspread with them.THE May-fly. 31Reaumur, also, compares their periodical appearanceto clouds and rain, so thickly did they coverhim. They begin to emerge from their subaqueousabodes, and assume the form of nymphae,as soon as the sun has imparted sufficient warmthto the water, that, as an old poet says —Hatches them at last,As well as genial warmth, or hen, or sun ;A thing so strange, so bold,As scarce, perhaps, no author ever told.'They then come forth in myriads, as I said,from their burrows. I have dubbed much withthe natural may-fly (which on some of the riversin Hampshire they will not permit to be used),and towards evening have found them scarce,and, on searching the trees near the stream,discovered what I thought to be the flies withtheir wings extended, but, on closer examination,perceived that these were their exuviae, orenvelopes. Reaumur confines their taking theform of aurelian to between eight and half pasteight in the evening. It has been remarked, too,by Swammerdam, that the great periodical rise ofephemerae is confined to three days. This latterentomologist, in a treatise that leaves nothing to32 EPHEMERAE.be desired, also established, that most of themtake three years before they arrive at sufficientmaturity to undergo the metamorphosis.As to the period of their existence, that ofsome does not exceed above an hour ; many notmore than four or five, and none, perhaps, livelonger than a day. They divest themselves oftwo coats; one immediately on emerging fromtheir natal element; and of the other, as I remarked,they rid themselves before laying theireggs, for which purpose they hover over and siton the water, and in so doing, if they wet theirwings, are instantly drowned.We may from these ephemerae learn a morallesson. They are an image of ourselves, themost fortunate of whom, after fretting and toilingfor years in vain pursuits, the quest of gloryand the acquisition of riches, have no soonerobtained the darling objects of our ambition,than we arrive at a period of life when we ceaseto find in them any enjoyment, and when all thatsurrounds us is mere vanity and nothingness.After this homily, I will add that, accordingto De Peer, there are upwards of one thousandfour hundred different flies and insects ; not thatI pretend to know a hundred of them. PerhapsANGLING-BOOKS. 33also you do not know that the eyes of some arefound to be made up of an aggregate of manyminute ones, which in some insects amount to sixor seven thousand, and spread up and down thebody as on the spider and scorpion-fly. But thisfield is inexhaustible, and I shall not go into it."I find in the angling-books no exceptionmade as to Wales, and have been reading themattentively during our journey, for I bought allI could find in Weller's catalogue. Here theyare : — look at the indices yourself."All the books that have ever been writtenon angling, all that can be conveyed by wordsor drawings, will never teach a tyro to make afly, to throw one, to spin a minnow, or play afish. One might as well attempt to swim fromreading of Leander's or Byron's exploits ; to playat billiards by studying the angles mathematically;or at chess (remember Rousseau*) byfagging at habits and problems from Walker.Experience and habit are all in all. A singleday's instruction from a practised hand is worthRousseau mentions, in his " Confessions," having studiedhabits for several months, and fancied himself becomebienfort, but the first time he sate down to play hewas beaten by a very inferior player. — E.VOL. 1. D34 MANUFACTURE OF FLIES.all the minute instructions, and woodcuts, howeverwell executed, that are extant. He wholearns Alphabets of fishing will never be out ofhis alphabet. Besides, every lake or river hasits particular flies, as you will find during ourtour."What flies do you recommend VThere is one at which they will rise hereduring almost every month in the year, for itabounds in Wales at all seasons. Every evening,when k is fine, you will see it swarmingabout the banks. They call it the cocobundy.It is a beetle, and not unlike what we call inEngland the red spinner. It would be best forus, whilst Charters tries the river, to employourselves in dressing a few flies. I have broughtwith me some Russian hog's bristles : they areround and small, and some of them eleveninches in length, are preferable to any gut orgrass, and instead of rotting, as they do, becometougher in the water. I have also got fineswan's down, dyed, by a silk-dyer, of severalnuances ; viz. three degrees of yellow, two ofgreen, two of brown ; and feathers for wings, andhackles of the same colours. In the fly-art, everyman who has the slightest pretensions to theHOOKS. 35name of angler should be an adept. He shouldalso know how to stain his line the hue of theparticular water in which he may have to throw.Choose gut that is fresh and round; do not,in economy, cut it too near the ends, and letit soak half an hour before you begin to knot.The hooks I always use are the Kirby-bend.Sir Humphrey Davy talks much in praise ofO'Shaughnessy's Limerick ; but they are difficultto be obtained genuine, out of Ireland, and somesold to me for such, were too highly tempered,so that I snapped one or two, and gave them up.The sharpness of their curve is also liable to cutthe line. These, I think, you will find perfect.The cocobundy is very simply made. I perceivea fine red or ginger game-cock in the yard ; wewill get some of his neck feathers for the hackle,and for dubbing use peacock's hurl.** Now for Lesson I."Q 236 OUR SUPPER.THIRD DAY.Our supper. — Trolling. — Objections to the fly. — The flyvindicated. — The Ithon. — A depopulated jungle. — Art ofthrowing a fly. — Rods. — Chub not worth catching. —Etymology.Pennibont, on the Ithon, Thursday, 1st June.Weary, wet to the skin, hungry (which triesthe temper enough of itself), and discontentedwith his afternoon's sport, Charters is just arrived.The landlady gives herself wholly up tothe promotion of his comfort, and the servantis frying the fish for our supper — a musicalsound — animus est in pains.The trout and eels were rather muddy. ChubI never will touch again, for I was told how theyfeed. But the chickens and ham (not smoke-driedin the chimneys, as in England) were extolling.37excellent, the ale good, omelet not amiss. Nowfor a cigar and Charters.I can't say much for the Ithon. I havefollowed it at least five or six miles through itsserpent-like course. The lower I went, the moresluggish it became, and ended in weeds andrushes. You know I always troll, and I amsatisfied that, had there been any good trout inthe river, I should have taken some. As it is, Ionly caught twelve, the largest less than a quarterof a pound, and four chub. I lost one of atleast four pounds weight, owing to the steepnessof the bank, and my indifference whether he gotoff or not. These chub are poor dastardlythings, and, notwithstanding what Walton says,the worst of fish. The eels, and not very largeones either, tormented me sadly, and made greathavoc among my hooks. As to my bait, I deemit infallible. Trolling for ever ! say I."Notwithstanding your predilection for trolling,and your boasted lure, whatever it may be,I still believe more fish, at the right season ofthe year, may be taken by the fly, though it isnow late for it here, than by any other process ;at all events, you will not deny that the method38 TROLLING.is more artificial, more ingenious, and moreamusing ?"Agreed ; but the disappointment of seeinga troller take all the large fish, whilst you basketthe small ones, is not put into your account."I had rather land even small fish with myfine tackle, than weigh large ones with yourclumsy and coarse machinery ; besides, it doeshappen (you forget Sir Humphrey's Denham andDenton angling) that we do take large fish."By accident. The larger fish are not impelledby hunger to rise, except for a very fewweeks in the year, and even not then, where fliesof considerable bodies, such as the stone-fly, thecaddew-fly, the May-fly, and a few others, havenot emerged from their rough coats, or their stateof grubs, and which species, I believe, are rare,even if they exist here ; and I am still inclinedto believe, that the best trout, as I said before,only rise in playfulness."A pretty paradox, a fine specimen of specialpleading ; merely for the sake of exercise, perhaps,and to keep their fins in order, eh ! Didyou ever open one of their capacious stomachs,and find them gorged with flies ?"Yes, but only in the early part of the season.OBJECTIONS TO THE FLY. 39and when, starved by long abstinence, the periodicalswarms come down, or rather, rise up.When the trout in large waters, and bold rapids,has acquired a certain strength and size, his real,substantial food consists of the smaller class offish,especially of his own genus. Thus, youwill always find him in the deepest hole, or lurkingbehind some root, or projection, under whichhe conceals himself in the eddy, till some unwaryyoungster, impelled by the torrent into hislurking-place, presents himself. You may passthe fly over his lair (if I may use the expression)fifty times without success ; but offer him mybait, and he is your own."I should be sorry to become a convert toyour doctrines. So you have discarded the flyaltogether ?"I used it at first ; but my objections to itwere taken from observing that, amongst themost expert fly-fishers, no one was perfectlysatisfied. The day was too fine, or too foul ;the water too clear, or too muddy ; the wind tooviolent, or too low, or in the wrong quarter ;and if none of these vexations could be referredto, there was a never-failing reason for unsuccess: — it was not the right fly."40 OBJECTIONS TO THE FLY.That reason is an obvious one, doubtless.It is essential to hit the exact colour and formof the fly. But go on'*Essential as that point may be, how often isit accomplished ? A trolling bait, such as mine,will answer at all seasons, weathers, and places.The fly can only be thrown on particular spotsof a rapid, rocky, wood-fringed river, and thesegenerally are the very spots least frequented bythe monarchs of the stream. But should youmake a fortunate cast, and find one of them athome, first he is disturbed by the agitation ofthe surface ; next, you are open to his observation,a circumstance of itself sufficient to scareand banish every trout that has arrived at yearsof discretion. As to the small trout, you mayhave them at all times, for age and experiencemake an extraordinary difference in the habits offishas of other animals."Now for my reply, to which, in accordancewith the rules of your practice in the courts, Iwill have no rejoinder. It is the imperfection ofthe art against which you would inveigh, notagainst the art itself. Any one may become atroller ; the greatest bungler may, in eddiesand falls, but not elsewhere, ensnare the wariestTHE FLY VINDICATED. 41of the finny tribe. I have no curiosity to wormout your secret, and I hope it is liable to noneof the objections humanity suggests, againsttreating frogs d la Marshal, or impaling live fishor grubs. As to myself, nothing will ever induceme to use aught else than the fly. When thestream is troubled, or the wind and weatherunpropitious, I can amuse myself with preparingmy flies, or knotting my hanks of gut. Whenothers find the water too clear, with a line of theright colour, and as fine as the threads thespider weaves in her web of gossamer, I canmake my fly drop like the parachute of the dandelion.In salmon-fishing this precaution is unnecessary,for a splash in the water attracts them.You will one day recant, and, after you haveseen me land one out of the Wye or Tivy, discardfor ever your boasted panacea. You nowdeem it irresistible, but you will find it otherwisewhen you have tried the lakes, whose inmatesare too delicate in their tastes, too greatepicures, to look at aught else than a fly. Nousverrons — another cigar, and then let us part withJuvenal's not inapt —'TeNos facies, Fortuna ! dean, ccjcloquc socinus.' "V2THE Thon.The Ithon, Friday 2nd.It was our plan to hunt down the Ithon,though with little prospect of much sport, toRhayader.We found the river what Charters had describedit, a broad and sluggish stream, flowingthrough a deep, loamy soil, that gave a whitishtinge to the water, sufficiently clear, however,for the fly, though much rain had fallen duringthe night. Julian, when he saw the open, greenpastures through which the river winds, on oneside covered with black cattle, and the woodedand high banks on the other, interspersed withA DEPOPULATED JUNGLE. 43farm-houses, inveighed loudly against civilization,as the bane of sport of all kinds, against game-laws,and gamekeepers, arguing, that therecould be no property in the Aera nature,Even India," said he, " is beginning to bespoiled. On visiting some jungle, that had suppliedexcellent beat, I have often been disappointed,to see a new village encroaching on ourmanor. Tigers there were none, we knew, butexpected to console ourselves with abundance ofother game, which, in our eagerness for that noblesport, we before had disdained to fire at. Whatwas become of the chicane ? The florida, thatavoids the haunts of men, had forsaken her disturbedretreat ; the solitary snipe had sought amore retired haunt, and the nylgau, supposed tobe a mule between kine and deer, and partakingof the character of both animals, had disappeared.You have no idea of the delight of traversingone of our untrodden wildernesses, withlong, withered grass up to the howdah, and herdsof antelopes, hogs, peafowl, quail, and partridges,getting up on all sides. But, if men must fish,let it be * in society where none intrudes.' "Wild animals have not an instinctive terrorof man ; but when disturbed and shot at, soon44 ART OF THROWING A FLY.learn caution, and, if Sir Humphrey Davy's observationis correct, teach their offspring to beequally wary, without their having had the sameexperience. Pheasants know well a preserve,and in time of danger, make for it. Fish areequally knowing, and keep to a guarded part ofa stream. After a river has been well whipped,it is useless to throw a fly into it, and fishare much shyer near towns than elsewhere.But to business. I perceive that round thatpoint the river must make a considerable fall,and if there is a trout in the place, we shall findhim in the eddy. I see Charters at the end ofthe meadow, posting along at a famous rate,which proves that he has met with nothing todetain him in his bush-fighting."As I am putting together my rod, I wishyou would give me some instructions, though, Ifear, I shall make a sorry pupil."« The art of throwing a fly is by many easilylearnt, whilst others, with infinite practice, neverbecome very dexterous ; just as some men willnever be good whips, or have a good hand inriding. To give you an instance ; a tyro, likeyourself, who was fishing with his uncle, tookmore trout than that practised angler, theRODS. 45descendant of the celebrated Cotton. Perhapsyou will say, his skill was hereditary, or intuitive.In Hampshire, last May, whilst SirH. P was pretending to give instructions toM how to throw, the latter took, and landed,a trout of ten pounds weight. When a boy, Ikilled more partridges in the same number ofshots than I have ever done since, and the firsttime I ever threw a fly, brought to shore asalmon in the Tivy, under the auspices, it istrue, of an experienced veteran, but with a rodmade by a village carpenter. It was of mountainash, and spliced ; the most equally balancedmachine I ever handled. According to some,the best have ash for the bottom or handle-piece,hickory for the mid-joints, and lance woodfor the top, which seems to me as preposterousas Horace'sService pictor aquinasHunger si velut, variasque induced plumes.'And I cannot help thinking, that it is owing tothis very heterogeneous alliance of woods differingin calibre and grain that good implementsare so seldom met with. A good cricket-bat, orbilliard-cue, is not more rare than a good rod,and the best I ever had was, as I said, of ash.46 RODS.Hazel is also excellent, and an old angling poetgives these instructions : —Then go, and in some great Arcadian wood,Where store of ancient hazels do abound,And keep away their springs and tender brood,Such shoots as are the straightest, long, and round.And of them all cut off what you think good.And choose the fairest, smoothest, and most sound,So that they do not two years' growth exceed.In shape and beauty like the Belgian reed.'Splicing, though somewhat troublesome intravelling, is the best mode to adopt. Such rodsrun no chance of snapping at the joints, or gettingunbent, to which latter evil, in the most criticalmoment, saturation by wet, and warping in thesun, render others liable. Such are also morepliable — the play more even. You may rememberthat the masts of vessels are always spliced,and a yard that has been so, will go anywhereelse. Brass binding, to groove into the joints, Iutterly condemn, as affecting elasticity ; but ifrods with joints be used, I should recommendthe Killarney practice, of having each with a pintoslide into the ferule, and plugs of wood ofsimilar contrivance, to fit afterwards into them,and save their being indented. But this is along lecture : now for a throw."CHUB, NOT WORTH CATCHING. 47I have been used to handle a four-horsewhip, but do not find this so easy."You have too much line out. Take careyou do not hook me. There, you have gotyour flies into a scramble. See, the fish arerising — but small. I think I can reach the curlyonder. Yes, I have him ! He is not one ofthe Cone fish (I think I see myself throwing inatwo-pounder). There, he is landed, and doesnot exceed half a pound — a good fish for thiswater, but in bad condition."I have had several rises, but they discoveredthe deception."You did not check at the right moment. Avery practised eye knows the exact time to doso. But I have now got a good fish. He pullslike a log, and I suspect is not a trout. I wasright ; it is one of my abhorrence, a chub. It isa poor, cowardly creature, and see, he is lying onthe surface, quite impassive. Hand me the net.He is at least three pounds ; but is scarcelyworth carriage."As I was saying this, we were warned by a boyoff the river. But it was no privation. Chubare not worth catching ; and it may be laiddown as an invariable rule, that where they48 ETYMOLOGY.abound, trout do not ; the latter are too genteelto like such society.The remainder of this day's sport is hardlyworth detailing, and Julian was most occupiedin watching the ephemerae, and in the way toRhayader, which we reached at an early hour, inapelting rain, impromptu the following epigram,to me the far most amusing thing in thisblank day.Say not, their life is but a day : those hoursOf love and light would count an age of ours ;From joy to joy in endless change they rove,And die in loving, as they lived on love.A piece of advice to Welsh angling tourists,not to lose their time on the Ithon, though it isa pretty classical tempting word, which Charters,who is a great etymologist, will have isderived from Tunnus or Thon, which, he says,was originally a generic name for fish. CreditDuctus Capella, non ego.We had no nodes, and broke up at an earlyhour, Julian having first finished his ordinaryquantum of claret, two bottles, which he had theprecaution of getting merit on. We consoledourselves with a humbler beverage, concha.FOURTH DAY.The Wye. — Romantic spot. — A run. — A sein. — Hearingof fishes. — Voracity of fish. — Hooking. — Wariness offoxes. — Samlets — Dinner.From Rhayader to Llanidloes,Saturday, 3rd June.The scenery improves, and becomes wilder inits character. The Wye (the river Ear s^oyri^v)at this distance from the sea, is a noble stream,and deserves the distinction. How precipitouslyit rushes over its deep-worn bed in a con-vol.I. E50 ROMANTIC SPOT.situation of falls, where the finny tribe, amongits rugged and uncertain bottoms, secure intheir retreats, defy the net.The morning was warm and cloudy, and thewater in admirable order, for scarcely any rainaffects it. Yet in the first two miles we scarcelygot a rise, which confirms my opinion about theshyness of fish near towns. Julian and myselfsoon came up to Charters, who this day did notcarry the bag so fast. He was posted in a mostromantic spot, at the bottom of a castella, of atleast twenty feet, which he had reached by climbingover rocks that the force of torrents in somemighty inundation had thrown together in confusedand chaotic masses. At his feet was anestuary, ending in a deep, quiet pool, a likelyresting-place for a salmon. He beckoned to usto stop and watch his proceedings. He hadattached a bullet to his usual quantity of shot,about two feet above the hook, and sunk itgradually in the foam. The plomb gave him anotion when it had reached the ground ; he thendrew it gradually upward, the force of the currentkeeping the bait in full play. We soonsaw he had a run, and heard him exclaim —A RUN. 51He has darted under the projecting rock,and I shall inevitably lose him ! I might aswell attempt to move the rock itself. Ah ! hehas broken away, and is gone."As we were moving on we heard the whizzingof his winch, and a halloo : —I have another run ! This is a gloriousfish ! Come and help me !".The bending of the rod proved his words true.Keep him well in hand ; but if he will godown the stream, pass the rod to me from belowthe rocks."I cannot stop him ; he has run out all myline; so take the rod. Quick !"He is safe if I can get his head round againstthe stream. Now I have reeled up, and haveline to spare and give him, if he again peremptorilydemand it."You may be sure he will leap ; — down rod,and slack line when he does."Well done ! He is a brave fish. That leaphas tired him, — it is nearly over. Now guidehim down the shallows, and I will jump behindhim into the water. He is safely netted."What is it ?"E 252 A Sewing.A sein, in fine order. He weighs at leastfive pounds, and for his size, is possessed of infinitelymore strength than a salmon. I amdelighted with this sport."You are fortunate, for these fish are scarce,so far from the sea."And now we may go."Go ! Why ?" asked Julian ; " surely theremust be many more fish in so likely a spot."Doubtless there are ; but, after all this disturbance,for some time not a fish will stir."I have ever understood that fish have nosense of hearing ; indeed, there is a vulgar proverb,the purport of which is, that if they possessedany such sense, no man would become anangler."I confess there is little known on this intricatesubject, but I will inform you of the opinionof others, and afterwards give my own. Thecelebrated Hunter made a very elaborate examinationof the organs of fish in general, and hisobservations are worthy of great respect. Hesupposes that they are possessed of the perfectpower of hearing, and that the organ creatingthat power consists of a hard substance, resentOF FISHES. 53being gristle, and in some species crusted overwith a thin plate of bone, that admits of nocollapse, and which he denominates the ear.He gives also some experimental instance oftheir possession of this faculty. He describes apond where the fish were numerous, which atthe firing of a gun disappeared, burying themselvesin the mud. Lacepede observes, that theirritability of the muscles in fish is much greaterthan in any other animals ; and Sir HumphreyDavy says we cannot judge of the senses ofanimals that breathe water — that separate airfrom water by their gills — but that it seems probable,as the quality of the water is connectedwith their life and health, that they must beexquisitely sensible to changes in the water.The reasoning is, doubtless, well founded, andrather than admit the position that fish hear —that, inhabiting an element so substantial, theyshould have a sense which seems alone applicableto a more subtle element, — I would gofarther, and assert, that the whole frame of thefish constitutes its ear, and deny that there is, ondissection, found any such distinct organ as anear, although there is such a hollow bone as54 HEARING OF FISHES.described by Hunter. Bone, too, is less sensibleof sensation than muscle. The human tympanumis a fine but tense membrane, on which theportio mollis of the eighth pair of nerves islargely distributed, and it is through the mediumof this membrane that the nerve receives thevibration of the external media. Now, a bone iscertainly very ill calculated to convey this vibratorysensation : why should we not, therefore,rather suppose, as I have done, that it acts onthe whole frame ? But Anderson, in the ' PhilosophicalResearches,' has written a very elaboratetreatise on sound with reference to water.Persons immersed in that element have certainlyheard, but very indistinctly, so much so thatthe firing of a gun over their heads, at the depthof twelve feet, was scarcely audible, though theshaking of the banks was felt. Now, our sensoriumis very acute ; whilst fish are proved to haveno organs of hearing by this simple fact, thatgold-fish in a vase took no notice of a loudshout, whilst, at the slightest scraping of theglass, they exhibited great disturbance. This isto me decisive. The substantiality of the elementthey inhabit must necessarily render theHEARING OF FISHES. 55smallest motion perceptible to their delicateframes, and the smallest undulation of the airbe equivalent to the perception of sound bythe whole body of the fish, which takes instantalarm : thus, thunder drives fish into their deepand secret holes, not because they hear, butbecause they feel."I remember being on the Savoy side of theLake of Geneva when Lac Leman was like amirror, and the Latine sails of the barks hungidly on the yards, and were reflected from agreat distance in the water (the sign of a deadcalm,) when I overheard, certainly three or fourmiles off, on the opposite shore, the conversationof a paysan and passant, every word ofwhich (to our infinite amusement) was so distinctthat we lost not a syllable."This proves my position. Their voicescould not penetrate the water owing to thesolidity of the element, and the sound, in traversingthe smooth surface, found no more resistancethan it would have done from a plate ofglass or a slab of marble."I can, perhaps, throw some light on thissubject of acoustics, by relating two facts that56 HEARING OF FISHES.came under my own observation in India. WhenI was at Moorshedabad, the collector had alarge tank full of fish, that were petted by hisdaughters. They had erected a bell, whichwhen rung brought all the wish from differentparts of the pool to be fed. So tame were they,that they took bread out of the hands of theiryoung mistresses — an interesting sight !"As no animals have stronger instincts thanfish, I see no reason why they should not becapable of recognizing, and perhaps attachingthemselves to, those who feed them ; and if so,the story told, in some Roman writer, of a lady(whose name I think was Antonio) bewailing thedeath of her lamprey, was not so ridiculous asPetrarch * would wish to make it out."You perceive that bells bringing the fishmay be reconciled with, and does not militateagainst my theory. But now, Julian, for yourother fact."In going up the Ganges, I had an opportunityof seeing the most singular mode of catchingfish ever adopted, and as it bears some" Petrarch de consolation utrinque fortunae." Caputde Piscinb. — E.HEARING OF FISHES. 57relation to the subject, I will also describeit to you. During the periodical rains, thegreat river I mentioned overflows its banks,and causes vast inundations, so that I havebeen sailing for nearly a day together in a continuedfresh-water sea. After the floods havesubsided, the smaller fish crowd up the nulla,or rivulets, formed by the draining of the land,perhaps fearful of their larger foes, or themselvesin search of food. A fisherman, of an idle sort,you may think, plies his dingy, or punt, up oneof these, and when it grates the sand, moors itacross the stream. With a long, indented bone,somewhat resembling a call made for quail, heingreat unconcern, with his * bubble bubble,' orgoorgooru, a pipe so called from the bubbling itmakes in having the smoke drawn through ahalf-filled cocoa-nutshell, in one hand, and hismusical instrument in the other, creaks alongthe gunnel of the boat, and awaits the arrivalof the invited. Strange to say, his guests,attracted by the noise, do arrive, and findingthe shallow stream obstructed by an unusualobject, the boat, throw themselves over. Thisleap is well calculated, and would be cfl'cctual,58 HEARING OF FISHES.but that (as I should have explained) our Hindoohas extended a net on the lee side of the boat,and against this they commonly strike, and areentangled in the meshes. By such means I sawsome dozens of these little animals made captives."This would imply a very fine sense ofhearing ?"I think not. Even this slight noise causedan undulation of the air, and thence, though inalesser rate, an undulation in the vater, andwould most likely have produced no effect exceptfrom contact with the water."Lord Byron says (by the by, the idea isMadame de Steel's,) the face breathes music :why may we not, and by a less exaggeratedimage, suppose, that fish feel it ? Lacepedeobserves on the hearing of fishes : * On nevoit ni ouverture experience pour I'organe deTome, ni oreille externe, ni membrane du tympan,ni cavite meme du meme nom, ni passageaboutissant a I'interieur de la bouche, ni osseletsauditors correspondent a ceux que Ton a hommesenclose, martial, ou crier, ni lampoon, ni communicationinterfere, designed par la denominateOF FISHES. 59tion de centre ronde.' Without any of theseorgans, how imperfect must their sense of hearingbe ; and it seems clear that the hollow bonementioned by Hunter, cannot be an ear."But a Frenchman has not only given them anexquisite ear, but the faculty of speech. His reasoningis somewhat amusing from its seriousness.How do we know that a fish has not as many,or perhaps more, vocal intonations than a bird ;both seem to have been formed on the samemodel ; the one flies, the other swims. The soledifference is in the elements, for swimming andflying are the same thing. Why should theynot talk ? It is no argument to say, that we donot hear them either speak or sing, for this,perhaps, may be the fault of our dull organs.The water is everywhere interpenetrated by air,which the fishes breathe ; why may they not, byequivalent media, form vibrations of sound, andnotes, too delicate, it is true, to reach our ears,but which may make them understood one bythe other ? I love at least to indulge such anotion, nor can I, without some sort of philosophicalchagrin, figure to myself, that Nature liasdeprived any of her works of that perfection she60 VORACITY OF FISH.hus stamped on the rest, or that she has doomedto an eternal silence the innumerable tribes thatinhabit the immense regions of the ocean andthe course of rivers. * Le silence est le partagedes morts, la parole donne la vie aux vivantA > »meme.Tranquillity being now restored," said Charters,*' I shall make another essay at the pool ;and I do not despair of hooking the same individualI lost."** Sir Humphrey Davy, I think, says, that apricked fish will not rise again, or, at least, takethe artificial fly."But he gives an instance of a pike's voracity,by one being produced on the table, at Denham,that had carried off a short time before, thehooks and tackle of Clericus."He mentions no such fact regarding trout,but I can tell you one that happened to me theother day at Postlip, near Winchcomb, in Gloucestershire,where I was indebted for a goodday's sport to their liberal and hospitable proprietor,Mr. Regent. I had been told therewere some good fish in the mill dam, and thitherthis gentleman and myself proceeded. Scarcely aminute elapsed ere my companion (we both usedHOOKING. 61the same bait) hooked a fish, whose strengthproved, after some struggling, too much for histackle. The gut broke some inches above thehook, and the fish was lost. In the same spot,and within a few minutes, not more than five, Ifound myself engaged violently, and succeededin landing the trout. The identical hook, andtackle lost by my companion, and which he hadhad just time to supply, was sticking in themouth of the animal. His weight exceededthree pounds."•' It would seem, then, that the hook createsno very exquisite pain? Your story pleasesme.I conceive not. The substance of the mouthis bony, or gristly, which, from the scanty supplyof nerves, for in them is the seat of all pain,cannot be susceptible of it, or, in other words, awound in the mouth cannot exert a sympathy inthe nerves of the animal, with which the part inquestion has a very small connexion. The tortuousmotion of the fish on being hooked is theeffect of fear, perhaps of the sense of difficultyof respiration, in the determined effort naturemakes against thraldom."** It would seem, then, that the common re-62 WARINESS OF FOXES.mark, that when a fish escapes it is useless tocontinue to angle in the same spot, is not borneout in fact, and that the tribe are not so wary assome four-footed animals ; in Sweden, for instance,if a fox escapes from a pit, none are evertaken again in the same, wily reynard havinggiven a hint to his fraternity."That this is not the case here, I have provedalready, and shall try to exemplify the otherposition."Julian and myself here left him, and pursuedour sport, principally confined to the taking ofsamlets, of which we basket upwards of ahundred.Do you suppose them to be really the youngof the salmon ?"There are many opinions on this subject.They are called indifferently, samlets, par, last-spring,or fingering, from the bluish marks onthe back, as if made by the impress of thefingers. Observe their barred sides, and thatthe spots on the belly are very numerous andbright. The shape of the fish, too, seems toshow, to my satisfaction, that it is full-grown,and inclines me to think it a mule or hybrid,though it is said to disappear with the floods ;SAMLETS. 63from which some argue that it is carried downinto the sea. That it so disappears, I have mydoubts. Certain it is, that it exceeds not, inthese rivers, more than a few inches in length,and like the sprat, is never found with roe. Itis very delicate eating, almost as much so as thesmelt, which, whether it be a genus of itself,restat in generis. It partakes of the flavour ofthe sardines in the lake of Geneva, of which Ihave seen hundreds taken off the wall of acampagne,* with the common house-flies. Thenatives never dress them, in consequence of theirmanner of feeding. These fresh-water anchoviesare, I believe, peculiar to that lake."But the river is become almost too shalloweven to contain samlets, and behold a village,where, when Charters arrives, we will dine."Oh ! here he comes. What bait can it behe uses ? He has taken at least twenty poundsof trout, and many eels. Does he always meanto keep his secret ?"I am still of opinion, it will not answer forthe lakes."Never was the sound of " Messrs. vous eyesservis" at the Salon cs Strangers, at Paris,half so grateful as the announcement of dinner.DINNER.The best definition of man, which has puzzledall philosophers, is, that he is the cookinganimal. I devoutly believed it to be one ofthe most interesting of his characteristics, whenthe trout, fried and boiled, the finest I ever ate,came upon table. We made a delicious meal,and in the evening, faute de chevaux, walked toLlanydloes.SCENE ON THE WYE.OUR INN. 65FIFTH DAY.Our inn. — A Fisherman. — His advice. — Start for Plinlim-monk — Approach to the mountain. — Oriental Hot Spring.Religious Rites. — Hindu Baptism. — The old Fisherman.A chalet. — Its inhabitants. — Our notes. — Julian.Llanydloes, Saturday evening, 3rd June.This little town I shall not describe. Theinn, the second in the place (mem. always gotothe second,) was clean and comfortable in theextreme, and the landlady civil and obliging. Ihave the bill : — " Supper, beds, breakfast forthree, 13*. ;" though, after the manner of falstaff,our sack bore a very disproportionateratio to the carte.Our first thought on arriving (follow thehabit, it is a good one) was to send for a fisherman.Were I possessed of that essential andmost useful (for it fills up) talent to a novelist,description, I would draw his portrait ; as it is,VOL. 1. F66 A FISHERMAN.you must be satisfied with a silhouette. Sufficeit to say, that he had lost his left arm, and wasapparently seventy years of age, rather shortthan tall, and answering Tacitus's description ofAgricola, " calves et gracilis senex." (A Romanemperor and a Welsh fisherman — what a strangeidea to come into the head !) His costume wasa brown serge jacket, with large pockets, andleggings of the same material. The lines of hisface expressed hard labour, and care was engravedon his brow. He spoke English, notonly without any Gallicisms, but with elegance.His easy and unembarrassed manners showedan acquaintance with the world, and the tones ofhis voice (there is no better criterion by whichto detect vulgarity) were modulated and pleasing.How easy it is, by the commonest sentencethat proceeds out of the mouth, to know a manof education. I entertained no doubt, and willallow you to be as sceptical as you choose, thatthe blood of the Cadwalladers ran in his veins,or perhaps, like Sir Watkins Williams Wynn,that he could trace his pedigree from Comer,one of the sons of Noah, I believe —'Twas quickly seen,Whatever he was — 'twas not what he had been.HIS ADVICE. 67He told us that he had been fishing all day inthe Severn, and that it was (as I verily believe itto be) a very indifferent river (strange that heshould be so candid): — he advised us not towaste our time in tracing its course, and ended bycomplaining of a new weir of Lord 's, thateffectually prevented the salmon, once abundantas high as Llanydloes, from making their way tothe spawning grounds.We asked to see his flies. They were wellmade, and I bought of him two dozen, at areasonable rate : no common occurrence, for atReader we were asked sixpence apiece for ,which were uni-coloured, plain-lookingthings, mostly of the grouse hackle. Ourpictor recommended our proceeding straightto the Begalen pool ; declined dining at ourexpense; and wishing us sport, left us. Ishould, had he been an Italian, have left himwith an " a rivedei'lo.^''Llanydloes, Sunday, 4th.Dies non'' as the lawyer says, and as Julian,one of the "nefastij** (unbelieving Hindu.) Notbeing one of the " rnetuentes Sabbath" I went tochurch, and said to Charters, " Lay up for yours68 START FOR PLTNLTMMON.self riches in heaven." The profane fellow repeatedthe word " riches," and said — " Ay, asByron wanted Greenfield to do, when, in Harrowchurch-yard, he altered the inscription on histombstone, adding a h before, and altering theito a double ee." But Byron's was a crib fromnot only divine, but Dean, Swift, who derivedthe word from ' bear riches,' an etymology quiteas good as any of Charters's.Machynlleth, Monday 5th.We had intended hiring ponies, or a gig, toascend the Plinlimmon, but, the post-master beingthe only person who had licensed horses, wewere eventually, and a contre coeur, obliged togo post. It was ten o'clock when we started.The road lies over a series of barren downs,unrelieved by almost a single tree. The onlyobjects that broke the dreary uniformity, or deformityof this scene, were occasional patches of" Pudenda et mirabilis oratio," as Suetonius says. Ibeg the reader to remember that " non meus hie sermoest," and, as a moralist, I cannot but strongly disapprove ofthis flippancy, and would, certainly, out of the profits ofthese volumes apply some part in masses for his poveraanima, had I, with " The Irishman in Search of a Religion,"any faith in the comfortable doctrine of their efficacy. — E.APPROACH TO THE MOUNTAIN. 6*9corn, stunted and small-eared, sparingly scatteredhere and there over the adjacent bottoms.The ascent begins at the fifth mile, and a precipitousone for a carriage, it was, for three more.When at the top of the hill we had an uninterruptedview of the country round, a dismalwaste of bleak hills and dales. The boy at laststopped before a wretched hovel, where, makingacquaintance with the tenant, a sturdy farmer,he was easily persuaded to serve as a guide tothe pool, which he made out to be three miles orso ; his " so" being twice or three times the distanceof the miles. A Cicero, as they say atRome, is indispensable ; seeing there is no track,and a succession of moors, covered with whin-berrybushes, to be traversed, which, he told us,contained grouse. A more uninteresting desertcannot be conceived.After a laborious walk of two hours and ahalf, we came in sight of Plinlimmon, which isonly deserving to be celebrated as the birth-placeof four rivers, namely, the LlyfFant, that joinsthe Doveyy near Machynlleth ; the Ilhydal, thatfalls into the sea at Aberystwith ; our old friend,the Wye ; and last, yet chief, the Severn. Thisnoble river rises from a small spring on theTO ORIENTAL HOT SPRING.south-east side of the mountain ; so small, indeed,is its source, that a child might stride overit. The water is of a red colour, and brackish,denoting the presence of some mineral. Weasked Julian if he had seen any of the springs ofIndian rivers, or other springs there, and, towhile away the tedium of this march, he gave usthe following account of a very singular (sie, thatis tributary to the Ganges.A little below Monghir, at the foot of theRajhmal Hills, is a place called Seetacomb,where there is a hot spring, that, in the qualityof the water it momently throws up, andits crystalline purity, is, I believe, unrivalled.The water, however, has the singular propertyof being hot eight months in the year, and,during the four hottest months, of being cold.It has no other sensible quality than its heat,which may be 150° Fahrenheit."This at least can contain no fish ? Butgo on."It is, as I said, beautifully transparent, and,in taste, is not to be surpassed by the purestspring-water ; indeed, it is considered as superioreven to that of the Ganges, which is held insuch estimation that some of our officers, even inRELIGIOUS RITES. 71camp, used to drink no other, at no small expense,you may suppose. But this is in suchrequest that even at Calcutta some rich nativessend from time to time for a supply, and alltravellers lay in a provision of it. Upon inquiryat Monghir, we learned that sulphur, thoughnot in the immediate neighbourhood, is foundat the distance of a day's journey, yet it has notthe slightest appearance of foreign impregnation.During the four months when it is cool, it becomestroubled, stagnant, green, and full ofunclean animals; but no sooner does the rainyseason commence, than it begins to bubble up,purify, and become hot, as we saw it. Being anobject of veneration to the natives, who makepilgrimages to it from all parts of India, it is asource of considerable emolument to the Brahmans,who give instructions as to the ceremoniesto be performed, and repeat certain Sanscritprayers, for which they receive a sum proportionedto the means of the neophyte. Whilewe were there we saw a few of the rites gonethrough by the Hindus belonging to our fleet.These mysteries were paid at a colder fountainby the side of the hot one. The devotees approachedthe officiating priest with the most72 HINDU BAPTISM.reverential awe, and stood before the holypadre' with a little of the water in their hands,whilst he ran over a benedicite. He then taughtthem in what manner, and how often they shouldpour the libations, and having placed a ring ofsome shrub on one of their fingers, the ceremonywas concluded by the votary plunging over headand ears in the fountain, and each putting apiece of money in the Brahman's hand, took hisdeparture."And how can you, who are more than halfa Hindu, reconcile such mummers with religion?"All religions have their mummers, and theignorant and unenlightened, who can form nometaphysical notion of the attributes of a God,must have some type of his goodness or power,by which to be taught to acknowledge Him.The true Brahman is like the philosophers ofold : but, not to enter into this subject, the mythologicalworship of Greece and Rome, that ofthe saints and relics of the Romish Church, andthe adoration of the Virgin, are not more ridiculousthan this baptism and regeneration ofthe poor Hindus, which they perform in honourof one of their Nine Incarnations."THE Began POOL.This subject was inexhaustible, and we hadreached the Begalen pool. It is of an irregularform, shut in on all sides by drear hills andcrags, and may be a mile and a half, or twomiles in circumference. The bottom is coveredin many parts with weeds, and it is very shallow ;the water of a pitchy blackness, from the peatybed in which it lies, and islander here and therebymasses of rock.74 THE OLD FISHERMAN.Leaving Charters to his accustomed solitary,monotonous bait, Julian and myself pursued thewinding shore ; and making a sharp turn roundan almost isolated crag, discovered the old fishermanfrom Llanydloes. He was standing on aloose fragment of rock, and so much engaged inthought, or in his pursuit, that he did not perceiveus till we were within a few yards of him. Hewas whipping away ; his line falling to the fullextent unheeded, straight as an arrow, and makingno more effect on the water than some raindrops.1 accosted him with the ordinary salutationof — ** What sport, old soldier ?" and whenhe opened his basket I perceived in it twenty orthirty trout, none exceeding half a pound.You call me old soldier, but I never servedin the army. I lost my arm," and here he heldout the stump, " on board a ship. I had strucka dolphin with the grains, and previously woundthe rope that is always attached to the harpoon,round my arm ; the consequence was, that Icould not disengage my wrist, and it was somuch mutilated that I. was forced to have it amputatedimmediately. I took a turn round thejib-boom the next time I threw off the bows."** The loss of one arm," observed Julian,THE OLD FISHERMAN. 75seems to have imparted additional vigour tothe other, as we see happen to a branch of atree when the neighbouring one has been lopped.I should like to throw like you. What may youget a pound for these fish ?"They are much esteemed in the valley,more so than the Severn trout, because they cutred, which is owing to the quality of their food,the leeches, that are abundant here ; but theyare so delicate that they will not keep, and mustbe eaten the day they are killed. It is time,therefore, for me to make the best of my way toMachynlleth; and you, gentlemen, — the rainhas begun," looking up; "we shall have moreof it, for I see a dark cloud gathering in thatpart of the heavens."Perhaps you are a native of that place ?"*• No," he replied, with a sigh ; " I have notseen my native village for many years. I shallnever see it more. Never return to it in consequenceof no matter. I am a wanderer, andmy pilgrimage will be soon over. I am now onmy way to the Bala lake."Knowing the attachment the Welsh, like allmountaineers, have to the spots of their nativity,I was curious to hear something of his history,76 A CHALET.and said — " We are also going to the northernlakes, and perhaps you will bear us company ?We shall be glad also to profit by your experienceand knowledge of angling in this country."After a pause (which betrayed indecision orabsence of mind), he agreed to the proposition ;and we had hardly thrown twice, during which Itook a fish of a pound weight, when the raincame down like a water-spout, and, to add toour mortification, not a breath of air stirred thepool. We bided the pelting of the pitilessstorm for some time, and without a dry thread,were at last driven for shelter into a hut, which(except a deserted fishing-box, belonging toColonel Evans,) was the only one on the mountain,where we found Charters, who had not hada single run.The interior of the chart did not belie thewretchedness of the outward appearance. Itconsisted of only one room, without windows.The doors were of such rough carpentry thatthe wind passed through them, above and below,at will. They possessed, however, the advantageof giving admission, through the crannies,to the light, that also came in a flood down thehuge chimney. Within, huddled together roundITS INHABITANTS. ' 77a miserable turf fire, was assembled a familyparty, consisting of three generations ; the lasta numerous one ; the floor, filthy as that of anIrish cabin, was half paved with loose flags, andhere and there full of puddles, and the mudwalls ran down with damp, against which stoodin rows, several truckle-beds without curtains.How human beings could subsist in such aden was my astonishment but it was greaterstill when I observed the cheerful and contentedcountenances that encircled the fireside : — thechildren, who slunk into a corner, scared by theappearance of strangers, to finish their mess ofllaethewyn (buttermilk), or mwdran (flummery),showed in their ruddy cheeks rude and vigoroushealth, and one of the boys might have sate to asculptor as the model for an infant Hercules.A very pretty, rosy-cheeked, black-eyed daughter,of seventeen or eighteen, through the densesmoke that pervaded the apartment (as if toexemplify the fact that no seclusion from theworld, or state of poverty, however abject, iscapable of repressing the ruling passion whichgoverns all female minds, viz. that of dress), wason her knees hard at work, on a bench in thecorner, at what is called getting up frills, of78 OUR Notes.which, no doubt, she was not a little vain ; forthe Welsh peasant girls pay more attention totheir heads than their heels, and although yousee many without shoes, you will rarely find onewho has not a neatly plaited cap under herround beaver hat.It was perceived at a glance that we werenot likely to be relieved from any of the inconveniencesof wet, cold, and weariness there, andlearning that they could give us nothing to eatbut potatoes and oaten-bread, or to drink,than milk, a consultation was held, and it wasvoted that we should proceed to Machynlleth,nine miles distant. One comfort was, that wehad to descend the whole way, which was accomplishedwith much greater ease than had beenexpected ; and having changed our drippingclothes over a good fire, and with an excellentsupper, we soon forgot, like mariners after astorm, the fatigues of the day.* * *Going to bed.Charters begins to be disgusted (I think) withhis patent bait, and talked of nothing at ournodes but the stupid and bad taste of the troutin the Begalen pool. I have no curiosity toJULIAN. 79know what it is, but Julian, who whipped offtwo dozen flies, and whom it was dangerous tocome near, for fear of being hooked, is dying toknow the secret. He had quite enough to doyesterday and to-day with disentangling hisend, that, like the Gordian-knot, he served halfa dozen times as did Alexander — cut it. Why,one might have heard it crack half a mile off";truly, his line was a regular four-horse whip;he has made, too, a dozen banks in it, thathave taken, to its no small detriment, half anhour to knot. In the lakes he may do better,for he can throw a shorter line, which I cannotpersuade him to do. He begins to tire ofangling, and daily threatens to be off". HisTrichinopolies will not last long if he goes on atthe rate of half a bundle a night. All his cameltrunks, that he calls " bowles," are arrived.SIXTH DAY.Birdlime. — Romantic town. — Dragging for Salmon. — Resortsof Trout. — Hooking a Trout. — Water-proof boots. —Precautions. — Wading. — Size of Fish. — A glorious Pool. —Enormous Eel. — Eels. — Their migration. — Food of Eels.Propagation. — Variety of Eels. — Adders. — A strangeSupper. — Stewed Cat. — Anecdote.Machynlleth, Tuesday, 6th June, daybreak.We found Charters up, and drying before thefire some red birdlime (consistent stuff) in a tinbait-box. He has at last shown it to us. Whatdo you think it is ? Salmon paste, or roe, preparedat Liverpool, and costs him, carriage andall, twelve shillings a pound. Walton, I amROMANTIC TOWN. 81told, speaks of it, and Daniell, the sportingparson, taking his account from " Barker's Artof Angling," a scarce old book. In a generousfit, Salmonius, as we mean to call him, (query,what sort of a word salmon is : should it nothave an ana tacked to it?) has given some toJulian, who means to leave behind him his flyingmachinery. We shall now see if my words donot come true, that any bungler may succeedin trolling, or rather, in sinking and drawing.Julian is in high spirits, for he has hardly takena fish above three ounces yet.Charters has had a consultation with oldHumphrey, and is oflp to try a tributary streamto the Doveyy, called the Divlas. He finds largewaters won't do. We are under weigh too.# « « #We passed through the single street of thissomewhat regularly built town. It is romanticallybacked by broken and abrupt rocks, picturesquein their outline, and as beautifullyvaried in their tints as the old buildings in aCanaletti. We soon came in sight of the Doveyy,and observed before us two men carrying a net,and coracles strapped on their shoulders. Theword coracle, or coracle, is derived from corioy aVOL. I. oS2 DRAGGING FOR SALMON.skin, and seems to prove the invention to belongto the time of the Romans. These skiffs are fourfeet wide, and two over the head ; the shells,formed of wicker basket-work, and covered withflannel, the principal manufacture in this partof the country, or with coarse cloth, pitched ortarred. We stood on the bridge for some timeto see the operations. They were about to dragfor salmon ; and it must have been difficult topreserve the balance in such frail and fragilemachines. The net was attached to the twoboats, and connected them. When all was clear,the fishermen made with their paddles a considerablecircle, and then reunited, drawing incautiouslythe sweep. They seemed very dexterousin the management of their canoes, andperfectly unconscious of danger. Danger theremust be, for the upsetting of one would inevitablyinvolve the safety of the other, if not thelives of both, by entanglement in the meshes.A salmon of ten or twelve pounds weight leapedover the corks, but the first essay was a failure.This is a most destructive practice," I observed," and if permitted, care should be takenthat the laws regarding salmon-fisheries are wellenforced. The size of the meshes, as in France,RESORTS OF TROUT. 83should be looked to, and netting at the spawningseason strictly prohibited. I was some yearsago at Caermarthen, the latter end of October,when the fish are crimson, flabby, and full ofova, and saw the oracles from the public walk,sweeping the Tower, and their prey afterwardsopenly sold in the market. I am told, that SirWatkins, to whom the greater part of this finevalley belongs, will not permit them to ply abovethe bridge, and has keepers to protect the river,so that it may be said to be preserved. Com-mentions ! Courage! Julian."I see a large trout lying under this arch ;he seems asleep."The arches of bridges are favourite resortsof trout. You will observe them motionless (asyon hawk suspended in his atmosphere) forhours ; but they are so shy, and glutted withfood, that it is difficult to waken their attention.I have at Geneva and Zurich seen large ones,similarly posted, tempted with a great variety ofbaits, but in vain ; among which, however, wasnot the salmon-paste. Its grape-like crimsonglobules may attract him. Let us go below,for here you cannot get the lure near him,though the eyes of fish are, in my opinion,g284 HOOKING A TROUT.not so indistinct of vision, as some suppose ;but even were we to hook him here, he mustinevitably break away, even from this gut,which, though single, is as strong and stout as afiddle-string. A lions ! Essays nous."The water is deep, and the current rapid, sothat the bullet will be required — a la Charters."Your first cast was too near the buttress ofthe bridge. Try again."Yes. I have him ! He is off on the otherside the bridge, and is running out all my line.*He is as strong as an otter."You have turned him. Keep his headstraight, the curb tightly drawn, and guide himin true dragoon style, through the arch. See, heis quite exhausted. Now I '11 net him. He is afinely fed fish of at least three pounds weight,though we have no Mrs. B in our trainwith her scales to weigh him. Fancy weighingevery fish as it is caught ! What will Salmoniussay, now ?"We have begun the day well ; and nowwhat think you of the paste ?"What I ever did ; that it is an unworthycontrivance, and that I will never condescend touse it. Besides, it is a pity and a shame toWATER-PROOF BOOTS. 85adopt it, as it cannot be procured without destroyingthousands of salmon. I do not denythat it is a clean bait, and a murderous one,especially in small rivers, and confined rapids,such as this ; and now that the river fly-fishingis nearly over ; but no salmon will be evertaken with it, though Walton does talk of oldHenley's doing so with some scented stuff! Formy part, I shall be sufficiently amused, though Ishould have little sport, in tracing this nobleriver in its course up the valley. It will benecessary, friend, to wade to-day "'* These boots I bought at Kington, will atleast keep out the water. They are of doubleleather, the soles half an inch thick, and I havehad them besmeared with a newly-discoveredpreparation, or water-proof receipt, taken from abook ; it is wax and caoutchouc, even quantities,melted together, and a single dressing answers,it says, the purpose."You will find your specific fail. All I haveever tried have done so. I once ordered a pairof shooting-boots similar to some I saw in awindow, floating in a vase of water. It is true,they expelled the wet, but they also excludedthe air ; were air-tight ; and the consequence86 PRECAUTIONS.was, that my feet were always in a cold bath ;and I soon discarded them, when I heard that afriend of mine had lost his life by adopting sucha contrivance. The best plan is, for those afraidof their heads, to do as I saw practised at Geneva,in the Rhone ; have a pair of boots similarto those still worn occasionally by the Frenchpostilions, that come half way up the thighs,carried by your servant or guide, and whenfording or wading, draw them over your leggings."As Mrs. Arundel says, you must first catchyour fish, i. e. first have your servant to takewith you. Fine lumber, to carry about, wouldbe these wooden overalls !"True. I despise such effeminate, andwear strong high-lows, that lace; shorts, longgaiters, and Welsh stockings, which may beeasily taken off", and pocketed before, and replacedafter wading. I never, also, as youknow, go out without a short Mackintosh capein my jacket pocket, to protect my shoulders incaseof rain."For my part I have a hydrophobia : youwill scarcely get me to wet my feet."You a soldier, and afraid of wet ! YouWADING. 87remind me of the Longchamps at Paris, where aFrenchman rode about on a fine sunshiny dayholding an umbrella over his head in ridicule ofthis lady-like custom of our compatriots, and tothe great amusement, at our expense, of his own.Wet your feet ! why, what is to be done in thisDoveyy without wading ? the river winds somuch, and the wind is so strong, that, withoutfrequent crossing, it is impossible to get a flyproperly into the water, and one must throw itas light as the thistle-down, or nothing is to bedone here ; even now it requires a good handnot to whip off the stretcher. But take myadvice, and always wet your feet early in theday, before you become heated by exercise.When the water is warm there is no danger,though Sir Humphrey Davy talks of palsy andrheumatism. I have waded all my life, nor everexperienced myself, nor ever knew any one whohad experienced, any ill effects from it. Fishermenby trade live to a great age. When I wason the lake of Como, two pescatori passed usin a boat, father and son, one a hundred andseven, and the other seventy-six. I was someyears ago at Stroud, and saw two workmenin a dyeing factory, whose feet were containsWADING.sally wet, and they were both hale men, andabove sixty."There is an article, I think, in Blackwood,on the subject. The opinion of that writer isdecidedly against you. But I shall try thisrapid at least four feet deep."If you do, I hold it impossible to troll successfullywithout immersion. You cannot otherwisecommand the mid current ; at least to spinaminnow naturally, would be impossible. Isome years ago had an equal horror of the water,but was cured by seeing my tutor in the art,whilst I stood shivering (as we see boys do,afraid to take a plunge in a cold bath) on thebank, take, in one rapid, with his minnows, orsamlets, I forget which, three trout, one weighingthree pounds and a half, the maximum ofsize, perhaps, in any of the Welsh rivers, — atleast, I have never seen one exceed that weight.We hear, indeed, of fish of five or more pounds,but I look upon such relations as mere hearsays."You may well treat such with suspicion ;for my part I am sadly disappointed. How doyou account for their being so much smallerthan in England ?"SIZE OF FISH. 89You know what Sir Humphrey Davy says ofthe Teme and Cone, at Denham and Denton.The Hampshire rivers produce fish of ten andmore pounds. This is owing to the superiorquantity and quality of the food, no less thanthe soil. The flies in Wales are smaller, and ofless variety, and the beds of the rivers are almostall gravelly, or rocky, besides being overstocked.The mountains, lakes, rivers, and forests of Asiaand America are commensurate with the size oftheir continents. A similar remark (with certainreservations) may be made with regard tofish. The pike in the Swiss lakes grow to anenormous size, particularly in that of Geneva,which is thirty-six miles in length ; and the troutfed by the waters of, what Voltaire calls, * LeLac,' par excellence, far exceed in weight anyknown in any other country. Thus, the salmonin Wales are proportioned to the size of thewaters into which they migrate, few surpassingtwelve pounds, whilst those of the Shannon,the Boyne, the Ballyshannon, and the Barrow,(about whose respective merits, flavour, and thequantity of their curd, the Irish contend, as theGreeks did about the birth-place of Homer,)and some of the Scotch rivers and lakes, arriveA GLORIOUS POOL.at fifty pounds, and more. — But I am takingnothing. I fear the stream has been whippedalready this morning, the fish are so shy. I amright, for I perceive two persons lashing thewater a mile a-head."Look, there is a glorious pool ! and thewater, from the intensity of its blue, must bevery deep. I wish I could get at the oppositeshore, where the beech-trees overhang thestream, throwing it into deep shade ; there,where the current sets and eddies."You will find a ford a little higher up, if Imistake not ; there, where the cows are. Good !I see I have made you a convert."ENORMOUS EEL. 91A run ! a run ! I have a monster now. Hehas reeled out two-thirds of my line, and seemsas fresh as ever. I cannot get a view of him.It must be a salmon. Come over, and help meto land him."No ; he is not quick enough in his motionsfor a salmon. Do not let him get among thestumps of the trees. You have turned him —reel up."This multiplier winch is now useful. Ha !I have raised him ! It is no salmon ; you areright ; but an enormous eel ! Pshaw ! I neverwas more annoyed !"Keep a tight hand on him, and he mustcome on shore, nolens volens ! There, he isworking his way as naturally over the stones asif the land was his element. He must weigh atleast four pounds."He is as dark almost as a Conger eel, andcannot have been, by his colour, long fromthe sea."Perhaps only a few days. The tide comesup within three or four miles of Machynlleth,and he has got his marine appetite. Charterstold you this morning that the salmon-paste isthe most irresistible of lures for eels, and has92 EELS.an ingenious theory, that their main object inpushing up rivers is to devour the spawn. Certainit is, that whilst the sun is shining out sohot, he would not have left his retreat underyon bank, but for the attractive smell and crimsoncolour of the lure. You may remember thesurprise of the fishermen at the village wherewe dined, when Charters opened his basket andproduced several eels of two or three pounds,and they declared they had never seen an eeltaken before in the day-time, out of the Wye."Can you tell me anything about the naturalhistory of these ugly brutes, that Count Lace-pedeis in such raptures with, calling them allelegance, grace, and beauty ? He commences achapter on that slimy monster with the followinglist of its properties ; one would think hewas describing his mistress : — * Elle est offerte,cette image gracieuse, et a I'enfance foldtre, quela variety des evolutions amuse, et a la vivejeunesse, que la rapidity des movements enflamme,et a la beauty, que la grace, la sou-please,et la gaiety interesse et sediment, etala sensibility, que les affections douces et constantstouchent si profondement, et a la philo-theirMIGRATION. 93sophie meme, qui se plait a contempler et leprincipe et Effet d'un instinct superior.' "It is singular that so little should be knownabout it. All I have read throws little lighton the subject. Sir Humphrey Davy confesses,after a long commentary on the observations ofothers, all he knows is, that he knows nothing,leaving the question precisely where he found it.The reason of the migration of eels is certainlya great problem. If they are hermaphrodites,they do not push up the rivers for the purposeof perpetuating their species, like the salmotribes, whose eggs, according to the doctrinelaid down in ' Salmoniaia,* cannot developed youngfishes independent of the influence of the air —without aerated water. That they do push upthe rivers we know ; and analogy would lead usto suppose that they are also oviparous, were itnot that they are met with only a few days old innumerousshoals, in the Atlantic. I have seenthem in myriads making their way over perpendicularrocks, that compose the sides of waterfalls,in effecting which in the river Teme,buckets' full, not much larger than lob-worms,were secured by a boy. Thus, the probability94 FOOD OF EELS.is, that they are viviparous, and that the delicacyof their skins rendering them very sensibleof changes in the temperature, they, like birdsof passage, make for the springs in the summer,that they may enjoy a cooler atmosphere, andon the approach of winter return to the sea, ordescend to the deeper and more still and muddyparts of rivers, and hide themselves there, orunder banks, and stones, where they lie in adormant state ; for that they do not all, likewoodcocks, make an annual migration, is provedby their being seen occasionally at all seasons.Their food is the carrion, as they are the vulturesof fish ; but Charters's idea is somewhatconfirmed by the experience of to-day, that theyare ravenously fond of, and well acquainted withthe taste of salmon spawn, and must be verydestructive to that daily decreasing species, andwill tend ultimately to exterminate it, if meansare not taken to thin them. Here they arequite unmolested, for the poorest peasant in thecountry (the same prejudice exists in Ireland), ifalmost starving, would loath llyswonad (eels),highly as we esteem them, particularly whenthey attach themselves to such clear streams asthese ; nor will any Welsh cook willingly touchPROPAGATION. 95them, looking upon them with an equal horrorto snakes and adders."Is there no perceptible diversity of sexobservable in these reptiles, as in snakes andadders ? My ' bearers' killed in my compound(a corruption of the French word campagne) twocobras. Examination clearly distinguished thefemale from the male, by the narrowness andflatness of the tail. You know it has been foundthat all the venomous are viviparous, all theinnocuous genera the contrary, — would not this,by analogy, militate against the argument youheld just now, or at least, be a strong presumptionin favour of the opinion of theiroviparousness ?"No perceptible generative organs have beenas yet discovered, though they must exist, unlesswe conceive, like the water-snakes in the ' AncientMariner,' they are generated by the stateof the water itself, or as the vermicular monstersexhibited in the hydro-oxygen microscope."The ancients certainly thought them nothermaphrodites, and were of opinion too, thatthe water-snake, and lamprey, coupled together; and Orestes, in the ' Chocforaj,' callshis mother a murenophis, i. e. having been so96 VARIETY OF EELS.unnatural as to pair, or cohabit with ^gysthus.There is a passage in Marcellus that thus describes,and throws light on that remarkablesimile, and chimes in with my notion.Quale turenne colder stimulates more,Garcia conjugal returns temperate veneno,Effendi summon in scapula, efFusumque reportCautious in rigid, mox salt precipice seDeficit in medias sinus flaminius unda,Sibilaque ingeminans, charm vestige amici :Ilia, sono auditor, confessio occurrit amant,Multiplicity ambo contingent corpora next.'Fabula ! fabula ! Certainly, there aremany different kinds of eels ; and this of yoursdiffers essentially from the Thames eels, but stillmore from those of Loch Em, that are of so vasta size that the fishermen hang their skins up todry, and make leggings of them impervious tothe water. Still more unlike are they to thepond eels, that have no communication with anystream or rivulet, much less the sea."Their migration, then, is not necessary fortheir propagation ?"Certainly not ; they get climate, like otheranimals or plants, though they do originate inthe sea, the proof of which is found in theWeen lake, in Sweden, where eels have, withinADDERS. 97a few years, made their appearance since theopening of a canal that communicates immediatelywith the sea, some untameable cataractsin the river Got having previously impededtheir progress, and yet they find their way intothe lake of Constance, and must have ascendedthe falls of SchafFhausen."I was speaking of adders some time back :do you consider them of one genus ?"A Hampshire acquaintance of mine made acollection of adders from the New Forest, withwhich it abounds, and put them into a cage,with wires so narrow that they could not worktheir flexible bodies through it. He there prisonedfour different kinds ; a black, a pink, atortoiseshell, and a grey, and made many experimentson their venom, which, by trying its effecton animals of one species at different times, hefound to possess different degrees of virulence.The animals he chose were cocks. Fowls areknown to be cold-blooded, and therefore bestfitted for such an experiment. One died soonafter it was bitten by the black ; another lay in astate of torpor, after being exposed to the teethof the other three ; but I forget which he saidwas the least noxious. He once forgot to feedVOL. I. H98 A STRANGE SUPPER.these extraordinary pets for some weeks, but, onexamining the cage minutely, discovered a partof the tail of the grey adder, evidently provingit had been devoured by the rest."Your story reminds me of Ceylon, where amedical gentleman confined in like manner anumber of scorpions, which fought most desperately,till the weaker were all victims to thestronger ; and at last only one remained behind,with the trophies of his victory, the claws andshelly parts strewed around him. How do youknow that eels, like them, and adders, do notfeed on their own species ?"*I have never known or heard of their takingsuch a bait. But, speaking of adders remindsme of Mole di Greta, and the strange supperwe had there, which the beauty of the placehardly compensated for, to my companion. Ihave before me still the orange groves, thatslope down to the bay, and remember the deliciousodour of the bloom when I opened thewindows in the morning. But our fare. — At• I saw a pike taken in Gloucestershire by trolling, ofeighteen pounds, that had one of four pounds undigested inits stomach, and that fish another in his, of one pound, sothat three fish were taken by the same bait. — E.STEWED CAT. 99the Cent ray friend fed heartily on the dish,which passed for ' anguille fritte.' What doyou think it was ? Fried adders. I knew themountains of the Abruzzi abounded with them,and did not like the black look of the reptilebrood ; their heedlessness roused my suspicion,but I said nothing till the half-empty piattawas removed; when out came the murder,for the ' Giovinetto,' as they call in Italy awaiter of sixty (like the boy in Ireland), couldnot deny the loathsome fact. I have been shyabroad of nondescript dishes ever since I discoveredI had devoured for a hare the best part ofa stewed chat at Geneva. When last at thatthistly-looking place, I was sensibly struck withthe diminution of the numbers of the feline tribe,that used to keep me awake, some years before,with their amatory serenades."Your friend's qualms recall an anecdotetold me at Cheltenham the other day, of littleMoore, who is known to be the greatest epicure,as he has always been the greatest tuft-huntergoing, as Byron used to say. A friend andhimself made an excursion to Greenwich to eatwhite bait, which, I am told, is as fine as theMango fish at Calcutta, or Pomfret at Madras.H 2100 ANECDOTE.This friend was no other than Lord Stratford,who, determined to hoax his brother bard quellemalice ! as you say), had bought, before heleft town, a small-tooth horn comb, which, whenthe soup was served, he dropped secretly intothe tureen. Moore found the contents delicious,and was overpersuaded by his titled bonvivant (though, according to the immortal Brummell,it is highly incorrect) to be helped a secondtime to soup ; when what should be ladled outinto his plate, but the damning evidence of thecook's cleanliness? Tommy's fertile imaginationpeopled it with a hundred — hairs. Thestory goes to say, he ate no white bait that day."But what has all this to do with angling ?A tremendous storm is brewing from the southwest;and we have got fish enough for ourdinner. Let us see if we can get it dressedin the manner of white bait, at that village,which, by the map, should be Llanwin.• You have no need to say, bon appetit.' "DEJEUNER. 101SEVENTH DAY.Dejeuner. — A Bull. — Narrow escape. — Boar-hunt in India.Henry's death.The banks of the Doveyy, afternoon.Well, we have made an excellent dejeuner hla fourckette, or, as you would say, tiffin. Thetrout had none of the muddiness of our Englishtrout, and were firm enough without our havingresort to crimping, that most execrable andbarbarous custom, which Sir Humphrey Davydwells on in every chapter with as much complacencyas a boy spins a cockchafer, or as alady of my acquaintance impales a worm."Let us hunt the waterfalls higher up. Whatdelightful meadows ! What a lovely valley ! Itgrows wider and more open ; and there is not apart of the river where the fly cannot be thrown.This scene would be a fine study for Burgher,102 A BULL.that group of black cattle making one of thoseforegrounds he delighted in. Do you see thelord and master of the seraglio ?"And hear him too. He does not approve ofour approach, and deems it an intrusion on hiszenana,' and, like the Shah of Persia, wouldwillingly make it death to come near or lookupon his harem. I do not much like his suppressedand sullen roar.It increases in its diapason ! See how helashes his sides with his tail, as if it were a thongto goad him into ferocity ! He has left theherd, and is moving slowly along the water'sedge towards us ! And now he stops, and bellows,as though he thought to intimidate us,and lowers his clapped neck to the ground,and shakes his horned head, as if in preparationfor butting. When he comes up close, as hewill do, get ready some of those large stones topelt him with**The water is here too deep to be fordable,if we wished to cross. But I shall not stir, forthe appearance of this rapid pleases me, and Ihave just had a rise. Look out ! Here hecomes !"When he finds us resolute, and feels a stoneNARROW ESCAPE. 103or two rattling against his old horns, he willturn back, but, if he perceives in us any symptomsof alarm, he will assuredly gore us."There, that stone has struck him on thehead, and he has sulkily turned up the bank,where he stands and watches us, with a redand gloomy eye, and an inward disappointedmoan."I will tell you a narrow escape I had someyears ago in Tuscany. R and myselfhaving heard of a flight of cocks, had gonedown into the Maremma to shoot. You haveheard of the Maremma. It possesses an almostinterminable extent of morasses, ' overgrownwith long, rank grasses,' and hillocks, as Shelleybeautifully describes, * heaped with moss-inwoventurf,' a wilderness of putridity anddesolation. It was the month of November,before which time it is dangerous to set footthere, for, till the first frosts, even many of thefever-stricken serfs forsake it. In the eagernessof sport we had been led farther than we calculatedfrom our alberto, a solitary, wretchedhovel, bordering on the marsh, the abode ofthe most ghostly, yellow, emaciated objects inhumanform I ever beheld, except some of the104 NARROW ESCAPE.cayenne, curry-dried, liver-worn Anglo-castilianswe left at Cheltenham. The sun wasfast setting, and we had still two miles to make,and were coasting along the edge of a knoll,thickly set with huge and speckled aloes, intermingledhere and there with stunted ilexes,and chesnuts, and with the strawberry-tree,then bright with its globes of deep red gold,when methought I heard a rustling among thebranches, and a sound like that of the grindingof teeth. I noticed it to my companion. Hesuddenly turned ashy pale, and whispered hysterically,* We are near a herd of swine !'Vast numbers, I should have told you, areturned out in the fall of the leaf, to fatten here,and become so savage and wild, that none buttheir keepers dare approach them, and, cased asthey are in an almost impenetrable mail ofleather, even they sometimes fall victims to theferocity of these brutes.* It is well for us,' continued my friend, 'thatthere is a hut within a few hundred yards. Letus lose no time in making for it.' As he spake,the sounds became louder, and I saw some hundredhogs emerging on all sides from the brushwood,grunting fiercely, and gnashing their teethNARROW ESCAPE. 105in unison. They were huge, gaunt, long-legged,long-headed, and long-backed creatures, giantsof their species — spectral monsters, more likestarved blood-hounds than swine'*Ha ! ha ! ha ! Why, you have been drawinga picture of Russian wolves ; a whole packof them could not have frightened you more !"Nor would they have been so formidable,laugh as you may. They now mustered theirforces in battle array, outside the thicket, andcommenced the attack in a systematic and regularlyconcerted manner, the veterans of the herddirecting the movements of the hostile band,and one, by a deeper grunt, not ill resemblingthe word of command of a certain General, ade gree porous of our acquaintance, givingdreadful notes of preparation, as if to spirit onthe line to a charge."Ridiculous ! Run away, indeed, from tamehogs ! why, I have charged a wild boar in Indiawhilst he was whetting his tusks, which wereheard a mile, and jabber him too, with a consciousnessthat on this unerring hand dependedmy life or death — but these — pshaw!"You shall hear. The danger was to usmore imminent ; for you had only a single106 NARROW ESCAPE.enemy to deal with. We made our way withdifficulty through the rotten and yielding morass,leaping from tuft to tuft, and risking, by afalse slip, to plunge into a bottomless abyss,whilst our blood-thirsty pursuers, with their longlegs and lanky sides, and tucked-up bellies,advanced, a fearful phalanx, in semilunar curve,momently gaining ground ! My friend, whowas more accustomed to the bogs than myself,soon outstripped me, not daring to look behind.Once, and once only, did I, and beheld themcoming on like a pack of hounds in full cry, andwith the scent breast-high, and, to my horror,perceived the two horns, or wings, of the troop,making an echellon mouvement in an ever-narrowingcircle, like a regiment of cavalry bringingtheir right and left shoulders forward, to outflank,and then enclose us. I dared not risk asecond glance at my foes, but the hoarse voicesof the ringleaders ran through the ranks, and Iheard and saw the plash of their many feet, as theyturned up the mud but a few yards in my rear.How I reached the hut I know not, but reachit I did, when I found my friend leaning againstthe wall, breathless with terror. The shed wasrudely constructed of peat, and appeared to haveNARROW ESCAPE. 107been long deserted, consisting only of bare wallsand a few rafters ; but, providentially, there wasa door hanging by one hinge : this I contrivedto shut just as the centre of the herd reached thethreshold. They made a halt, retired a fewpaces, and collected together, as if to hold acouncil of war. Whilst they were undecided howto act, we discharged our four barrels loadedwith small shot, from the window, at the nearest,who slowly limping, with a sullen grunt of disappointment(reminding me of yon bull), thewhole of their comrades at their heels, retreatedinto the covert.' Thank God !' said R , when he sawthe last disappear among the aloes. * It isbut a year since, a traveller, crossing the Maremma,paid for the journey with his life.There was not a tree to shelter him ; andthough he was a determined man, and wellarmed, and no doubt made a gallant resistance,they penned him in, and devoured him. Icould show you the spot where the swineherddrove them from his mangled remains ; it waspointed out to me the last time I came here.' "*• Mckenzie had as narrow an escape atColombo, with a wounded elephant, who charged108 Boar-hunt IN INDIA.over him, and his two tusks entered the groundon each side his head, without injuring him !Whether it was that the enraged animal thoughthe had killed him, or was ashamed of his mal-adroitness,he struck at once into the jungle.But T will tell you a story to match yours, or, asthe French say, a pendant. The boasted hog-huntingin the forests of France and Germany isnot to be compared with that in India."India again ! I know a Welshman who laysthe scene of all his stories at Shrewsbury."*as I was saying, their boars are sheer domesticatedMaremma-hogs, in comparison, and theirtusks mere grinders, to a Bengal bahadur's.I should like to see a pack of hounds engagedwith one ; it would be no suicide. At Moorshe-dabad I made one of a party of three to beat avast grass jungle, bordering on the pawn-gardensand sugar-canes (immediately on the banksof the Ganges,) to which the ' seers' owe theirmonstrous bulk and fat. We were mounted onsmall and very courageous Arabs, for no otherhorses will face a wild boar, and armed withspears (several spare ones being carried by ourhircarras *) of between four and five feet long.Boar-hunt IN INDIA. 109the shafts of which were of the male bamboo.They had been made at Monghir, spears andall, for the English steel (even Palmer's) is toohighly tempered, and is apt to snap at the point,like a needle, from being too brittle. I hadnever seen the sport ; but not so my two companions,one of whom was the judge of thedistrict, and the other my brother. He was ona mere cat, little larger than a 'tattoo,' fromwhose back he had killed, at different times,upwards of seventy hogs. The line of beaterswas hardly formed, when we heard the cry ofBurro suer ! Burro suer ! Sahib!' Off wentthe boar! Off'doured' we after him, at aspanking pace, thinking little of ditches, heapsof earth, and holes, where the hogs had beenrooting,' or dry wells, of which the place wasfull. The jungle was above our girths, and theprogress of our prey was only traceable as thelong withered grass rustled and waved with hismotion, as the passing gust rushes along, turningup the surface of the river. I marvelled athis speed ; it was like that of the wind.For five or six hundred yards he beat us hollow,and I thought we had lost him ; but the110 Boar-hunt IN INDIA.whetting of his tusks, resembling that of a scythe,soon showed us the contrary. He had run till hecould run no longer, and becoming blown, stood,in rather a more open spot, at bay, grindinghis tusks, as I described to you just now, andwaiting our charge, to return it. I happened tobe in advance, and, riding with too slack a rein,or too weak a curb, met him full in the face,and my horse, who was conscious of the danger,neither swerved to right or left, but leaped cleanover him. Whilst in the air, I threw at random,but my spear did not fall within many yards ofhim. Henry came next — and was counted, onall hands, if not the best hog-hunter, the mostintrepid jabber in India. Jobbing is a habitcondemned only by those who have not thenerve to practise it. It was his invariablecustom. It is true, that the risk is threefold ;first of dislocating the shoulder, next of losing thebalance, and third, of getting one's horse ripped.Perhaps you do not know what the termmeans. ' To jab,' is to plant the spear — neverletting it out of your hand, but making itapivot to wheel upon. The object is to fix itbetween the shoulders, through which a IN INDIA. Illdirected point will pass with scarcely any sensibleresistance, or, to use a common phraseamong us, as through a lump of butter ; inwhich case death follows without a groan. Butthis time the pony (he was not more thanthirteen hands high) by an over-boldness, orperhaps a false step, came within contact ofthe two awful tusks. One of them struck hissinew, cutting it like a knife; and the spearglancing off from the tough hide of the boar,and slightly grazing it, horse and rider camewith a tremendous fall to the ground. Whatwas my horror on turning round, to see Henrylying flat on his face, and the wounded savagestanding astride over him, and digging his tusksinto his back !The judge now came up. The questionwas, how to act ; it was a choice of evils. Ifrescued, my brother's fate was inevitable, andthe peril not less imminent from the delivery ofthe spear, which, without most unerring handling,must transfix at the same time the fallenand his infuriate foe. R screwed his courageto the sticking-place, and in an instant thepoint was in the heart of the savage, who.112 henry's death.lay weltering in his gore, and under him mybrother, who had fainted from his wounds. Buthe recovered, thus verifying the old couplet —If thou be hurt with hart, it brings thee to thy bier,But barber's hand will boar's hurt heal, therefore thouneeds not feare.'Henry used to show the scars, and the tusks,the largest I ever saw, which exceeded nine inchesin length. His recovery and escape were equallymiraculous ; even now, I cannot help thinking ofthe scene without shuddering. But he neverlived to hunt hog again, for he was killed, poorfellow, at an outpost, during the Goorkha war ;and though they be irrelevant to our pursuit,I will repeat to you some lines, the last ofwhich is imitated from Catullus, that I wroteon the occasion.At that lone outpost fallen — I see thee now,With none to wipe death's cecrops from thy brow 1A brain wild-throbbing with delirious fires !An eye more glaring as the spark expires !Why was it not reserved for me to payThe last sad duties to thy suffering clay ?To heap the dust o'er thine abandoned bier,And soothe thy spirit with a brother's tear I'RESULT OF OUR SPORT. 113*' And this we call angling ! But I perceiveour host, with his char d banc, in the road,whom I directed to fetch us. How many trouthave you got ?**I have not counted them ; but at least adozen ; and the trout and the eel."We will have a rise out of Charters at ournotes"VOL. I.EIGHTH DAY.Arrival of Salmonius. — His account of himself. — A bet —A Kilkenny story. — Lord Byron's faith in abstinence. —Ortolans. — A poacher's fly. — The Duke of Norfolk'smilk-punch. — Start for Plinlimmon. — Our flies Mycompanion's travels. — The Fisherman's Tale.MachyntUeth.Salmonius is already arrived, and has producedtwenty pounds of trout, and is as muchin love with his " Pasta" * (so we call it,) asever. He gave us this account of himself : —Lord Byron, and his friends at Pisa, invented a sortof Macaronic language. For instance ; they used to callTHE DIVLAS. 115*' You remember crossing a stream a milefrom the turnpike-gate : it was the Divlas. Itis, in character, an infant Wye. Nothing can bemore romantic than the gorge through which itrushes, in a continuation of falls, I might say,torrents, leaving here and there deep, temptinglittle pools for salmon to repose in, as theyalways do before they push up to their spawning-grounds.I, however, took none, though I hadhold of one of five or six pounds. He must,however, have been hooked foul, for he was asstrong as at first, after I had played him aquarter of an hour. I found the stream everywhereswarming, for not an inch of it can benetted, hardly a fly thrown the whole way, as,on one side, sloping down to the water's edge,and overhanging it with its branches, rises anamphitheatre of oak, and, on the other, lie hugemasses of rock, up which I clambered with difficulty.I made a sumptuous breakfast at theflannel manufactory, which was the extent of mytravels, for a tremendous weir — I will not describe,but show you on paper — stands close toit.It is well there are few such contrivances,firing, tiring — hitting, coping — riding, cavilling — walking,M sjxissiny, &c. — E.1 2116 A BET.for in no floods can a salmon, with all hisstrength and cunning, ever pass that barrier.This you may judge of by my rough sketch.There is such fishing in this half-mile of theDivlas, that I would venture to wager bastingmore trout there in six hours, than Julian withthe paste (though he has taken a good fish byaccident), and you and Humphrey with yourpaltry flies, will in as many days."I caught Humphrey's eye as he was speaking,and took him aside ; and after a few moments'conversation with him, said, smilingly, to Charters: — "Suppose I reverse the bet, and lay,that I and Humphrey, putting Julian out of thequestion, will catch more in six hours than youin six days. Are you agreed ?"You are not in earnest ?"What shall it be ?"A new suit of clothes for Humphrey, andcomplete fishing apparatus, with six hanks ofgut from Chevalier, and, to punish you, a ten-poundnote."Done !"And now I will tell you a story, and applyit. You know a story is nothing without ' a localhabitation and a name ;' it is like a landscapeA KILKENNY STORY. 117without trees — a picture without a frame — awoman without her bust — a flower without perfume— a — "Hold ! hold ! — similes enough."Well, then ; my friend. Sir Ulysses Onslaughtwas walking with his lady in the environsof the lake of Killarney, where he was going outsalmon-fishing, and met an old beldam, namedMrs. Malwadding. — ' The top of the morning toyou.' — * The same to you, Mrs. Malwadding.' —I dreamed a dree, your honour.' — * What wasyour dream about, Mrs. Malwadding V — ' Och !I dreamed that your honour's honour would giveme a pound of tay, and your ladyship's ladyshipa shiner.' — * Well, but dreams always are verifiedby their contraries.' — ' Och, then, it 's yourhonour's honour that 's to give me the shiner,and your ladyship's ladyship that 's to give methe pound of tay.' — Need I tell you that Mrs.Malwadding's wit ensured her both the tea andthe money ? Thus, Humphrey's wit deservesthat both the tackle and the note should be his,and so in either case, whether winning or losing,it shall be ; and we will let you dream over thebet this night, with a certainty that the truth ofyour vision will be realized by its contrary."118 FAITH IN ABSTINENCE.Not till you have won it. But what do youmean by ' this night ?' "You shall know after dinner'*^ * *Confession is reckoned, by all true Catholics,as salutary for the soul as fasting. Byron,who was a ' virtuous man,' in Falstaff sense ofthe word, had great faith in abstinence, for onFriday he would not touch ' beccaficas.' I hopehe finds the benefit of it. For me, poor weaksinner, (whatever day or week in the year itmight be) I could never find it in my heart toresist those seductive little darlings, or ortolanseither, particularly when they came up, withtheir charms to be guessed at, under an envelopeof vine-leaves. By way of parenthesis,the proof of their being fit for the spit is, whenthey cannot rise from the ground, the only validtest of a man's inebriety in Ireland.But there is no question here about suchbonnes touches ; all I say is, that travellers, muchmore fishermen, have, or ought to have, a specialdispensa from his Holiness for animal food ; and,though this is a Friday, and I had dined oncealready, I made a second meal as hearty as thefirst. But this is not the point that presses onA POACHER'S FLY. 119me like an incubus in a nightmare ; for, gentlebrothers of the rod, I have another, and 'severeraccount to settle with you for once, and willpromise not to sin again, if you will give meabsolution, when I have imitated Byron (I hadforgot that his " Confessions" are in the handsof Messrs. Moore and Murray), and candidlyimparted (which I mean to do when I have summonedcourage, though not immediately, so donot be in a hurry) a sin that weighs heavily onmy mens concha of the reverse of recti.You remember the story of the poacher whocould catch as many trout out of the squire'sstream as he pleased, whilst its owner wasalways unsuccessful ? What do you think thepoacher used ? Not lime, though it is a deadlykilling thing, and may be detected, when fishare so taken, by examining their eyes ; but acoarse fly, made of a white feather, plucked fromthe neck of a fowl. The evening moth wasthe fly he imitated ; and what do you think oldHumphrey whispered in my ear ? — ' Whitemoths and the Begalen Pool !' But remember,that the moths' part of the confession rests entirelyentre nous at present. Would that thewhole secret had rested ever unrevealed —120 START FOR PLINLIMMON.Nor pass'd these lips, in sacred silence seal'd 1*What a stale quotation, and how dull ! But,not so Julian ; he was elated ; so gay, and witty,and the cause of wit to others — though I haveno time to ask you to laugh too (nor would you,for you have been made too serious by my revelation)— that I had smoked three cigars anddrunk as many beakers of milk-punch, for whichI have the old Duke of Norfolk's recipe (if youlike you shall have it gratis), and had almostforgot my bet. It was time to remember it,and I abruptly said to Charters —We have ordered our host's gig, and aregoing to Plinlimmon."To Plinlimmon ! What ! to that dull poolon the black mountain ?"The same."What, at this time ?"Precisely."Then, good, or rather, bad luck to you !"In half an hour we were en route, with twodozen flies of old Humphrey's — (the old fox !)There were some mottled-winged, with a brownbody, and black hackle with red points; somewith light mottled large wings, double, the bodythe whitish stuffing of an old saddle, or suchOUR FLIES. 121dubbing as had been got in a tanner's yard, anda large whitish yellow cock's hackle over all.We had besides, a few that I found in pokingover Julian's shop lumber, and plenty of feathers(from an old hen, caught at roost,) en cos debesoin IIt was, as Plato says, deep twilight, o^dog^u0vg ; the air from the mountain refreshing,and the stars burnt out the promise of a finenight, whilst the broad disk of the moon rose,silvering the top of Plinlimmon. My venerablecompanion (whilst I held the reins) was communicative,and entertained me with an accountof his travels in the New World, that will, perhaps,he said, one day eclipse the Old,* and mycuriosity was strongly excited to know his story,but I felt a delicacy in making the request. Heseemed to divine my thoughts, and at lengthsaid : — " Your kindness has won my confidence,and I will reveal to you what has never yetescaped my lips to any human being." — Hesighed deeply, and having paused for a while, asif to collect his thoughts, began thus : —An ingenious friend of mine has an idea, that whenour colonies are become mistresses of the worhl, Englandwill only be visited as it was by the Phoenicians, for thepurpose of getting tin I— E.THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.I am the only son of the proprietor of asmall ros, or poor mountain farm, that runsdown to Llandyssil. It seems to me, in mypartiality, one of the loveliest spots in the creation.The Tivy is there swoln into a streamworthy of being called a river, and, windingleisurely (as we saunter along, loth to leavesome delicious landscape) through its own greenvalley, makes a turn opposite our cottage windows,and is lost among the plantations, whosewhite house peeps like a bird's-nest from amongthe leaves. In this village I first saw the light.My father, who was educated at St. Peter's,Caermarthen, had acquired some smattering ofLatin, and spoke English without an accent,which is rare in that, or any part of Wales ; andinstead of increasing his fold, as his fathers haddone for some generations before him, set upa day-school, and, in addition to this occupation,opened a Ranter's chapel, and collected a smallflock of lambs of another kind.** You must know how much we Welsh areTHE Fisherman's TALE. 123given to dissent. Besides my father, there wereno less than three other preachers in our parish,all following mechanic trades, and as manyplaces of worship ; and I often wondered (thoughI might have recollected that, in the times ofthe Apostles, one was of Paul and another ofApollos) how ours should be the only faith,whose tenets were so vaguely defined as toadmit of such a variety of interpretations, eachsupported by texts, yet so fine and subtle intheir distinctions, that one would suppose arude and ignorant peasantry could scarcely betaught to distinguish one from the other.I was, in fact, a thoughtful and inquisitiveboy, and used to put strange questions to myfather, and to suggest doubts that tasked hisdivinity sadly. Instead of solving these bywords,he took to the more forcible, but lessconvincing argument of blows ; and repeated thisdiscipline so often, that I very early took arooted dislike to reading the Bible, but a stillgreater to his canting prayers, and never-endingdiscourses, and to the scandal of all his congregation,and in defiance of his anathemas, though1 had got almost all Watts's hymns by heart,and possessed a passable voice, refused to THE fisherman's TALE.nue leading the canticle for the day, in which hisnasal twang was sonorously pre-eminent.I might have been fifteen when this waywarddisposition broke out. I had an uncle, whokept the small inn at Pennibont, (which meansbridge end.) He was a conformist of the Churchof England, but rather lax in his devotions,owing perhaps to his trade, that, like poverty,'makes people acquainted with strange bedfellows,'I mean with persons of all persuasions,and no persuasion. But he was an excellent,warm-hearted man, and what would have seemedperfectly unique in your country, honest withal ;he was extortionate in his dealings with his customers,and never took advantage of their sacrificeson a holiday to chalk up at the door one potof ale more than they had really drunk. Here Ialways met with an asylum from the brutal violenceof my father, during the paroxysms of hisfanatical zeal, and found a never-failing advocatein the person of my little cousin Mary."Here the old man's voice faltered, and theeffort to conceal his emotion seemed painful, butsoon, in his accustomed tone, he proceeded.I mentioned to you my cousin Mary ; shewas of the same age as myself — born on theTHE fisherman's TALE. 125same day. It was said that we, as children,might have passed for brother and sister, for oureyes and hair were of one colour. We hadplayed together from earliest infancy, and whateverthe weather, or my engagements, (for I assistedin my father's school,) I had never goneto bed without running over to Pennibont, only astone's throw from home, to kiss my little wife,as I always called her. Yes, once, and onceonly, when I was taken to the Eisteddfodd, atthe county town, the extent of my travels.Then she wept all night, and I never closed myeyes — perhaps I wept too.But I am making myself ridiculous by thesechildish details — What is love? How, andwhen does it begin ? Is there any period of ourlife at which we can pretend to assign a date toits existence ? In the retrospect of my earliestdays, I can call to mind none, however early, inwhich the image of Mary was associated withallthat was dear to me. You expect I shalldraw her portrait. Every eye makes its ownbeauty, and nothing is so difficult to define. Ishall not make the attempt.You have heard of the custom of Care,which the Americans denominate bundling. It126 THE fisherman's tale.is almost universal in this country, and is doubtlessextremely ancient, for we Britons, in preservingour language, have preserved with it theprimitive manners of our ancestors. This modeof courtship, you, I know, look upon as barbarous,but the annals of our parishes will prove itin general to be an innocent one, much as youmay think the contrary.The Germans have, I am told, a dancewhich excites no voluptuous ideas in them, whoare used to it from infancy, but this is not thecase with those foreigners who adopt the habitlate in life ; and the very circumstance of itsbeing deemed improper, tends to make it so inreality. I don't know if I rightly exemplify whatI mean. I shall have to speak of this custom ofours presently.Kin, I am sorry to say, in this Christianland, are generally anything but kind. Myfather had often tried in vain to convince myuncle of the errors of his ways, and believed, orprofessed to believe, that all out of his own littlepen, were lost sheep, and predestined to eternalperdition ; you may imagine then that these twobrothers were not very brotherly; but my attachmentto my cousin was encouraged by bothTHE fisherman's TALE. 127families, and it was mutually agreed, that ourbidding* should take place as soon as we wereof age.I was sixteen when I first began to 'carean willy,' with my little Mary. No languagepossesses so many terms of endearment as ours ;our ' unvaried y', (sweetheart,) ' louis bach pert,'(pretty little dear,) 'anwylbach,' (my pretty dear,)seem to me the most musical of all sounds ; andin the confidence of our hearts, that throbbedwith one impulse, many a night have we lainawake lavishing them on each other, and raisingPerhaps my readers may like to see a draft, as the lawyerssay, of a bidding.As we intend to enter the matrimonial state, we are advisedby our friends to make a 'Bidding' on the occasion,at the sign of the Three Horse-shoes, when and where theattendance of your agreeable company is earnestly solicited,by your obedient servants, Griffiths Griffith, ploughman, atMachyntlleth, and Mary Lloyd of Cabal. The young man'sfather and mother, John and Gwynian Thomas, and hisbrothers and sisters, David and Rays, and William, desirethat all gifts of the above nature due to them, may be returnedto the young man on the above day. The young woman'sfather and mother, brothers and sisters, (naming each) alsodesire that all gifts due to them be likewise returned, andwill be thankful for all gifts, &c.(Signed) " Griffiths Griffith,Mary Li-boyd." E.128 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.air-built plans for our future years that imaginationmade more real than realities.For two years, every Saturday night did Ishare her couch — Years ! they were moments !there was a flood of rapture in them that hasmade all the course of my long life seem madeup of shoals and shallows. Harbour a thoughtagainst her innocence ! no ; passion formed asmall part of what I felt for her. Some mightsuppose that I was not happy, that a communionnot of souls alone, but of the senses —of our whole nature, is thirsted after, and becomesan imperious claim and a necessity inlovers. I know not how others feel, but Ithought there was no greater heaven than inher arms, and morning found her sleeping inmine with no blushes that night had need tohave concealed. Would you coldly censure —would you condemn this intercourse ? Was shenot the soul of virtue ? was not her honour dearerto me than my life ? Was she not my betrothedmine, by all the ties that twine about ourhearts in infancy, that had been indissolublystrengthened by years into a bond of the tenderestaffections? mine — by the protestations ofunalterable love, a thousand times repeated andTHE fisherman's TALE. 129sealed by her lips ? O Mary, Mary ! and to losethee !"The old man here sobbed convulsively, and abig burning tear fell on my hand : his emotionwas sacred — I did not venture to interrupt it.He continued.Who could live on the Tivy, a stream likethe Tivy, and not become an angler ? I wasscarcely breeches when I used to play the truantand get under the arch of the bridge that separatesLlandyssil from Pennibont and hide myselfthere, and with a hazel-stick, and a line ofknotted thread, and a crooked pin, pass hourafter hour unconscious of their lapse ; and ifI had two nibbles and a bite, would go homeand dream of some mighty samlet, and walk inmy sleep, fancying I felt him pull ; and when,rousing myself in my eagerness, I stretched outmy hands to land him, I hardly knew for someseconds whether I was awake or asleep, so likereality was my dream.There was an old soldier, (most of our fishermen are such,) living on his pension in thevillage, who initiated me in his art, and underhis instructions (for I was a willing pupil) I fabricatedwith my own hands rods in different years,VOL. I. K130 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.according to my strength, the last of our mountain's,and a splendid rod it was, till at lastI grew almost as expert as my master in themystery of fly-making and throwing, to whichI ever exclusively addicted myself; and in processof time there was not a rapid, or ford as wecall them, nook, or estuary in the river, for somemiles up and down, that I had not visited, orthat were not identified in my memory by therecollection of some piscatory exploit. But littlewould have been the satisfaction they affordedhad there not been one to whom I could recountthem — one to whom I could present the spoil ;and many a salmon, not large indeed, but moredelicately flavoured on that account, have I laidat the feet of my eye-sparkling Mary.I fear you will think me tedious ; but prolixityis the defect of age, and we have yet farto go — I much to say.There was a gentleman by fortune (I shallnot mention his name) who had purchased aconsiderable estate in our immediate neighbourhood,where he was residing just as I had attainedmy eighteenth year. This Saxon, for suchwe call all Englishmen, had a son, not mucholder than myself, who was keeping his terms atTHE fisherman's tale. 131one of your universities and spent his vacationsat ' The Plas.' You must have found that noobjection to fair angling is ever made on thepart of our Welsh gentry or farmers, evenwhen their grass is trodden down or corn damaged,as I have often seen shamefully done ;and till the arrival of this * Says,' the Tivy hadbeen free as the mountain-air we breathed.This young collegiate, not satisfied withnetting on his own side the river, was in thedaily habit of beating and dragging on that ofall the petty proprietors in the village ; and hisfather had erected a weir above it similar to thatin the Divlas, that no salmon but in the greatfloods could by possibility ascend. He was amagistrate and justice of the peace : law is expensive,and the causes at our Caermarthenassizes are generally said to be gained by theparty who has the longest purse or the bestadvocate ; so that, though all-murmured, no onehad the spirit or the courage to contest thesquire's right to set up the new fishery.Thus matters stood. There is a pool, a miledown the river, where there are in the monthof September seldom less than two salmon ; theyseem to go in pairs, for whenever you take one,K 2182 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.another is sure to supply his place. I have thespot before me still. How could I forget it!On one side the bank is precipitous and fringedwith alders, and the water exceedingly deep,whilst on the other, which is open, there is a lowbed of pebbles, that shelves gradually to theshore, an excellent landing-place. I had beenlashing some hours without getting a rise in differentpools, and was determined to give this atrial, as a last resort, not liking to come homeempty-handed to Mary.** It was near sunset when I took my post onthe gravel bank. I used, I remember, a verygaudy double-winged fly, made of the feathersof the kingfisher, (which are very numerous onour river,) and the peacock, with a thick goldbody, unlike anything in nature ; but our salmonlately come from the sea, have either forgot, orare ignorant of the forms and hues of insects,whilst, when they have had more experiencehigher up, they will not look at any but dullones. Well, at the very first cast, I hooked theconsort of the fish I had taken the day before.She gave me some trouble, and I was nearlyhalf-an-hour before tiring her, but I landed heratlast, and was putting up my tackle, and hadTHE fisherman's TALE. 133unspoiled my rod, when who should happen tocome up but the young squire. He had had ablank day, and whether it was that jealousy ofme for having been more successful than himselfmade ill-blood, or that he was naturally arrogantand overbearing in his temper, he accosted me,taking up my salmon, with,"You d — d poacher, what are you doingon my ground ? I'll have you whipped at thecart's tail, you Welsh rascal, and sent out ofthe country." Saying this, he threw my fishinto the water.I stood motionless for a moment, like onein a trance, eyeing with vacant stare the placewhere the salmon had sunk with its own deadweight, but it immediately rose again. It lay,awhile, motionless on the surface, but by degreesopened its gills, moved its fins, turned onits side, and at last waddled quietly and slowlyinto the middle of the pool, and disappearedaltogether.** It is a mistaken idea that we Welsh arecholeric. Our language being full of harsh consonantsand gutturals has given rise to thiserroneous impression. Till then, at least, I hadnever known what rage really was : but my blood134 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.now boiled within my veins. I was in a fever ofindignation. My first impulse was to throw theinsolent wretch into the pool after the salmon,and, flying at his throat, I seized him with thatintent ; but he was older, and taller, and strongerthan I, and succeeded in disengaging himselffrom my gripe, but not before we had mutuallygiven and received several heavy blows fromeach other's fists, in which he had a decidedadvantage.Retiring a step or two, he then lifted up hisheavy salmon rod, and struck with all his mightat my head, which was bare, my hat havingfallen off in the scuffle ; fortunately for me, Ieluded the aim, and slightly grazing one ear, thefour brass-bound joints descended with a tremendouscrash on my shoulder. I staggeredwith the blow, was thrown back on my knee, andinstinctively making a lever of my right arm,laid it (as some demon willed) on the butt-endof my own rod, armed with the spike. It wasmuch sharper than they usually are, and wasnothing more or less than a large nail, to whichI had attached a screw. Blinded by passionand smarting under my bruises, and scarcelyknowing what I was doing, I seized it in theTHE FISHERMAN'S TALE. 135middle, as one would a spear, rushed at him likea tiger thirsting for vengeance, and plunged itinto his side.The victory was mine — but what victory !Crying out, ' Help ! Help ! I am murdered !' hefell.The whole scene had only occupied a fewminutes, but when I saw him prostrate on theground, I awoke as from a frightful dream.Was I a murderer ? Had I taken the life of afellow-being? I ran to him, he made no motion.I got some water in my hat, and threwsome in his face ; he showed no signs of life. Iflew to the PI as, alarmed the servants, and, accompaniedby two of them, returned to the fatalspot of our encounter, and taking him in ourarms, still bleeding and senseless, we carriedhim into the house.The village doctor happened to be callinga few moments after. He immediately had thepatient stripped, and on washing and examiningthe wound, discovered that it was superficial,the point having glanced off from the ribs. Myantagonist had only fainted from loss of blood.It was easily stanched, and by adopting theusual remedies, he to my infinite joy opened his136 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.eyes, stared wildly about him, and was in a shorttime sufficiently recovered to sit up on thecouch.The old squire now entered. He refusedto listen to a word I had to say in my vindication,and on the deposition of the servants madeout my mittimus ; and the same night I wascarried off to Caermarthen and lodged in thecounty-gaol.Four long months did I lie in prison. Atlength the day of my trial came : the testimonyagainst me was conclusive. The evidence of myaggressor was diametrically opposed to the truthhe denied all that occurred previous to theinfliction of the wound; in short, my defencewas deemed worthy of no credit. I had thecharacter among the fanatics of my father's congregationof being irreligious ; my youth waslooked upon as no extenuation of the crime, andI was sentenced to be transported to the coloniesfor fourteen years."Here the old man groaned deeply, and Ithought he would have broken off his narrative ;but he took up again the thread of it thus : —Of all my friends and relations, Mary wasthe only one who did not abandon me • she hadTHE fisherman's TALE. 187braved the opinion of the world before the assizesby often visiting me in my cell, and up tothe day of my leaving it for embarkation, continuedto minister to me like an angel. Howinexpressibly bitter was our last meeting ! Shevowed to me an eternal fidelity ; that vow wasregistered in Heaven. We parted — without ahopeI shall not speak of what I endured onboardthe ship : you may imagine * howling,* butyou can hardly picture to yourself what it wasto be condemned to listen to the details of blood,in which they gloried, and the impious scoffs ofmy abandoned associates — to be their * equal,*the companion of those hardened, desperate,profligate wretches — ' one of them' — in thathorrible floating dungeon for nine months. Sufficeit to say, we reached New South Wales.I made a link in a chain of convicts sentto clear the country. It was an interminableforest full of all horrible reptiles ; they usedto crawl over me as I slept on the hardground, but would not sting me : my backwould show you characters graven with scarsfrom other stings, the lashes of our drivers. Ihave shed tears bitter as blood ; I have prayed138 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.for death like him in the Scriptures, but itcame not.The term of my exile was expired, and Isucceeded, through the recommendation of thecaptain of the vessel in which we sailed, andwith whom I had ingratiated myself by my goodconduct, in getting a passage home. Home,said I? what home had I, a felon — a criminalbranded with eternal infamy and shame ! Ihad left my home young, hale, flushed withhealth ; but hard labour, bad climate, spareand unwholesome diet, and misery that furrowsdeeper than age or disease, had so completelychanged me, that even Mary, were she living,could not have recognised me. With a fewdollars in my pocket, saved by extra work duringthe last years of my transportation, I landedat Gravesend, and finding there a coasting-brigbound for Aberystwith, put myself on board, andafter a short voyage, behold me once more settingmy foot on my native shore.The next morning I came in sight of Llan-dyssil. I have heard of the pleasures of memory :how inexpressibly painful to me was the contrastbetween past and present feelings! how agonizingthe sight of every well-known objectTHE fisherman's TALE. 139around me ! The Tivy, whose murmurs wereonce the sweetest music to my ear, seemed inevery fall of the river, as I followed its course, toroll along in a melancholy cadence, as if ominousof other times ; but, as one of our poets says, Iknew not that it was an oracle. I passed themansion of my enemy ; I saw it was inhabited,unlike most of the Welsh gentlemen's seats Ihad passed, and was curious to know if anyretributive justice had befallen him. I saw thelittle church-tower; the cottage where I wasbornI was dressed in a sailor's blue jacketand trowsers ; but my weather-beaten features,bronzed face, bowed shoulders, and the loss ofmy arm, had needed no disguise.I left the road to avoid going through thevillage, and, following the course of the streamthrough the meadows, then enamelled withflowers, for it was June, soon came to what youmay conceive would be the sole object of myjourney, Pennibont. I perceived that the signhad been changed, but the name on it was thesame. Before the door were stopping severalgwladwrs (peasants) in their clean but coarsegrey garbs, merrily drinking from their taxed140 THE fisherman's TALE.carts, and three or four flanges (girls) mountedon ponies and dressed in their Sunday attire,their white and nicely-plaited caps peeping fromunder their round, smart, fine beaver hats. Theywere on their way to a wedding, and the bride,about eighteen or nineteen, was easily knownfrom the rest by a large bouquet of wild flowersthat had no doubt been culled by the hands ofher lover, who stood whispering in her delightedear. I thought of Mary — thought how often Ihad lifted her on her side-saddle to go to market;I thought too but no matter.I threaded the crowd unobserved, and, passingunder the well-known ivied porch, took mypost on one of the benches of the large open fireplacein the kitchen ; there I narrowly watchedthe faces of the inmates as they entered, but notone was familiar to me, and the host, whom Iheard called Jones, was a stranger. Seatednext me was a man of about five-and-thirty, inthe garb of a gamekeeper, and, calling forbarra cous ' and ' cwrw,' I invited him to par .take it : he was already far gone in liquor, andI hoped to elicit from him in his cups some informationthat I was afraid, yet breathless withdesire to learn.THE FISHERMAN'S TALE. 141With the usual inquisitiveness of our countrymen,he said bluntly, * Where you come from?where you going ?** I left Aberystwith this morning, and ambound for Tenby to join the Mary lying there.It is now some years since I travelled this road ;but the people of the inn seem to me not thesame, though, if I remember right, the landlord'sname was then also Jones.'' Right — right : this house is now Squires,and he turned out the old cadneau (fox)because '* Because what 1 I thought him an honestsort of innkeeper, and his cwrw was better thanthis.'* Eze, sure ; but since the Hanks o' Bristle'(the boys of Bristol) have sent us their cheapporter, there has been no good ale brewed inthese parts. But as to old Jones '*' ' Landlord, dere rien Hank!' (another potof ale.)** * As to old Jones — you don't call to mind,do ye, a prettyish sort of a body, his daughter ?mayhap it was before your time, if you havenot been here for some years.*142 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.' Now you mention it, I do remember somethingabout her ; she was fair, with blue eyes,wasn't she ?'* Eze, sure ; the minx wasn't amiss, andmight have married well, and got as good abidding' as Rays and Winnie outside, but, onsome silly crotchet or other, refused to bundlewith half the young boys about. I 've heard say'twas all along of her taking up with a fellowas was sent to Botany for an attempt to murdermy master the squire. The chap was a sort ofa cousin of hern ; but I bennet of this part ofthe world, so I can't say nothing concerningthat.''* ' Well, but the girl. Some more of yourgood cwrw. Master Jones !'' Eze, indeed, the girl. Well, as I wassaying, she wouldn't hear of no courting, andwould have died a maid, ha, ha, ha! butfor '« For '' Squire, when he was a young one, had aneye for a louis glare (a clean girl), and likes tosee the country well peopled, ha, ha, ha !'' He couldn't 'THE FISHERMAN'S TALE. 143* Why what 's the matter, man ? This aleof Jones's is rather a take-in ; it an't so poor asyou think for — why it seems to choke ye !** I have had a long dusty walk, andWell?'' Eze, indeed, if you ha' come all the wayfrom Aberystwith. Here 's t' ye V' But go on.'* 'Tis now just twelve years back — ay,twelve years, come midsummer day — sin Icomet to look after the squire's preserves ; anda year and a half after that '' Well, friend, after what Y' You must know that squire took all of asudden to coming down from the Plas to have amug of ale of an evening out of the hands of thelittle Mary, as folks called her. It was a greatthing for the house, and a vast honour too to thegirl; but she didn't think so, for it was butseldom that she would serve him herself', and herfather and she used to have words about it. Tomake the matter short, (I hope there's no listeners,)master took a huge fancy to the wench,and was resolved to have her by hook or bycrook, ha, ha, ha !'144 THE FISHERMAN'S TALE.' The wretch !'* What is that you 're mumbling, mastersailor Y*' ' The wretch — ed creature ! But drinkyour ale. — Another pot, landlord!'' The business is now hushed up ; but folkswill talk, and this made a great to-do in the villageat the time.'* This what ?'' You shall hear. After squire bought thePublic, he used to chat with Jones concerning anew lease, and they were off and on about it forsome while, and there was a deal of going backwardsand forwards to the Plas. It 's my believethat squire had no mind to let the old man haveit ; for he used to lodge and board Eisenachgentlemen that tramped about the country likegipsies, with their packs on their shoulders, tofish and shoot, as if there were no trout andgame at home.'' But this lease V' Eze, indeed, the lease. One day squiresends down David to bid some one come directlyfrom the public on pressing business.Now Jones, we all knew, was gone to NewcastleEmlin to the fair, and so, after o' David' tellingTHE FISHERMAN'S TALE. 145o' Mary that the affair was pressing — and so itwas, ha, ha, ha! — he gets the little girl to gowith hit to the Plas.'« < We— 11 r* Ay, sure it was well, I Ve heard say, for thesquire that she came without being sent for —of her own head, as a man may say.'' He did not dare V' Dare I ha, ha, ha ! poor tender thing ! Shewasn't such a chick neither; she must ha* beenfull-fledged — twenty-two or twenty-three at theleast, ha, ha, ha ! (This ale gets into my noddle.)She was shown into master's justice-room ;I was talking to him about nabbing an oldpoacher as she came in, and as I knew master'stricks, look you, took myself soon out ofhearing.'' What could you have heard ?'** ' Heard, bless your soul ! Why, accordingto Winnie the maid's account, she screeched forall the world like a stringed rabbit. Ha, ha, ha !'' The villain, the damned villain !'' What 's that you 're saying ? If you don'tstop that foul mouth of yours, I '11 drive someof your teeth down your throat to join thecwrw.'VOL. I. L146 THE fisherman's tale.** I eyed him fiercely, and laid my clenched fiston the table ; he did not like my determinedlook, or perhaps drowned the recollection of mywords in a deep draught of ale, and, when hehad taken breath, with a grin of horrible meaningsaid,' After a time, squire's bell rang. I was uptothe whole affair, and would not let nobodyanswer it but myself. As soon as I entered theroom, by master's smirking face, and the rig ofthe girl, I could see with half an eye what hadhappened. She was squatted on the floor, hercheeks scarlet as her cloak, her teeth stronglyclosed, and her eye fixed and stony. Shelooked for all the world like a body in a trance.But all of a sudden, as if she was waking out ofa night-mare, she sprang up from her seat, beforeI could stop her, brushed out of the door,and we could see her from the window scuddinglike a hare scared out' of her form, and scurryingalong the banks of the river, till some aldershid her from sight.'O God ! does thy vengeful bolt sleep ?' There is a big pool between the Plas andthe inn, which we often drags for salmon ; theTHE FISHERMAN'S TALE. 147water there is sleepy, and the sides go down (forI once measured it) into near eighteen foot — eze,indeed, eighteen foot. Well ! will you believe it !the foolish creature threw herself into it, andonce in, 'twas not so easy to get out; a lambmight as well try to climb out of a sawpit, or afox out of a well.'I recognised at once by the description of theworthy servant of this wretch, that it was theidentical pool that had been the cause and sceneof all my misfortunes. I had now nothing tolearn, but was rooted to the bench.* In the evening there was a great outcry atPennybont, and when old Jones came back fromfair, he runs trotting as fast as his stumpy legswould carry him to the Plas ; all he learned was,(for master wouldn't see him) that Mary hadleft it in the afternoon. He was like one daft,and wandered about the woods all night, andscoured the country round, calling on her byname,but no Mary could answer. The nextday the Tivy was dragged, and sure enoughthere she was hooked out. They tell me shewas the prettiest corpse that was ever clappedinto a winding-sheet. But you don't listen ?l2148 THE fisherman's tale.I had listened too long. A fire was in mybrain, an eating fire ran tingling through myveins, a sword was rusting in my heart. Irushed out of the house, not knowing whithermy steps were hurrying me. One would havesupposed that they would have borne me towardsthe spot, now doubly fatal, but destiny, orsome demon, directed them otherwise.The road led into a deep plantation of oaksand beech-trees, that had grown up since mydeparture, whose overhanging branches formeda green arch that almost made it twilight. Imoved on involuntarily, and scarce conscious ofmy way, but as the imagination in dreams bringsclearly before the eyes objects, if seen, scarcelyremarked by day, thus the scene has since recurredto me in horrible distinctness. I waswalking at a frantic pace, when, on making asharp angle in the avenue, I all of a suddencame upon a man. Those features, the gloomyexpression of that shark-like eye, could they everbe obliterated by change or time from my memory?It was — yes, my inhuman persecutor, thecause and origin of all my miseries — the violfisherman's TALE. 149later of innocence — the murderer of my poorMary, stood before me ! Whether he recognisedme I know not, but he started as if a spectrehad crossed his path, screamed, and turning onhis heel, attempted to escape by flight ; but Ipursued him with the speed of a maniac, andwith my knife, which in my precipitate retreatfrom the inn I carried unclasped in my hand,overtook him, and plunged it to the handleagain and again into his heart. Deep groans,succeeded by horrible convulsions of his form,accompanied the stabs.His limbs were loosened, and he was stretcheda senseless corpse at my feet. But my vengeancewas not yet satiated. I knelt on him — Istamped on his breast — I spurned him from mewith contempt and abhorrence, as does a fathersome loathsome and venomous reptile that hasstung his child. I howled in triumph over hismangled remains.♦ ♦ ♦ *What happened next I know not, for I longlay in the shadow of death. But when Iawoke, I found myself fastened with heavychains to the wall of the very cell which I had150 THE fisherman's tale.occupied sixteen years before, in the gaol of Carmarthen.It was long before I could believethat all that interval had not been a frightfultroublous dream, and I thought when I heardthe step of the turnkey, that it was that ofMary.By degrees however, reason, as light returnsslowly to those long immured in darkness, cameback, and I was roused to a consciousness of thepast, and sense of my real situation. The prisondoctor was a kind and compassionate man :he soon struck off my fetters, and having, duringmy ravings, learned a part of my story, interestedhimself in my behalf, and took a journeyto Llandyssil to collect evidence for my defence.The trial was a long one. Among otherwitnesses, was examined the gamekeeper, fromwhom was unwillingly elicited a confession ofhis master's guilt. Mary's father gave importanttestimony in my favour ; mine was no more, andwas thus happily spared the second shame of seeinga son set at the bar for murder. My love —my wrongs — my madness — the unpremeditationof the crime — pleaded that mercy should temperjustice ; and, when the sentence of death wasTHE fisherman's TALE. 151passed on me, it was whispered in my ear, that itwould be commuted for — the hulks.« * ♦ «Nineteen years ago I escaped from them,and no Hue-and-cry was published, no meanstaken for my re-apprehension.My tale is at an end You see me nowleading the same precarious life I have everdone since that period. I have nothing to livefor in this breathing world, and daily repeat,with old Llywarc —Woe to him who has been fated to an evil destiny IDeath ! why wilt thou not befriend me ?' "" Truant o tinged a tinged.Wi o angau na 'nri dygrel.*'Can Liawahc, Hen i'w lltu'iint.VOL. f. r, \MOONLIGHT SCENE.We reached the pool, and, taking off ourleggings, waded to a small craggy island, offthe shore, and then resumed them.The night was calm, and only now and thena breeze following the curve of the lake, gentlyruffled its surface ; but overhead, the moon, likethe wheel of a vast flaming chariot, rolled overthe precipitous dark clouds, and between themsome spare stars peeped dimly out. We approachedthe longest day ; and it could scarcelybe called night. Wrapped in my long Mackintoshcloak, and lighting my cigar with a steelSUCCESSFUL SPORT. 153and * amadow,' I sat on a fragment of the rock,and having adjusted my tackle, began to castwith my long salmon rod. I followed, in mymanner of throwing, old Humphrey, who drewback the line with gentle pulls, for about a yard,which made the fly seem as if alive. At thesecond cast I took a trout of three pounds ;at the third, one on my stretcher and seconddropper, and landed both. All the fish in thepool seemed collected round the place ; thefools ! The moths were irresistible in theirattractions.But why dwell on the details of this murderoussport ? The day broke, and found us witheighty-one fish ; none small. We loaded thecart, and at seven returned to our inn, when Iwent to bed, and dreamed, not of Plinlimmonand the Begalen Pool, but of Mary and Llan-dyssil.154 THE BET GIVEN UP.NINTH DAY.A fine morning. — The bet given up. — Mountain Scenery. —Annoyance from flies. — Flying Bugs, and other wingednuisances in India. — Travelling in Hindoostan. — Myriadsof white Ants. — Their mode of architecture. — Theirdevastations. — Their King. — Grandeur of the Welshmountains. — Cader Idris. — The Towyn famous for Salmonand Sea-trout. — The Pennibont Inn. — Colonel Vaughan'sliberality. — Destructive sport of three Anglers. — A delightfulevening.Machynlleth, Thursday, 8th.It is a fine morning ; and our kind and attentivehostess' table (it is a fair-day) will bewell supplied, that is one comfort ; for thenight's poaching burthens my conscience. Charterswas " unbounded," as they say in Sussex,and has given up the bet, and written for thetackle. I had some difficulty in making theold man take the paper, and he shed tears — butthey were not of pleasure.ANNOYANCE FROM FLIES. 155* * *The valley of the Doveyy, and its tributarystreams, would have supplied us with amusementfor many days (or weeks, earlier in theseason,) but I was anxious to proceed on ourexcursion, and we set out in the old char a bancat noon.The scenery is the finest we have yet metwith. It reminded me of the more cultivatedparts of Switzerland. The side hills are wellwooded, and, nested among them, are some delightfulcountry-houses. The road follows theDivlas, confined to a narrow, rocky channel, stillrapid, and gradually diminishing in width. Ethroute Charters would stop the vehicle, and trythe brook, and had set up his tackle for thatpurpose. We did not, however, think it worthwhile to imitate his example.Whilst loitering on the bank we were attackedby hosts of insolent enemies, in the shapeof flics. If Homer thinks them fit for heroicpoetry, why may not I for plain prose ? Theirbites were as venomous as those of gnats, asour lips and cheeks, wherever they settled, borewitness. This annoyance, though not in anc(iuiil degree, we had experienced the day ANNOYANCE FROM FLIES.fore ; and to while away the time of our journeyfor Charters was soon tired of catching smallblack trout, of a few inches long, (the weir at theDivlas as effectually confining them as if theywere in a piscina,) the conversation turned onflies, by my observing : —We can now judge of what lo's punishmentwas, or, if we want to know what its effect is oncattle, we may read Bruce's account of the Abyssinian* tafana,' that drives the cows as mad asin the Prometheus that ' horned damsel' wasmade by its stings. The flies in Switzerlandthat torment the horses are larger than humbleness,and an English mare I had with meduring a tour was with her fine skin in a stateof such excitement, though naturally a quiet animal— and I am not an indifferent horseman —that I was "Made you a field-officer, as we say in thecavalry."You have hit it. I once made one of a picnicparty from Vevay to St. Gingolph, the mostromantic spot, perhaps, in Europe. We wentinto the woods to dine, and were scarcely seated,when our gipsy concern was broken up bythe attack of large, pale, half-animated gnats.FLYING-BUGS IN INDIA. 157that spoiled the beauty of more than one of ourfair ladies' skins. But Julian will tell us somestories of his Indian tormentors, for he neverfails to find a climax for every marvel of thecreation, however marvellous."I was attacked in Bundlecund by othermonsters quite as bad as the harpies of old —by swarms of bees that had made their hiveson the trunks and branches of the trees underwhich our tents were pitching ; they descendedon us in myriads, leaving their lives in everysting, and punished our camp-followers so severelythat they were obliged to decamp, andwe had to abandon the tempting shade of thepeepul (or banyan) tope for the canopy of thesky, and a burning one too, for it was in themidst of the hot winds. But what do you thinkof sand-flies, no bigger than the points of pins,that have a particular partiality for eyes ; blister-flies,that cause no tears of rapture ; flies, one ofwhich in a glass is an emetic ; or flying bugs,that in crossing a table pervade it with odoursnot Assyrian ?**"Charming country! — no wonder you haveleft it."You should go to Madras, and sleep a night158 TRAVELLING IN Hindostan.in the Black Town ; the mosquitoes there arefine, game, speckled fellows, and so minute thatno gauze-curtain can exclude them. A brother-passengerof mine, a mauvais sujet, (I speak of hisphysique,' and not of his ' morale,' as you say,)was nearly dying of their bites ; and the flieswhich lay their eggs in the feet, and become longsnaky worms that, once domiciled, are only tobe wound out like a skein of thread, and oncebroken in the process produce mortification,are not much less noxious than lo's oestrum."Her stings, if I read the tale aright, werestings of another sort."Talking of gnats, I should think the whiteant-flies, when in their amatory state, wouldmake as excellent lures for trout as your whitemoths, Stanley, at night. But you do notlike the allusion ; you know the history of thoseIndian pets ?"The history ! that means a long story. Nowfor a yarn, as the sailors say — spin it, Julian!These mountains are very dull and barren —Bengal for ever !"There is a species of hymenoptera not mentioned,I believe, by Cuvier, though found in allparts of India, and in its habits, perhaps, moreMYRIADS OF WHITE ANTS. 159remarkable than any — I mean the termites, orwhite ant. This insect, in size and shape, notill resembles a nut-maggot ; it is also of a paleyellow colour, and sluggish in its motions, butnot inactive in doing mischief, and for what purposecreated, God only knows, but for our sins.Shortly after my arrival in Calcutta, I had occasionto visit Cuttack, and had a dak hired forthat purpose. Travelling dak is travelling post,only that, instead of relays of horses, you haverelays of men ; these chaise a porters consist offrom twelve to eighteen in number each relay,four only at a time carrying the palanquin orlitter. The stages seldom exceed eight miles,and the pace is never less than five."About the general rate of posting inFrance."Me void, done en route. I could not speaka word of that barbarous-patois the HindooThe monsoon had set in ; the rain camedown in cataracts and without intermission, andyet the air was hot and heavy to suffocation.Fancy me boxed up in the narrow vehicle, andpanting for breath in a shirt and pair of * pi-jamais'(drawers), and you may form somenotion of the boasted and expensive luxury of160 THEIR MODE OF ARCHITECTURE.a d^k in the rains. But the road : it now laythrough avenues of bamboos so overgrown andnarrow as hardly to admit the palanquin. Atonetime my bearers were wading up to theirknees in paddy-fields, when a false step wouldhave embedded me in black, putrid, tenaciousmud ; at another, they went splash-splashingthrough an almost interminable inundation, or,by way of variety, made a dead stop at somenulla, (five such they came to in one day,) whenit was necessary to disfurnish the litter and formeto cross h, la nage.At night every thing assumed a worse aspect,for the torch's glare gave horrible indistinctnessto objects, and as we threaded vast jungles, I expecteda tiger to spring on us at every step ; orwhen we emerged from some black forest, fanciedmyself about to plunge into one of the Belgianthe Inferno, escorted by demons, who keptup (like my black attendants) a continual concertof groans. I could not help thinking inmy lucid intervals, with many a sigh, of theneat post-chaises, macadamized roads, and ablehorses of Old England. One day (our journeylasted several,) I observed in a vast horizon-bounded,watery plain, several mounds of earth.THEIR MODE OF ARCHITECTURE. l6lgrouped together, and forming a sort of oasis,which I at first took for huts of the natives, orsheds for their cattle, but on coming up to themI discovered that they belonged to a colony ofwhite ants.'* These barrows were all of pyramidal shapes,varying from twenty to thirty feet in height.They were fabricated of a congeries of mud andsticks, or straws, and were, I found, inhabitedby congregated myriads of ants from the circumjacentplains, who had constructed these colossalretreats for the purpose of escaping beingdrowned in the periodical flood, — with its rise,they also rising above the level.This was the only interesting object I remarkedduring this tedious and monotonousjourney, and I was desirous of learning somethingabout the habits and pursuits of theseclever masons. I soon had an opportunity ofgratifying my curiosity, for I found that ourbungalow, like every other in the cantonment,was a * formicaria.'Bungalows are mud-walled buildings chopped,or thatched with grass, and there theswarms take up their domicile ; but not contentwith making stealthy ravages on all below, theVOL. I. M162 THEIR DEVASTATIONS.diminutive marauders, in their voracity, devoureven the thatch, and in two or three years soconsume it, as to let in the sun and rain. Thebeams too of the houses, if not of bamboo, sissoo,or teak, are not safe from their devastatingfangs, or mandibles, attempted like the fineststeel, and they soon convert mango and the softerwoods into dust.It is curious to observe them at their labours.Whether it be for the purpose of shielding fromthe air, or protecting themselves against theinroads of other hostile ants or insects, theycommence their operations by constructing galleries,kneaded together with a kind of mortaror paste. This cement is at first wet, whether,like the spiders', from some exudation of theirbodies, or a kind of saliva, I know not, but noengineer could make better covered ways.The rapidity with which these arches are setup,surprises no less than the expedition withwhich, after they are raised, the work of devastationgoes on. They are by no means epicures.Nothing comes amiss to them. I have openedbooks, of which only the covers remained ; eventhe corks of my bottles in my down, or cellar,were devoured, and the wine spoiled by the ad-theirDEVASTATIONS. 163mission of the air. I have seen glass, of whichthe polish had been lost, their teeth having actedas a file upon it ; and the collector of a districtcharged the white ants with the deficiency in histreasure chest.One day in Bundlecund, as my tent waspitching (no long operation), I remember takingup a backgammon board from the ground, andfinding not only the leather eaten, but even thedeal-board under it perforated into holes.During a standing encampment, I haveknown tents, though the 'canals' (walls) andfly' (roof) consisted of four or five cloths, completelyhoneycombed in a very few weeks.They have, as I said, no invidious preferencein the way of diet ; paper — linen — leather — cotton,all dry vegetable matter (for they are notcarnivorous) are subject equally to their ravages.They do not seem to possess the sagacity ofhoarding, common to many species of the formica,but in a climate, where nature and artsupply them with a never-failing abundance offood, such providence would be unnecessary.Like other hymenoptera, during the periodof generation, which takes place in the * rains,'they have wings, and, attracted by the lights,M 2164 THEIR KING.descend from the choppers in thousands, anddestroy themselves in the flame of the lamps,which they sometimes extinguish with their carcases.This change of condition lasts, however,a very short time, perhaps only a single night ;and probably, like the ants mentioned by Huber,after their wings have answered the purpose ofthe perpetuation of their species, the lovers tearthem off, or they become torn and useless, beingmade of such flimsy and gossamer materials, thatone wonders how they can support the disproportionatelybulky bodies of the insects at all,who, however, take no long flights.I might mention, by the by, that when theyare in the amatory state the natives make curriesof them, as they do of the locusts, confirmingthe account in the New Testament of John theBaptist's fare. The king, as the Greeks usedto say, ((^ccfffXsvg,) is a grub nearly three-fourthsof an inch in length, and very inactive from hiscorpulency — indeed, scarcely able to crawl; nobad emblem of a rich Hindu or Mussulman, whogets obese in proportion to his wealth : he isgenerally carried or dragged by his subjects. Ihave attributed to this ant a masculine sex,though perhaps erroneously, for it may be anTHEIR KING. l65hermaphrodite, or perhaps the mother of theswarm.This sacred and pampered personage hasmore than once fallen into my hands ; it wasimmediately surrounded by vast crowds of theants, who betrayed extraordinary solicitude aboutits safety, fearlessly exposing themselves to danger,and lavishing on it the most tender caressesand attentions. Knowing that its destructionwould not prevent my bungalow from beinginfested by the tribe, I generally set it free,when it was borne in triumph by rejoicing multitudesof its guards.Huber has said that bees, when they losetheir queen, can make another. Whether thewhite ants are gifted with a similar creativepower, I am unable to affirm ; no fact in naturalhistory is more startling, if true. I have readthat these pernicious insects have lately foundtheir way into some sea-port in the south ofFrance, having been brought there by a merchantmanfrom India. Were the ships fromthat country liable to such a pest, what cargocould escape ? But I have never seen them onboard,and should imagine they cannot exist inthe holds of vessels ; not but, once transported166 GRANDEUR OF THEinto Europe, they might easily be acclimate'd,as neither damp nor cold affects them. Godforbid that the white ants should ever domicilehere! for, compared with them, the new andpernicious insects that produce the dry rot are agenus innocuous."Charters, who thought every moment lostthat was unemployed in fishing, had been longimpatient to arrive at the end of our destination,and was in the clouds during the greater part ofthis long entomological lecture. For my part,I had been for the last mile so struck with thecharm of the scene that had burst upon mewhere the road turns off to Doggedly, that mywhole soul was absorbed in it. I said —How grand those mountains that shut inthis gem of a lake on all sides ! look, how itglows in the sunbeams like a sapphire! Howsteep those rocks, that seem to form ramparts— an inaccessible barrier to this littleworld!"Yet those specks are the wild flocks withouta fold ; see how they hang on the precipice, orcross in files the broken crags, to pick up ascanty vegetation that here and there relievestheir barrenness !"WELSH MOUNTAINS. 167'* Perhaps, a few years since, they were completelydenuded. The rock decomposes : firstcomes moss, whose decay becomes the parent ofgrasses ; thus have I seen a * scoria ' of Vesuviusislander with patches of green and yellowflowers. Even the marble and the granite meltaway, and my fancy pictures to itself Switzerland,and dwells on some chalet, with its littlegreen meadow and garden-plat, hanging almostin the clouds, which it requires the sturdy legsand steady head of the mountaineer to reach ;my brain has grown dizzy in watching his ascentto his eagle-home."You call this mountain untameable ; but Isee a shepherd threading the zigzag path, andthe peasant girls wind up it with considerableweights on their heads, to the market of ,which, as the crow flies, is not morethan four or five miles distant. But, cast youreyes to the right; that is Cader Idris, the secondhighest mountain in Wales. Snowdon, asits name implies, is covered with perpetual snow,whilst on those three summits it never rests."How bold its outline ! It looks like a seatfit for a giant, the Monarch of mountains, or aCybele, with her rocky diadem !"168 PENNIBONT INN.What do you call this little stream thatdebouches from the lake ?"It is the Maes-y-Pandy, which joins theDysyawy, a few miles below, and afterwards iscalled the Towyn, that gives its name to a townsome eight miles distant, where it falls into thesea. It is famed for its salmon and sea-trout ;and, occasionally, the former make their wayinto the lake, where one was taken last year,with a common fly, of twelve pounds !I have brought you, gentlemen, to the inn. It is the nearest to the lake, and, asyou see, you might throw a line from the windows.There is another public-house, that has,perhaps, better accommodation, but it is furtherfrom the boats, which are moored every night atthe farmer's opposite**To whom do the boats belong ?"To Colonel Vaughan, the proprietor of thelake. He keeps them solely for the accommodationof all lovers of the art, and never throwsa line or net into the water himself. No leaveis even required."It were well if our English esquires wouldimitate this noble Welshman in his liberality tobrothers of the angle."DESTRUCTIVE SPORT. 169You must remember that trout are of littlevalue here. The distance to Doggedly and ,joined to the exceeding delicacy ofthe fish, which is common to those of the BegalenPool (as I told you), makes them scarcelyever pay for their transport."Let us go in and see our lodgings. Hospitiummodicum, I doubt not."In the parlour we met a gentleman, whoasked us to look at the album. At the firstpage I opened, I perceived a record of the lastweek's sport of a party, which appeared to memarvellous : — " Three brother anglers, five hundredtrout in five days." — I expressed mysurprise.It is too true," said the stranger. " Shouldthis murder continue, the lake must be soonthinned of its fish. Even now they are considerablydiminished since my remembrance.From twenty to thirty is now looked upon asexcellent sport, even when you whip all day,but double that number might have been obtainedsome years since without much labour."I shall be well satisfied."It is but a few years since this lake was firstknown, and was, I believe, first discovered by a170 A DELIGHTFUL EVENING.descendant of the celebrated C , as keenand good a sportsman as his illustrious ancestor.He makes a journey here twice a year, expresslyto throw a fly in the water. — But here he is !Let us see his basket. Thirty fish, I declare !All of nearly the same size, from half to threequarters of a pound."I shall employ myself till dinner in makingflies, and tomorrow try my luck."We passed a delightful evening ; and were Inot too tired, would make you think so ; butmy sides ache with laughing, and my handwritingis become already illegible.PERPETUAL RAIN. 171TENTH DAY.A Stranger's Invitation. — Perpetual Rain. — Angling in aBoat. — Irish Rods. — Metamorphosis of a German Flute.Advantage of a strong Breeze. — Sir Humphrey Davy'sFlies. — Hooking a Trout. — He is landed. — Descriptionof him. — Beautiful Scenery. — A new comer. — Disadvantageof wading in the Water while fishing. — Deep "Waternot favourable. — Cormorants. — Signal for Dinner. — AMorning's diversion. — Digression.Tal y Llyn, Friday, 9th.The stranger I addressed on arriving at theinn, or who addressed me, I forget which, hasengaged one of the boats and has had the politenessto offer me a seat. Salmonius (Julianwould not go, pleading letter-writing) is off tothe Towyn.Well, it pours as usual ! As Jaques says,the rain it rained every day.' Since we leftCheltenham, we have scarce once escaped adrenching ; but I have not taken the leastcold."172 IRISH RODS.Any weather, however, is better for anangler than fine weather; clouds, rain, a galeof wind — these are the elements of success here.I have looked down the valley from the bridge,and it is black as night towards Towyn, whichindicates a succession of showers, and there is amist on Craig Cock* (the red cock.) I perceive,too, some curlews on the lake, proving that thegale has been strong at sea, or that they apprehendit ; but we have Mackintosh cloaks. Rogerand the boat are ready."Then let us on board."** Which end of the boat do you prefer foryour station ?"To me it is indifferent whether I throw overthe right or left shoulder."I will take the head of the boat. Do youuse a single or double-handed rod ?"The fatigue of whipping with a double oneis less; it is not necessary to throw the fly,which I here do seated, to the extent of itspower."You are right, for I have taken fish almostunder the gunnel of the boat. What rod isyours ?"A rock on the south-east corner of the lake E.METAMORPHOSIS OF A GERMAN FLUTE. 173An Irish one ; it grooves into the ferules.I once ordered a pendant to it at a celebratedtackle-maker's, but when it came home it was asunlike my pet as possible : in fact, the fabricationof a rod that will stand is a mere accident.Care also should be taken, after a hard day'sstraining, to lay it down horizontally ; you perceivemine, that has been in use many years, isas straight as it was the first day."You are fortunate. I might say with Horace,' O si anglais ille proxies accept !' formine has twisted like a French horn ever sinceI lent it to a tyro in the art some days back,who caught more trees than trout. Since whichI have set it down in my tablets, ' Never lendyour rod, your gun, your cue, or cricket-bat, toyour best friend.' "Your mention of a French horn reminds meof a story of my Indian friend's that he amusedus with the other night. He was in some placeup the country at the season of the hot winds,when the heat is so intense, night and day,though it blows a gale of wind and dust, thatto put their noses out of doors is literally whatthe Italians c&\\ a * seccatura,' a drying-up. Abrother-officer at this delightful season borrowed174 ADVANTAGE OF A STRONG BREEZE.his German flute, and when he sent for it in therains, lo and behold! he hardly recognised hisold acquaintance again with his new face, andreturned it to the borrower, telling him thathe had lent him a German flute, but that it hadcome back a French horn : — so it seems withyour rod."Yes ; mine has the true Horatian line,but not of beauty. But we are far enough out ;opposite the boat-house. Hold, Roger ; downwith the large stone, and let us drift. Thewind, I am glad to see, is freshening from thewest : without a strong breeze nothing is to bedone in this lake.The finny darter with his glittering scalessuspects the fraud when the surface is unruffled ;he also probably sees the line, even though itshould be, as yours is, the colour of the water.I like to see the pool strongly agitated, and fullof what the Genevese call ' moutons' and theIrish * white horses.' Before the sun is high, itwill make a sea for our little bark. ' Lo ! wherethe gust comes blackening the water, as it walksalong like a thing of life.' "How do you account for one pool beingfreer than another ?"SIR HUMPHREY DAVY'S FLIES. 175' Davis sum, non (Oedipus ;* it altogetherbaffles inquiry. Perhaps Tal y Llyn is a remarkableevidence of this truth. The trout, whichhave almost ceased to rise in the rivers at thenatural fly, having been glutted with the superabundanceof that sort of food, supplied them bythe prolific influence of the spring-season, or, inthe angler's language, having become lazy, arehere as eager for the fly as when nature andthey burst into life from their winter sleep ; andhere, as Sir H. Davy remarks of the Swedishand Norwegian rivers, they are almost indifferentto the genus of the fly."What flies have you ?"A cocobundy, a grouse hackle, and a bluegnat ; but all larger than the natural fly."I can hardly forgive Sir Humphrey Davyfor allowing his great mind to trifle so muchabout the peculiar manufacture of flies. Beassured that, when you have the right colour,your success will depend upon your throwingthe line, and not on the exquisite delicacy ofyour manufacture. The best fishermen in Ireland,Scotland, and Wales, will be found amongsome rude peasants, who are always carelessabout the workmanship. These are very roughly176 HOOKING A TROUT.made, a circumstance of little import in myeyes."There ! I have a rise at my dropper, acocobundy. He rose short. Now I have him !And you too have hooked one ?"Yes ; with my stretcher, a black. Theyfight bravely. Now mine is out of the water."Keep him in hand, for the fish here, whenthey feel the hook, make for the bottom, wherethey know there is a quantity of long thread-likeweeds, and where, if they entangle the line, theywill most likely break away, for their mouths,like themselves, are very delicate."My tackle is very slight."As it should be, always proportioned to theprey. Take care he does not get under theboat ! Roger, bear a hand !"What a beautifully-formed fish !"He is in high season, as proved by thecrimson of his fins. His weight does not exceedhalf a pound, the general average of the trout inthis lake."They seem of a peculiar species, and certainlydiffer from any we have met with. Theyare narrower and whiter ; their spots fewer."There ! I have hooked two with my grouseDESCRIPTION OF HIM. 177hackle and cocobundy. From being like herrings,which they resemble, they are calledherring-sized.' They evidently go in shoals.I shall probably lose one or the other, perhapsboth. They die game. There ! they have bothsprung out of their element ! After that efforttheir vigour is spent. Now, Roger ! Yes, theyare both boated safe !"How bright their eyes are ! Their backsare like tortoiseshell, and their bellies resembleburnished silver !"** Yes ! it is evident that they prey gregariously,for when you take one I invariably do thesame, and, what is strange, that which I havenow hooked, took the fly a yard, at least, underwater,whilst I was watching your sport."Their drifting down the pool is a fatallydestructive mode ; for thus we sweep the wholeof the water, and in the course of the day lashevery part of it."*' We are now at the head of the lake, wherea river, you see, runs into it ; and the weedsrise above the surface. It seems a likely spot.I have him ! Sure, he is larger than common.Roger, land him."** Bred among the weeds and rushes, he variesVOL. I. N178 BEAUTIFUL SCENERY.from the rest of his finny brethren. He is, youperceive, broader in the back ; his Read smaller ;his belly as golden as that of a carp ; the spotsin the neck of a deeper mottled colour. Anoble fish for this water, and weighs two pounds.Perhaps he is the patriarch of the place ?"We are now aground !"And our host is arrived with the old mare,to tow us against the wind to the bottom of thepool, where we will take the sweep of the leftside."I shall be glad of this half-hour to observethe scenery. See, how the rack drives over thesummit of Cader Idris, whose range is now bare.Look where the lower ridge of the mountainshadows with its craggy sides the village of Italy Llyn, seated on each side a gorge, throughwhich falls a cascade. And here to the left is agreen hill, smooth as a bowling-green, of deliciousverdure, sloping like a wall to the water'sedge. And that grove of pines beyond, whichoverhangs the farm-house, and the church, andthe inn, and the sloping woods in the valleybeyond it. The place is beautiful !"I shall throw as we move through the water.I have often taken fish while Roger has beenA NEW COMER. 179rowing. The lake is so small that they areaccustomed to the object."What is the length ?"Scarcely more than a mile, and barely aquarter of one in width."But there is a new comer, wading up to themiddle in the water. I have not as yet seen himtake a fish."** Perhaps he will not get three by throwingall day. They are shy of any one on the bank,wading, but take no notice of us. Now for asecond drift ; we are too far out. I have foundby experience that in deep water, they do nottake the fly, or are too indifferent to rise at it.This pool is, however, in few parts more thanten or twelve feet deep ; and so sensible is thegentleman in the other boat of this truth, sowell does he know every inch of the pool, thathe never wearies himself in vain, nor goes veryfar from shore. Let us at once follow his example."** Do you see those cormorants ? It is strangethat there should be only two in the wholelake."There never were known more than two.There is a peculiar economy among birds, per-N 2180 CORMORANTS.haps a greater than is to be found in anyother animal tribes. These come from " ,'or the Bird Rock, some miles distant,which is thronged with them ; but the neighbouringlakes and rivers are apportioned to acertain number for their support, and that numberis never exceeded, so that it would be uselessto kill these, for others would immediately besure to supply their place. See, one has dived ;he is carrying off a large fish."These wretches are insatiable. I once shotone. His craw was full of worms, that are continuallygnawing for food. Behold him, on theedge of the lake, on an old broken fence, standwith his wings extended to dry, in preparationfor a fresh chase."See, too, his consort has joined him, andthey hover over the pool."We have filled our baskets, and the whiteflag is hung out at the inn, as a signal fordinner."Take an oar, and we will row ourselves.And now what think you of a morning's diversionat Tal y Llyn VSo much that I would willingly pass the restof our three weeks' tour here."DIGRESSION. 181This is the Angler in Wales, indeed ! exclaimssome fair reader. I hear her, and shall take thehint, and the liberty of digressing a little, no,not a little, in future, and in this I am only followingthe example of Byron, which will remindyou of a common remark of Glover's, " I andClaude."182 SKETCHES OF SALMONIUS.ELEVENTH DAY.Sketches of Salmonius — Musical Phenomenon. — NotesIndians — Delights of a migratory Life in the East. —Oriental Field Sports. — Descriptive Verses. — A Shik-marie. — Astonishing feat in the den of an Hyena. —Crocodiles and Alligators.Saturday evening.Salmonius talks in rapture of the Towyn,and tells us, nay, has proved, that it is full oftrout. He has brought back with him threedrawings, two coloured on the spot ; and bythem it would seem .that he is not exaggeratingwhen he says he has met indeed with wildscenery. Two of his sketches are differentviews of the Craig-a-Deryn, or Bird Rock, ofwhich the stranger spoke. Charters gives thefollowing account of it : —On making a turn in the river this morningit might be about five o'clock — I heard, orMUSICAL PHENOMENON. 183seemed to hear, a sound like a distant organ,swelling in the wind, and now dying away ingentle undulations, though an organ would illdescribe the exquisite harmony of this burst.Each note seemed to be distinct, while all werewith such precision amalgamated, that it wasimpossible not to deem it the perfection of musicalart. This extraordinary phenomenon powerfullyarrested my attention. The strain, as Imoved forward, increased in volume ; it was ofa strange and unearthly character, such as Memnon'sharp is said to have produced at sunrise,or, as Prometheus describes, when he receivedthe welcome visit of the amiable nymphs ofOcean. Had it occurred in the night, I shouldhave exclaimed with them — Lav (po(is^ov to (as t^-ffgfTgf, and thought some spirits of the air hadbeen joining in a concert, or that I had heard intrance some planetary music. I listened attentively,and looking towards the direction whencethe notes proceeded, descried a rock, rising outof the vale to the height of some hundred feet,apparently torn from the mountain range bysome convulsion of nature. The shape was singularlypicturesque, and leaned forward, asthough * meditating its fall,' in the maimer of184 MUSICAL PHENOMENON.the hanging tower at Pisa, and like it, a plummetline dropped from its apex, would havefallen far beyond the base. As I approached itthe sounds became less melodious, and I couldthen distinguish the voices of the birds, thatwere hovering over their nests, and the answersof the unfledged and callow young. I was at aloss to account for what had been harmony inthe distance thus magically becoming dissonancewhen near ; and it seems a problem inacoustics well worth solving.* On arrivingFor the resolution of this difficulty I avail myself of anoriginal, and I think, satisfactory theory, propounded sometimesince at the Literary Institution, Cheltenham. Thegentleman who read the lecture is justly esteemed forhis musical genius and his philosophical research into thathidden science of acoustics, for such is still the doctrine ofsounds, and had met with a similar phenomenon in Italy,when accompanied by some musical friends to Vesuvius.It appears that, in order to try the effect of a full chordreverberating from the deep recesses of the crater, a strainwas sung. The echo was discord. The experiment repeated,produced a similar effect. It was then proposed tosing a discord, which was done. The result was perfectharmony.Sound is undoubtedly produced by the undulations ofthe air, forming themselves at first into a sharp wave, orcontinued zigzag, which, however, as it yields to the resist-musicalPHENOMENON. 185opposite the rock, I shouted, to try its effect onthe inhabitants of the place, when a screamarose, such as I had never before heard, fromincredible multitudes of cormorants, gulls, herons,hawks, crows, coughs, and curlews, whichquite darkened the air. They wheeled roundand round the summit of this wild promontory,once of the body of the atmosphere, gradually declines toa straight line, thus: —'>^N^W~'^~'Now, a perfect chord would be produced by any othersound exactly corresponding in undulations with the first,so, in fact, as to produce no collision with the angles, if Imay so term them.Now, in traversing over a plain atmosphere, discord orconcord would be continuously discord or concord ; butwhen repelled by an immoveable body, the undulations take,as it were, a new starting-post, and are returned in perfectconcord. To this, then, we may attribute the phenomenonwitnessed in Italy, and from the Craig-a-Deryn. The Echois the musician alone. Nor should we wonder that theancients personified her, and attributed to her iiifiucnccsuch magical effects. — E.186 CRAIG-A-DERYN.settling, to rise again with shriller shrieks, andmany darting down till they came within gunshot.Their retreat is perfectly inaccessible,and it is said by the simple peasants, that aGenius of the birds presides over the rock, andtakes them under its special protection, hurlingdown (as happened last year to a daring birds-mester)all who endeavour to scale it. The looseand friable nature of the material is an additionalobstacle to such an attempt, small stonesmomently rolling in what the Swiss call anSeulement, and the Welsh, Dear Dw, intothe space between the river and it, so that atits foot, a considerable mound, or heap, hasbeen raised by the continual frittering away ofthe surface of the rock."This evening produced a Nodes Instance.Julian, who had been very dull during dinner,under the inspiration of his claret, and a dozenof Trichinopolies (he sometimes smokes halfa bundle of cheroots a-day), got among hisAnthropophagi,' and told us of sundry perilousNotes INDIANA. 187hair-breadth 'scapes, not indeed in the imminentdeadly breach (though he has been at thestorming of several posts), but from the jawsand claws of divers tigers. One of them sprangon him from a thicket, and dragged him off hishorse, but was diverted from finishing his mealby a friend, who rode after the brute, and drewoff his attention to himself. He keeps very voluminousjournals of the records of wild sportsof the East, perhaps of things it is no sport toread, for I find he rises from the perusal of themin no merry mood. I will endeavour to commitsome of his anecdotes to paper. More than oneof the party, I could perceive by their countenances,thought of the 'Arabian Nights' Entertainments,'or the * Parrot's Tales,' or theexploits of Houston or Altar.You, gentlemen," said Julian, " are occupiedwith what is only fit to amuse children.Your hare-hunting and fox-hunting, and battues,and trout-fishing, are tame, when compared toour manly and spirit-stirring sports. Nothingcan be more delightful than the migratory lifewe lead in India. The little camp, which dailychanges its ground, and is pitched in some massMIGRATORY LIFE IN THE EAST.majestic evergreen tope, or mango grove — the careof our elephants, dogs, and favourite Arabsthat know their masters, and follow us to be fed,like dogs — fresh ground to beat every day, perhapsuntrodden by man — a line of elephants, theinterspace filled up by beaters — our howdahs,furnished with three or four Joe Cantons— gameof all sorts, from the florida to the quail, andthe tiger to the antelope, continually sprung —and then, after gun-fire, good cheer ! — thatbrotherhood, which our exile creates, and forwhich my soul yearns ! — and then the hookah,the divine hookah ! One of these parties, frommuster to muster, is worth an age of a life likeyours.It is true, that I should not be the poorhypochondriac, half-animated, half-livered manI am, but for my devotion to these pursuits.Snipe-shooting first was my bane. Imagine alimitless bog, tufted with rank grass ; time, midday; a line formed of eight or ten natives, andmyself, in a pair of * pigammahs' and a shirt,wading up to my knees in the black, offensive,putrid compost, that the extreme heat of avertical sun (which strikes you when you arefirst under it like an electric shock) draws upORIENTAL FIELD SPORTS. 189above mud-mark, and thence into the frame :the snipes getting up at every step, and flying(for, like owls, they hate the glare) a few hundredyards, and then settling, to be kicked upagain. I have killed in two hours, though anindifferent shot, thirty-five or forty brace.*' We have four sorts of snipes : what we callthe solitary snipe; the painted snipe, withgrouse-like plumage, and heavier on his wings,and in little esteem at the table ; the commonsnipe, and the jack. I imagine they never migratewith us ; not so the quail, who in the*jow' jungle on the banks of the Ganges assemblein the cold weather in incredible numbers.But what sportsman ever coldly calculatesany danger, much less to his health ? You, forinstance, with a load of trout you can hardlycarry, and though you (not I) loathe the sightof them in any way dressed, cannot, thoughrunning down with perspiration, resist wadingin a likely rapid. Stanley was speaking justnow of a chamois-hunter — that he seldom diesin his bed, will sleep in the snow, climb wall-likeprecipices, and leap fissures in the avalanche ;hour after hour, hid behind some projecting crag,watch a gorge when the herd arc likely to pass190 ORIENTAL Field-sports.For what ? — a single shot, in which, if he succeeds,the deer will most likely fall into someinaccessible place where he is irrecoverable. Andyet this Alpine huntsman's peril does not exceedours. Hawking was once my favourite pursuit,and a no less hazardous one. Our quarry is thecurlew, and when on the wing, keeping the eyeon the birds, we follow them in a direct line,not knowing over what ground or into whatravine our steeds may carry us.I once wrote a description of a scene Iwitnessed, and shall preface it by telling youthat the hawks are so numerous, that they hangabout and follow our line while shooting, and soimpudent are they, that they will pick up almostevery wounded bird before it is possible to recoverit : I have made many a one pay the forfeitof his poaching. The couplets were these : —With flapping wings and screaming heard afar,The curlew, startled, quits his lone minna;A falcon heard, who hovering through the dayHad mark'd our line, expectant of his prey.He raised his swoop, and instant through the skies,Amid the quarry's loud and piercing cries.They both ascend. More upward seen to rise,The dissonant curlew more majestic scalesThe blue vault, wider wheeling as he sailsDESCRIPTIVE VERSES. 191The hawk, as foil'd or scorning the pursuit :But not the less the victim's voice is mute,Nor less relax'd her efforts at that feint ;For well do her instinctive terrors paintThe beak relentless and the pinion's force,That flags not in its unremitting course.Too sure the toils the wily foe has wound —Too just her fears ; for see I around — around,Lessening and ever-lessening to the sight.Scarce can the eye in that aerial heightTrace the swift congress of their arrowy flight INow seen but as their shifting plumage gleamsAnd sparkles in the sun's meridian beams ;Now but two specks appear of doubtful hue —Now, dizzy grown the brain, are lost from view ;Whilst yet is heard at intervals on highThe exhausted curlew's faint and desolate cry.Her destined hour is come, and sooner farThan dies a meteor, falls a falling star,Both in one orb lie intertwined beneath,Indissolubly lock'd in one embrace of death !'There are some things of which poetry,however indifferent, will present a better picturethan prose ; thus these somewhat tumid lineswill remind you more of Claudia than of Virgil.We English boast of our personal and mentalcourage, and hold India by opinion ; yet no menpossess a greater contempt of death than the192 A SniKKARIE.natives of India. I was early convinced of thisfact on my joining my regiment at Cawnpore.I had not been in that cantonment (which LordHastings used to say was only famous for thefineness of its dust) many days, and breakfastingwith a brother officer in his bungalow, when oneof his servants came to say that two shikkarieswished to speak with the sahib. A shikkarie isa sportsman by trade, has lost caste, and is calledby us, though improperly, a pariah, for that nameis only given by the natives to an domesticateddog; it is, however, not inapplicable in thatsense of the word to those men, who eat indifferentlythe most disgusting animals, such ascobras, wolves, hyenas, or any carrion they canprocure by the chase ; and in this they resemblethe bushmen at the Cape and the snake-catchersin Java, who literally do feed on poisons, likethe Pontic monarch of old, and with the sameview. Do you know how they draw a reptile'steeth to get at this strange food ? They enragehim with a piece of cloth, which when hehas seized, they give it a jerk, and the teeth andfangs are extracted with it : this by the by. Togive you an idea of what sort of folks shikkariesare. One of them, when we were encamped atA SHIKKARIE. 193Sherghur, the most emaciated wretch I everbeheld, came vociferating to me as I was standingbefore my tent, ' I am starving ; give meone of your sheep.' I had taken with me intothe field several that might have cost me originallyonly a rupee each, and taking pity onthe beggar, I complied with his importunity.I scarce dare continue. The moment he couldcall the animal his own, he rushed upon it, mouthopen, (like a wolf,) and planted it in its heart andsucked the blood. But his ravenous appetitebeing yet insatiate, with tooth and nail henext tore off the skin, and began to devour thequivering limbs, instead of salt, using sand bywayof digestion, I suppose, as fowls do at sea,which being unprovided with on our voyagehome, they literally plucked each other, andsaved ' Jemmy Ducks' the trouble. But ourshikkarie : I could endure the disgusting spectacleno longer, and shuddered to think I wasa link in the chain of humanity' with such amonster ; Bruce's Abyssinian feast was a dinerd, la Russe* to it. To return to where I setout. These two shikkaries told us they had• A diner d la Russe is when the table is only garnishedwith fruits and flowers and the viands handed round. — K.VOL. 1. O194 FEAT IN THE DENdiscovered the den of a hyena, and proposed totake him alive in our presence.Though incredulous of such a feat, we madeimmediately a partie de chasse, and followingour savage-looking guides, accompanied them toJagemow, once one of the largest cities in thatpart of India, but then a wilderness of ruins, orrather of ruined tombs, that extend for severalmiles round the site of the new town. Aftertraversing ravine after ravine, at the imminentrisk of our necks, our conductors stopped at lastat a colossal mound of earth, resembling a barrow,that had formerly been a family vault.The bones of many different animals, and someskulls, that had perhaps belonged to the formertenants of the place, lay scattered about, and atits foot was the entrance to a cave. I hadbrought with me an English terrier, whom I putto earth immediately. We listened for sometime,and soon heard, though at a great distance,a quick bark, and then a savage growl, thatproved some brute was at home.The dog had not, however, a badger, or foxto deal with, and soon came yelping out, with histail between his legs, and covered with bloodthat issued from his jaws. We now supposedOF A HYENA. 195that there was no other way of getting at thehyena (if such it was) but by digging down tolira, which the compact and iron nature of theground rendered hopeless. But to our amazement,the least robust of our black allies laidhimself flat on the ground, and with a pickaxebegan to hammer at the roof of the covered way,till it was large enough to admit his body intothe recess, first having wound round his waist along and strong rope.We soon lost sight of our hero, and hisprogress through the windings of the cave wasonly known by the occasional echo of his strokes,when he found the passage too narrow. Twicehe reissued for air, and to rid himself of thedust that filled his nose, mouth, and eyes ; andthe last time selected a round mass of ' concern,'(a brittle lime-stone,) which he rolled beforehim, and then disappeared, as I thought for ever.I could scarcely draw my breath for anxiety,which was increased by a surly low growl, announcingthat the intruder was observed, asheafterwards told us) the savage had becomevisible to lira, by the glare of his glassy eyes.We could next make out, by the voice of theshikkarie, and the fierce protracted howls of theo 2196 FEAT IN THE DEN OF A HYENA.hyena, that they were engaged in combat. Ourfears now painfully increased, which, however, thecompanion of the daring assailer did not seem topartake. To be short, — in about half-an-hour,we were not a little pleased to see him, who hadthus * bearded the lion in his den,' make his exit,covered with dust, matted to him by perspiration.He held in one hand the end of the rope,which he gave into ours, desiring us to assist indragging the struggling savage into day.We were six or seven in number, and by dintof main force, for it called all our sinews intoplay, we at last succeeded. His jaws wereclosely muzzled, his fore and hind feet fastenedtogether with the dexterity of one practised insimilar exploits ; and having committed thehyena to a sack, brought for that purpose, ourtwo pariahs suspended it from a bamboo, andwe returned to cantonments."Sir Humphrey Davy's story of the alligator'segg, and the young one that attacked the * accoucheur,'is a bagatelle to yours. It was, indeed,like picking the teeth of the crocodile."The Egyptian crocodile, and the Indian alligator,I believe to be the same. The latter areof two kinds, the long, and the snub-nosed.CROCODILES AND Alligators. 197The tanks in Bengal, where the women wash,are full of them, for they are as sacred there, asJuvenal describes them to have been in Egyptin his day. When the Ganges is low, I haveseen sand-banks covered with them, and at avery short distance they look like logs of wood,or trunks of trees. I was possessed of a three-ouncerifle, and have frequently suspended myoars to float past one of the islets, and struckthe nearest of its monsters, who, though he dyedthe ground, and afterwards the water, with hisblood, always succeeded in sinking quietly intothe river, which, strange to say, they do almostwithout making a ripple. They rarely attackmen.The dandies, sailors, (very unlike ours) towthe hedgerows, and ' folios,* sometimes allday, and are rarely, if ever, carried off by them.Fish I should imagine to be their principal food,for during one of those long and tedious voyagesof twelve hundred miles, as I stood one eveningon the deck, I was attracted by a loud smashingnoise, and to my astonishment, saw the head ofan alligator, out of the water, and holding anenormous * Roe matches,' of thirty or fortypounds, in its tremendous jaws."198 CROCODILES AND ALLIGATORS."A la bonne heure! something about fish atlast."*' If they knew their power, they would be astremendous as, in antediluvian times, must havebeen the mammoth, and the phagomammoth,which, perhaps, after all were as comparativelyharmless."The night was far spent when Julian hadceased, and he promised to give us anotherchapter out of his book, on another occasion.START FOR Cade Iris. 199TWELFTH DAY.Start for Cader Idris. — Ascent of the Mountain. — LynCay. — Mountain-trout. — A fall of Frogs. — Summit ofthe Mountain. — Vast Prospect. — Julian's excitement ofspirits. — Return to the Inn. — Charters meets with anAdventure. — A Female Angler. — Her history.Tal y Llyn, Saturday, 10th.By dint of strong persuasion, and upon myquoting to Julian Lord Bacon's advice for a manthat is melancholy even to move from one roomto another, I have dragged him out of his den,and Salmonius being already gone to pay hiscourt to the Tow^yn, we have hired our 'scart-mare and his merci's (daughter's)black pony, and are off to picturesque on CaderIdris.The base of the mountain, geologists say, isslate, what the mid strata are, ' chi sa ? ' thehigher summits granite, and the estimated height200 MOUNTAIN-TROUT.above the sea two thousand eight hundred andodd feet ; but our lake, as its name implies — forTal y Llyn means the high lake — is alreadynearly half that altitude.From recollecting a similar expedition toSnowdon some years since, I had expected tofind the ascent more difficult ; but we had noneed to dismount once, and, all the windings andturnings of the mountain-paths taken into account,we did not estimate the distance to LlynCay (mind, I had no pedometer in my pocket)at more than four or five miles. Julian wouldnot take with him his tackle, and I broughtmine, but quite indifferent about the sport. Thislittle lake lies at the foot of a perpendicularrock of the same name as itself. The water isof a dark blue, and shelves down at once intosixty fathoms, and its whole extent cannot exceedas many acres. It is so abrite on allsides from the wind, that, though it blew hard,there was scarcely a ripple on the surface, acircumstance, independent of the depth, veryunpropitious.As I expected, I never got a rise nor saw afish move, though they tell me it abounds withSUMMIT OF THE MOUNTAIN. 201trout, which the impossibility of extracting themfrom their crystal retreats renders probable. Iobserved to Julian —It is strange that the summits of almost allhigh mountains contain trout. I have seen thelake on the Mont Cenis dragged ; it was said bythe fishermen to be unfathomable, and is doubtless,like this, the crater of an extinct volcano.The same is observable of the St. Dotard andthe Simplon; and the wonder is to find theretrout that do not exist, and could not, in theCovered and the torrents rushing from it."I have been reading White's Natural Historyof Melbourne, who gives a relation (a well-authenticatedone) of a fall of frogs. Fish, Ihave been told, (though I have never seen them,and will not vouch for it,) are found in the tankson the tops of houses in India ; and I havemyself known ponds that had been dry for eightmonths in the year swarming in a few days afterthe rains with small fry, which our bearers usedto catch in their kummerbunds, and I have eatenthem too, and doubt not they were almost asgood as the white bait Tommy Moore was preventedfrom doing justice to. The only way to202 VAST PROSPECT.reconcile this strange circumstance that savoursof the marvellous is, that the spawn, perhaps thefish themselves, must have been taken up intothe clouds by some water-spout, and descendedin a shower."An ingenious solution of the knot."We had now reached Pen y Cader Idris,or the head or seat of the Giant Idris. The daywas so clear that not a cloud intercepted theview ; a vast prospect lay stretched, like one ofthe models I had seen of Switzerland at Geneva,below us.Our guide pointed out the Wrekin, a solitarysugarloaf-shaped hillock, as it appeared, on theimmense plain of Salop, and which I had seenfrom Eaton, though forty or fifty miles distant.It was skirted by the silver windings of theyoung Severn. Between it lay the Bala lake,the largest of the Welsh lakes, and a worthyrival of Windermere, to which it has been compared,with the Ferwyn chains, surmounted byArran ben Lyn, that seemed little inferior, as wellas we could judge, to Cader itself. To the west wegot a peep, through a chasm in the Brecon range,of Swansea Bay. The valley of the Towyn, andCHARTERS'S ADVENTURE. 203the coast of Cardigan, and the shores of Merionethshire,with a wide expanse of ocean, lay atourfeet, and we thought in the dim horizonthat we could descry the coast of the sister-island; nor did we forget, in the panorama, tocast our eyes in the direction of Tal y Llyn, hiditself from sight by a range of the mountain, andto gaze on the bleak and barren Plinlimmon andthe county of Montgomery.This enchanting scene, the ride, the exercise,and the mountain-air, gave Julian an exuberanceof spirits which broke out occasionally in a kindof hysteric merriment that savoured of flightiness:he pressed his pony down places that itwas hardly safe to have descended at more thanawalk, and might have met with a serious accident,had not the little animal been very sure-footed;but he carried him, without making afalse step, back to our little inn, where we foundCharters impatient for our arrival.** He has given up fishing at an earlier hourthan usual," I observed to Julian ; " there mustbe some mystery in this."204 Charters's ADVENTURE.We sat down, in addition to the old trio, witha stranger, also a brother of the rod, to dinner,the others having taken their departure.Well, Charters, what sport to-day?"I have met with an adventure. Do you seethis sketch of Pont y Garth ? it is thrown overa narrow part of the river that rushes rapidlythrough the arch. I was standing and leaningover the parapet to let my line down, when Iheard the gate that skirts one end of the bridgeopen, and having turned round, observed a "Well, what did you observe ? some prettyblack-eyed peasant-girl going to market withher basket of butter and eggs balanced on herside-saddle, eh ?"I observed a girl, but not a peasant-girl.Her nut-brown locks were surmounted by abroad, flat, straw bonnet; her little hand wasarmed with a delicate fly-rod, and in her trainwas an attendant maid, who carried a basket.She favoured me, as I passed, with a look thatalmost tempted me to address her, or to worshipher — or rather she was< Too fair to worship, too divine to love,'for she seemed to me like one of the deities ofthe streams, or the personification of Diana."A FEMALE ANGLER.A pretty costume for Diana. I have seenthe Diane a la biche, as the French call it, inthe Louvre, and Diminishing's Diana and thenymphs, (the counterpart, by the way, of Ovid's,)some holding greyhounds, others shooting withbows and arrows, and the pretty one in thewater, but not fishing. It should have beenreserved for Rubens to paint your goddess witha straw bonnet and a fishing-rod. I thinkaeschylus says, that she guarded all the younglingsof the forest, but it is the first time I everheard of her presiding over, much less destroyingfishes, young or old."206 A. FEMALE ANGLER.The gentleman," observed the stranger, whowas a native of the country, "has comparedMiss well ; or perhaps she may be ratherconsidered an Undine —Her mind, face, form, are superhuman ;'Tis pity she is not a woman.She need not sit for a statue, for she is herselfone. The ancients rightly depicted the goddessof the chase as inaccessible to the shafts of love,and your friend, like many of us, may chance torenew the tale of the disconsolate Endymion."Well, Charters, and what then?"I laid my rod on the wall, and followed herwith my eye. She turned immediately down tothe bank of the stream, and began her cast. Inever thought it a graceful art before, but no oneever threw as she threw.It seemed to cost her no effort, and the flydropped like a flake of snow on the water, andseemed to have no more effect on it than a realgnat. Romeo says, he wished he were a gloveon Juliet's hand. I should have liked to havebeen the rod, to be clasped between her fingers,or to have been a fish, for I would certainly haverisen if I should have had to die for it the nextmoment. The only lines I ever made in my lifeCHARTERS'S ADVENTURE. 207I wrote upon the stone of the bridge : I think Ican remember them.If I a trout, and thou should beAn angler, I would willinglyRise, were I caught, thy charms to see,And, dying, be content to die."That 's a crib from Waller, I declare : andwhat became of the ensnarer ?"I watched her and watched her, through allthe windings of the stream, throwing, and catchingsamlets at every throw, which her manillatook off the hook, till she became a white speckon the bank, and then an envious rock hid herfrom my sight — and — and then I returnedhome."Povero Endymion I" exclaimed Julian, suitingthe action to the word.Ill-fated youth !Go, day by day, and waste thy manly primeIn mad love yearning by the vacant brook,Till sickly thoughts bewitch thine eyes, and thouBehold'st her shadow still abiding thine,The Naiad of the mirror.' "But who is the young lady, sir ?"She is the only daughter and sole heiress ofa gentleman of large estate, and of one of the208 A FEMALE ANGLER.oldest families in this country, tracing back hislineage to those Britons who retired to the fastnessesof these mountains to preserve their freedom.He is now old, and dotes upon this lastscion of his stock with a fondness that is somewhatselfish, for he declares that the day of hermarriage will be that of his death, and she returnshis love with a filial devotion, and hasrefused every suitor, (and she has had numberlessoffers,) with a strange insensibility. I accusedher of coldness, but that she has an excellentand feeling heart all allow. She had a brother,who lost his sight when a boy, and him shetended with an affection that almost made, assome one beautifully says, the infirmity underwhich he laboured, a blessing.She played to him (for she is a great musician)and sang to him his favourite childish airs,and would take long walks with him on thebanks of the Towyn. Often have I met themthere ; her idiot blind brother leaning on herarm, and she anxiously observing the road lesthe should hit his foot against a stone. It wasnot till he died (which he did in her arms, andshe nursed him too, during his long illness, as ifhe had been a child) that she became partial toHER HISTORY. 209these pursuits. But you are much mistaken, ifyou think she has an unfeminine mind. She isas gentle as she is beautiful."You speak of her con more''Perhaps I do. To see her, and love her — "The stranger did not finish the sentence, andhis voice betrayed his emotion, which, I saw, hewas ashamed of having shown. We rose, andwishing him a buona notte, retired.VOL. I.210 NATIONAL CUSTOMSTHIRTEENTH DAY.Fishing on a Sunday prohibited. — National Customs shouldbe respected. — The River Lee. — Inn at Bow. — TheParlour. — Representation of a Chub. — A consequentialPersonage. — His Sanctum sanatorium. — The Inn Ordinary.Cockney Anglers. — Welsh Congregation and Curate.—A deserted Village. — A Meeting-house. — A Publican'spiety. — Hypocrisy. — Welsh Peasantry. — Their overreachingspirit.Tal y Llyn, Sunday, 11th.You would be stoned, or at least have thedogs set at you in Scotland, and be Yes-intendedin Wales, were you to fish on a Sunday. Alwaysrespect the customs and prejudices of the peoplewith whom you live : I have ever done so, andcan with a quiet conscience say that I nevermissed a bull-bait at Salamanca, an opera atNaples, a regatta at Palermo, the corso at Milan,a veglione at Venice, a/c^e des barques at Geneva,fifete des vignerons at Vevay, or a quadrille-partyat the Bois de Bologna (when not better en-shouldBE RESPECTED. 211gaged) on that day, and think " Napoleon ilGrande" perfectly right in making himself aMussulman in Egypt, a Catholic in Italy, a Protestantin Germany, an esprit fort in France,until it answered his purpose to believe in theesprit saint ;* nor can / believe that Socrates bythe last act of his life, the sacrifice of the cockto Aesculapius, had any faith in its efficacy oratonement, but that he was only paying thedeference of a good citizen to the religion of hiscountry.What a rambling thing the human mind is !why, Don Juan himself never digressed more!But what has Napoleon or Socrates to do withSunday? — Much; do not be impatient — I wasonly showing how the greatest and wisest' of menacted. Now the Londoners, spite of Sir AndrewAgnew, make the Sabbath (" The day of theLord's rest ! what a profanation !" would exclaima Puritan) a day of no rest to the little fishes.• Bonaparte had some difficulty in persuading PopePius VI. to officiate at his coronation; it is even said thathe would not have dispensed the unction but for the emperor'sthreat — " J'ai Monsieur Baron dans ma poche,"meaning that he would Protestantize France in case oi' hisholiness's refusal. — E.P 2212 PARLOUR OF THE INN AT BOW.Some years back I was travelling with my mareand gig on a Saturday — not on a Sunday, markthat — meaning to reach town that night; but,as a loose shoe would have it, my groom thoughther a beetle tender on the off-foot, so that I was,a contre cceuVy condemned, though not for myanti-sabbatical sins, to pass the night at Bow.Who has not heard of Bow ? Those who havenot, may learn that Bow is on the river Lee, thesacred stream of hebdomadals, the scene of theimmortal Walton's exploit, catching the chub,vide page — no, I have not got Julian's book —and eating him too. Chub ! chub ! — as PeterPindar or George the Third said of Pye'spoetry — " no more of that — no more of that!"I tried it at Pennibont on the Ithon. TheHindoo would certainly worship them : there 'sa puzzle, now ! Why ? Never mind ; let us goonswimmingly.There are four inns at Bow solely supportedby the angle, thanks to Isaac. I chose the signof " The Pike," and was bowed into the parlour,an odd-shaped, many-sided place, in every cornerof which stood huge cupboards — no, they hadno porcelain in them, and I should say buffets,(for I like to be correct in my phraseology,) andREPRESENTATION OF A CHUB. 213round the polygon hung sundry coloured anduncoloured drawings of fishes. I examined themattentively, and perceived that they were ea-votesmade by the pious (I doubt that word)devotees of the rod in commemoration of theirtriumphs over divers jacks, (a jack is a pikebefore he comes to years of discretion,) chubs,tenches, and perches ; and at the bottom of eachmarvel of art and nature was neatly inscribed inaprinting hand, after the date, first the admeasurementof the fish and his weight, next aminute description of the bait, float, hook, rod,and line instrumental in the exploit, and lastly,in characters of gold, the name of the too happyand thus immortalized victor.Among the lares of the place, and doubtlessworshipped as such, (at least, they ought to havebeen by the host,) I observed — strange I shouldnot have done so at first — a gilt frame (theothers were black) suspended over the chimney-piece,inclosing a silver-leaf paper in the shapeof that malacostomous, bull-headed, cow-congealing,finned animal, a chub. It was a monster{horrendum forme) of the species, and musthave weighed, from its length, if Sir H. Davy'srule is a good one, (which (jucnj? because fishes214 A CONSEQUENTIAL PERSONAGE.are not always in good season or well fed,) atleast four pounds. I was surprised to find noname, date, or history, attached to this, I haveno doubt, faithful model, and was puzzling mybrains to account for this, as I thought, invidiouse.vceptio regular, when I was struck by the suddenapparition of a consequential personage.He was about four feet and a half high, verywell set upon his pins, though on the wrong sideof sixty, and had on one of those classical wigs(his was a black one) that I am sorry to see gettingout of fashion, yclept bobs, i. e. smooth atthe top and pole of the head, and ornamentedwith two rows behind, and one in front, of curls,which the Greeks, from their size and shape andresemblance to the bells of the flower, calledhyacinthine. Tastes change — I am sorry for it —out upon 'em ! He was habited in a drab fustianjacket with very ample pockets, indescribablepantaloons to match, and Hessian boots withouttassels, that came up to the calf, — by the by, Iremember a college-friend of mine writing toHoly to make him a pair for a large calf) andsuch seemed to me the punchy little gentleman,who accosted me with, " Sir, you are lookingHIS SANCTUM Sanctum. 215at that 'ere picture, (frame, he meant; butfine frames and pictures were probably synonymouswith him) : sir, I 'm proud to say, sir, that,sir, I caught, sir, that chub, sir."I congratulate you. What a noble fish !"Yes, sir. I 've never been man enough toget such another, sir. It is the biggest fish, sir,that has been seen in the Lee ever since, sir ;and that is ten years ago, sir ! I will show youthe hook with which I hooked him, sir."With that, he opened one of the aforesaidclosets, and then unlocked a compartment in it,about five feet high. It was, I found, his sanctumsanatorium. On the shelf were lying, inthe nicest order, some portentous black pocketbooks,enclosing cases that, I found, contained,on bamboo frames, twelve lines in each, of hairand Indian hurl, alternately, like the flats andsharps of a piano, and galore of shots, fromnumber one downwards, in as many divisions ofthe sliding centre-bit ; and side by side lay floatsof all sizes, some green and red, some red andgreen, some yellow and red, and some red andyellow ; together with sundry and divers plumbingmachines, kill-devils, minnow-tackle, spring216 ANGLING IMPLEMENTS.snap-hooks, nets, and kettles for live baits,fishing-panniers, landing-nets, worm-bags, andboxes for gentles and other uses.He thought he had now produced the desiredeffect, and said — " Now, sir, I will show you,sir, the hook, sir." He opened a shagreen-casedsnap-box, and produced the trophy with the airof a hero, and that self-consciousness of superioritythat deeds of fame and glory justify. Iwas astonished to see no rods among his implementsof slaughter, but had observed somesticks, of three feet long, standing erect, each inits receptacle, arranged in gradation like thetubes of a Pan-pipe, and, by way of climax, atthe extreme end, a portable stool, of the samematerial of which they were composed : —These, sir," said he, " I find the best rods, sir ;they are all of bamboo, sir, and the joints slideinto one another, sir ; and when I am tired withmy day's sport, sir — for I never misses walkingdown, sir, to the Lee, sir, for the Sunday, sir, —I always takes one for a stick, sir."As he was speaking, several persons, armedwith rods of a similar description to that of thelittle old gentleman, bustled in, and showed bytheir deference how much they appreciated theTHE INN ORDINARY. 217high " eminence" to which "merit" had raisedhim ; and in a short time the house swarmedwith fishers. He seemed perfectly known tothem all ; and in fact, it was easy to see that hewas the Apollo, the arbiter quorum, the oracleof the temple.The ordinary was now served, and the chairtaken, of course, by the little Unknown. Assoon as the cloth was removed, one of the clubproposed the health of Mr. Longjaw, our host,(on his right) and his bull ! This was drunk inthree-times-three ! On which the owner, for himselfand bull, got upon his legs, and said — *' Gentlemen,I humbly thank you for drinking myhealth, gentlemen, but more so for drinking thehealth of that 'ere bull !" Thundering applausefollowed; when my next neighbour, talking ofthe fine animal, shouted across the table —Bill, I have been to see the calves ! and whatdo you think Longjaw feeds 'em on ? Chalk !"" La ! Dick !" replied the other, " don't youknow that that 's vat makes weal vite ?"The conversation, soon les regis, now turnedupon angling, and was confined to the weather,which naturally elicited the novel quotation of" When the wind 's in the south," cS:c. the218 COCKNEY ANGLERS.proper depth, and bait for the season, and otherequally interesting topics ; and each of theparty, as he eyed the mural ensigns, gloated onthe idea that he would the next day rival, orsurpass his bygone brethren of the rod, and havehis name, like theirs, chronicled in gold.I soon retired ; and the next morning wasdisturbed long before cock-neigh,* and startedfor London at an early hour. On coming to theLee (most like a canal, or the New River) Ibeheld it literally lined with fishers, as it wasin the times of an old cockney poet fisherman,who says —And mark the anglers, how they march in rank,And all the river's sides along they flank !"Some were seated on the banks, with their legsdangling over them ; some were lying at fulllength, with their instruments (not) of destructionby their sides, watching the float ; somestanding, and all with baskets strapped overtheir shoulders ; one loaded with provisionsenough for a week, and the other large enoughfor provisions for the next; whilst others, in aIt has been suggested to me by a learned friend, thatthe land of Cocaine" is derived from Aristophanes'sKvKoyia, or yaia, land of cuckoos. -E.A FALL IN THE RIVER. 219group, were collected about " the Complete Angler,"who, like the genius of the place, seatedon his tripod, was giving out his prophecies,like the Pythoness of old. Just as I was passing,a poodle-dog, who had, contrary to all "jus etnorma," been hied into the water to pick upan orange, mistook for it the old chub-catcher'sfloat, and, in bringing it to land, by a suddenjerk, hooked its owner off his perch into theriver. Then arose a tremendous hubbub, for,in addition to the barking of the poodle, andthe screams of the young Isaacs for help, wereheard the responses of the men of the HumaneSociety, who, brass-plated and glazed-hatted,came hurrying, with their apparatus for resuscitation,to the spot ! But of drowning there wasno fear, for the depth was not much above hisknees, though it was at the imminent risk ofhis catching his death-scold, that he was fishedby his disciples out of the mud ! I stood uponthe seat for some time, looking at this grotesquescene, worthy of the pencil of Cruikshank or thefair authoress of the " Comic Offering," andlaughing till my sides ached.Well ! this is Sunday, and there is a churchon the opposite side of the pool. But the A WELSH INCUMBENT.vice is in Welsh, and I shall not form one ofthe congregation, if two or three gathered togethermake one. A few years ago they spat onthe floor at the name of the devil, and, at thatof Judas, struck their heads in concert — customsthat reminded me of the Swiss places of worshipat the present day, when the officiating * Cure 'at every pause in his * sermon' gives a signal tohis parishioners to blow their noses, and a trumpetingruns through the aisles of the church.The incumbent of this is literally passing richon forty pounds a year, for he has, on that slenderstipend, contrived to bring up a large family,but not to increase his flock, gradually dwindleddown to about as many sheep as he has pounds.After his duty was over, I had no difficulty inmaking him out at our host's, for he was easilyknown by a three-cornered hat, and his greythreadbare coat of true home manufacture.He was smoking his pipe to a pot of cwrwin the ingle-nook of the kitchen. After he wasgone, the Welsh stranger told us that the presentbishop, when he came to the see, made thepraiseworthy resolution of distributing the prefermentamong the native ministers, and that,having heard of two brothers, whose curaciesTHE CONGREGATION. 221did not exceed thirty pounds each, he inductedthem the same day into livings of nearly a hundreda-year.There are few such in his diocese. Theywere, it appears, well qualified to have contestedthe houghmagandie, or the whistle, with Burns,or his heroes, Craig Darroch, or Glendale ; foron the joyous occasion of their taking possessionof their incumbents, being noted 'turners,'they met at the Goat and Tun, to finish abarrel of cwrw, and when the feat was performed,being anti-carthusian, and not approvingof Miss Martineau's Preventive Check,married the next morning, one the daughter ofthe publican, a strapping, six feet, red-faced,and red-headed amazon, the counterpart of ourhost's, who performed, like her, the triple officeof chambermaid, cook, and scullion ; and theother that of the clerk, who had distinguishedhimself among the out-and-outers of the aleparty. Amen, said I, to the nuptials. Butthese instances are rare, for more exemplarycharacters than the generality of the Welshclergy are not to be found, or who are morefree from the aw^i sacra fames, a motto notinapplicable to the dissenting hypocrites in this222 A MEETING-IIOUSE.country, who extort from the pockets of the deludedpeasantry, what should go to relieve thewants of their ill-provided families.Charters has been prowling about Pont yGarth. Having arrived at a petrie, (village) tothe southward of it, to his surprise he found itdeserted. The alehouse which he entered toget a pot of cwrw, had neither customers norhost, and all appeared as if some sudden calamityhad befallen the romantic spot. Scarcelyhad he passed the threshold, when a bellowingof monstrous portent struck his ear. Curious toknow the cause he issued forth, and led by theprotracted screams, found they proceeded froma stable that had been turned into Tyrwrdd, ormeeting-house. Here had congregated the villagers,and a stentorian orator, with his headwrapped, like a turban, in handkerchiefs of allcolours, the trophies of the sweat of his brain, ormany a hard day's labour of a similar kind, everand anon he wiped his melting face, and roaredand roared again, whilst to each ebullition of themother, the audience returned a simultaneousconcert of groans. The only words Charterscould distinctly make out were ' That Ager,Moab Ager, Ussfrid-dda,' Father, Son, and HolyA publican's piety. 223Ghost, and Gorgonia, the Welsh Hallelujah.Nor were there wanting dishevelled locks, ortattered caps, yet still the women wept, and toretheir hair, and the men seized on their faceswith their hands, and struck their heads, asthough a fire was in their brains, that rackedthem to frenzy ; in fact, Irving's ladies of theunknown tongues, the Troopers at the love-meetingsin America, or the new Incarnationistsof Johanna Southcote, could not have appearedmore ridiculous than these ranters.He had not been a spectator of this extraordinaryexhibition long, when a man, who seemedto be foremost in the impassioned responses,turning round, eyed him, and in an instant allhis enthusiasm had evaporated ; he smelt a customer,and immediately leaving the crowd thatcontinued to rave in discordant unison, in decentand composed English, such as a positive humancreature — yes, a simple, downright, human beingwith common intellect and common sense wouldhave used, civilly asked if he wanted anythingat the Sun. Charters having answered in theaffirmative, our host, without manifesting inhis deportment any hesitation or compunctiousvisiting of conscience in at once abandoning his224 HYPOCRISY.devotions, with the alacrity common to his tribe,led the way to his house, which was indeed theinn; and applied himself with all composure torelieve the traveller's thirst.The fellow had a cunning eye, which encouragedCharters's inquiries, and he could notrefrain from asking him the cause of all thishubbub. Our host was safe from listeners, forno other person in the place understood a wordthey were saying, and in his own homely way,I do not quote his words, replied, *' This is amonthly meeting of the Pregethwr,' (preachers.)They have been employed in praying and singingsince six this morning. For my part I donot much admire them, for it takes up time andhinders business, but I must ingenuously confessthat I get much by it, for after the exertions ofthe day are over, their throats become dry, andthe appeals to my ale-barrel are strenuous andrepeated. I must admit, that my making one ofthe congregation, and indeed my being conspicuousin it, is indispensable to my success as apublican, for, were I lukewarm in my zeal, Ishould find such enemies in the preachers, thatI might bung up my spigot." The same influence,he added, he doubted not moved theWELSH PEASANTRY. 225shopkeepers in this, and most other villages, whofound their trade increase as they became adeptsin these mummers.Poor human nature !" said Charters ; " willmen never cease to assume the garb of religionto cover interested views ? When will the stateof society be such, that every one will follow thedictates of his own conscience, and worship hisMaker free from the slavish influences of hoodwinkedpriestcraft, or the detractive eye of sectarianmalevolence ?" And with this observationhe left him.A few words as to these infatuated creatures,and the peasantry in general. In personal appearancethe inhabitants of this secluded part ofWales are a robust (though not short) healthy-looking,hardy, primitive, simple, and harmlesspeople ; in their manners and address very awkwardand shy, particularly the men ; with atrue Milesian disregard of cleanliness in personand dress, and fortunately with an equal indifferenceto the quality of their food, or what ourlabourers call comfort in their abodes. Theycan mostly read their Bibles, the only books theyare acquainted with, and which they are taughtto believe the only ones worth reading. TheirVOL. I. Q226 THEIR Overreached SPIRIT.knowledge of English is extremely limited, andvery many know only those politely-affirmativephrases of " eze indeed," and " aye sure."A friend of mine used to say that a braveSuisse was the greatest rogue in Christendom. Ido not mean to say that it applies to the ancientBritons, though (like the Swiss, with all theirbravery towards their own compatriots) they arenot over-scrupulous in trying to overreach travellers.As a proof of this. Charters having occasionto send a man to Aberystwith, for hisletters and newspapers, a never-to-be-omittedprecaution, and great resource in a Welsh tour,for some time paid twelve shillings per trip.Verbum sapientia — sat hodie.JULIAN'S FONDNESS FOR SMOKING. 227Fourteenth day.Julian's fondness for smoking. — Anecdote of Maturin. —Swallows. — Their habits. — Sir Humphrey Davy's Remarkson those Birds. — Flying Fish. — Atmospheric Evaporation.— Fishing in Boats. — New Arrivals. — Angling inIreland and Switzerland. — Piscatory Character of theLake of Geneva. — Byron's Opinion of Angling. — Waltonand Sir Humphrey Davy. — Colour of Rivers. — GenevaFlies and Rods. — Rhone, Trout. — Cretins. — Goitres. —Azote. — Bridge of St. Maurice on the Rhone. — Anglingin that River. — Bains de Louche. — Pass of the Gemmi. —The Aar. — Lago di Guard. — Enchanting View. — SwissScenery — Traditions.Tal-y-L3ai, Monday, 12th.Julian was particularly gloomy yesterday,and continues so this morning. He will smokehimself into a mummy, for he gets thinner dayby day, and will be reduced, as the Irish say,into a perfect Otomy. He keeps to his den likehis hyena, reminding me of Maturin, who, whenin the agonies of poetical digestion, typified itQ 2228 THE HABITS OF SWALLOWS.by two wafers on his forehead, a red and a blackone. The first denoted only ordinary raving ;and in a matter of life and death (but even thenwith fear and trembling, though he was very uxorious)his wife might approach him ! but whensporting the sable patch, he was a kind of Balfourof Burlie in the cave, and you might as wellhave looked at the Gorgon.Our humano major has, however, consented(though as a spectator) to bear Stanley andmyself company on the pool. Salmonius hasgot it into his head that our trout will take hisbait. He little knows them.Well, friend, we shall have another wet day ;the surface of the lake is covered with swallows.What insatiable creatures they are, and howwell does Juvenal's * Ore volet plena mater jejuna'express their voracity. They almost dipthemselves as they fly, so closely do they skimthe pool."An invariable sign of rain. I perceive theyare all of the sand species."I am half inclined to think that these birds,as well as swifts, often remain with us all theTHE HABITS OF SWALLOWS. 229winter (if, indeed, the latter migrate at all),congregating like bats (as I remember, when aboy, on thrusting my hand and arm into ahollow tree) in some inaccessible holes, in banks,churches, or old buildings, as neither of thesespecies are ever met with during their passage.A sand-swallow, some years ago, in Sussex, onthe first of January, whilst I was shooting, flewabout me, and seemed actively employed in thesearch of flies. It was as warm as April. Thatthey can live long without food is evident, forthis bird of which I speak must have lain in adormant state many months."I remember being on the Newfoundlandbank, about the latter end of March, when animmense flight of swallows from the WesternIslands took refuge, in a strong gale of wind, onthe shrouds and yards of our vessel. The seawas half covered with weed and pink flowers,carried out of the Gulf of Florida, remindingme of aeschylus's * Egan as with flowery weeds,'&c. The weather was remarkably cold andunseasonable, which we ourselves felt the more,from having rapidly left a warm latitude. Oneof my cabin-windows (for I had half the roundhouse)was open, and hundreds took refuge230 SIR H. DAVY ON SWALLOWS.there; but, having once settled, they becametorpid, and never flew again."** But how do you account, as you said, forswallows flying low being a sign of rain ?"Sir Humphrey Davy in his ' Salmoniaia'thus reasons, for this, doubtless, seemed clearto that great chemist, though I must confessthat I don't understand him : — * Swallows followthe gnats and flies, and gnats and flies delightin warm strata of air, and, as warm air islighter, and usually moister than cold air, whenthe warm strata are high, there is less chanceof moisture being thrown down from them bythe admixture with cold air ; but when the warmand moist air is close to the surface, it is almostcertain that the cold air flows down into it,and a deposition of water will take place'"What an analogical and ill-balanced sentence! He had not been studying the style ofThucydides. What wonderful instincts theseflies have ! and how philosophically they reason!"The seriousness of man, as I heard anIrishman say, bangs the world, barring thebees (though they do make hexagons as perfectas a mathematician could, and though hexagonsare the only figures in which no space is lost)"FLYING FISH. 231More credit is given to the bees than theydeserve; all circles of a similar matter, whensubject to equilateral pressure, form themselvesby necessity into hexagons. But Paddy shouldhave said gnats and flies, which latter, I shouldconceive, are the objects of the swallows' search,and that it is owing to the weight and moistureof the air, that the former bon gre mal gre aredriven down, when they become the prey of theirrelentless pursuers from above and below."The most unfortunate of all the createdtribes of earth or air are the flying fish ; pursuedby their myriad enemies, the bonitos and albacores,which throng the tropical seas and makethem at night one phosphoric flash, they riseonly to be attacked by multitudes of gulls, whichdrive them back only to rise again."The unnatural distinctness of the cattle inthe distance, shows, too, that the atmosphere issubject to a rapid evaporation, a never-failingsign of rain."I frequently observed this in Switzerland,particularly in going from Interlaken to Latteror the Vale of Waterfalls. So rapid,indeed, was the evaporation that several of thesesmall cascades were taken up before they reached232 FISHING IN BOATS.the bottom of the tremendous mountains fromwhich they tumbled. For the three succeedingdays we had hardly a moment's intermissionfrom rain, no uncommon, though no very agreeablecircumstance amid the high Alps."On our return I should like," said Charters,to make some propitiatory offering to thedeity of the sea, who seems as unmitigated inhis wrath as he was in the time of Horace, for Iam likely (though I recollect he escaped) to meetwith a double wreck."Wrapped in my long cloak to my heels, thatdefied him, I sate at the head of the boat, whilstthe trout rose momently at my flies, and cameto net. Charters was sobbing out his patentbait, but did not get a single run — a remarkapplicable to the other boat, where a newarrival from the other inn was trolling with aminnow, with no better success. Salmonius,wet to the skin after our first drift down thelake, and Julian in nearly the same plight,jumped on shore, and made the best of theirway to Pennibont, to hang up their VestmentsMaj'is Neo.Forty fish were the produce of this day'ssport.IRELAND AND SWITZERLAND. 233We met in the evening at dinner several newanglers.One was just arrived from the Lakes of Killarney,where he had had splendid salmon fishing.Another, from those of Cape Kerig, littleinferior to this, and last from the Bala lake,which, he says, is only good for pike. A thirdfrom Built, where he has been passing all theseason on the Wye (of which, and its tributarystreams, in the months of March and April, hespoke highly) ; and a fourth, in a disappointedmood from Switzerland.This latter was complaining much of the sportthere, and we asked him for some account of it.I knew every inch of the country, but told himI had been too wise to load myself with theimpediments of rods, and their et-waters.Yes," said he, ** you were wise. I took thetrouble of carrying tackle during a long tour,and though pertinaciously enthusiastic, nevermet with a single decent day. The streams areeither too thick, from their vicinity to the glaciers,or too pellucid when they debauch fromthe lakes. In fact I lost my labour."234 PISCATORY CHARACTER OFI have heard the fishing at Geneva muchvaunted."Lac Leman is not poissonneux.* It con-theLake of Geneva produces a fish peculiar to itswaters, and much prized at the tables of their rich, calledthe * ombre Chevalier or large grayling, that sometimesweighs twelve or fourteen pounds. There is also anotherspecies, which I believe exists nowhere else, a very ugly-finnedanimal, without scales, much resembling the miller'sthumb, or bull-head. It bears the name of Lost, and growsto several pounds weight. They catch them in baskets, likeour eel-traps, which they sink near the rocks, or under thewalls of the Campaign. But the principal fishery of theplace consists of a coarse fish, called Vaugeron, or * ferra,'(erroneously, I think, confounded by Sir Humphrey Davy,with the ' shilling,' or fresh-water herring.) It seems to meavariety of the mullet, or rather a roach. They are takenexclusively in nets, from twenty to thirty miles distantfrom the town, in the deepest part of the lake. I neverheard of either the Lost, or Vaugeron, taking any bait, thelatter certainly confining its food exclusively to vegetableproductions. They never exceed two or three pounds, andare in undeserved esteem among the natives. But the mostdelicate fish I ever ate is the Genevese trout, which are oftento be seen in Paris, at the ' Gourmand,' in the Palais Royal.In the Rhone are found very large grayling ; I have oftenobserved them at the bottom, in some still spot, congregatedtogether, but they refused all my lures. It is true, I haveseen small ones taken with the fly in the rapids ; but noneare ever found in the Lake, or in the Are, where the glacieredwater is too cold for them.THE LAKE OF GENEVA. 235pains pike of a vast size, but they are very rare.I have had a hundred trimmers floating downthe wind for hours, and never got a run. PerchThe last time I was at Geneva, I saw the townspeoplepoaching in the town ditch, with machinery new to me. —They make use of a line, well leaded, to which they attachseveral large crossed hooks, and draw them across the bottom,where there are pike ; and so dexterous are they withthis killing contrivance, that they seldom miss their aim.The fosse has a communication with the lake, and in themonth of March and April the pike congregate here ; but atthis season will take no bait, probably owing to a disease inthe mouth, as observed by a late traveller in Sweden, and towhich circumstance he attributes the non-extinction of allthe species offish in waters where they abound.I met the other day with a curious old book. Bishop Burnet'sLetters, in which speaking of the Lake of Geneva hesays, " The Lake is well stocked with excellent fish, but theirnumbers do sensibly decrease, and (me is quite lost ; it is notonly to be ascribed to the ravenousness of the pikes, but toanother sort of fish they call mountains, which were nevertaken in the lake till within these six years (1686) last past.They are in the Lake of Newcastle, and some of the otherlakes in Switzerland, and it is likely that by some conveyanceunder-ground they may have come into channels thatfall into the lake. The water of the lake is all clear andfresh. It is believed also that there are many great fountainsall over the lake. These springs do very probably flowfrom som<5 vast craters that are in the neighbouring mountains,which are as great cisterns, that discharge themselvesin the valleys, which are covered over with lakes." — Ed.236 BYRON'S OPINION OF ANGLING.I have caught near the town in considerablenumbers, from a boat. They let down a quantityof lines baited with worms, and this theycall * La Peche.' The most provoking river Iever threw fly into, is the Rhone. Byron saysit is so clear that the smallest pebble is visibleat all seasons in the deepest part, for rain neveraffects it."Speaking of Byron, what did he mean byabusing angling, and Walton, in his Don Juan,and calling him a quaint old coxcomb ?"He was always straining at some paradox tostartle with. I believe he never threw a fly inhis life, or, except at Bedstead, in some dullpond, ever wetted line, or used any other baitthan a worm, the recollection of which mightwell disgust him. Walton is too culinary, andwho can bear the idea of skinning frogs, orimpaling live baits ? I am surprised at SirHumphrey Davy's dilating with so much complacencyon the barbarous and detestable customof crimping; for myself, the pleasure ofcatching suffices. I am no frying-pan or potsportsman."But you were speaking ofThe blue rushing of the arrowy Rhone.'GENEVA FLIES, AND RODS. 237What can account for the colour of rivers ?for instance, the Tiber being gamboge ; the Po,a fainter yellow ; the Rhine, greenish ; the Wye,silvery ; the Dee, tan ; and most of the Welshlakes nearly black."The accidents of banks and sky in someinstances, in others the beds over which theyflow, and the foreign impregnation the waterreceives during its course."But those cannot be the sole causes, for theJumna and Ganges flow almost in a parallelline ; both take their rise in the snow, and thoughthey run through nearly a similar soil, the oneis always thick, and the other pure as crystal,and, at their junction at Allahabad, the latterfor some distance is traceable, as if she seemedunwilling to unite with her troubled sister."This is more observable still in the BalaLake, for it has still a greater antipathy to theDee, that runs unmixed through it in a streak ofinky blackness."Thus at the meeting of the Are and Rhone,about a mile below Geneva. I had a pocketbookof fine London-made flies of all colours ;but the trout would not look at them, and Isoon adopted one in use, threw a very small238 RHONE TROUT.grey gnat, but I never took a fish of more thanapound. It is said, that a fisherman with oneof these minute flies (I was not present anddoubt the story) killed a trout of upwards offorty pounds, but such an occurrence had nothappened for twenty years, and may never happenagain. The rods they use are very longand pliable, and of hazel, all lashed together inthe rudest way, without winch or reel, and theyfasten at the top a knot-line, as thick as one'slittle finger at one end, and tapering to a hair atthe other. I tried to wield this machinery, butcould make no hand at it. It requires greatpractice to throw as they do, fifty or sixty yards.I was determined not to be outdone, and resortedto trolling, with a small perch out of the lake,the next day, and succeeded, after six hourswading up to my middle, in bringing home afish of upwards of as many pounds, — a glorioustrout, but dearly bought, for I had to pay a fineof five francs to the gardes de chasse, who areappointed to prevent any other mode of anglingbut the fly."*' A six-pound trout is a mere minnow towhat the Rhone generates."True, they arrive at sixty or seventy, thoughRHONE TROUT. 239I have never seen them so large ; but a forty-poundtrout is not an uncommon one. Much ofthe revenue of the city is derived from thisfishery : the trout are stopped in their way intothe lake by hoop-nets, and confined in floatingstews sunk off the town till their sale in thepublic market. All the fish, I believe, come upthe Rhone, and not down it, for their weirs arean effectual barrier to their progress, and I neverheard, though such an accident may occur, of atrout being taken in the Lake : this I did notknow when I tried the Rhone above it."What success had you ?"It is white, and the flies invisible to trouteven if there are any, which I doubt. The Va-raisinscertainly never fish either with nets or inany other way."But the Valaisans are hardly removed frombrutes."I have heard of their Cretins," observedJulian, " though I never saw them."Their Cretins ! then you have been spareda hideous spectacle. The Cretin is hardly ahuman being. He can scarce pronounce articulatesounds; his features are inexpressive ofintellect : he loves to bask in the sun and grope240 GOITRES.in the mire. He is incapable of any labour, andlives upon the charitable contributions of travellers,whom he importunes with a clamorouschattering like that of a baboon. They have allimmense heads and more immense goitres, thatsometimes hang half-way down the chest."The word I understand from the recollectionof Juvenal'sQuis tumid gutter miratur in Alpheus?'and Shakspeare'sDew-lapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at themWallets of flesh'"Well described."But what is supposed to occasion them ?"*' There are many opinions on the subject, forthe Swiss doctors are as far from agreeing as tothe cause, as the Italian ones on that of malaria.Now the Valais is shut in between two walls ofmountains, and through it runs the Rhone, thatis allowed by the superstitious and degraded inhabitantsto overflow its banks at will : hence,not only the loss of much good land, but the returninginundations leave swamps that breathecontagion and pestilence."Goitres are known even in this part of theAZOTE. 241country, nor are the Valaisans the only Swissthat have goitres."No ; the Genevese fair ones are very subjectto them ; and even our countrywomen generallypay for a long residence in that detestableclimate of fogs and * rises,' by this unsightlyaddition to their throats."Is anything positively known by their wiseacredoctors about the cause of goitres ?"The most probable one is, calx in the water.But, on what subject can medical men arriveat any certainty ? Chemistry has made somestrides lately, but it must be considered in itsinfancy still, when we cannot discover, in analysingthe food of animals, the principal substancethat has been supposed to colour theblood, azote. It is certainly found in watercresses,cabbage, and some few other esculentplants, but none is discoverable in the grasses,nor any in the food of fishes."True, fish live in an element wholly destituteof azote or nitrogen, excepting what is adventitious.Water is composed of equal parts ofoxygen and hydrogen : they live only by theseparation of one from the other. But inhabiting,as they do, an element so different from ours,VOL. I. R242 BRIDGE OF ST. MAURICE.all we know about them must be little more thanconjecture. As to azote, it is merely a negative,and has nothing to do with the colouring of theblood, as Sir Humphrey Davy, and others, oncethought ; this, according to Lane and others, isderived from the oxygen of the atmosphere combiningwith the proto-oxide of iron. Sir HumphreyDavy has supposed, indeed, that azote is acompound of oxygen and hydrogen ; but on whatproofs I know not, for he was unable to decomposeit, even with the aid of his powerful voltaicbattery. The supposition therefore is, that itis a simple gas."But to return to the Rhone."I was saying, I had tried the Rhone abovethe lake. I passed three hours below the bridgeof St. Maurice, whilst my travelling companionsketched. The bridge consists of a single arch,of more than two hundred feet span, supposedto be the work of the Romans. It is a remarkableone. Its abutments rest on the Swiss andSavoy Alps ; the Dent de Mede towering abovethe town and castle in threatening grandeur.The river was swollen beyond its usual size bythe melting of the snows, for it was July, andrushed, troubled, and with great impetuosity.BAINS DE LOUCHE. 243through the chasm, as if indignant at being confined,carrying down with it vast quantities offir timber, that enabled us to judge of therapidity of the current."Not the best place in the world for fishing,certainly ; and what might you take ?"Nothing."Perhaps the glacier water is too hard ?"No ; I have seen very large red trout takenin nets at Grendelwald, not a mile from theglaciers, themselves finer than the boasted MerdeGlace at Chamouny, that forms the Environ."Did you try any other of the rivers ?"Several. I passed two days at the Bainsde Louche, that almost unvisited retreat, at thefoot of the Gemmi, and there threw a fly intothe Lonza, an inconsiderable stream, descendingimmediately from the glacier that overhangsand yearly threatens to overwhelm the spa, asit has done more than once. But the trout,though numerous, were small, and the banksmuch covered with wood. We laboured a wholeday for a dozen. I crossed the next day theGemmi. It separates the canton of Valaisfrom the Oberland Bernois. Nothing can bemore dreary than this pass to Swarrenbach,R 2244 PASS TO SWARRENBACH.zigzagged as it was by the Tyrolese workmenthrough the perpendicular rock.* It is awful —so awful that a Frenchman, whose head was notthe strongest, turned back the day before, andhad not nerve to cross it. The top presentsnothing but barren and desolate harmless rocks,such as Prometheus describes, and a pool frozenat all seasons. It had several inches of ice onit, for the frost had been severe in the night,though the heat was (we afterwards heard) suffocating,as we had found it at Sion. But it wasa cheering contrast, when we came in sight ofthe Wander, and followed its banks, coveredwith rhododendrons, then in full bloom, downto the valley that bears its name. We passeda day at Kandersteg, but could not get a rise."Had you better luck at Thun ?"Werner has laid at Swarrenbach the scene of his domestictragedy entitled " The Twenty-eighth of January." Thestory is founded in fact ; the murder of a son, who returnsincognito, after a long interval of years, to his home, by hisfather, ignorant of such relationship, and instigated bycupidity at the sight of the stranger's wealth. It is onlyamid the glaciers and avalanches of the Gemmi, where suchan attentat could be probable ; and the mind must throwitself back on these frightful solitudes, in order to considerit a reality. — E.ENCHANTING VIEW. 245Never was there a finer-looking stream thanthe Aar. It issues from the lake in two rapids,of a deep transparent blue, deeper than any Iremember, except the Lago di Guard. Butneither the river nor the lake gave us a fish ofany size. This my companion did not regret,for he consoled himself with the enchantingpanorama from the castle."I remember it well. To the east, the sidesof hills, covered with vines and country houses ;above tower Alp above Alp, the imposing summitsof Risen, and Stockholm, their glacierheights contrasting with the sombre verdure ofthe midway forests of pines ; whilst to the west,the eye reposes on the Jura, and between looksover a vast and fertile plain, abounding withcattle and interspersed with fruit-trees."Your eye has a vision more clear and distinctthan mine. Fancy us wandering along thebanks of this lovely lake, glassy as a mirror, inacalm evening in July."Fishing would have been a profanation ofsuch a scene."** From thence we boated it to Interlaken.No spot on earth is more delicious than thevalley of Bodeli ; the Aar flows through it too246 SWISS SCENERY.gently for the fly, and is too translucent. Thereis, however, a waterfall at Unterseen — a mostromantic sketch it made! and here, after twodays' thrashing, I did succeed in taking threetrout, but neither of them of any size. I heregave up the pursuit in despair, and left mytackle behind, when I crossed the little Shedding."You vaunt the Swiss scenery, and our travellerspost over the Continent in troops to thatcountry, whilst they leave unvisited, and areignorant of, the beauties of Wales. I adviseyou to ascend Cader Idris, and I defy the Reggiosurpass it in miniature. Can any spot onearth vie with this lake ? I cannot certainlysay so much for the Begalen pool."*' Thus the Swiss lakes differ from each other.Lac Leman is a sunny scene ; that of the Waldoowes its charm to its sacred solitude anddeep seclusion : it was the next lake we visited.Its banks are classic ground ; we seemed tobreathe there the air of liberty. We had pointedout to us the spot where Esher embarked in thestorm, forcing Tell to become his pilot; therehe landed, and from the rock where the chapelnow stands winged the arrow into the tyrant'sheart."TRADITIONS. 247The story savours somewhat of the marvellous,and is about as true as the exploits ofMunchausen, Obi, or three-fingered Jack."If it be a romance, it ought not to be, asthe polite Frenchman said of Dr. Moore's Anglicism; it is entwined with the best sympathieswe imbibe from our childhood, which, as byNibbi's scepticism that throws doubt on all theantiquities of Rome, we do not like to haveargued away by cold critics or chronologers, norto have treated as a popular fable a story sodramatic and spirit-stirring."The Swedes have a similar tradition in allits parts : which is the original I do not pretendto say, but, like two fine pictures, there cannotbe two originals. It is supposed to have beenintroduced by a Swedish colony who settled atMeyringen, and whose descendants still betraytheir unmixed origin."» « « «But the night was far spent, and after ScottI concluded with the valediction to Marion,*' To each and all a fair good night.And rosy dreams and slumbers light !"248 COLLOQUY WITH A CIGAR.FIFTEENTH DAY.Colloquy with a Cigar. — Anecdote of Glover the Painter. —His knowledge of the language of Birds. — New Flies. —Success produced by them. — A Decoy. — Charters andhis chaste Mistress. — Julian's sporting Reminiscences ofIndia. — Juggernaut. — Infatuated Pilgrims. — Self-immolation.— Dangerous bathing. — A barren Scene. — A Herdof Antelopes chased. — Cheetahs. — Lion-hunt.— Tiger-shooting.— A Lion's lair. — Lamentation on leaving India.Tal y Llyn, Tuesday 13th.Is this a cigar (as a dear, good, deaf, old,tobacco-loving gentleman, who has never heardthe sound of the melodious word, pronounces it)that I see before me — the small end towardsme ? — Come, let me clutch thee !"But softly," whispers the cigar — a real savannah,not one of your town-made pretenders —"softly!"Softly ! lightest thou not have known instinctivelythat I would not for all the worldCOLLOQUY WITH A CIGAR. 249handle thee too roughly ? that I would take theebetween my thumb and forefinger, and touchthee as tenderly as I would the stem of a delicateflower ?"Thou dost so, and I thank thee. But thereare some who do wound us barbarously, shortenthe brief span of our being, making it only a fewvolcanic exhalations, who cruelly wound us withtheir teeth, and bite off our stalks, and pinch usbetween their lips, as though they were afraidof our touch — as if there was poison in it, andwhen we are not half extinct throw us contemptuouslyaway. Thou wilt not be one ofthese rThou doest me wrong by thy suspicions :see, I half hide thee in my mouth, and shallkeep thee there till thy life is spent ; then willI sigh over thine ashes as a Hindu over thefuneral pyre of his mistress."Nonsense!" exclaims the barrister, as withallhis fingers he took up half an ounce of snufF(he has taken a canister since we came out) andapplied it to his olfactory organ — "nonsense!hold a colloquy with a cigar ! What absurdityis this!"250 ANECDOTE OF GLOVER, THE PAINTER.And why not ? did not Rousseau confabulatewith the birds? Would Glover* have found aless musical language in any of his favouritesGlover, the celebrated landscape-painter, who has withdrawnhimself to a new world, having exhausted the old, carried,perhaps, his knowledge of birds beyond that of anyman who ever lived. It was his custom, in the summer-season,to visit the most romantic parts of England and Wales, andthere to pitch his tent and draw and colour from nature.He chose for his retirement the vicinity of some unfrequentedvillage, and, being very abstemious in his diet, contentedhimself with the humble fare that the nearest ale-house afforded.His sole companions in these excursions were birds,with whom he held colloquy, professing perfectly to understandtheir language and to have made them conversantwith his own. Pigeons were his favourites, as being mostintelligent: of the latter species, he had one who wouldsit on his shoulder while he was at work, and who, whenevening came, was wont, at a given signal, to fly home andawait his master's return. One day the artist made a circuitousroute, and being interested with sketching somenewly discovered scene, or catching some extraordinaryeffect of light, forgot the hour, when he was surprised atseeing the little creature soaring above his head, and atlength alighting on his accustomed perch. When seatedthere, it expressed, by the querulous tones of its voice andthe sharpness of its beak, its displeasure, which Glover wasfor a while puzzled to divine the occasion of. He soon,however, threw him up in the air, and pointed towards theencampment ; but his attached friend resumed his old post,and would not be driven away, nor would ever afterwardsLANGUAGE OF BIRDS. 251than in this dear charmer, whose last remainsof existence I will soothe by the tribute of mypraise ?be induced to lose sight of him, being afraid, as the paintersaid, that it was his intention to give him the slip. Starlings,he used to say, were possessed of great genius; andbeing asked which of the feathered tribes were the least so,after a pause, he replied, sparrows — not that they wantedtalent, but that they were vulgar fellows.He had made the habits of birds so much his study, thatwhen a lark was hovering over a field, he could tell whetherthe songster had eggs, a callow brood, or if the young werefull-fledged ; in fact, Jean Jaques was a mere ignoramuscompared with him. It is a pity he did not leave us, beforehe went to the New World, a complete grammar and dictionaryof the particular language of each species, and anexact prosody for rightly comprehending the intonation ofthe words. Thus, perhaps, he was convinced that nightingalesor thrushes (the finest songsters, by the by, of thetwo) do not sing for the pleasure of singing, but of conversingwith one another and conjugating the verb " love."A French abbe gives the following dialogue between twomagpies, which our bird-linguist is as likely to have rightlyinterpreted as Chanipollion has done the hieroglyphics : —II n'y a rien plus ici a manger. Allons ailleurs.Oii allez vous, ma raie ?"Je men vais."Suivez moi. Venez vite, accoutred. Voici des bonneschoses."Ou eyes vous ?"'' Me voici."252 COLLOQUY WITH A CIGAR.Yes, pretty chuck ! chuck !" I continued,addressing myself to the imprisoned spirit, andceasing for a moment to suck her soul out.Thou piccianina ! thou darling ! thou tempter !in whom is no coquetry, in whose breath of balmno falsehood or deceit, whether thou chooses toembody * thy naked beauties * in the vesture ofthe golden Dos Amigos, the gathered Sylva,or the sober-stole Woodville, or disdained notthe sable livery of Cuba ! Thou friend to himwho has no friend beside, to whom I communicatewithout disguise the inmost secrets of mybreast, who makes it not solitude to be alone,but rather peoples it with all sweet fancies anddelightful reveries !Thou comforter ! thou best of anodynes ! whoVous manger tout. Je vous battrai."'* Ahi ! ahi I vous me faites mal I"Qui est-ce qui arrive la."J'ai peur."Gare I gare 1 Alarme, alarme I Canons nous !"Saxons nous."Montaigne says, " Comment ne parlement elles contreelles ? Elles parlent bien a nous, et nous a elles."Ed.But by pure lovers more admired by farIn naked beauties — give me a cigar. — Byron.NEW FLIES. 253soothes to rest my troubles and inquietude,and makes them vanish into thin air like thyself— who warmest me in winter, and now, asI am seated after breakfast, enveloped in thepalm-leaves of my dressing gown, with my legson the table, dissolved in thine own aroma, floatingin clouds as fragrant as incense from analtar, throws a delicious perfume around me, ahalo over my mind — I love thee !"In the midst of this eulogium and ardent declarationof my passion entered Julian, unshorn,and with haggard look, as though he had foundno opiate from his last night's Trichinopolies.To our questions as to his health, he said, laconically," I am well for all day." Nothing, Ifind, annoys him more than such inquiries. He,however, assumed spirits that were not naturalto him, and Roger soon came to announce thatthe boat was ready.But first I must catch the old black hen, andthen this little feather-legged bantam, that hasmade her nest, half hid by the augustines underthe window. She is certainly a cross from thegrouse, at least her plumage is exactly liketheirs. Throw the landing-net over her. Cackleaway, my lady ! It is not the first time you254 A DECOY.have been caught, and must give me some ofthose pretty neck feathers, for I saw yesterdaygnats on the water, speckled like them, with agreen body, and this I will imitate with some ofthe wool from the old carpet."I set to work, and when I had completed mytask, sallied forth to the lake. They were completelysuccessful : thirty-five trout were theproduce of this day, which I passed with one ofthe strangers.He had been trolling in the Bala lake, anddescribed a murderous process, that I, poor ignoramus,had never before heard of.His prescription was this. Procure a longglass tube, with holes for air, and one largeenough to admit minnows. Imprison half-a-dozen,and drive a plug in tight, attaching itfirst by perforation, and a knot, to a water-cord,with corks sufficient to weigh the machine, havingpreviously calculated the required depth,and let it float out from the boat twenty orthirty yards. You may then troll with a goodlively bait, with certain success, i. e. a certaintyof slaughter, for all the perch in the neighbourhoodwill be attracted to the decoy.A curse on all such contrivances !" thinks Ito myself.CHARTERS'S MISTRESS. 255Charters has not forgotten his chaste Dean,and has been Endymionizing till a late hourabout Pont y Garth. He has made a sketch ofher, and if it is like, (but lovers' eyes see with adifferent vision to those of common mortals,)she must be passing fair. The young Welshman'sstory of her being cold as the moonbeam,has not chilled him. She did not make herappearance, and he consoled himself with victimizinggalore of trouts, but none of them outof their teens of months.Since dinner I have been trying to bring outJulian, and have succeeded. He is never happy,or animated, but when his fancy turns back toIndia. One of the party had with him a repairedgreyhound, from Ireland, that remindedour 'Senator' of a coursing of quite a novelkind. And you shall have his description of it,preface and all — which is like the mile and thewai bit, in Sussex, the one twice the length ofthe other.I went with Colonel G , and a party,among which were two ladies, to pass a month256 INFATUATED PILGRIMS.at Juggernaut, the Golgotha, or Gehenna (theHindostan word for hell is Geranium) of theEast and not improperly applied, for the environsof the place of skulls are white with thebones of victims, who come to die there, thinkingthemselves sure of ' Keylas' (Paradise) ifthey can reach it, so to do. We had with us,camels, elephants, horses, palanquins, and a trainof servants and followers, that astonished myweak European mind, for I had but just arrivedin the country.We found on the beach several desertedbungalows, that had been built before the cantonmentwas removed to Cuttack, from which wehad set out, and took possession of those best inrepair, having brought all our camp equipage tofurnish them for the occasion.It was the time of a great Teerut, the Ram-latina,*and we had found the road literally avenuewith pilgrims from the remotest parts ofIndia, emaciated, half-starved creatures, such asDante describes Ugolino, or Sir Joshua Reynoldspainted him. Some were measuring their lengthin the dust ; others with their arms raised abovetheir heads, till the muscles had become rigid andSee Appendix.SELF-IMMOLATION. 257inflexible; others, their nails bedded into theirhands ; and many stark naked, reviving theaccount of the early Christian worthies in theThebaid.The ' That,' the drawing out of the carriageof the idol, took place the day after our arrival,and I was present in the great square, and seatedat the Collector's house, when the doors of theTemple were thrown open. I cannot tell youwhat was my horror to witness the torrent ofbodies, like a meeting of waters, rushing in conflictingeddies through the gates. When thetide had subsided, I saw three hundred left deadin the crush. I am telling no fiction, but a positivedamning fact ; — damning, I say, to the Company,for they had exacted a rupee from each ofthese devoted fanatics. How strange it is thatwe can weep over a moving tale, and with tearlesseyes bear spectacles so shocking to humanity!*' We passed our time in hunting all day nearthe ruins of the Black Pagoda, eating and drinkingafterwards till twelve, and then bathing bymoonlight in the surf, though we knew it to befull of sharks. But I had as narrow an escapefrom the jaws of the sea ; for, having got intoVOL. I. s258 A BARREN SCENE.that r§txv(jt>ia, I could not get back for nearlyhalf an hour, the retiring curl carrying mewhence I had set out, and it was only by divingthrough it, as it retreated, that I at last effecteda landing.I began by talking of greyhounds. W ,the collector, had just received from Englandthree or four thorough-bred ones, and invited usto a course. We mounted our horses beforesunrise, and proceeded some miles along thetri-breakers sea-shore, between which and thejungle was stretched a long tract of level yellowsand."'* It must have been a novel sight, and tomost an uninteresting one ; yet, even from sucha scene a poet can draw inspiration; for youremember what one of the greatest in these prolifictimes, in riding along the Lido at Venicewith Lord Byron, says : —I love all wasteAnd solitary places, where we tasteThe pleasure of believing, what we see,Is boundless as we wish our souls to be.And such was this wide ocean, and the shoreMore barren than its billows'"Such an idea never crossed one of ourA HERD OF ANTELOPES CHASED. 259minds, though this was boundless and barrenenough, without a blade of grass to relieve theeye. But on the beach itself grew some lichens,and marine weeds here and there, that temptthe antelopes from their thickets to cross theplain in the night, and pick up this scanty vegetation,of which they are fond.I had seen, the day before, one of thesedeer in the open part of the covert, bound afterbound, as if in play, leave behind the fleetest ofour dogs, and was assured that such would betheresult here.We came at last in sight of a herd, remindingme of Virgil's * cervos prospect errantes.*Off they went, and off were slipped, full threehundred yards behind, the greyhounds. But theodds were now greatly in their favour, for theirfeet passed with comparative lightness over thesurface, whilst the cloven hoofs of their preysank deep below it, and the consequence was,that they were overtaken, and two pulled down.As to our horses, they were, as you may suppose,far in the rear, and came panting and blowing,and toiling, up to their knees, through the looseground, to where two beautiful black bucks lay.Some years afterwards I had an opportunitys 2260 LION HUNT.of witnessing a course of another kind, againstthe same sort of animals. It was with * cheerThey were drawn to the ground on asort of four-wheeled platform, by two natives,armed with sharp instruments of defence, in casethey should be outrageous. The antelopes aresaid to be fascinated, as birds are by snakes, atthe sight of these brutes, and prevented byterror from using the means Nature has providedfor their safety. But in this instance,when found, notwithstanding the incrediblybounds of their feline enemies, they made clearoff, and the hunting-leopards were so savage attheir unsuccessful chase, that it was some timebefore their keepers ventured to approach them."' Naturam expelled /wrca, tamen usque recurred,' "said one of the strangers, laughing at his ownpun.But I despised these pastimes when I hadbeen initiated in nobler sport. My friend Williams,of the 8th Dragoons (who was drowned,poor fellow ! with Shelley, in the Mediterranean,)wrote me an account of a lion-hunt, inwhich I regret much not having joined. Hisletter (which I am sorry I have mislaid, orwould read to you) was highly graphic.TIGER SHOOTING. 261It was the season of the hot winds, when,driven by want of water from the Bichanier, orGreen Deserts, on the edge of which the party-weremet, the beasts of prey seek the junglesnear the villages on its borders, and commitgreat ravages among the cattle.'* The chase had been for several days veryunsuccessful, when a Rhaiot, or Allah, cameone morning to their camp, saying, that a buffalofrom his herd had been chased away in the night,and that for some time past he had frequentlyheard the phaoo. This sound, though it is supposedgenerally to come from the jackall, orlion's provider, I imagine to proceed from malesor females, in the amatory state, purring like cats.Be this as it may ; the train was ready for thefield, and immediately sallied forth, and withthem, half the 'gong,' to form a line between theintervals of the elephants, eight in number, onwhich was mounted the * Partie de Chasse.' Imust tell you, that an elephant which has oncecarried baggage loses all his courage, and isworth nothing for hunting.My friend was mounted on a female I haveoften seen. She was so bold that she wouldattack a tiger, and kneel on him ; and I had262 A LION'S LAIR.once one of the same sex, that, having got aleopard between her legs, kicked it backwardsand forwards, from her hind to her fore foot, andfrom her fore to her hind, with the ease westrike a tennis or cricket ball, till it was dead.This by the way.*' Their ' battu' was of a different kind fromyours at Wykeham or Entomb. Profound silencewas observed, for tiger is not like phea-sant-shooting or fox-hunting, and the leastnoise often scares away, to be found no more,the slinking sly game of the forest. They beatfor four hours without finding, and began tothink the peasant's tale a fable, when, coming toa clear spot amid the jungle, they perceived theprint of a buffalo's hoofs, and a number of monstrousfoot-marks of wild beasts, that had seeminglybeen hunting in company. These trackswere sometimes lost in high dagger-grass up tothe howdah, and then the ground was too hardto retain the impression ; but, by careful pricking,they were hit upon again, and finally led tothe carcase of a buffalo still warm and halfdevoured.It was now certain that the animals, whateverthey were, could not be far distant ; but itA LION'S LAIR. 263was uncertain which course to take, from thecircumstance of distinct traces of paws beingperceptible in four different directions. Sufficeit to say, they conducted to the lairs of as manylions, who were thus proved to have been huntingin a pack ; a fact which forms a singular exceptionin the habits of creatures of the feline species,and is well worthy of notice by the naturalist.They were so much glutted, that threeof them showed little fight ; but the fourth, anenormous male, having been struck at the onsetby a ball from Williams's Joe Wanton, foughtwith desperate courage, and sprang upon one ofthe elephant's heads, to the great terror of themahout and the imminent risk of the owner.The brute, however, having no crop aru there, soonfell with his own dead weight, and was noteventually overpowered and killed till he hadreceived thirty balls; — we counted them.My friend had the hide, which he was entitledto as the inflictor of the first wound.The distance between the eyes was greaterthan in any tiger I ever saw.Perhaps you are not aware that it is a,custom religiously observed to burn off the264 DEATH OF A LION.whiskers, lest they should be administered in thenature of a poison : the natives believe that asingle particle of hair of so strong a quality mustbe attended with the most fatal consequences tothe intestines. Shakspeare seems to have attributedthe same quality to horse-hair, and says,in Anthony and Cleopatra,Which, like the courser's hair, has got but life,And not the serpent's poison.'But this by the way.It was from Williams's description of thedeath, I wrote, almost in his own words, the followinglines : —Senseless, outstretch'd, and gasping on the plain.Life ebbing fast from many a streaming vein,Yet — yet unquench'd, his lurid eyeball's fireGlares with a savage, fell, malignant ire ;And his curved paws, in act of conflict still,Though lost the power to slay, retain the will.And if a leaf but rustle, feebly closeThose fangs in fancied clutching of his foes.Then does a wilder frenzy light his eye,And lengthen'd howls of lingering agonyExpress a joy not all his pangs abate —His lordly nature overmastering fate.And when the blood in suffocating tideRush'd upward, and the rattling throat deniedREGRET FOR LEAVING INDIA. 265Their further utterance, stifled groans express'dThat thoughts of baffled vengeance marr'd his restedies ! his terrors e'en outlive his breath,And all the lion shows itself in death !'** But my days are counted : the spell isbroken — it was a protracted dream. I shall nomore mount my favourite * hatter ;' never againthread those untrodden solitudes ; accompanyno more to the chase the brothers of my heart,whom I left — fool! fool! — to return to what?my native country. Country ! it is a cheat —a juggling cheat, a word most mouthed by thosewho know it least. Call it exile — call it whatyou will, India was my country. There I hadfriends, a home, congenial employments — pursuitsto rouse the mind to energy : here all istorpor — stagnation — death !Man has no scorpion like inglorious rest ;Unfed — the worm will feed upon the breast.' "With these words he left us, and I, forone, returned in no very merry mood to mychamber.266 SUCCESS ON TAL Y LLYN.SIXTEENTH DAY.Tal y Llyn. — Success on this Pool. — Dine en petit comic.lady Holland and Tommy Moore. — Return of Charters.— His Adventure. — Shelley's English-Italian Lines.Buona Note.Tal y Llyn, Wednesday, 14th.Lashed as this pool is, from morn till dark,strange that the trout should be such fools as torise. But I lashed it again, and still with thesame result — thirty fish to add to the list !♦ ♦ ♦ *We dined en petit comitis the Welsh Angler,Julian, and myself. Charters did not return.Where can he possibly be ? * * * * Thestranger has retired, and Senator, lost in thejungles of Hindoostan, made no Christopher atournodes : reminding me of what Lady Hollandsaid to Tommy Moore, on his return to thedrawing-room after dinner — "Moore, you didCharters's ADVENTURE. 267not do your duty to-days'* At twelve o'clockour Endymion made his appearance, with a truelover-like, Sir-Joshua face, haggard, wan, anddisconsolate. This time he has really met withan adventure. Hear him.As I was sauntering along the banks of asmall rivulet that falls into the Towyn, I suddenlycame in sight of a gentleman's seat. Itwas built of the white stone of the country,and seemed to have been added to, and modernized,at no distant period. The pleasure-groundswere filled with American plants, andthe lawn, which exhibited the nicest care ofsome elegant mind, shelved down to the edge ofthe silvery stream, that gaily danced along likesome infant to rush into its nurse's arms. Thehouse, peeping through some venerable beech-trees,was backed by a range of wild mountains,part of the extreme chain of Cader ; and halfwayup, its sides were clothed by a forest of oak,contrasting well with the barren and brokencrags that overflowed it.How pleasant, thought I, from this * loopholeof retreat to peep at such a world* as mustexpand itself from the windows of this sweetabode ! Would that such a retreat were mine !268 Charters's ADVENTURE.I sighed, and passed on to where the junctionof the two streams offered a deep bay. Itattracted me, and I soon hooked a small trout.** Just as I was drawing him to land I observeda large fish make two or three rapidzigzags, that flashed each like a plate of silver ;they were preparatory to his seizing my prey,which he did, notwithstanding my resistance,dragged it several yards, then dropped it, anddisappeared. I trolled for some time with thepaste, but he was on a different scent ; and Ibethought me of my artificial minnow (for I hadno live baits), and as the water was slightly discolouredby yesterday's rain (though I had triedit often without success), was resolved to giveit one more essay. At my very first cast Ihooked and landed him. He was a sea-trout offour pounds. I hallooed to the boy who wasfollowing with my pony, and sent it, with mycompliments, to the mansion.The day was fast closing, and the mist,which had at intervals been floating fast overthe mountains, now grew dense, and at lastdescended, more like a tropical rain, or a waterspout,than a shower, when a maid, whom by hercostume I perceived to be other than a peasant.CHARTERS'S ADVENTURE. 269approached me, and, with a very pretty address,delivered a message, to the purport that hermistress had observed that I was overtaken bythe rain, and begged I would accept of shelter,and some refreshment at the villa.I was scarcely a becoming figure for a lady'sboudoir ; but there was so much of romance inthe ' situation,' that I could not find it in myheart to get out a negative.** I put up my rod, wound the tack roundmy hat, and accompanied the pretty-spokenmessenger, chatting with her on the way, andendeavouring, by cross-questions (at which Iam rather an adept), to elicit some informationrespecting the owner of the mansion.But the cunning minx was as wary in herreplies as the most practised French abigail.The hall-door was open, and I was ushered bythe manilla into a saloon, furnished in the newestfashion, and that bespoke the opulence of theinhabitants. A square green-damasked ottoman,with cushions the most inviting, was in thecentre of the room ; an upright piano, and aharp, stood against the walls ; and a cheerfulblaze from a wood fire threw a flickering lightover the apartment.270 CHARTERS'S ADVENTURE.'' Before I had time to seat myself, I waswelcomed by a sweetly-modulated voice, soft,and clear as a silver bell, proceeding from a girlthat I took to be nineteen, and in whom I recognizedat a glance the mysterious Naiad of thestream. She was above the common height,resembling most — Cynthia as she appeared toActaeon,* or rather the Personification of Greece,that stood before Atossa in her dream, and madefor ' a queen of the land.' Her form was of exquisitesymmetry, and seen to advantage throughthe many folds of the 'wind woven' muslin robein which she was enveloped, being what theFrench denominate a blouse.Her air was easy and unembarrassed, andher step—• The antelope,In the suspended impulse of its lightness,Not less ethereally light.'Her hair, as I told you, was of a deep brown,that corresponded with her eyes, and floated inluxuriant and massy ringlets over her fair shoulders,which fell with the true classic bend, andwould have defied a shawl to have remained onTamen author ellisIpsa dea est, colloquy tenus superfine omnes.Ovid, iHfef.— Ed.CHARTERS'S ADVENTURE. 271them without constant assistance from the hand,a piece of coquetry so successfully practised inItaly; but coquetry formed no part of thecharacter of the lovely Cambrian, whose gracewas that of nature, and countenance the indexof a mind pure and unadulterated by the vanitiesof ball-rooms and the posture-study of opera-boxes.She thanked me for my present, said herfather was from home, and supposed I was surprisedat her receiving me in his absence, butthat she had always held in sovereign contemptMadame de Steel's maxim, * Queene femme doitceder aux opinions du monde.*I saw before me a second Diana Vernon, abeau-ideal likeness of that charming creation ofthe Scotch novelist.*' In half an hour all the formality whichstrangers feel was worn off, and our conversationbecame, if not confidential, unrestrained.She spoke to me of our mutually-favourite pursuit,and seemed to be well acquainted with thelakes and rivers of her native hills, particularlyTal y Llyn, Bala, and Cape Kerig, the Dee,and the Tivy.* My pursuits,' she remarked archly, * I am272 CHARTERS'S ADVENTURE.aware, are thought too masculine for our sex;but I am the only child of one who has been,though he is now unhappily getting old, a determinedsportsman, and he has long given me ataste for amusements that have ended in constitutingmy happiness. You will be surprised tohear that I breed race-horses ; I am also fond ofhunting, and could show you in my stable, formy groom is just returned from giving her abreathing, a mare that has carried me over stonewallsthat few of my father's hunt dared to facetill I showed them the way. You see this littleterrier ; I like him because he is no varmint, andmany a fox has he drawn from earth.'The rough, wiry-haired, blink-eyed creatureseemed by his caresses to appreciate his mistress'spanegyric, and leaping into her arms,watched for some moments her intelligent andanimated features, and then, making a turn ortwo, rolled himself up to sleep in her lap.*' Can such occupations, thought I, glancingat the piano, be consistent with the finer artsand accomplishments that embellish woman ?She seemed to read my thought, and, ringingfor lights, which were brought by the same attendant,moved towards the instrument. It wasCHARTERS'S ADVENTURE. 273a grand piano of Broadsword's, and on the desklay the opera of ' Semiramis.* I was familiarwith the music of that chef-d'oeuvre of Rossini,for I had been at Florence in 1826, and duringsix weeks drank deep of the inspiration of thedivine and soul-piercing Pesaro.The book was open at a cavatina which hadstilled, night after night, the noisy * palchi' ofthe Pergola. She sat down before it, and Ilistened as if my whole frame, like that of a fish,was one ear. At the first notes she struck, Icould perceive that she was a finished ' pianiste*I never heard but one woman who had so Jirjn atouch ; her prelude was brilliant. She began tosing : the enchantment increased ; her voice wasa magnificent ' contralto' — her accompanimentfaultless, for she indulged in no variations of herown, and contented herself with the notes asthey were written, which I perceived, by thesharpness of the character, were French. Herpronunciation of the words was purely Tuscan.There was no difficulty that did not vanishbefore the marvellous flexibility of her organ.Her deep notes now penetrated the bottom of myheart, and now she played with her voice like aVOL. I. T274 CHARTERS'S ADVENTURE.humming-bird* fluttering over the tops of flowers; and when she had ceased, I was so charmedto silence that I had no breath to utter a singlebravo.' To conceal my emotion, I involuntarilyCharters's description of Miss 's singing remindsme of the song of the nightingale in Pliny the elder, so beautifullyparaphrased by an Italian poet ; and, as Ty tier hassaid it is untranslateable, I will endeavour to give my versionof that masterpiece of writing, itself evidently borrowedfrom some Greek poet.Delightful bird ! marvellous indeed thou art ! Howcan so mighty a voice reside in so diminutive a frame ? andthat frame be animated by such an indefatigable spirit, andhave the faculty of modulating its strains of harmony withso perfect a knowledge of music ? What enchanting tonesare here I Now they are drawn out in an endless sinuosityof sweetness ; now she dwells on a single note ; now blendsmany variations into one ; then takes up those she has abandoned,and all at once muffles them. At times she murmursto herself the air: full chords, flats, sharps, crotchets,minims, quavers, semi-quavers, semi-demi-quavers — all yieldto the marvellous flexibility of her organ, for she runs upand down the gamut, fluttering and playing with her voice,in treble, tenor or base, at will ; in short, her little throatpours forth the most exquisite melodies that the art of mancan elicit from the finest wind-instruments. The pretty creatureshave also trials of skill together, in which it is evidentthat the contest is carried on with more and more emulation:defeat is not unfrequently succeeded by death, the spirit ofsong surviving the power to give it utterance." — E.CHARTERS'S ADVENTURE. 275turned over the leaves of another book lying onthe rack, and happened to light on a ' duo' inOdoardo and Oloiska, which I had heardBut no matter.She rose ; and I took her place, and asked,striking the first notes of the prelude, if sheknew the duet ? She smiled an affirmative, andsoon we were joining in that divinest —Cio che tu bran' io bravo,Non avium' che un' cure INever was I in better voice, for I never feltso deeply. At first, indeed, it trembled, and Ifancied, though it might be imagination, thather's trembled too ; but at the close they werein perfect accord, and seemed like a soul withina soul, 'a difference without discord,' — ' notesformed for each other, yet dissimilar ;' such wasthe entire harmony in which they blended. Sufficeit to say, that our bravura left nothing tobe desired, but that the words should be true.Never till then had I really known what themagic of music was. I could have worshippedher, as I once saw happen to Miss Stephens, andthe thought brought with it the blighting recollectionof her insensibility.An elegant collation now made its appear2276 SHELLEY'S ENGLISH-ITALIAN LINES.once (but my heart was too full to eat), accompaniedby several sorts of French wines, towhich, however, I did ample justice. Hoursflew away like moments, when I would have hadthem crawl into eternities. I was like a birdunder the fascination of a hawk — spell-bound,and had not courage to tear myself away fromthe spot. It was necessary to remember thatthe night was far spent. I rose, and extendedmy hand ; she did not refuse it, and I think Inever heard a sound so melancholy as her —Good night !'"As I was opening the door she said — ' Sir,'(that cold monosyllable sounded like a knell,)I am going to Aberystwith tomorrow, to preparefor the races, where I have a horse to runfor the cup, and then we mean to pass a monththere for sea-bathing ; but if you come into thispart of the world again, I — my father will beglad to see you.' I bowed, and rode my ponyat speed to our hotel.""At at ! habet;" I said, laughing; "I will showyou some English-Italian lines, of Shelley's,which, as she is a professor in that language,though not in the language of love, she may setto music. Send them to her, original and myBona Note — GOOD NIGHT ! 277translation, a line in the last stanza of which Ihave a little altered, to suit the occasion. Perhapsthey may help to soften a soul flinty as hernative mountains.Bona Note!Buona notte I Buona notte ! come maiLa notte asia buona senza te ?Non dirmi buona notte, che tu sailnotte sa star bene da per se.Slings, sura, cup, senza seme,La notte, quando Lille m' abandon,Pei cuori che se barton inside,Agni notte senza dira, sara buona.Quanto male buona notte si suona,Con inspire, e parole interrogate.II modo di aver la notte buona,E' mai non di dir la buona notte IGOOD NIGHT IGood night ! Good night ! Ah ! say not so !Can night be good where thou art not ?Say not Good night ! Night 's good, you know.Whether we would not, or we would.Dark, silent, hopeless, sad, alone.Night seems when thou withdraws thy light ITo hearts that only beat as one,There needs no voice to say, Good night I278 GOOD NIGHT IGood night 's a sound ill understoodBy one who parts with words that blight*The only way night can be goodIs, never more to say, Good night !"And so ' Buona notte !' Charters, and pleasantdreams. I think I shall dream of hermyself — And you, Julian."Dreams have made up the best of me. Thisboutonner et deboutonner, as the Frenchman said,avant qu'il bruit la cervelle !' — I 'm sick on't."Var. — In sighs and murmurs of delight.THE OLD FISHERMAN. 279SEVENTEENTH DAY.The old Fisherman — His Illness. — His Opinions. — A Bard.Transmigration of Souls. — Origin of that Doctrine. —Bardic Poetry. — English translation of a Welsh Poem. —A Salmon Hunt. — Neapolitan method of Fishing.Tal y Llyn. 17th.Should any one chance to read this journal,he will be surprised to have so long lost sight ofthe old Fisherman.Humphrey has never been well since our expeditionto the Begalen pool. Whether it werethat the fatigue was too much for him, or thatthe relation of the fatal events of his early lifeawakened too vividly recollections of things thathad only floated dimly in his imagination, hehas been gradually sinking ever since that night,and has not crawled out since our arrival morethan three or four times. Poor fellow ! he isnow confined to his room.280 A BARD.Julian and myself have been constant visitorsat his sick-bed, and this morning I had along conversation with him. The old man willnever live to benefit by the first fruits of thebet, or second, that have arrived, and seemed togive him little pleasure. There is, it seems, akind of freemasonry, between the Indian andhimself, in their religious or irreligious creeds,and it would appear that the old man is morethan half a Hindoo. Thus they agree that thewhole tribe of fishes is considered fair game,allowable food, and no others, except such asmay directly or indirectly cause the death ofman : rather a broad latitude by the by, if theychoose to make it so, for thus a bull, or even agoat, or a ram, might effect this. Their conceptionof the Divine nature is equally Brahminical,denying the Supreme Power all locality ofexistence, as unworthy of him, and that of matter,by the following aphorism; " Nid Dim ontDuw, nid Duw ont Dim," or " God cannot bematter, and what is not matter, cannot beGod :" reminding me of Byron's,When Bishop Berkeley said, There was no matter,Why, then, it was no matter what he said !"TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS. 281Thus they are both Immaterialists. Humphreytells me, that he met at the Eisteddfodd,at Caermarthen, a hierophant, in the person of aBard, who, after a long probation, initiated himin the mysteries of his sect, and in the doctrinesof Baptism, the principal one of which is, ' FiatVeritas pereat munus.' * This liberality is notconfined to metaphysics, but, like that of theIlluminati of Germany, and the Carbonari ofItaly, their leading profession of faith is, libertyand equality, and consequent perfectionabilityand happiness, all the world over. But there isa point still in which he comes nearer to Julian'sway of thinking, a belief in the transmigration ofsouls into the bodies of animals, a sort of purgatory,by which men at last get absolution forall their sins ; and so they ought, seeing it is notavery comfortable persuasion, nor half so agreeableas Dante's, some of whose * circles ' must berather pleasant places.Now, Julian (if the beasts of the field haveany influence in the next world, and Pope's Americansavage is right,Who thought, admitted to another sky,His faithful dog would bear him company")Y Gwir yu erbyn y byd.282 BARDIC POETRY.will certainly, for his sins and murders, have topass into the body of some anthropophagous tiger,and Humphrey for his, into some mighty eawg(salmon) or brothel (trout), whose antenatal existence,he thinks, accounts for their wariness, orwhat we call, in our blindness, mere instinct.This strange system of theology, our discipleof the ''cwmry" contends, was drawn immediatelyfrom Heaven,* and taught by Comer, theson of Japhet, not of Noah, as it appears,whence it has been orally preserved (like themarvellous poems of Ossian) from Bard-brainto Brain-bard, down to the present times, pureand unadulterated by the lapse of ages, orthe changes in matters of religion, and was, hesays, common to the disciples of Brahma andthe Egyptian Magi, whence it found its wayinto Greece through the medium of Pythagoras,who picked it up during his travels into thosecountries. Something like the common sentimentin Wales, that " John Jones has alwaysbeen John Jones." As to the language itself,Gwyn oar nenDe read a9au'r Awe.We derive from HeavenThe primeval inspiration of Baptism.Ed.BARDIC POETRY. 283he quoted St. Isidore, to prove that it wasthe same spoken in Italy in the times of Janusand Saturn. He seems to entertain no fearsof a future state, which he thinks himself near,and has a full confidence in the immortalityof the soul ; — but what sort of immortality ?Who would not rather be a revolutionary materialist,or an animal-magnetic Theosoph ? Infact, they believe everything and nothing"*The old bard has repeated me text after text,arranged in tri-metre, which he has rendered formy conversion literally ; but they seem to me,generally speaking, anything but oracular —neither over-wise nor over-inspired : he firmlybelieves them to be as old as Adam. Thesesententious proverbs are conveyed in verses thatwalk side by side like the French male andfemale rhymes, except that they go in threes ofright centre left, as a troop is told off.These epilogues or triads, he says, are easilyretained in the memory, (I know I should notlearn one in a month,) and he quotes one thatsays whoever remembers the verses will neverwant a friend by day or a guard by night.♦ ' Coelliuw dim, a coelliaw pob petri.' — E.284 BARDIC POETRY.So say the Arabs of Altar's poetry, and sobelieve the Irish of their famous ' rhann/ orrhyme, written by St. Patrick himself, of whichI remember two of the saving stanzas : —All pious Christians that repeatThis rhann with true devotion,They need not be afeard of allThe water in the ocean :The blessed Virgin too will grantWhatever they desire.And they'll always be savedBoth from water and from fire."Humphrey also spoke to me much about anold sportsman and warrior-bard who lived toone hundred and eighty, a good old age, equalto that of an eagle, who, the ancients thought,never died but when his beak cut his own throat :this worthy is, in fact, the Welsh Nestor, andlike Horace has of course been turned into acanorous swan, whilst his brother bards havebecome, as Pythagoras says, cackling geese.Some of his lines he quoted in his story ; hecalls him Llywarc, and says he is the greatest ofpoets in the " Ynys Ordain," or the Isle ofBeauty, (Britain,) by which he means a part forWELSH POEM. 285the whole, the Principality. I was curious tohave a specimen of his merits, and with muchexertion, which I fear has been too great afatigue for him, he has dictated to me, who amnotorious for my scepticism, very many of theTribal Milwr, or Warrior's triplets in Welsh,and a literal lineal version. By the effect theyproduced on Humphrey, they must be full offorce in the original, monosyllabic, consonantal,and by-me-and-all-foreigners-unpronounceabletongue, well described in Beppo —A harsh and northern, whistling, grunting guttural,In which they 're forced to hiss, and spit, and sputter all."Taking leave of him for an hour, I amusedmyself with selecting such stanzas or parts aspleased me most, and having turned them intoEnglish, flattered myself, as Byron says, until Iread them to the old man, that they were doneinto very decent verse ;" but the Cambrian, Isaw, did not think so. Here they are, and thetranscript will fill up the time till dinner ; theyare, it must be remembered, addressed by thebroken-hearted minstrel to his staff, a fit divinityfor a Druid.286 WELSH POEM.Baglan bren, ganges gale,Baglan bren, neud gwanwyn ?Baglan bren, neud cyntevin,neud rudd rh, neud cry, begin ?Baglan bren, neud cynhauar,Rudd rhedyn, melon calav ?Eiddil, hen, hwyr yd re IDyrgweny gwyn gwyn gre gore gwydd,Dear hyde, diwlydd bre ;Eiddil hen, hwyr yd re.Baglan bren — ganges gale,Ana cynnwysi : Duw died !Elwir pen cywir connived.Y saw a 'm cared ni 'm car.Wyv tridyblyg hen, wyv anwad— al drum,Vy medway privy-gas crammed,Ymgyvarvyddynt yn unfed.Y ddeilen hon neu's eynnired gwyn.Gone hi o'i tingedHi hen — eleni y ganed IAden leveret eyni ranA'i du gyssel eyr eu bran,Can ddiwg ac aryan.Ysyd Landor dra gweilgiY, gwna mor nailed wrthiTrwydd a get di anwyl."ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 287O say, my staff, my sole remaining might.Is it the spring ? do all things breathe delight ?Can sounds or odours sweet to day turn Llywarc's night ?Or, tell me, is it not a summer s morn,The furrows green, the bloom on the young com ?Feel I the west wind fan my faded cheek in scorn ?Does autumn from the full ear shake the seed ?Is the fern brown, and parch'd the yellow reed ?sam a sapless stem — a useless, wither'd weed!Slow — slow my steps. Winter has bound the rill ;O'er the bleak heath the scoffing gusts howl shrill ;Free bounds the wild deer now — from me can bound at will.Bear up, my staff, yet bear awhile with me,My sire, like thine, was a time-honour'd tree ;Bear with an old, old man, in second infancy.Those who once loved me love me now no more,For I am triply bent — old, blind, and poor ;Loathsomeness, palsy, aches, catarrh, are all my store.The leaf that hangs the last upon the bough.Sways it not whencesoever the wind may blow ?With every breath to fall, I shake and quiver too.Hist I hark ! 'twas some oracular voice that spoke 1No ; from the hollow of the Druid oak,Omen of death and fate, I heard the raven croak.On — on to Landor ! Emblem there of me,A dark — dark stream flows on to swell the sea :Thus be my years and woes gulled in eternity I288 A SALMON-HUNT.Our Wye stranger made one of the dinnerparty, and related a battue, of which he wasspectator, different from that of Bengal ; it wasa salmon-hunt, and whether it be peculiar toWales I know not.The party consisted of a great numberof persons, not fishermen alone, but the farmersand proprietors of the land on the banks of theriver Wye, where they were about to beat. Forthis last purpose many of them were exclusivelyassembled, and armed accordingly with longpoles ; the rest, some with single and some withdouble-pronged harpoons, but they were differentin make, the first having a shank of threefeet and being fastened by a rope similar to thegrains' on board a ship, and the other possessinga handle of seven or eight. Thus equipped,all sallied up the stream.It was then low water; in fact, at anyother season than in the greatest drought suchan expedition could not take place with anyprospect of success.On coming to a pool, the spearmen tooktheir posts at intervals in the shallows, forA SALMON HUNT. 289several hundred yards above and below the spotwhere it was expected to find the prey lying;and the signal being given by the most distant,and conveyed through the line that they werebarrow' (ready,) the ' wanders' (beaters) wadedinto the pool up to their middles, beginning tolash and agitate the water with loud yells.Presently, one of the finny tribe, frightened bythe unusual disturbance of his retreat, as wellas the barbarous Welsh screams, (as he wellmight be,) dashed up the stream. * Vinidd!*(up) cried the beaters with one voice, which,like the-word of command through the ranks ofa regiment, was conveyed voice by voice fromman to man, as the fish passed his ambush.The river was lower on this occasion than ithad been known for many years, and the shallowswere consequently so shallow that thesalmon, which was a giant of the species, did notin many places, where theObliqua laborLymph fugax trepidare rio,'find more than depth for his huge body to swimin ; and his back once appeared above the surface.But I was not till then aware of the birdlikevelocity, the lightning speed of the eawg,VOL. I. u290 A SALMON HUNT.nor ever considered how admirably Nature hadprovided the means of its self-preservation, bylifting it with a form of all others the bestadapted for cutting so solid an element as itinhabits, a form from the imitation of which, Idoubt not, that of the arrow has been derived.You may conceive, that it must require no littledexterity, and a good and practised eye, toallow for the loss of time from the arm to thefish, in order to strike him as he darts past, fearadding wings to his fins. The first of his enemiesmissed him. * Vinidd !' he vociferated.The second was equally unsuccessful. 'Vi-nid!' he exclaimed.In like manner the salmon escaped from theshafts of several more in succession, and at last,being more alarmed than ever by the disturbancein the bed of the river, made by a randomspear that fell wide of him, turned sharp round,and resuming his old course, with the samechances against him, returned in safety to thepool whence he had set out, and took refugeunder the roots of some alders, that lined thebank, and once there, it was needless to endeavourto start him a second time.A SALMON HUNT. 291The next pool produced two salmon, whotook different directions. * Vinnid eawg unlaura (a salmon up and down,) echoed the voicesof the 'wanders,' and the banks sent backthe accustomed watchword, 'Vinidd un laura!*This time both the salmon felt victims. Anaccident happened, that I believe is not unusual,to one of the victors. He was hanging earnestlyover the bank, so far that in delivering hisharpoon he lost his balance, and man and fishlay floundering together in the rapid, to thegreat amusement of the lookers on, and myselfamong the number. A complete ducking wasthe only consequence of this ridiculous mishap,and the spearman was soon consoled by thesight of his spoil (that weighed upward oftwenty pounds), and the conscious pride of theexploit.**' The sport was continued after sunset, butthen the battue ceased, and the strictest silenceand caution were observed. The peasantsThe salmon was a female. These are easily distinguishedfrom the males by the nose being larger and morehooked, the scales less brilliant, and the body speckled overwith dark brown spots. — Ed.U 2292 NEAPOLITAN METHOD OF FISHING.brought bands of hay or straw, which theylighted, and held down by the side of the spearmen,who crept quietly along to the most likelyparts of the river. The salmon had now theodds greatly against them, for, attracted by thetorches, they rose, and lay motionless almost onthe surface of the water, presenting an easy aimto their foes, who announced each victory by thedeath-yell of 'Cloth unto!' (kill again), that wasrepeated in deafening shouts by the spectators.The night was dark : — the glare of the flambeauxlighting up the banks of the river, andreflected on its surface — the figures of thespearmen, in broad relief — the cries of the harpooners,and the yells of applause, that followedeach triumph, presented an animated and novelscene.""This method of taking fish reminds me ofwhat I saw practised in the Bay of Naples, in1822, from the Chittagong, where I lived. Iused nightly to watch the motion of a broadlyreflected, rapidly-moving torch, opposite mywindows ; and on inquiring what it meant,learned that it proceeded from a boat, to whichit was attached, and which boat contained * Fer-neapolitanMETHOD OF FISHING. 293dinando, il re dei Lazzaroni,' as he was properlycalled, for none of them could vie with him inimbecility of intellect, in vulgarity of manners,or in dexterity at their own particular occupation."But our lights are nearly extinguished, andgive us warning that the dawn is not far distant."APPENDIX.APPENDIX.from Swammerdam' s rare Treatise on the Ephemera.HOW AND IN WHAT A WONDERFUL MANNER THE WORM ISTRANSFORMED INTO AN Ephemera.When the time of the change of the worm of theEphemera is approaching, and the wings, hidden in thecases or husks, have acquired their due strength andform, and it is no longer in the power of the wormto delay its change ; those which have their parts thusdisposed and prepared, march out of their habitationsinto the water. This usually happens in the eveningbetween six of the clock and half an hour after. ThisI observed on the thirteenth of the month of June, inthe year 1671, pursuing the change of the worms of theephemera.The other worms, which are not as yet come to thisstate of growth, remain in their cells. Those whichhave crept into the water move forward, and make allthe haste they can from the bottom to the surface;which, when some more swiftly and others more slowlyare arrived at, each of them is changed into a wingedinsect. But this change or casting of the skin is sosuddenly performed, that even the most attentive |kt-son cannot otherwise judge, than that the worm breaks'298 THE EPHEMEIIUS.or bursts its way and swiftly flies out of the middle ofthe water.Every insect that I have hitherto observed has a certainand determined time appointed for it by the omnipotentGod to expand its wings and dry them, that theymay become smooth and polished, before they are ableto prepare themselves for flight. But the Ephemera,on the contrary, is almost at one and the same point oftime a reptile and a flying creature. Wherever onesees at this time a little water bubble up, if he casts hiseyes on the surface, there is immediately a winged insectobserved to issue out of the middle of the water.Argus would want eyes, if he should attempt to tracethese miracles of the adorable Creator of the universe.If any one goes into a boat and fixes in a situation directlyagainst the descending stream of a river, then hemay very well see these insects emerging or rising up,and casting their skin.It is difficult to say what is the reason that these wingsare so swiftly expanded, and yet have neither musclesnor joints in them, but only artificially plaited and folded; nay, they must again change their skin the momentafter. This difficulty surely is very worthy tobe solved. I indeed thought it necessary that thesewings should be provided with muscles and joints in thesubstance of them, as we have observed in many otherinsects; for the latter can by the help of such jointsand muscles very artificially contract their wings into anarrow compass, and again quickly unfold or displaythem. This holds, among the rest, in Ear-wigs, whichhide or put up very long wings in a small sheath, whichfolds and covers them so neatly that they seem to bequite destitute of wings. But though the Ear-wigs canTHE EPHEMERUS. 299by the power of muscles and joints, which they have inthe middle of their wings, closely fold these wings inthe same manner as in the Ephemera, which has not yetgone through its change, and again quickly expandthem ; and though 1 thought the Ephemera was inneed of the like assistance, yet the supreme Architecthas not been pleased to make use of the same structure ;and it appears that even this structure was not necessary.If the trials that I have hitherto made can throw anylight on this instantaneous expansion of the wings, itmust consist in this : that I think the water, which iswarmer on the surface than in the bottom of the river,flowing all over and penetrating into the wings, contributesvery much to their expansion. For by the assistanceof the water, the blood which is then driven out ofthe heart into the wings, in order to promote this needfulexpansion, may be impelled with greater force; inthe same manner as we see the blood is by the help ofhot water drawn more plentifully into the feet, andthose parts are more distended when any one is bloodedin the foot. Thus, because the blood and all the humoursin this insect, when it gets into the water, swims aboutand is employed in changing its skin, are violentlymoved ; hence the surrounding water may be of greatservice to impel the humours contained in the wings, sothat they may be more expanded. Wherefore we likewiseobserve, that in the wings of insects, if wounded atthat time, there follows a mortal hemorrhage, or if thecreature survives, the wings are never afterwards displayed.To the more ready expansion of these wings,the ini|ielle<l air likewise probably contributes verymuch, becauijc it is conveyed thither through the numerouspulmonary tubes, and may serve for giving300 THE EPHEMERUS.strength and firmness to the pulmonary pipes, and forexpelling the humour from thence. If you cut off thewings of the worm of the Ephemera when it is very nearits change, and throw them into a basin of water, youwill immediately see them expanding by the force ofthe water flowing round tierra, and at length extendingthemselves into their natural, smooth, and even surface,so that they would serve the creature to fly if theywere dry and strong enough. I have often made thisexperiment on the wings of this insect, and by thatmeans have in some measure learned how they are expanded.When I have put them in the water, in themanner aforementioned, I have observed that theirlarger folds were first opened, and then by degrees thewings were stretched out at length. Afterwards, thelongitudinal plaits of the wings were expanded, until atlength the whole wings were entirely thrown open.This may be seen in the insect itself, which I have delineatedfrom the life ; but the figures of the wings be-aforementionedare drawn with the help of a microscope.So long as the wings continue in their plaits and foldsthey are of a dark grey colour ; but this by degrees becomesmore faint when they are expanded.When the Ephemera has taken its first flight, it seeksout with all speed for some place where it may quietlyrest ; and having found such a one, it casts off a verythin and tender skin from its whole body, that is, fromits head, breast, belly, and wings. But before I treatof this other change of the skin, I must observe that itis always made on dry land, whereas the former is constantlyperformed in the water. And the first changeis likewise much more admirable and worthy of observationthan the second. When the Ephemera first castsTHE EPHEMERUS. 301its skin or outward coat on the surface of the water, itat that time entirely loses its former shape ; but this isnot the case in the second change.Therefore, under the first of these changes, in whichthe skin of the worm, opening on the head and back,suddenly is separated from the body, until the flyspeedily and quickly makes its way from thence, somevery considerable parts are lost, that is, all the branchesor gills on each side, together with the ten rowing finsunder them. Nay, when these branches are separated,they do not leave even their hairs upon the body, butall vanish away so entirely, that only some small vestigesor points remain of them, which form a little marginor border on the sides of the belly. The Ephemeraloses also its teeth or forceps, and the former shape of itslegs, and the cases of its wings, and tails, and otherparts. Hence the Ephemera having gone through thischange of its skin, is become as it were another creature.But as it is very difficult, perhaps impossible to observeall these things in the very short space of time inwhich the skin is casting, any person may do this at hisleisure, if he gently and dexterously strips the worm,that is to change immediately, of its skin. For thenthe parting branchiae or gills, which adhere to the exuviaeor cast skin of the worm, are seen very plainly :then likewise appear those prominent apical or pointsthey leave on the body of the Ephemera itself; nay,you may likewise see those little holes which receivedthe apical or points just mentioned. The pulmonarytubes may be likewise seen. Why should I say anythingof the muscles, tendons, vessels, and nerves whichare separated from their membranes, like ripe fruitfalling from a tree ? for neither reason, observation, nor302 THE EPHEMERUS.experience can discover anything of them, since they areall directed by the Omnipotent wisdom and providence,and conducted in such a wonderful manner that theyare altogether incomprehensible.Again, though many parts of the worm of the Ephemeraare extended and become longer under the firstchange of its skin, yet the horns which project from theforepart of the worm's head only cast their skin, andwhen it is off they become more slender and short in theflying Ephemera than they were in the worm itself*The change that happens about the eyes merits yetgreater attention, for their cornea tunica, which was of asmooth and equal surface in the worm, seems in theEphemera, after casting its skin, to consist of a congeriesof many eyes, which form a little net equally divided.The legs likewise, together with two of thetails, become as long again by the change ; but the thirdor middle tail is entirely taken off, having served nopurpose but to the worm.When I say the two eyes of this creature are composedof a congeries of lesser eyes, six, nay seven thousandof which I have observed thus clustered together insome insects ; whereas in others, as spiders and scorpions,they are. dispersed all over the body ; I would not haveany one conclude from thence, that their eyes are formedas they are in the human species and other known animals.They are by no means such, for they want thehumours; but every globular division emits an hexagonalfilament like a needle, which terminates in the net-liketunic or coat of the eyes, and J;his coat itself endsat the nerve and brain : so that these creatures see in adifferent manner from us. We see by the assistance ofrays collected on the inside of our eyes, but these per-THE EPHEMERUS. 303form vision by a collection of nervous filaments, which,when they see, are lightly and gently affected and movedin their prominent extremities by visible objects,and by the rays of light or colours, and other appearances,as I have described at large, and expressed infigures, in my treatise on Bees.As to the succeeding change of the skin of the Ephemera,which immediately and without interruptionfollows the first, we are to observe therein, that theEphemera having once cast its skin, chooses no particularplace to rest or settle in, in order to undergo theother. It fixes upon any place it can find in its flight,and it does not regard whether it be wood, stone, earth,a tree, a boat, a ship, a beast, or a man. It seems tobe a most innocent little creature, indifferent to everything,so that it can rest anywhere, in order to cast offthis second skin, which is done in the manner following:The fly firmly and strongly fastens its legs, which arearmed with sharp claws for that purpose; then it appearsas if seized with a shuddering and trembling motion,and immediately its skin opens on the middle ofits back in the small shield that is placed there: thisopening becomes by degrees so large towards the foreparts,that the creature can thrust its head out of it.After this it draws its legs also out of the skin, whilstthe claws, adhering to the cast skin, are in the meantimestill firmly fixed in their places ; and this indeedcontributes much to remove the skin from the rest ofthe body.Moreover, it must be well observed, that the headand legs are stripped of their skin in the same manneras we draw our feet out of our shoes, or our head outof a narrow cap. But as to the other parts, namely, the304 THE EPHEMERUS.first and second pair of wings, the skin is drawn offfrom them in such a manner, as that the inside is turnedout and the outside in, as we invert a limber pair ofgloves, the inward surface or inside of the fingers beingpulled out. At the time when half the skin is drawnoff the wings, these insects are as helpless captives, andfixed in that condition, they even lie for some timewithout any sensible or remarkable motion. The restof the body is likewise by this second change extended,and becomes much longer, and the tails become a thirdpart longer than they were after the first change. Sothat the tail and legs which were made, under the firstchange, a third part longer, are now again as muchmore lengthened ; but this holds more perfectly in thetails than the legs. For as the tail consists of hollow ringswhich are capable of being drawn out from each other,hence its extension is much more conspicuous than thatof the legs, because the latter only lay folded in the skin,but are now extended fully to their length, and nothingmore. It is moreover to be observed in regard to thetail, that its hairs, which were planted very thick in theworm of the Ephemera, are placed more remote fromone another when it flies, and they also become muchfiner and thinner, since they likewise cast their skintwice, and appear issuing out of their hairs as out oflittle sheaths.The Ephemera having thus partly shaken andpartly drawn off its skin, by inverting or turning it insideout, being now perfect, seeks again the water, onthe surface of which it flies and beats up and downgently and quickly, and, as it seems, wantonly sportsand plays, and then rests again, leaning on its tails,and striking its wings against each other. Whilst theTHE EPIIEMERUS. 305fly is thus in motion on the surface of the water, andloosely playing with its wings, its tail, which is hollowand full of hairs, very easily supports the body ; for asit contains air in it, it is therefore carried lightly uponthe surface of the water, and does not sink under it.Something like this is observed in several other insects,which will continue in the same manner suspendedon the surface of the water by the help of hairs, withinand between which the air is detained, as is the case inthe worms out of which gnats and gad-flies are produced.The air, however, does not always continue in the tailof the Ephemera, but sometimes comes out of it, andmay at any time be let out if they are pricked with aneedle, in order to dry and preserve them ; for thenthey generally become corrugated or wrinkled, andsink or fall together.There is also another reason why the Ephemeraflies thus bghtly on the surface of the water, and thatis, because it carries a small bladder full of air in itsbody ; unless we should rather incline to think that itis the stomach of the Ephemera, which is then inflatedor blown up with air. But 1 shall affirm nothingcertain concerning this matter, since it is not sufficientlyclear to myself.The male, as appears to me, changes its skin twice,but the female only once. I do not, however, advance thisas undoubted truth, since I have not yet confirmed itby a sufficient number of experiments. For this reason,if it be thus, we observe that the tail* of the female areathird part shorter than the tails of the male. Besides,another more remarkable difference is, that the eyes inthe male are twice as large as in the female. A thirddifference is, that the yellow colour of the body inVOL. I. X306 THE EPIIEMERUS.the male approaches more to red than in the female.The male likewise has, besides his two larger tails,four appendages, like crooked little tongues, whichcannot be so distinctly seen in the female. These arethe great differences of the two sexes.The Ephemera does not engender either in the bodyof the water, or on land, nor in the air, but the femalethrows out her eggs on the surface of the water, andthe male afterwards casteth his sperm upon them, andhe has probably, for this purpose, larger ey ts given himby the all-seeing Creator, that by means of this advantagehe may easily find out the eggs of the female whereevershe has dropped them. As therefore a great manyspecies of fish without coition throw out their eggs intothe bottom of the water, to be afterwards impregnatedbathe male ; so the Ephemera throws its sperm intothe water. These eggs, when cast out, are not collectedand concreted together in the form of a perfect ovary,like that which the Ephemera carries in its body, butare separated and dispersed from each other as theyare in fish. That the Ephemera while a worm doesnot perform the business of coition in the water, is manifestfrom hence, that it does not come out of its cellsonly at the time it is to cast its skin. Nay, if it shouldgo out of them, as it sometimes does through necessity,or to breathe fresh air, yet it is by no means able to doany act to propagate its species in the water, for it cannotremain suspended in the water but while swimming,and it sinks immediately to the bottom when ithas a mind to rest in it : but at the bottom it has nofixed residence till it has made a new cell or habitationfor itself. To these we may add another, the strongestargument of all, that is, that no insect ever enters uponTHE EPIIEMERUS. 307the business of generation until they have cast theirlast skin; at least I have been taught so by all theexperience I have had in their examination.Neither do the Ephemera breed or engender in theair ; this may be easily observed when they fly. Besides,they could not possibly breed in the air, becausethe legs of the males are so vastly lengthened after thelast change of the skin, that Clutius took them forhorns. Those who would favour such an opinion, mustconsider what an apparatus is necessary for such coitionin the air ; as may be seen in those flies which do it,and particularly in the Libertas, which perform theirvenereal embraces in a wonderful manner, flying andwandering all the time in the air, visibly coupled a longtimetogether. I therefore conclude from all my observations,that the Ephemera never engender together,either in the, air. or water, but that the female onlythrows her eggs on the water, and the male afterwardspours its sperm, which it carries about in flying, as thefemale does its eggs, upon them ; so that this operationis performed without any communication of the twosexes. All these things are hastily transacted in theshort period of a most transitory life, so that a more accurateinquiry into them cannot possibly be made.These little creatures do not eat in the whole courseof their lives, while perfect flying creatures, as is alsothe case with many other insects. I have likewise foundby experience that frogs, lizards, serpents, and camc-lens, are capable of living without eating many weeks ;nay months.X 2308 THE EPHEMERUS.HOW LONG THE EPHEMERUS LIVES, AND WHAT HASTENSHIS DEATH.The Ephemera thus flying about and wanderingover the surface of the water, and moving sometimesup and sometimes down through the air, never livesmore than four or at most five hours; that is, from sixo'clock in the evening, or half an hour after, until eleveno'clock. This I say from experience, because I havecarried some of them closed in a box in my chamber,and then accurately observed the length of their lives.All die in this very short space of time, nor do any ofthem, which is a matter very worthy of observation,die a natural death on land. All of them invariably gotothe water again after they have gone through thesecond change of their skin. God, therefore, theSupreme artist, has been pleased to assign this insect ashort life that surpasses all admiration.Who has so great a genius, or is so conversant in theart of writing, as to be able to describe with a duesense the trouble and misfortunes this creature is subjectto during the short continuance of its flying life ?For my part, I confess, I am by no means able to executethe task; nor do I know whether Nature everproduced a more innocent and simple little creature,which is, in truth, destined to undergo so many miseriesand horrible dangers.Believe me, that the life of the Ephemera is short,nay, amazingly and incomprehensible so ; an immensenumber of them are always destroyed in the birth, beingdevoured by fish. Nor does Clutius acquit any speciesof fish of this barbarity, except the perch and pike.Though the rest of the Ephemera have escaped thiscruel danger, yet on land, when they are engaged in theTHE EPHEMERUS. SOiTgreat work of changing their skin, they are barbarouslydestroyed by swallows and other birds. Nay, if theyescape this danger, when they afterwards approachagain to the surface of the water and carelessly sportand play there with their wings and tails, they a secondtime become a prey to the fish, which drag them away tothe dark bottom of the water and devour them. If theyfly higher into the air, another kind of torment attendsthem, for they are persecuted with a different barbarityby other kinds of birds, which tear their limbsasunder and devour them. Though these insects arethe most innocent perhaps of all others, they are morecruelly treated than the most mischievous of wildbeasts.As the Ephemera abounds with useful lessons andmoral precepts, so it affords sufficient matter for variousspeculations. It is engendered, grows to its bigness,and then generates large eggs, casts them, grows old,and dies in the space of five hours. This short termcomprehends the morning, noon, and evening of its life.When the Ephemera is flying, and particularly alittle before the end of that time, the trout which eatit as its food comes to its perfection ; its flesh andflavour being finer than at any other time. So I havebeen assured by Nicholas Julius, formerly Consul atAmsterdam, for he fairly made trial of the matter.One may ask farther this question, why, exclusive ofall those dangers and misfortunes, the life of the Ephemerashould be so short ? In answer to this let it beobserved, that the eggs of the Ephemera, whilst it stillswims as a worm, are arrived at their perfection, so thatas soon as the insect is increased and perfected by changingand extending its limbs, their eggs are instantly fit310 THE EPHEMERUS.for production or birth ; to which may be added, thatthe Ephemera has not the nourishing of its offspring,wherefore God* has made this creature likewise morethan others void of reason, as the ostrich among birds,that He from whom springs all reason and knowledgemight take upon himself the care of nourishing itsprogeny.Since, therefore, this creature assumes its winged formonly to propagate its species, it follows that when thisis done its death is naturally near at hand, and for thispurpose it seems to remain three years hidden in thewater and mud, and to undergo after that time itschange, and get wings in that form, living till the businessof generation is performed, and then it dies.THAT THE EPHEMERUS KIND FLIES THREE DAYS, AND SometimesFOUR. CERTAIN OTHER SPECIES THEREOF ARE Described.That the Ephemera are changing and flying duringthree days continually, is known to all who live nearthe rivers famous for this annual miracle. I have observedthem flying the fourth, nay, even the fifth day,but then very few in number. These were the successionof insects hatched one after another, and hence Ithink they had been worms of the same year, the wingswhereof had acquired their maturity somewhat slowerthan some others, and that these latter were sick, orprevented by some impediment which hindered thechange in the appointed time. As, on the other hand,it is certain that the transformation of the worms ofthis species, which are changed before their time, happenson account of their wings and other parts beingperfected earlier than natural.THE EPHEMEIIUS. 311As this may and does continually happen in all theinsect kinds, I see no reason why the Ephemera shouldnot sometimes be produced in the winged form somedays sooner or later than the strict time ; since it iscertain, from experience, that the general change inthem may happen fourteen days sooner or later, as theseason of the year favours it more or less.If we attentively consider the things which have beenhere related of the Ephemera, it is evident that Outfitspeaks truth when he says, " The Ephemeron, orDiaria, is a wonderful fly, whether we consider its make,or shortness of its life." But some of the other particularsrelated of this insect by this author, as well asAldrovandus, Johnson, Clutius, and others, who arecited by the latter writer, do not correspond with thetruth. Far be it from me to upbraid or animadvert onothers in these matters, since it is possible that thisgentleman might have described a different Ephemerafrom mine, as there are various species. Besides, Nature,or her author, God, is perfectly inexhaustible in themarked properties and dispositions of these creatures.I shall only recommend it to any who shall be desirousof knowing the truth, to consult the insects themselves ;for Nature far surpasses all the writings and treatisesthat can be compiled, and in this and all other caseswill teach more in one instant of time than any one canlearn in a long series of years out of the best library.Whilst I was engaged in investigating the nature ofthis insect, I met with various specimens of it at differenttimes, but I never had the good-fortune to see theEphemera of Hocfuagcl, which Clutius delineated,and which is found among the figures of Hocfuagel.But I once found its nymph trodden u}X)n in the road312 THE EPHEMERUS.that goes by the lake of Dismember. I at that timethought it had its origin from a kind of blackish andtoothed water-worm, which has a closely corrugated orwrinkled skin. Since the latter, having attained its fullbigness, leaves the water, and betaking itself to land, isthere changed into a nymph, which in process of timeperhaps acquires the form of the Ephemera delineatedby Hocfuagel.The ephemera afterwards throws its eggs into thewater, which is the case with many other insects, andwith several other species of the Ephemera which I canshow. I saw and took some of their species in the riverLoire, at Saumur, in France. These do not differ intheir general form from the Ephemera of our country ;but they are less, and of a somewhat different structure.I have seen great swarms of them flying, when Ichanced to walk in the evening on the bridge that isover the river at Saumur. Some of these carried aboutthem their second skin, still sticking to their tails, asthey flew up and down above the bridge. I havenothing further to say of this kind, or of other species,which I presume, only that some of them are as short-livedas our Ephemera which I have been hithertodescribing ; but I have observed that others of themlive longer than these. I therefore apprehend that thevarious species are distinguishable from each other byseveral further peculiarities, and for this reason I donot pronounce those authors reproachable who relate anythingof these or of the like insects, because what theysay does not exactly agree with the species of our particularcountry. Far be it from me to be guilty ofsuch temerity, since God is infinite in all his works, andthe species may be numerous.THE EPHEMERUS. 313About the end of June 1670, when I arrived in thevillage of Shorten near Amsterdam, I went sometimesin the evenings into the fields, where so great a numberof minute insects, which were somewhat larger thangnats, at times pitched upon my clothes, that I was allovercovered with them. Each of them cast a smallskin on my clothes, after which I observed that all ofthem returned to the water, and then, like the largeEphemera, sported and beat up and down. Theseinsects are produced nearly in the same manner as theKphemerus before described, for they live in ditchesand water-trenches ; and when they are to suffer achange in the fly-state, they likewise at regular timescast two skins, one in the water and another on theland. The manner of the smaller Ephemera differsfrom the larger, in that they do not hide themselves inthe mud, or form cells or long holes, but merely inhabitstony and sandy bottoms. Therefore, nature hasformed them of a rougher and more robust constitutionthan the larger Ephemera. Their skin also ismore like the crustaceous integuments of crabs andshrimps. They have also branchiae or gills, androwing fins on the sides of their bodies. When in themiddle of summer any one takes up stones from theRhine or Leek, or other collections of waters in ourown country, in carrying them to the land, he will mostcommonly see some worms of that kind sticking tothem, which is likewise the case in other countries andother rivers, as I myself have learned from experiencein the Loire, the Seine, and other rivers of France.Hence it is evident that there are many distinctspecies of the Ephemera,The end of the wonderful history of the Ephemera."— Sivarnmerdam.314 MAXIMS AND HINTSPage 33.The following Maxims and Hints for an Angler aretaken from an amusing little book with this title, writtenit is said by Mr. Penn, a no less accomplished anglerthan chess-player.Bear always in mind that no tackle is strong enoughunless well handled. A good fisherman will easily killa trout of three pounds with a rod and line which arenot strong enough to lift a dead weight of one poundfrom the floor, and place it on the table.Remember, that in whipping with the artificial fly, itmust have time, when you have drawn it out of thewater to make the whole circuit, to be at one timestraight behind you before it can be drawn out straightbefore you. If you give it the forward impulse toosoon, you will hear a crack. Take this hint, as yourfly is gone to grass.Never throw with a long line when a short one willanswer your purpose. The most difficult fish to hookis one which is rising at three-fourths of the utmostdistance to which you can throw. Even when you areat the extent of your distance, you have a betterchance ; because in this case, when you do reach him,your line will be straight, and when you do not, theintermediate failures will not alarm him.It appears to me, that in whipping with an artificialfly, there are two cases in which a fish taking the flywill infallibly hook himself without your assistance,viz.1st. When the fly first touches the water at the endof a straight line.2nd. When you are drawing your fly out for a newthrow, in all cases it is necessary, that in order to hookFOR AN ANGLER. 315him, you should do something with your wrist whichit is not easy to describe.If your line should fall loose and waving in the water,it will either frighten away the fish, or he will takethe fly in his mouth without fastening himself, andwhen he finds that it does not answer his purpose, hewill spit it out again before it has answered yours.Although the custom of fishing up and down thestream is usually settled by the direction of the wind,you may sometimes have the option ; and it is thereforeas well to say a word or two on both sides.1st. If when you are fishing down-stream, you take aslip or two with each successive throw, your fly isalways travelling over new water, which cannot havebeen disturbed by the passing of your line.2nd. When you are fishing up-stream, you may losethe advantage of raising so many fish ; but, on the otherhand, you will have a better chance of hooking thosewhich rise at your fly, because the darting forward ofa fish seizing it, has a tendency to tighten your line,and produces the desired effect.3rd. If you are in the habit of catching a fish sometimes,there is another great advantage in fishing upstream,viz. whilst you are playing and leading (necessarilydown stream) you do not alarm the others whichare above you, waiting till their turn comes.The learned are much divided in opinion as to thepropriety of whipping with two flies or with one. I ammyself of opinion, that your chance of hooking fish ismuch increased by your using two flics ; but I thinkthat by using one, you increase your chance of landingthe fish.Wlicn you arc using two flics, you can easily find the316 OF FISHES.bob fly on the top of the water, and thus be surethat the end-fly is not far off. When you are usingonly one fly, you cannot so easily see where the fly is ;but I think you can make a better guess where the fishis likely to be after you have hooked him.Page 49.Manuel of the elements of Natural History, by J. F.Blumenbach.SECTION VII.Of Fishes.99. — Fishes are those animals which possess red coldblood, which move by means of true^ws, (with bonyor cartilaginous fibre,) and which breathe by true gillslying deep at each side of the neck ; and not, as in thelarvae of frogs, &c. projecting beyond it.Remark. — I say true gills and tine fins, in order todistinguish them from organs to a certain degree analogousin young frogs, salamanders, &c. (94.)100. — These gills branches) in fishes almost perfectlysupply the place of lungs. They are placed oneach side behind the head, for the most part under oneor more large semilunar plates, hence called operculabranchial, and in most instances connected with themembrane of the gills, membrana branchiostega. Thegills themselves are filled with innumerable very delicatevessels, and are mostly divided on each side intofour layers, which somewhat resemble the beard of aquill, and which are attached at their basis to a correspondingnumber of little bones.101. — Respiration, which fishes are nearly as incapableof dispensing with as those animals which possessOF FISHES. 31Tlungs, is in them effected by introducing the air, whichthe water holds in solution, through the mouth intothe gills, and then expelling it again through the branchialaperture aperture branchial); consequently notby inspiring and expiring through the same passages asin those animals which possess lungs.102. — Not having lungs, it is evident that they cannothave any voice, although some, as Coitus cataractCohitisfossilis, &c. can make a noise.103. — The form of the body in fishes, in general, isinfinitely more varied than in the two preceding classes*In most, however, the body has a vertical direction, i. e.is flattened at both sides corpus compressed ;) in some,on the contrary, as the Rays, it is horizontal, and extendedlaterally corpus depressed vel plagioplateum ;) inothers, as the Eel, &c. it is more rounded ; in others,prismatic or quadrangular, &c.In all, the head and trunk are connected immediately,without being separated by a neck.104. — With only a few exceptions, fishes are coveredwith scales ; in the osseous fishes the scales are real, areformed of a peculiar substance, and in different speciespresent a great number of varieties in point of form,marks, and colours, which latter sometimes shine likegold and silver. On the other hand, the cartilaginousfishes, in general, are covered with several bone-likeplates, hook-shaped prickles, &c.The scales are covered externally with a kind of slime,which appears to be in a great measure excreted fromsmall cavities, which in most fishes are placed in a linealong each side of the body.105. — The fins, the organs of motion in fishes, inwhich a very great power of re-production has been re-318 OF FISHES.marked, consist of their bony or cartilaginous spines orrays, connected together by a particular membrane,fastened to a bone, and set in motion by certain muscles.They are called, according to their position, the upperdorsal fins ; those at the side, behind the gills, pectoralfins ; those on the belly in front of the anus, abdominalfins ; those behind this opening, anal fins ; and lastly,those on the tail, which always have a vertical direction,caudal fins.The flying-fish, as they are called, have very long andstiff* pectoral fins, by means of which they can raisethemselves above the surface of the water and fly for ashort time.106. — Another auxiliary in the motion of fishes, particularlyin rising and sinking, is the swim-bladder, withwhich fresh-water fish in particular are supplied, andwhich communicates by a particular canal ductus pneumatic)generally with the oesophagus, seldom with thestomach.107. — With regard to their place of abode, fishes ingeneral are divided into sea-fish and fresh-water fish.Many can live for some time out of water, as the eel,muroena, &c. ; others in hot mineral springs.*108. — Most fishes, especially those of the sea, arenocturnal animals, that is, they are active during thenight, and in the day remain in a state of repose. Hencethe inhabitants of islands and coasts, who live on fish,choose the night for catching them.109- — A great many species of fish change their placeof abode at certain seasons of the year. Many sea-fishascend the mouths of rivers and creeks to spawn ;Somewhat, in Crozier's Journal de Physique, Air. 1774. p.256. and Buffon, Supplement vol.v. p. 540 &c.OF FISHES. 319many, as the herring for instance, in the North Atlantic,make extensive migrations at certain seasons of theyear in incalculable numbers between the coasts of thewest of Europe and north-east of America.110. — Fishes are in a great proportion carnivorousanimals, and as they have no feet with which to holdtheir prey, are supplied with a variety of other contrivancesfor mastering it. Some have long fibrous threads{cirri) about the mouth for the purpose of enticingother small marine animals as with a bait, as in the stargazer,frog-fish, &c. Others, as the Choetodon nostrahave a kind of syringe, with which they strike downinsects flying over the surface of the water ; others, asthe three selfish, the electric ray, the tetrodon electrical,and tri chi urus indices, and the two fresh-waterfish, the electric eel, and silures electricus, possess apeculiar benumbing paralyzing power.111. — As to the external senses of fish, smelling mustbe very acute from the distance at which they discovera bait. heir hearing also is good, and they haveorgans similar to those of the internal ear in other hot-bloodedanimals. Above all, however, there are manypeculiarities in their eyes, numerous membranes partlynot found elsewhere.112. — From the deficiency of correct observations,little can be said decidedly on their instincts and othermental faculties. It is known, however, that many*trout for example become very docile, and that others,as old carp, are very wary and cunning.113. — As to their sleep, the observation that wasmade with respect to the amphibia is applicable, viz.that probably most have a winter sleep, but only aBarter Opuscula Subscciva, t. i. 1. 2. p. 88.320 OF FISHES.very few are found daily asleep, as is said to be the casewith gold fish.114. — Except the small number of viviparous fishes,such as the eel, the blends viviparous, but very fewactually copulate. In most instances the female laysthe impregnated eggs, the male coming afterwardsand sprinkling them with his semen.Advantage of this circumstance has been taken inrural economy, young fish having been procured by theartificial mixture of the ova and semen of trout.Remarks : — Among many other peculiarities in themode of generation of fishes, many, as the lamprey,possess the organs of both sexes in perfection ; whilst inothers, as the carp, anomalous instances of hermaphroditesare found.115. — The increase in the number of most fishes iswonderfully great, so that, although the ova are in mostinstances proportionably much smaller than in anyother class of animals, the ovaria of many are largerthan the whole of the body. Thus, in the herring, therehave been counted from 20,000 to 37,000 ; in the carpupwards of 200,000; in the tench 383,000; in theflounder upwards of a million.116. — In some cases the young fish have not theirperfect form when they escape from the eg, but must,as in the amphibia, undergo a kind of metamorphosisby which they obtain fins.117. — In proportion to their size, fishes reach a veryadvanced age. Examples are known of carp, pike, &c.living one hundred and fifty years ; on the other handsomesmaller fishes, as the stickleback, living but a fewyears.118. — The liability of fishes to man is not very va-hamlets.321nous, for the most part only as food, but. in this respectof the utmost importance to a great part of the humanrace, who live entirely on, this class of animals.Savage nations, as the Kamtschatdales, Brazilians, &c.possess the art of preparing fish in a great variety ofways, even as a kind of flour, bread, sec. With many,as the islanders of the Pacific Ocean, fishing forms aprincipal occupation, and a serious kind of study withreference to the ingenious methods and instruments theyhave invented. To a great part of the cultivated worldthe taking of the herring, the cod, the tunny, &c. isof still greater value; the inhabitants of the easterncoast of the middle of Asia clothe themselves in thetanned skin of the fishes, &c.119. — Fishes of prey are the most noxious, particularlythe shark in the ocean, and the pike in freshwater."Page 63.There is an old distich that says,The first great flood that happens in May,Carries the salmon fry into the sea.That the samlets are not the salmon fry, but hybrids,seems most probable by the following facts :** In the river Tees about two or three miles fromMiddleton, there is a remarkable cascade. The rock isabove twenty feet high from one side to the other, andsalmon cannot get up it. The pool it falls into has beenoften plumbed without finding bottom. Below thisforccy as it is called, there is abundance of these pinksmelton or stagger trout in summer ; and above is neverfound owe."Another reason why I think the pink is from the sal-vol.I. Y322 SAMLETS.mon, is because they are all melts, or he fish ; and to befully satisfied in this point, 1 have taken all the fish thathave been in a long shallow pool, above five hundred,of which there have not been above twenty spottedtrouts, all the rest pinks with melts in them, so that Iconcluded it was not a distinct spawn of trouts, but wasproduced by some other heterogeneous spawning togetherof two different species of fish. I suppose it isthe pink that Mr. Walton talks of when he says, " Thereare certain waters that breed trouts remarkable both fortheir number and smallness. I knows*' says he, " a littlebrook in Kent that breeds them to a number incredible,and you may take them twenty or forty in an hour, butnone greater than the size of a gudgeon.There is also in the rivers near the sea, as at Winchester,and the Thames about Windsor, a little troutcalled a samlet or stagger trout that will bite as fastand as openly as minnows; they are by some taken to beyoung salmon, but in these waters they never grow tobe bigger than a herring""How these pinks are bred is still the question.My opinion of it is this :I have sometimes seen a she salmon that had, as Isupposed, lost her mate, with two or three melt troutin a hole, as I thought spawning with her. Sometimesa melter that has lost his mate, and could not find anotherin due time, has had two or three she trouts inthe bed with him. I have with a net taken them of allthese sorts, to satisfy my curiosity, and released themagain immediately, the spawn of both kinds issuing fromthem. Of these unnatural copulations proceeds the pink ;whether it outlives the winter or not, I cannot tell, perhapsit may go down to the sea about November, whenEELS. 323the salmon go down, when they have spawned, and maynever return, for I could never see one of them in thespring above four inches long"— T/fe North CountryA angler.Page 84.Hal. — He is a well-fed fish, but, in proportion, notso thick as my model, which was a fish of 17 inches by9 inches, and weighed 2 lbs. ; — this is my standardsolid. We will try him. Ho ! Mrs. B. ! — bring yourscales and weigh this fish. There, you see, he weighs5 lbs. 10^ oz." — Salmoniaia.Page 93.Phys. — As I was looking down into a ditch comingdown the river, which is connected with it, I saw a verylarge eel at the bottom, that appeared to me to be feedingon a small grayling : — are there many of this fishin the Teme .'' and do they breed here ?Hal. — There are many of this fish in the river ; butto your question, Do they breed here ? I must answerin the negative. The problem of their generation is themost abstruse, and one of the most curious, in naturalhistory ; and though it occupied the attention of Aristotle,and has been taken up by most distinguished naturalistssince his time, it is still unsolved.Phys. — I thought there was no doubt on the subject.Lacepede, whose book is the only scientific one on fishesI have read with attention, asserts, in the most unqualifiedway, that they are viviparous.Hal. — I remember his assertion, but I looked in vainfor proofs.Phys. — I do not remember any facts brought forwardon the subject ; but tell us what you think upon it.Y 2324 EELS.Hal. — I will tell you all I know, which is not much.This is certain, that there are two migrations of eels, —one up and one down rivers, one from and the other tothe sea ; the first in spring and summer, the second inautumn or early winter. The first, of very small eels,which are sometimes not more than two or two and a-half inches long ; the second of large eels, which sometimesare three or four feet long, and weigh from 10 to15, or even 20 lbs. There is great reason to believethat all eels found in fresh water are the results of thefirst migration : they appear in millions in April andMay, and sometimes continue to rise as late even as Julyand the beginning of August. I remember this wasthe case in Ireland in 1823. It had been a cold backwardsummer, and when I was at Ballyshannon, aboutthe end of July, the mouth of the river, which had beenin flood all this month, under the fall, was blackened bymillions of little eels, about as long as the finger, whichwere constantly urging their way up the moist rocks bythe side of the fall. Thousands died, but their bodiesremaining moist, served as the ladder for others to maketheir way ; and I saw some ascending even perpendicularstones, making their road through wet moss, or adheringto some eels that had died in the attempt. Suchis the energy of these little animals, that they continueto find their way, in immense numbers, to Loch Erne.The same thing happens at the fall of the Bank, andLoch Neagii is thus peopled by them : even the mightyFall of Schaffhausen does not prevent them from makingtheir way to the Lake of Constance, where I have seenmany very large eels.Phys. — You have shown that some eels come fromthe sea, but I do not think the facts prove that all eelsare derived from that source.EELS. 325Hal. — Pardon me — I have not concluded. Thereare eels in the Lake of Neufchatel, which communicatesby a stream with the Rhine ; but there are none in theLeman Lake, because the Rhone makes a subterraneousfall below Geneva; and though small eels can pass bymoss or mount rocks, they cannot penetrate limestone,or move against a rapid descending current of water,passing, as it were, through a pipe. Again : no eelsmount the Danube from the Black Sea ; and there arenone found in the great extent of lakes, swamps, andrivers communicating with the Danube, — though someof these lakes and morasses are wonderfully fitted forthem, and though they are found abundantly in thesame countries, in lakes and rivers connected with theocean and the Mediterranean. Yet, when brought intoconfined water in the Danube, they fatten and thrivethere. As to the instinct, which leads young eels toseek fresh water, it is difficult to reason : — probablythey prefer warmth, and, swimming at the surface inthe early summer, find the lighter water warmer, andlikewise containing more insects, and so pursue thecourses of fresh water, as the waters from the land, atthis season, become warmer than those of the sea. Mr.J. Couch (Lin. Trans, t. xiv. p. 70.) says, that thelittle eels, according to his observation, are producedwithin reach of the tide, and climb round falls to reachfresh water from the sea. I have sometimes seen them,in spring, swimming in immense shoals in the Atlantic,in Mount Bay, making their way to the mouths ofsmall brooks and rivers. When the cold water fromthe autumnal floods begins to swell the rivers, the fishtries to return to the sea ; but numbers of the smallerones hide themselves during the winter in the mud, and326 EELS.many of them form, as it were, masses together. Variousauthors have recorded the migration of eels in asingular way — such as Dr. Plot, who, in his Historyof Staffordshire, says, that they pass in the night acrossmeadows, from one pond to another : and Mr. Anderson(in Trans. Royal Soc.) gives a distinct account of smalleels rising up the floodgates and posts of the waterworksof the city of Norwich ; and they made their wayto the water above, though the boards were smoothplaned, and five or six feet perpendicular. He says,when they first rose out of the water upon the dryboard, they rested a little — which seemed to be till theirslime was thrown out, and sufficiently glutinous — andthen they rose up the perpendicular ascent with thesame facility as if they had been moving on a planesurface. — (Trans. Abr. vol. ix. p. 311.) There can, Ithink, be no doubt, that they are assisted by their smallscales, which, placed like those of serpents, must facilitatetheir progressive motion : these scales have beenmicroscopically observed by Leeuwenhoek. — (Phil. Trans,vol. iv.) Eels migrate from the salt-water of differentsizes, but I believe never when they are above a footlong — and the great mass of them are only from twoand a-half to four inches. They feed, grow, and fattenin fresh water. In small rivers they are seldom verylarge ; but in large deep lakes they become as thick asaman's arm, or even leg ; and all those of a considerablesize attempt to return to the sea in October or November,probably when they experience the cold of thefirst autumnal rains. Those that are not of the largestsize, as I said before, pass the winter in the deepestparts of the mud of rivers and lakes, and do not seemto eat much, and remain I believe, almost torpid.EELS. 327Their increase is not certainly known in any given time,but must depend upon the quantity of their food : butit is probable they do not become of the largest sizefrom the smallest, in one or even two seasons ; but this,as well as many other particulars, can only be ascertainedby new observations and experiments. Bloch states,that they grow slowly ; and mentions, that some hadbeen kept in the same pond for fifteen years. As verylarge eels, after having migrated, never return to theriver again, they must (for it cannot be supposed thatthey all die immediately in the sea) remain in salt water ;and there is great probability that they are then confoundedwith the conger, which is found of differentcolours and sizes — from the smallest to the largest —from a few ounces to one hundred pounds in weight.The colour of the conger is generally paler than that ofthe eel ; but, in the Atlantic, it is said that pale confersare found on one side of the Wolf Rock, and dark oneson the other. The conger has breathing tubes, whichare said not to be found in the other eel ; but to determinethis would require a more minute examinationthan has yet been made. Both the conger and commoneel have fringes along the air bladder, which are probablythe ovaria; and Sir E. Home thinks them hermaphrodite,and that the seminal vessels are close to thekidneys. I hope this great comparative anatomist willbe able to confirm his views by new dissections, andsome chemical researches upon the nature of the fringesand the supposed melt. If viviparous, and the fringescontain the ova, one mother must produce tens of thousands,the ova being remarkably small ; but it appearsmore probable that they are oviparous, and that theydeposit their ova in parts of the sea near deep basins,328 SAUCE rOR SALMON.which remain warm in winter. This might be ascertainedby experiment, particularly on the coasts of theMediterranean. I cannot find that they haunt theArctic Ocean, which is probably of too low a temperatureto suit their feelings or habits ; and the Caspian andthe Black Sea are probably without them, from theirnot being found in the Volga or Danube ; these, beingshallow seas, are perhaps too cold for them in winter.From the time (April) that small eels begin to migrate,it is probable that they are generated in winter ; andthe pregnant eels ought to be looked for in November,December, and January. I opened one in December,in which the fringes were abundant, but I did notexamine them under the microscope, or chemically. Itrust this curious problem will not remain much longerunsolved." — Salmoniaia.Page 101.Hal. — Now take your places — what think you ofour fish ?Phys. — I never ate better — but I want the Harveyor Reading sauce.Hal. — Pray let me entreat you to use no other saucethan the water in which he is boiled — I assure youthis is the true epicurean way of eating fresh salmon,and for the trout use only a little vinegar and mustard,a sauce a la Tartare without the onions.PoiET. — Well ! nothing can be better, and I do notthink fresh net-caught fish can be superior to these.Hal. — And these snipes are excellent ; either myjourney has given me an appetite, or I think they arethe best I ever tasted.Born. — They are good, but I have tasted better.CRIMPING FISH. 329Hal.— Where ?Born. — On the Continent. Come let us have anotherbottle of claret — a pint per man is not too much aftersuch a day's fatigue.There, he is a sea trout of nearly 3 lbs. This willbe a good addition to our dinner: I will crimp him,that you may compare boiled sea-trout with broiled,and with salmon. Now, if you please, we will cool thisfish at the spring, and then go to our inn.PoiET. — If you like. I am endeavouring to find areason for the effect of crimping and cold in preservingthe curd of fish. Have you ever thought on thissubject ?Hal. — Yes : I conclude that the fat of salmon betweenthe flakes of the muscles is mixed with muchalbumen and gelatine, and is extremely liable to decompose,and by keeping it cool the decomposition is retarded; and by the boiling salt and water, which is ofa higher temperature than that of common boilingwater, the albumen is coagulated, and the tardinesspreserved. The crimping, by preventing the irritabilityof the fibre from being gradually exhausted, seemsto preserve it so hard and crisp, that it breaks under theteeth ; and a fresh fish not crimped is generally toughfriend of mine, an excellent angler, has made some experimentson the fat of fish ; and he considers the redcolour of trout, salmon, and char, as owing to a pecu-liar-coloured oil which may be extracted by alcohol ;and this accounts for the want of it in fish that have fedill, and after spawning. In general, the depth of thered colour and the quantity of curd are proportional.Point. — Would not the fish be still better, or at leastpossess more curd, if caught in a net and killed immcdi-830 THE EAGLE.lately ? In the operation of tiring by the reel there mustbe considerable muscular exertion, and I should supposeexpenditure of oily matter.Hal. — There can be no doubt but the fish would bein a more perfect state for the table from the nets ; yeta fish in high season does not lose so much fat duringthe short time he is on the hook as to make much difference; and I am not sure, that the action of crimpingafter does not give a better sort of crispness to the fibre.This, however, may be fancy ; we will discuss the matteragain at table. See ! our companion on the lake, theeagle is coming down the river, and has pounced upona fish in the pool near the sea.Phys. — I fear he will interfere with our sport : let usrequest Ornither to shoot him. I wish to see himnearer, and to preserve him as a specimen for the ZoologicalSociety.Hal. — O ! no. He will not spoil our sport ; and Ithink it would be a pity to deprive this spot of one ofits poetical ornaments. Besides, the pool where he isnow fishing contains scarcely anything but trout ; it istoo shallow for salmon, who run into the cries.PoiET. — I am of your opinion, and shall use my eloquenceto prevent Ornither from attempting the life ofso beautiful a bird — so majestic in its form, so wellsuited to the scenery, and so picturesque in all itshabits.The Innkeeper. — Gentlemen, dinner is ready. —Salmoniaia.SALMON TROUTS. 331Page 114.Of the spawning of Salmon Trouts, sc.How the several species of salmon, salmon trout, burntrout, and spotted trout, and some other fish are propagated,I have been not a little inquisitive and curiousin my observations. I have seen all of them spawningseveral times with wonder and pleasure at the surprisinginstinct which the God of nature has given them.Salmon and the several species of trout spawn generallyin September and October, earlier or later, asthe season is most agreeable to that end.When plenty of salmon are taken in locks and nets,it is easy to observe when the spawn begins to grow inthem, which in some may be in the beginning of April,in others not till May, as they have got up the river andspawned and gone down again to the sea the precedingyear. For sometimes there not being proper floods tobring them down to the tide, they will lie a month orsix weeks in the fresh-water pools in a languid starvingcondition, and such fish will be a month or six weekslonger in recovering than when they do get to the saltwater.From their first having melts and roes in themtill they spawn is generally five or six months. In thefour of which they are in their full perfection, as severalother creatures are whilst the eggs are growing in them,sm in hens, &c.When there are no dams to stop them, as in theTweed, and most of the rivers in Scotland and Ireland,they will change the salt for the fresh water severaltimes in the summer, when they taste a fresh, as thefishermen call it, that is to say, when a great flooil and aspring tide reach a good way into the sea.f3:32 SALMON Trouts.And as these migrations or changes are necessaryfor their health, so there are some reasons,>that in amanner force them to it. For when they have got toolong in the sea and have laid among the rocks and seaweed,the sea-lice get upon them, stick so close, andmake them so uneasy, that they will pub the very skinoff where the lice bite them, and nothing cures them oftheir tormentors but the fresh water. And then again,when they have been above a month in the river and lieunder banks, roots, or stones, the fresh-water lice creepupon them and force them to get to the sea again to befreed from them, which the salt water does effectually.I must observe how this migration of creatures answersthe same end of Providence with that of woodcocks,quails, &c. ; and several kinds of fish that goround our island at their proper seasons, and furnishthe neighbouring inhabitants with delicious food.But the sea-lice are more troublesome to the salmonwhen they grow big-bellied at the end of August andbeginning of September, for then they are heavier andlarger, and lie more among the rocks, and get the morelice upon them, and this forces them to the fresh watersupon a double account, to be cured of the vermin andtheir natural burthen too. As this time their skingrows thicker than in summer, and of a dusky copperishcolour, to make them endure the cold of the winter seasonthe better. At this time also the melter is moreeasily distinguished from the roe, for now at the end ofhis lower chop there grows a hard bony gib, from whichthey are then called the gib fish, larger or less accordingto the age and size of the salmon, in some above aninch long, and taper. And this gib, as it grows, makesfor itself a socket or hole in the upper jaw which nailsSALMON TROUTS. 333up his mouth when it is shut ; and besides all the forepartof the head is at this time tough and bony.This is one of the numberless works of the God ofNature, by which the fish is armed and prepared forthe work he has to do when they are come to properplaces for spawning.At what particular time they choose their mates andpair like most other creatures, none of our books ofangling tell us, but I suppose it must be as they comeup the rivers, in shoals of three or four hundred together.And who knows but they may keep to theirown tribes, and match or choose mates among theirown relations ? for it has been observed that salmon particularly,and salmon trout, will come up the sameriver and spawn in the very same places wherein theyare bred, and I am inclined to believe the same of someother fish, as we read of swallows and other birds ofpassage.The lightest and strongest go farthest up the rivers,and the larger and heavier press up as far as they canget, if not to the place where they are bred, choosinglarge pools and pretty deep gravelly streams. As theycome up the river they swim close to the bottom, andgenerally in the middle and deepest part of it, makingtracks in the gravel and sand like sheep-tracks, bywhich we fishers know when any salmon are up theriver. And it has been observed that the pilots orguides, as fishermen call them, often come to the top ofthe water to reconnoitre, if I may use a modern militaryterm, and see what coast they are upon. Theyswim very fast, and generally more at night than day,and rest when they come to convenient places underbushes, weeds, banks, or stones, and then the whole334 SALMON TROUTS.shoal run again. The reason I suppose of their swimmingin the middle and at the bottom of the river is,because that part is the least disturbed by a flood, andthere is the safest and best travelling.They generally choose streams to spawn in, at the headof the deep great pools, both for their own securityfrom their mortal enemy the otter, and the great preservationof the young fry, which we may observe inthe spring very near the shore of those streams wherethey were bred, waiting for a flood to carry them down.When a gib fish has found a stream that he likes, hemakes a hole as a swine works in the ground with hisnose, his mouth being nailed with the gib in its socket.When he has made this hole a yard and a half or morelong and near a yard broad, he goes down to his mateunder a root or stone, and in what manner he makes hisaddresses to her I cannot tell; but I have often seenthe gib fish rush at his mate as if going to bite her,jolting her sometimes on one side and then on the other,chasing her from place to place as we see a cock pigeondoes the hen in the nest till they come to the marriagebed he has been preparing for her, where they lie at thelower end of it close by the side of each other.All the roes that are shot and touched by the melt,which is of a viscous quality, sink among the littlestones and gravel ; and those that are not touched by itare carried down the stream, and are delicious food forthe many trouts that are watching the opportunity.Then the she fish leaves her mate, chasing away thesmall fish, whilst the gib fish is working away at thehead of the bed, covering up the spawn with the graveland sand, which he throws up with his head, making atthe same time a new bed and filling up the other.SALMON TROUTS. 335This he does all by himself, for I never saw the shefish along with the he when he was making a new holeat the head of the other. Sometimes I have seen himlie still in the hole as if resting himself, and then in anhour or two bring up his mate again and do as before.If it is rainy or muggy weather, they will be threeor four nights in finishing their work, but frosty weatherputs them in a hurry, and they will have done intwo nights or less, and hasten down to their holds andtake the first opportunity to get to sea.In this manner salmon, salmon trouts, and I believeall trout spawn, and other fish that spawn in thestreams use much the same, or such like method inmaking beds and covering up their spawn.I have been more particular in this article because Ihave often seen it done, and in many places, both in theevenings and mornings, and sometimes at night withlights. Sometimes a salmon loses its mate before theyhave done spawning, and yet the gib fish has broughtup another in two or three hours to spawn with him.Whether there be any supernumerary shes in the pool,or he has taken by violence another's mate, I cannot tell,but I have a better opinion of our noble salmon than tosuspect him of such injustice.A salmon spawn heap will be three yards or more inlength, and two feet or near a yard in breadth, andlooks like a new-made grave'' — The North Country Angler,1786.Page 274.Digna miratu avis. Primi, tanta vox tam pavoin corpuscle, tam pertinax spiritus. Deinde in unaperfecta music scientia modulate editor sons; ctnunc continuo spirit traitor in longus, nunc variatur336 THE NIGHTINGALE.inflexion, nunc distinguish concise, copulate intro,promittitur revocation, infuscatur ex inopinato : interdumet secum ipse murmured, plexus, gravis, actus,creber, extent; ubi visum est vibrate, summum, medius,mus. Breviterque omnia tam parvis in faucibus,quae tot exquisite tibiarum torments ars hominem .— Certain inter se, palamque animus contentionest. Vita morte finit saepe vitam, spirit prius deficientquam cantus"— Plan. Nat. Hist. lib. 10. c. 29.End OF THE FIRST Volume.LONDON :PRINTED BY SAMUEL Bentley,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.